                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                BLACK BOX WARNINGS AND DRUG SAFETY:
     EXAMINING THE DETERMINANTS AND TIMING OF FDA WARNING LABELS

                                               Allan Begosh
                                              John Goldsmith
                                                  Ed Hass
                                             Randall W. Lutter
                                              Clark Nardinelli
                                              John A. Vernon

                                          Working Paper 12803
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12803


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      December 2006




The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the
institutions with which the authors are affiliated. Vernon is also a professor at the University of Connecticut
and a Faculty Research Fellow with the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER).

© 2006 by Allan Begosh, John Goldsmith, Ed Hass, Randall W. Lutter, Clark Nardinelli, and John
A. Vernon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Black Box Warnings and Drug Safety: Examining the Determinants and Timing of FDA Warning Labels
Allan Begosh, John Goldsmith, Ed Hass, Randall W. Lutter, Clark Nardinelli, and John A. Vernon
NBER Working Paper No. 12803
December 2006
JEL No. I1,I11,I18,I28,K2,K23,K32

                                            ABSTRACT

Comparing the safety of prescription drugs over time is difficult due to the paucity of reliable
quantitative measures of drug safety. Both the academic literature and popular press have focused
on drug withdrawals as a proxy for breakdowns in the drug safety system. This metric, however, is
problematic because withdrawals are rare events, and they may be influenced by factors beyond a
drug's safety profile. In the current paper, we propose a new measure: the incidence and timing of
Black Box Warnings (BBWs). BBWs are warnings placed on prescription drug labels when a drug
is determined to carry a significant risk of a serious or life-threatening adverse event. Using a unique
data set, one that includes all new molecular entities (NMEs) submitted to the FDA between May
1981 and February 2006, and subsequently approved and marketed, we analyze the timing and
incidence of BBWs. Our analyses also use data on several drug characteristics likely to affect the
probability a new drug will receive a BBW. We draw several conclusions from our analyses. For
example, drugs receiving priority FDA review are more likely to have BBWs at the time of approval
than NMEs receiving standard review. We also find that early prescription volume and orphan drug
status are associated with an increased likelihood of receiving a BBW. We do not, however, find a
significant difference in the rate of BBWs across time cohorts. A comparison of NMEs approved
before and after the 1992 Prescription Drug User Fee Act (PDUFA), which authorized the payment
of user fees from drug manufacturers to the FDA in an effort to expedite new drug application
(NDAs) review times, did not reveal a statistically significant difference in the rate of BBWs. Critics
of PDUFA maintain that reduced FDA-approval times under PDUFA have compromised drug
safety. We do not find empirical support for this contention.

Allan Begosh                                           Randall W. Lutter
Suite 15-36                                            Suite 15-36
Office of the Commissioner                             Office of the Commissioner
Food and Drug Administration                           Food and Drug Administration
5600 Fishers Lane                                      5600 Fishers Lane
Rockville, MD 20857                                    Rockville, MD 20857
allan.begosh@FDA.gov                                   Rlutter@oc.fda.gov

John Goldsmith                                         Clark Nardinelli
Suite 15-36                                            Suite 15-36
Office of the Commissioner                             Office of the Commissioner
Food and Drug Administration                           Food and Drug Administration
5600 Fishers Lane                                      5600 Fishers Lane
Rockville, MD 20857                                    Rockville, Maryland 20857
jcgoldsm@erols.com                                     Clark.Nardinelli@FDA.HHS.GOV

Ed Hass                                                John A. Vernon
Suite 15-36                                            University of Connecticut
Office of the Commissioner                             Department of Finance
U.S. Food and Drug Administration                      2100 Hillside Road
5600 Fishers Lane                                      Storrs, CT 06269
Ed.Hass@FDA.HHS.GOV                                    Office of the Commissioner, US FDA
                                                       and NBER
                                                       jvernon@business.uc
I.      INTRODUCTION


        For a new drug to gain FDA approval in the United States it must be

demonstrated safe and effective when used as directed. While there is an abundance of

clinical data on each new drug approved, there are no generally accepted and easily

quantifiable measures of overall drug safety to track trends in drug safety over time or

across therapeutic classes. Research efforts directed towards the identification of

aggregate drug safety measures could not be timelier. According to a recent report by the

Institute of Medicine (2006), there is a growing perception that we are in the midst of a

drug safety crisis in the U.S., and that significant steps are required to improve the current

system. The IOM report implies that a reliable, aggregate measure of drug safety in the

U.S. could be very helpful in monitoring the performance of the current drug safety

system.

        In the absence of good proxies for system-wide drug safety trends, academic

researchers and the popular press have been forced to focus primarily on drug

withdrawals, which may be unreliable measures due to their infrequency. Safety

withdrawals are drastic actions; they capture only the most serious lapses in drug safety.

Of 516 new molecular entities (NMEs) approved by the FDA between 1981 and 2006,

for example, only 16 were withdrawn for safety reasons.1 Furthermore, a decision to

withdraw a drug may be influenced by non-safety factors, such as the availability of




1
 A New Molecular Entity or NME is a drug that contains an active substance that has never before been
approved for marketing, in any form, in the United States.


                                                   1
alternative treatments and the potential impact on patient welfare.2 As no prescription

drug is perfectly safe (which is why they are only available through a prescription), a

better metric of overall safety should reflect actions to promote safety for a larger sample

of drugs, including drugs with safety concerns that remain on the market.

        The small number of safety withdrawals also limits the statistical utility of using

withdrawals as a metric for drug safety. Meaningful statistical comparisons of withdrawal

rates across cohorts are virtually impossible. As previously mentioned, of 516 NMEs

approved for marketing by the FDA between May 1981 and February 2006 (the time

period covered by our sample), there have only been 16 safety withdrawals, or about

3.1% of all NMEs. The corresponding 95% confidence interval associated with this

observation is bounded on the interval from 1.6% to 4.6%, or between eight and 24 safety

withdrawals.3 While the FDA, the general public, and other stakeholders would be

gravely concerned with a system-wide failure or problem that increased the safety risk of

drugs by 40%, an increase of this magnitude in safety withdrawals in the current sample

would not be statistically significant at the 0.05-level. Further complicating potential

measures of drug safety over time is the vintage of the drug, or drug cohort, post-

approval. Older drugs have had more time to experience safety withdrawals; a fact that

we will explicitly control for in our empirical analyses.

        Safety withdrawals are not the only possible action that can be taken when safety

concerns arise with a drug. A sponsor may elect to add, or the FDA may require them to

add, a warning on the product labeling. For the most serious safety problems, which may


2
  One example of this would be the decision by the FDA to withdraw mibefradil and bromfenac but to keep
troglitazone. See Fung, Man, “Evaluation of the Characteristics of Safety Withdrawal of Prescription Drugs
from Worldwide Pharmaceutical Markets -- 1960 to 1999,” Drug Information Journal, Jan-Mar 2001.
3
  As Npq>10, we use the normal distribution to approximate the binomial.


                                                    2
lead to death or serious injury, the FDA may require that the label warning be presented

in a black box.4 These Black Box Warnings, or BBWs, can be imposed either before or

after a drug has been approved for marketing, and they present important safety

information uncovered during the drug review or after the drug has been on the market

for some period of time. By defining a “safety event” as the addition of a BBW to the

label, instead of as a safety withdrawal, one gains considerable sample size and statistical

power.5 It is important to emphasize, however, that using a BBW to define a “safety

event” still captures severe safety problems because a BBW identifies drugs with adverse

effects that may potentially lead to death or serious injury. Moreover, because BBWs can

be applied prior to drug marketing, they may be used to evaluate the safety assessment

carried out by the FDA during drug review, something we explicitly consider in the

current paper. Indeed, the recent IOM report recommends that the FDA report the

timeliness of its regulatory actions, including black boxes added to labels.6 Timely

identification, confirmation, and communication of risks and benefits are the best

measure of regulatory success.

         Our paper will proceed as follows. Section II will describe the unique dataset we

employ in our analyses to study the determinants and timing of BBWs. This section will

also describe our model covariates and the rationale for their inclusion in the data sample.

We believe these data represent a significant improvement over the frequently used

withdrawal data, and may provide and excellent opportunity to study trends in drug safety



4
  The regulatory basis of the black box warning is at 21 C.F.R. § 201.57(e).
5
  For our analysis, we treat a drug withdrawn for safety reasons as if it also receives a BBW at that time.
6
  Recommendations to report BBW information and other ways of improving post marketing risk
communication activities are on Page 3-27 of the of Institute of Medicine, The Future of Drug Safety:
Promoting and Protecting the Health of the Public. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006.


                                                      3
over time and across therapeutic drug classes. The potential applications of BBWs as a

proxy for drug safety are wide ranging.

        In Section III we present and empirically test several hypotheses. The two

principal hypotheses of the section, however, concern the impact of the Prescription Drug

User Fee Act (PDUFA) of 1992, and its subsequent renewals in 1997 and 2002, on drug

safety, as measured by BBWs. Under PDUFA, manufacturers pay the FDA user fees to

hire additional staff to review new drug applications (NDAs) and expedite approval

times, which prior to the Act were growing steadily over time, and averaged over two

years in 1992.7 While recent economic research has documented the significant social

benefits of PDUFA via improved access to new drugs and increased incentives to invest

in research & development (R&D),8 critics of PDUFA have raised concerns over drug

safety because of the shorter FDA review times.9 For this reason, one of the principal

aims of our analyses will be to examine the impact PDUFA may have had on drug safety,

as measured by the prevalence and timing of BBWs. Section IV will conclude the paper

and make suggestions for future research.


II.     DATA AND MODEL VARIABLES


        This study employs a highly unique FDA dataset, one that is based on twenty-five

years of historical BBWs data. Specifically, we have tracked therapeutic NMEs

7
  Joseph A. DiMasi (2001) “New Drug Development in the United States from 1963 to 1999,” Clinical
Pharmacology and Therapeutics 69, 286-296.
8
  Tomas J. Philipson, Ernst R. Berndt, Adrian H.B. Gottschalk, and Matthew W. Strobeck (2005),
“Assessing the Safety and Efficacy of the FDA: The Case of the Prescription Drug User Fee Acts,” NBER
Working Paper 11724, Cambridge, Massachusetts; John A. Vernon, Joseph H. Golec, Randall W. Lutter,
and Clark Nardinelli (2006), “FDA New Drug Approval Times, Prescription Drug User Fees, and R&D
Spending,” AEI-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies. Available at:
http://www.aei.brookings.org/publications/index.php?tab=topics&topicid=44.




                                                  4
submitted to the FDA between May 4, 1981 and May 31, 2005 that were subsequently

approved and marketed.10 For these 516 NMEs, we included BBWs required in the

labeling through February 16, 2006.11 We used MedWatch to identify instances of

safety-related labeling changes.12

         Our database also includes several drug-specific attributes that we hypothesize, a

priori, will influence the likelihood of receiving a BBW. First, we record the review

status of drug applications received by the FDA. Drugs that are novel therapies are

granted priority status by the FDA, and as a result their NDA receives a faster review.

Because the therapy is novel, and because an expedited review may be more likely to

miss some potential safety problems, priority drugs might have higher rates of post-

market BBWs. Some previous empirical research has suggested a link between review

times and post-market adverse drug reactions.13 Second, some NMEs are for rare, or

“orphan,” diseases. These drugs generally have limited clinical testing prior to approval,

and therefore they may have a higher rate of post-market BBWs. Third, drugs primarily

used in hospital settings, which are frequently taken by the seriously ill, might have lower

rates of BBWs because these drugs typically have different safety profiles than drugs




9
  Public Citizen Health Research Group (2002), “Comments on the Prescription Drug User Fee Act
(PDUFA)” Docket No. 01N-0450, January 25, 2002. Available at: http://www.citizen.org/publications/.
10
   The starting date was chosen initially to create a data set to equalize the length of time before and after
the enactment of PDUFA. The data set has since been updated, so the significance of the start date no
longer exists. The term “therapeutic” means that we are excluding NMEs that do not treat disease, such as
diagnostic products.
11
   In some instances, a single BBW decision will apply to an entire class of drugs. Here, we count each
NME receiving a BBW as a separate incident, but we have collected some information on “class labeling”
and include it as Appendix A.
12
   MedWatch is FDA’s Safety Information and Adverse Event Reporting Program. For more information,
see http://www.fda.gov/medwatch/What.htm, accessed 7/7/2006.
13
   Mary K. Olsen (2002), “Pharmaceutical Policy Change and the Safety of New Drugs,” Journal of Law
and Economics 45:615-642.


                                                       5
purchased through pharmacies and taken at home.14 Fourth, we use a measure of the first

year prescription volume derived from IMS™ and Verispan™ data because some safety

issues are not revealed until there has been sufficient experience with a particular drug.

All else held constant, safety issues will be identified faster among drugs with higher

initial prescription volume. Finally, the drug review process itself changed with the

enactment of PDUFA in 1992. User fees funded the acceleration of the review process

for NDAs. Some of the criticisms of PDUFA suggest that the faster initial review could,

in theory, increase the rate of post-market BBWs. Moreover, under both PDUFA I and

PDUFA II (but not PDUFA III), user fees could not be used for post-market safety

surveillance. For the statistical analysis, we define PDUFA as a binary variable that takes

on the value of unity if the drug was approved post-PDUFA, and zero otherwise.

        We distinguish between BBWs added to drug labeling during the drug review

process, “pre-market BBWs,” and those applied after a drug has already been approved

and marketed, “post-market BBWs.” Post-market BBWs are of particular importance

because they represent instances where there is an acknowledgement that a drug was

initially marketed without all of the information later deemed necessary for safe and

effective use. We summarize these data in Table 1.




14
  Although we refer to such NMEs “Hospital Drugs,” the moniker identifies primary use in all non-retail
settings, including hospitals, nursing homes, and clinics.


                                                    6
   Table 1: Characteristics of Marketed Therapeutic NMEs May 1981- May 2005

                    NMEs Priority Hospital Orphan Pre-market
                         Review Setting    Status    BBW
          Pre-PDUFA  228   116      44       40       30

               PDUFA      288       116        21         46          51

               Total      516       232        65         86          81



III.   RESEARCH METHODS AND PRINCIPAL HYPOTHESES


       In the current analyses, we will employ three methods to study several different

hypotheses involving changes in the rate of BBWs over time. First, we examine the rates

of BBWs applied before a drug is marketed both before and after the enactment of

PDUFA. By directly comparing these rates, we can analyze the effects during the review

of the drug.

       Second, we will analyze the rates of post-market BBWs. We use the Kaplan-

Meier methodology and test for a difference in the BBWs rate for drugs submitted to the

FDA before and after PDUFA. We supplement this simple, exploratory approach with a

more thorough multivariate analysis, which includes covariates that control for other

factors hypothesized to affect the rate of post-market BBWs. These multivariate analyses

may shed light on key determinants of BBWs.

       Finally, we undertake an analysis of post-market BBWs accounting for analytic

problems associated with using submission cohorts to analyze surveillance. That is, to

accurately assess the impact of safety surveillance practices instituted by PDUFA, we



                                           7
develop a model that controls for the length of time a drug has been marketed under the

PDUFA regime, regardless of whether it was approved after the enactment of PDUFA.

       While we test several hypotheses on the determinants of BBWs in this paper, we

explicitly define the two that concern the possible influence of PDUFA on the incidence

and timing of BBWs. From a policy perspective, these hypotheses are the most germane

to the ongoing debate over the social costs and benefits associated with PDUFA. We turn

now to our first principal PDUFA-related hypotheses.


Hypothesis 1: PDUFA Accompanied a Change in the Rate of Pre-market BBWs


       Black Box Warnings are often applied during the review of the application, prior

to marketing. In our sample, there were 81 pre-market BBWs, 30 of them occurred pre-

PDUFA and 51 since its enactment in 1992. One might expect the expedited reviews

under PDUFA to lead to fewer pre-market BBWs, but as shown in Table 1, the fraction

of NMEs given pre-market BBWs after the enactment of PDUFA is actually higher,

0.177 versus 0.132. Of course, it is not immediately apparent how much of this difference

is attributable to PDUFA and how much is attributable to other factors that changed over

the sample time period. Table 2 summarizes the distribution of the 516 NMEs in our

sample by review status and PDUFA period.




                                           8
   Table 2: Comparison of the Incidence of Premarket BBWs in pre-PDUFA and
                    PDUFA NME Labeling by Review Type

                       Among NMEs Lacking Premarket BBWs
                     Review Status Pre-PDUFA PDUFA Totals
                       TOTAL           198     237    435
                       Standard        107     151    258
                        Priority        91     86     177

                         Among NMEs with Premarket BBWs
                     Review Status Pre-PDUFA PDUFA Totals
                     TOTAL             30       51      81
                     Standard           5       21      26
                     Priority          25       30      55


       In assessing the associations among pre-market BBWs, review status (standard or

priority), and PDUFA era (before and during), we use a simple cross-tab analysis of a

2 × 2 × 2 contingency table. This approach enables us to determine which combination of

variables best explains the variation observed in Table 2, while minimizing the number of

interactions required to account for the variation. We find that pre-market BBWs are

associated with review status; review status is associated with PDUFA; and pre-market

BBWs are associated with PDUFA. These associations, however, were not statistically

significant at the 0.05-level. There was a higher rate of pre-market BBWs for priority

reviews than for standard reviews, and there were relatively more priority reviews pre-

PDUFA; both of these associations were statistically significant at the 0.05-level. Pre-

market BBWs appear to be more common under PDUFA, but this difference fails a

conventional test for statistical significance (p = .051).

       When controlling for a drug’s PDUFA status, pre-market BBWs are 34 percent

more likely among priority review NMEs than they are for those receiving standard

reviews. Controlling for whether an NME receives a priority or standard review, pre-


                                               9
market BBWs are 13 percent more likely to occur if a NME was approved after PDUFA

than if it was approved before. Standard reviews are 13 percent more likely under

PDUFA than they were pre-PDUFA. Lastly, under PDUFA the rate of pre-market BBWs

for standard review NMEs is much higher than they were prior to PDUFA (12.2 percent

vs. 4.5 percent).

         The statistical association between PDUFA and the rate of pre-market BBWs is,

however, potentially misleading. The likelihood of a drug receiving a pre-market BBW is

affected by a drug’s review status, and its review status is affected by whether or not it

was approved before the enactment of PDUFA. After accounting for review status, the

association between PDUFA and the rate of BBWs remains positive, but is no longer

statistically significant at the 0.05-level. This exploratory analysis, therefore, does not

find empirical support for the hypothesis that PDUFA accompanied a statistically

significant change in the rate of pre-market BBWs. Future researchers, however, may

wish to probe this association more closely by explicitly considering the changing impact

of PDUFA on drug approval times over time. User fees have grown considerably since

1992, and reductions in FDA approval times were not instantaneous.15 We next study

whether or not PDUFA influenced the rate of post-market BBWs.


Hypothesis 2: PDUFA Accompanied a Change in the Rate or Timing of Post-market
BBWs


         As previously mentioned, the comparison of rates of post-market BBWs is

complicated by the fact that different drugs have been on the market for different lengths

15
  For an excellent analysis of the gradual impact of PDUFA on FDA approval times since 1992, see Ernst
R. Berndt, Adrian H. B. Gottschalk, Tomas J. Philipson, and Matthew W. Strobeck (2004) “Assessing the Impacts of




                                                       10
of time. These different life spans, or vintages of drug cohorts, make comparisons

between groups of drugs from different eras difficult. Because of this difference, we

analyze post-market BBWs using a survival analysis methodology. Survival analysis,

using a Kaplan-Meier estimator, allows us to capture events occurring through time, and

then directly compare these relative rates across drug cohorts.

         We ignore pre-market BBWs, and include only the first BBW applied after a drug

has been on the market. Once the BBW event occurs, the NME is removed from the

analysis. We divide the set of NMEs according to whether they were approved before or

after the enactment of PDFUA. The Kaplan-Meier graphs for these two groups are shown

below in Figure 1.

                        Figure 1: Survival of NMEs by PDUFA Status




         Fully two-thirds (68 percent) of PDUFA-era therapeutic NMEs survived nearly 13

years without any new BBWs (or safety withdrawals). Among the pre-PDUFA NMEs, 79

percent survived to the end of the data sample period without new BBWs. The shapes and


the Prescription Drug User Fee Acts (PDUFA) on the FDA Approval Process,” AEI-Brookings Joint Center for



                                                      11
locations of the PDUFA and pre-PDUFA curves are similar until year 12. The curves

diverge at year 12, but there are so few underlying observations that this divergence is of

only marginal importance. There are only six NMEs remaining in the PDUFA cohort at

the time of the safety event occurring in year 12.

         To test the equality of the two survival curves, we used a Tarone-Ware weighted

log rank test, which gives greater weight to the sections of the curves with more

underlying observations. We failed to reject the null hypothesis of equality (p = 0.22).

The curves are not statistically different from one another.

         Because the faster reviews and greater resources provided by PDUFA represent

only one of several factors that may influence post-marketing BBWs, we added to our

analysis four drug-specific attributes that plausibly might affect the rate of post-market

BBWs. These covariates are i) first year prescription volume; ii) whether a drug is

typically distributed through hospitals; iii) whether the drug received a priority review;

and iv) whether the drug was approved through the orphan drug program.

         Theoretically, we would expect drugs with greater initial patient exposure to be

associated with a faster identification of safety issues, and thus a higher likelihood of

receiving a BBW. It also seems reasonable to expect that faster FDA reviews, which are

given to novel therapies receiving priority review status, might lead to a higher hazard of

a post-market BBW. Safety problems among drugs distributed through hospitals (as

opposed to those being distributed through pharmacies) might be difficult to identify

because the individuals taking these drug tend to be already infirm. Finally, orphan drugs,

which are developed for rare diseases, and which typically have limited patient

populations, might be associated with a different post-market hazard rate for BBWs.


Regulatory Studies. Available at: http://www.aei.brookings.org/publications/index.php?tab=topics&topicid=44.

                                                        12
       To more rigorously test our second hypothesis, we use a stratified version of the

Cox Proportional Hazard Model and include as covariates the four aforementioned NME-

specific attributes hypothesized to influence the hazard rate for BBWs. In stratifying by

PDUFA status, we allow each group of NMEs to have its own baseline hazard, but

constrain the relative hazard to be the same across both strata. More specifically, we use

the semi-parametric Cox Proportional Hazard Model to measure the extent to which a

covariate shifts a hazard function up or down. The Cox model is flexible in that it does

not require an explicit specification of the model’s functional form. In a Cox Proportional

Hazard Model regression model, a hazard function for observation j is defined by the

following:


        h j (t ) = h0 (t )e Xβ = h0 (t ) exp(b1 x1 j + b2 x 2 j + ... + bk x kj )   (1)


       The first of the two components appearing in equation (1), h0 (t ) , is the baseline

hazard. It is not parameterized and is not estimated. The other component, e Xβ , is

sometimes called the relative hazard, and it captures the effect of the observed

characteristics on the hazard function. The effect of the vector of covariates, X, on the

hazard rate is independent of time, t. The hazard for one observation is proportional to the

hazard for another observation and this proportionality constant is independent of time

(hence the name “proportional hazard model”). By exponentiation with the model

coefficient estimates, we obtain hazard ratios for a one-unit change in the values of the

model covariates. For example, a coefficient estimate of 2.0 implies that a one-unit

change in the covariate would double the hazard rate. Estimating equation (1) using the

four aforementioned covariates (drug characteristics) we find that ultimate survival



                                                         13
without a post-market BBW is 72 percent for the PDUFA cohort and 80 percent for the

cohort approved before PDUFA. This is depicted below in Figure 2.


   Figure 2: Survival of NMEs by PDUFA Status with Drug-Specific Covariates




        Our Cox regression results from this model are summarized below in Table 3.

We present the hazard ratios, standard errors, t-statistics, and p-values for each model

covariate.


                 Table 3: Hazard Ratio Analysis of Safety Events



                                    Hazard Standard
                   Variable          Ratio        Error    t-Statistic p-value
             First Year Rx Volume 1.1316          0.0490    2.8538    0.0043
             Hospital Drug          0.2691        0.1399   -2.5240    0.0116
             Priority Review        1.6431        0.3718    2.1941    0.0282
             Orphan Drug            0.5979        0.2213   -1.3896    0.1648




                                             14
          As hypothesized, initial prescription volume is associated with an increase in the

hazard rate of a BBW, and this result is significant at 0.01-level. Also as expected,

hospital drugs are associated with lower hazard rates. This result is significant at 0.05-

level. This lower hazard rate for hospital drugs may be the result of the fact that the BBW

system is focused on drugs distributed through retail channels and taken at home; the

difficulty of identifying adverse drug events in a population already sick may also

contribute to the low hazard rate. In accordance with expectations, we also find that drugs

given a priority review have a higher hazard rate, and this is statistically significant at the

0.05-level. Lastly, while the coefficient on the orphan drug dummy variable carries the

theoretically anticipated negative sign, it is not statistically significant at conventional

levels.

          Including the drug-specific attributes in our model, not surprisingly, results in the

two survival curves appearing closer together; in fact, they almost touch in year 8 and in

year 11. The close proximity of the curves in Figure 2, along with the statistically

significant results reported in Table 3, suggests that much of any difference in timing and

incidence of BBWs before and after the enactment of PDUFA is associated with the

attributes of the drugs reviewed under each regime. While the evidence thus far appears

to suggest that PDUFA was not accompanied by a change in the rate of post-market

BBWs, it is possible that unmeasured intertemporal variability in the effectiveness of the

PDUFA surveillance regime may be partially influencing our results.

          In particular, review status may not fully capture differences in surveillance

across regimes. Drugs approved after the implementation of PDUFA spend their entire

marketing lives under the PDUFA surveillance program. Drugs approved shortly before




                                              15
the implementation of PDUFA would spend almost all of their observed lives under

PDUFA. Drugs approved near the beginning of our pre-PDUFA cohort would spend

about half their market lives under PDUFA. Clearly then, if the surveillance program

became more effective after the passage of PDUFA, we would see lower hazard rates

among drugs approved in the years just after PDUFA was enacted.

         To control for this effect, we add to our analysis the variable Months Pre PDUFA,

which is equal to the number of days divided by 30 between approval and September 1,

1992. For drugs approved after September 1, 1992, the variable is set to zero. We were

concerned that this variable, created to capture the effects in drugs approved prior to

PDUFA, would simply pick up some overall time trend. Therefore, we have also added to

our model the variable Months Pre & Post PDUFA. This variable is measured as the

number of days divided by 30 between approval and September 1, 1992. It is the same as

Months Pre PDUFA for drugs approved prior to PDUFA. A drug approved after PDUFA

would have a negative value for Months Pre & Post PDUFA, but would have a zero for

Months Pre PDUFA. Thus, the coefficient for Months Pre PDUFA measures the

proportional increase in the hazard function given one additional month a drug is

marketed prior to PDUFA.

         We define the dummy variable PDUFA, which is set equal to one for drugs

submitted for approval on or after September 1, 1992 and zero otherwise. The results

using PDUFA alone in the Cox model are reported in column 1 of Table 4. This

coefficient is not statistically significant at conventional confidence levels, consistent

with our results reported previously in Table 3.16


16
 The coefficient from our analysis tells us whether the hazard ratio is significantly different from unity.
We report in Tables 3 and 4 the hazard ratio and the standard error of the coefficient. A value of 1.3355


                                                     16
                     Table 4: Hazard Ratio Analysis of Safety Events
        (Coefficients are estimated hazard ratios; standard errors are in parentheses)


             Variable                      (1)         (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)
                                         1.3355      1.3924          1.2716         0.8639          0.8416
             PDUFA
                                        (0.3109)    (0.3255)        (0.2984)       (0.3393)        (0.3361)
                                            --      1.4551 *       1.7300 **      1.8457 **       1.7730 **
             Priority
                                                    (0.3173)        (0.3894)       (0.4174)        (0.4041)
                                                                    0.5300 *      0.4697 **        0.5347 *
             Orphan
                                            --             --       (0.1936)       (0.1731)        (0.2001)
                                                                   0.2681 **       0.3767 *        0.3870 *
             Hospital
                                            --             --       (0.1394)       (0.2034)        (0.2100)
                                                                                    0.9889          0.9888
     Months Pre PDUFA
                                            --             --           --         (0.0073)        (0.0074)
                                                                                    0.9998          1.0000
Months Pre & Post PDUFA
                                            --             --           --         (0.0049)        (0.0050)
                                                                                                  1.1297 **
   First Year Prescriptions
                                            --             --           --             --          (0.0487)
* Significant at the 10% confidence level
** Significant at the 5% confidence level



         Since before the start of our sample period, the FDA has been giving drugs

priority status designations based on whether they presented a novel therapeutic benefit.17

A change in the balance of priority-reviewed drugs may have an effect on the overall

likelihood of a BBW. This is because these drugs, with their ability to provide a novel

therapeutic benefit, may also involve unusual risk. We account for this change in the

balance by including the model variable Priority, which is set equal to one for priority

drugs and zero otherwise. These results appear in column 2 of Table 4. Priority drugs

have a higher hazard of a safety event, which is not unexpected. Again, the regime

variable PDUFA is not significant at the tested confidence levels.


implies that the variable is associated with 34% increase in the hazard rate. The coefficient is the log of the
ratio, or ln(1.3355) = 0.2893. As the standard error is 0.3109, the coefficient on PDUFA is not significant at
the 90% confidence level.




                                                      17
        We also wanted to correct for several other potential confounding effects.

“Orphan” drugs are given special review status because they are intended for small

patient populations. The orphan drug review is generally restricted to small clinical trials.

Moreover, the small number of patients treated with orphan drugs makes it difficult to

monitor drug safety after marketing. Therefore, the binary variable Orphan is defined to

be equal to one for orphan drugs and zero otherwise. As shown in column 3 of Table 4,

Orphan drugs have lower hazards of safety events. The small patient populations may

make surveillance more difficult and safety events less likely. The variable Priority is,

again, associated with a higher hazard rate, and PDUFA continues to be statistically

insignificant.

        The effects of adding Months Pre PDUFA and Months Pre & Post PDUFA are

shown in column 4. Neither of these variables is found to be statistically significant.

Column 5 includes the addition of the first year prescription variable, which is significant

at the 0.05-level. As was reported in Table 3, a million additional prescriptions in the first

year on the market is associated with a 13% increase in the rate of BBWs. Months Pre

PDUFA is not statistically significant, but Orphan and Hospital are, and are associated

with, as hypothesized, a lower rate of BBWs. The variable for priority drugs suggests a

higher rate of BBWs; this finding is significant at 0.05-level.

        In sum, our regression analyses generate several results worth emphasizing. Drugs

with higher initial prescription volume have a higher rate of postmarket BBWs,

supporting the hypothesis that relatively rare side effects are discovered earlier when

there is a larger initial patient population. Also, drugs receiving priority review have

17
  Since the implementation of PDUFA, FDA switched from a review system where drugs were prioritized
as being A, B or C to simply P (priority) or S (standard). We assume pre-PDUFA NMEs designated A or B


                                                 18
higher rates of BBWs, which could be caused by the relatively smaller initial clinical

studies, the fact that the therapy is more novel and thus less well understood, or both of

these factors. Drugs sold through hospitals have lower hazard rates, possibly because it is

difficult to identify safety risks when the patient population is already very sick. Orphan

status, which we found to be statistically significant at the 0.10-level, is also associated

with a lower hazard level, perhaps because of the smaller patient populations.

         Regarding our second principal hypothesis, we find no statistically significant

difference in the rate of postmarket BBWs after PDUFA. The comparable rates of

survival just prior to the last PDUFA failure (occurring at 11.8 years) are 84.4 percent for

pre-PDUFA NMEs and 83.9 percent for PDUFA NMEs. This is important because critics

of PDUFA have raised concerns of compromised drug safety, and while our findings in

this section are by no means definitive, they do suggest that safety has not been adversely

affected as a result of PDUFA.



IV.      CONCLUSION



         This research was motivated by the inadequacy of using the percentage of safety

withdrawals as a way to quantify drug safety in the U.S. Safety withdrawals capture the

most extreme events, they are influenced by non-safety factors, and they cannot be

subject to rigorous statistical analyses. The use of percentages can be misleading because

it does not account for the length of time a drug has been on the market. Analyzing a less

severe, but more common safety event, such as the application of a Black Box Warning,

addresses these shortcomings with safety withdrawals. Not only are drugs with BBWs a


to be equivalent to those currently designated P.

                                                    19
better reflection of the universe of drugs, they can also be used in a variety of types of

statistical analyses, as we have demonstrated in this paper. We have also demonstrated

the use of survival analysis as a method to compare rates of BBWs when drugs have been

on the market for different lengths of time.

       As expected, we find that the rate of application of BBWs depends on factors

such as whether a drug received a priority review, its initial prescribing volume, and

whether it was distributed primarily in hospital-type settings. We are unable to identify

statistically significant trends in the rates BBWs over time. This is an important finding

because PDUFA has been criticized on the grounds that it may compromise drug safety.

We find no evidence of this in the current study. Finally, given that recent economic

research suggests PDUFA has imparted significant benefits to society through improved

access to new drugs and greater incentives for R&D, our research suggests, on net,

PDUFA is likely to be generating social benefits in excess of costs. Of course, further

research is warranted, and we have made several suggestions for future directions.




                                               20
REFERENCES


Berndt, E, Gottschalk, A. Philipson, T and Strobeck, M (2004) “Assessing the Impacts
of the Prescription Drug User Fee Acts (PDUFA) on the FDA Approval Process,” AEI-
Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies.

DiMasi, JA (2001) “New Drug Development in the United States from 1963 to 1999,”
Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics 69, 286-296.

Fung, M. (2001) “Evaluation of the Characteristics of Safety Withdrawal of Prescription
Drugs from Worldwide Pharmaceutical Markets -- 1960 to 1999,” Drug Information
Journal, Jan-Mar 2001.

Institute of Medicine (2006) The Future of Drug Safety: Promoting and Protecting the
Health of the Public. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006.

Olsen, MK (2002), “Pharmaceutical Policy Change and the Safety of New Drugs,”
Journal of Law and Economics 45:615-642.

Philipson, T. Berndt, E. Gottschalk, A. and Strobeck, M. (2005), “Assessing the Safety
and Efficacy of the FDA: The Case of the Prescription Drug User Fee Acts,” NBER
Working Paper Series, Working paper 11724, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Public Citizen Health Research Group (2002), “Comments on the Prescription Drug User
Fee Act (PDUFA)” Docket No. 01N-0450, January 25, 2002. Available at:
http://www.citizen.org/publications/.

Vernon, J. Golec, J. Lutter, R. Nardinelli, C. (2006), “FDA New Drug Approval Times,
Prescription Drug User Fees, and R&D Spending,” AEI-Brookings Joint Center for
Regulatory Studies.




                                           21
