                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        WHICH COUNTRIES BECOME TAX HAVENS?

                                       Dhammika Dharmapala
                                         James R. Hines Jr.

                                        Working Paper 12802
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12802


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2006




We thank Alan Auerbach, Charles Brown, Mihir Desai, Daniel Feenberg, Ray Fisman, Fritz Foley,
James Sallee, Joel Slemrod, Jeff Smith, and Stanley Winer for helpful comments on an earlier draft,
Mary Ceccanese for expert data assistance, and Sebastien Bradley and Owen Kearney for excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Dhammika Dharmapala and James R. Hines Jr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Which Countries Become Tax Havens?
Dhammika Dharmapala and James R. Hines Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 12802
December 2006
JEL No. H25,H87,K10

                                                ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the factors influencing whether countries become tax havens. Roughly 15 percent
of countries are tax havens; as has been widely observed, these countries tend to be small and affluent.
This paper documents another robust empirical regularity: better-governed countries are much more
likely than others to become tax havens. Using a variety of empirical approaches, and controlling for
other relevant factors, governance quality has a statistically significant and quantitatively large impact
on the probability of being a tax haven. For a typical country with a population under one million,
the likelihood of a becoming a tax haven rises from 24 percent to 63 percent as governance quality
improves from the level of Brazil to that of Portugal. The effect of governance on tax haven status
persists when the origin of a country's legal system is used as an instrument for its quality of its governance.
 Low tax rates offer much more powerful inducements to foreign investment in well-governed countries
than elsewhere, which may explain why poorly governed countries do not generally attempt to become
tax havens -- and suggests that the range of sensible tax policy options is constrained by the quality
of governance.

Dhammika Dharmapala
Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
Weill Hall 5219
735 South State St.
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-3091
dhammika@umich.edu

James R. Hines Jr.
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
343 Lorch Hall
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
jrhines@umich.edu
1.     Introduction

       Countries eager to attract foreign capital face considerable international pressure to
minimize their taxation of income earned by foreign investors. Since reducing the taxation of
investment income earned by foreigners may entail unappetizing budgetary or political
compromises, not all countries seek to attract foreign investment in this way. The “tax havens”
are locations with very low tax rates and other tax attributes designed to appeal to foreign
investors. Tax haven countries receive extensive foreign investment, and, largely as a result,
have enjoyed very rapid economic growth over the past 25 years (Hines, 2005). There are
roughly 40 major tax havens in the world today, but the sizable apparent economic returns to
becoming a tax haven raise the question of why there are not more.

       This paper considers the determinants of who becomes a tax haven and who does not.
Some of the characteristics of tax havens are well-documented in the literature: tax havens are
small countries, commonly below one million in population, and are generally more affluent than
other countries. What has not been previously noted in the literature, but is apparent in the data,
is that tax havens score very well on cross-country measures of governance quality that include
measures of voice and accountability, political stability, government effectiveness, rule of law,
and control of corruption. Indeed, there are almost no poorly governed tax havens. In a
regression framework that controls for other observable variables, the impact of good
governance on the likelihood of becoming a tax haven is both statistically significant and
quantitatively very large: improving the quality of governance from the level of Brazil to that of
Portugal raises the likelihood of a small country being a tax haven from 24 percent to roughly 63
percent.

       The basic finding that tax havens are well-governed is robust to the use of a number of
different statistical approaches (including a nonparametric matching procedure). However, it can
be difficult to interpret cross-country evidence of this type, since the decision to become a tax
haven may ultimately affect the quality of local governance, and the quality of governance may
itself be influenced by economic or political conditions that also determine whether or not a
country becomes a tax haven. In either case, the data reflect a non-random assignment of local
governance quality, and raise the possibility that the apparent effect of governance on tax haven



                                                 1
status may represent a biased estimate of any true effects. In order to address this concern, the
nature of a country’s legal origin is used as an instrument for governance quality in estimating
the impact of governance on the likelihood of becoming a tax haven. The results indicate that
governance quality exerts at least as powerful an effect on tax haven status when instrumented
by legal origin as it does in the basic regression analysis. This suggests strongly that the direction
of causality runs from governance quality to tax haven status. The instrumental variables
analysis, together with a series of additional robustness checks, tends not to support alternative
explanations based on various omitted variables (such as natural resource abundance, unobserved
tastes for government spending, or communications infrastructure).

       Why are better-governed countries more likely than others to become tax havens? One
possibility is that the returns to becoming a tax haven are greater for well-governed countries:
that higher foreign investment flows, and the economic benefits that accompany them, are more
likely to accompany tax reductions in well-governed countries than they are tax reductions in
poorly-governed countries. In this interpretation, poorly governed countries do not forego
potential economic benefits in not becoming tax havens, since few if any of the benefits would
flow to them if they did. Evidence from the behavior of American firms is consistent with this
explanation, in that tax rate differences among well-governed countries are associated with much
larger effects on U.S. investment levels than are tax rate differences among poorly governed
countries.

       There is a substantial theoretical literature on the factors that influence the desirability of
becoming a tax haven (e.g. Kanbur and Keen, 1993; Hansen and Kessler, 2001; Slemrod and
Wilson, 2006). The empirical evidence presented in this paper suggests that tax policy choices
are implicitly constrained by the quality of governance. The supplementary analysis in Section
4.4 identifies a large negative effect of governance quality on corporate tax rates, thereby adding
to a growing literature on the determinants of these rates (e.g. Slemrod, 2004; Kenny and Winer,
2006; Hines, 2007). The analysis of investment by American firms in Section 5 suggests that
governance quality is an important, and hitherto largely neglected, determinant of the tax
elasticity of foreign investment. Hence it appears that tax policies can be added to the growing
list of economic policies likely to be influenced by governance institutions.




                                                  2
        Section two of the paper reviews the factors that influence the desirability of becoming a
tax haven. Section three describes the data used in the empirical analysis that follows, noting the
robust pattern that tax haven countries are well governed. Section four presents the basic
regression analysis of the determinants of tax haven status, along with instrumental variables
specifications in which legal origins are used as instruments for current governance quality. It
also reports the results of a series of robustness checks. Section five compares the tax sensitivity
of American investment in well governed and poorly governed countries. Section six concludes.

2.      Tax Havens in Theory and Practice

        Tax havens are well positioned to benefit from the considerable international mobility of
business investment and the associated tax base.1 There is ample reason to expect their low tax
rates to influence both the investment and the tax avoidance activities of foreign investors, and
an extensive literature documents the magnitudes of the effects of low tax rates.2 With respect to
investment, tax policies are obviously capable of affecting the volume and location of FDI since,
all other considerations equal, higher tax rates reduce after-tax returns, thereby reducing
incentives to commit investment funds. The first generation of empirical studies, reviewed in
Hines (1997, 1999), reports tax elasticities of investment in the neighborhood of –0.6. What this
means is that a ten percent tax reduction (for example, reducing the corporate tax rate from 35
percent to 31.5 percent) is typically associated with six percent greater inbound foreign
investment. More recent evidence suggests that FDI is even more tax sensitive than this.3




1
  Tax havens may serve different purposes for business investors than they do for individual and trust investors. The
analysis that follows concerns only the business uses of tax havens, which in any case greatly exceed their use by
individual investors. The sum of incomes earned in Panama, Bermuda, all Caribbean and West Indian countries,
Ireland, Luxembourg, Switzerland, Hong Kong and Singapore by American individuals filing forms 1116 and 2555
(which entails some double counting, as the same individual may file both) in 2001, and trust income earned in
2002, was $7.4 billion. By contrast, the controlled foreign corporations of American corporations reported $57.3
billion of after-tax earnings and profits in these countries in 2002. See Curry and Kahr (2004), Holik (2005), and
Masters and Oh (2006). Any unreported income is of course not captured in these figures.
2
  See Gordon and Hines (2002) and Devereux (2006) for recent surveys. For a fuller discussion of the tax rules
facing U.S. multinational firms and the evidence on behavioral responses to international taxation of U.S.
multinationals, see Hines (1997, 1999) and Desai, Foley and Hines (2003).
3
  For example, Altshuler et al. (2001) compare the tax sensitivity of aggregate capital ownership in 58 countries in
1984 to that in 1992, reporting estimated tax elasticities that rise (in absolute value) from -1.5 in 1984 to -2.8 in
1992. Using data drawn from a much larger sample of countries, and covering the years 1982, 1989, 1994 and 1997,
Desai, Foley and Hines (2003) offer evidence of an average -1.5 tax elasticity of asset ownership. Altshuler and
Grubert (2004) offer evidence of a -3.5 tax elasticity of investment in a sample of 58 countries in 2000.


                                                         3
         Tax havens attract foreign investment not only because income earned locally is taxed at
favorable rates, but also because tax haven activities facilitate the avoidance of taxes that might
otherwise have to be paid to other countries. One way that tax havens facilitate tax avoidance is
by permitting taxpayers to reallocate taxable income from high-tax to low-tax jurisdictions. For
instance, investments in high-tax countries may be financed with loans from affiliates in tax
havens; the resulting interest payments reduce taxable incomes in high-tax locations while
producing taxable income in the havens. Another method of reallocating taxable income is to
adjust transfer prices used for within-firm transactions. Multinational firms typically can benefit
by reducing prices charged by affiliates in high-tax countries for items and services provided to
affiliates in low-tax countries. OECD governments require firms to use transfer prices that
would be paid by unrelated parties, but enforcement is difficult, particularly when pricing issues
concern unique or proprietary items such as patent rights. Given the looseness of the resulting
legal restrictions, it is entirely possible for firms to adjust transfer prices in a tax-sensitive
fashion without violating any laws. Multinational firms can structure a variety of transactions –
intrafirm debt, royalty payments, dividend repatriations, and intrafirm trade – in a manner that is
conducive to tax avoidance.4 Finally, tax haven operations can be used to avoid triggering
home-country taxes that would otherwise be due on repatriated income. Placing a tax haven
company at the top of the ownership chain of a firm’s foreign operations creates opportunities to
redeploy income between foreign jurisdictions without receiving the income in the firm’s home
country and thereby producing a home country tax obligation. The resulting tax savings can be
substantial,5 contributing to the value of tax haven operations.

         Taken together, this evidence implies that countries contemplating adopting very low tax
rates can reasonably expect to receive significant foreign investment as a consequence. Active
tax avoidance on the part of international investors implies that taxable income conditional on
investment levels is also very sensitive to tax rates. As a result, the budgetary cost to a country
that unilaterally reduces its tax rate need not be very great, since a lower tax rate is accompanied




4
  Studies of the responsiveness of firms to taxes on these margins examine reported profitability, tax liabilities, and
specific measures of financial and merchandise trade in order to identify the effects of taxes; Hines (1999) and
Devereux (2006) survey this evidence.
5
  See, e.g., Altshuler and Grubert (2003) and Desai, Foley and Hines (2003).



                                                           4
by a larger tax base due both to greater investment and to greater taxable income associated with
local investment.
         Any budgetary cost in the form of reduced government revenue that accompanies
becoming a tax haven can, in principle, be recouped by increasing other taxes, such as personal
income taxes, value-added taxes, property taxes, or sales taxes. Indeed, the classic argument of
Diamond and Mirrlees (1971) that governments unnecessarily distort production when they tax
intermediate production implies (Gordon, 1986) that governments with a sufficient number of
available tax instruments can make all domestic residents better off by not taxing internationally
mobile capital.6 The reason is that small open economies are inevitably price-takers in world
markets, from which it follows that they are unable to shift any of their tax burdens onto foreign
investors. As a result, they have no incentive to tax foreign investors, since doing so simply
distorts their economies without extracting resources from foreigners. Since the costs of taxing
foreigners are borne by domestic factors in the form of lower wages and land prices, and these
costs include deadweight losses due to inefficient taxation, domestic residents would be made
better off by removing any taxes on foreign investors and instead directly taxing the returns to
local factors of production.
         The Diamond and Mirrlees argument offers countries a very powerful rationale in favor
of becoming tax havens, so it is worth identifying some of the key assumptions on which the
argument is based. The first assumption is that countries are relatively small, that they are price
takers in the world economy, and in particular cannot substantially affect the world return to
capital. While this is certainly a fair description of many countries, it may not characterize them
all, so the Diamond and Mirrlees logic is thought to have strongest purchase on small countries.
The second assumption is that foreign investors do not earn economic rents, in the form of
supranormal rates of return, from their local investments – or that, if they do, then the local
government is able to extract the rents with special charges, and need not use ordinary business
taxes for this purpose. This assumption rules out the possibility that governments might want to
maintain high rates of corporate income taxation in order to recoup some of the economic rents
earned by local mining firms, for example.7 The third assumption is that governments have at


6
  See Gordon and Hines (2002) for a further elaboration of this argument, and Keen and Wildasin (2004) for an
important caveat concerning the abilities of governments to transfer resources among themselves.
7
  Thus, countries that enjoy locational rents (e.g. through the presence of natural resources) may optimally choose to
impose high corporate taxes, if they are unable to impose a pure profits tax of the type envisaged by Diamond and


                                                          5
their disposal a sufficient number of tax instruments that they can effectively replicate the set of
tax burdens that would be created by taxing foreign investment income, only do so in a more
efficient manner. Finally, the fourth assumption is that foreign investors actually bear a burden
from paying local taxes. While this seems a rather obvious assumption, there can be situations
(analyzed, for example, by Gordon (1992)) in which greater home country taxes exactly offset
the benefits of foreign tax reductions, leaving host governments with little or no incentive to
offer investors low tax rates.
         The experience of tax haven economies in the period since 1980 is consistent with the
theory predicting significant associated economic benefits. Hines (2005) reports that tax haven
economies grew at an average annual real per capita rate of 3.3 percent between 1982 and 1999,
which compares favorably to the 1.4 percent growth rate of the world as a whole. Furthermore,
the public finances of tax havens remain robust despite their low tax rates on foreign investment:
by some measures, tax haven governments are actually larger (as a fraction of GDP) than
governments elsewhere in the world, and by other measures there is no discernable difference
between government sizes in the two groups of countries. It appears, therefore, that tax haven
governments are able to tap revenue sources other than business taxes to finance significant
levels of government spending, either through the greater economic activity that accompanies
becoming a tax haven, or by imposing higher rates of other taxes.
         Concern over the possible implications of international tax competition has prompted
many governments to consider international cooperative efforts designed to preserve their
abilities to tax mobile business income.8 Despite enthusiasm expressed by some participants,
differences of viewpoint and interest make international tax agreements involving more than two
countries notoriously difficult to conclude. The most ambitious and effective multilateral tax
agreement to date is an effort of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD).9 The OECD in 1998 introduced what was then known as its Harmful Tax Competition
initiative (OECD, 1998), and is now known as its Harmful Tax Practices initiative. The purpose


Mirrlees (1971). A locational advantage may also stem from agglomeration externalities that raise the returns to
capital in the presence of a large preexisting capital stock (see Kind, Knarvik and Schjelderup (2000) and Borck and
Pfluger (2006) for theoretical analyses).
8
  It is far from clear, however, that tax havens reduce incentives to conduct business in high-tax countries, and recent
evidence (Desai, Foley and Hines, 2006a, b) suggests that the presence of nearby tax havens stimulates activity in
high-tax locations.
9
  The following discussion of the OECD initiative is drawn from Hines (2006).



                                                           6
of the initiative was to discourage OECD member countries and certain tax havens outside the
OECD from pursuing policies that were thought to harm other countries by unfairly eroding tax
bases. In particular, the OECD criticized the use of preferential tax regimes that included very
low tax rates, the absence of effective information exchange with other countries, and ring-
fencing that meant that foreign investors were entitled to tax benefits that domestic residents
were denied. The OECD identified 47 such preferential regimes, in different industries and lines
of business, among OECD countries. Many of these regimes have been subsequently abolished
or changed to remove the features to which the OECD objected.

        As part of its Harmful Tax Practices initiative, the OECD also produced a List of Un-
Cooperative Tax Havens, identifying countries that have not committed to sufficient exchange of
information with tax authorities in other countries. The concern was that the absence of
information exchange might impede the ability of OECD members, and other countries, to tax
their resident individuals and corporations on income or assets hidden in foreign tax havens. As
a result of the OECD initiative, along with diplomatic and other actions of individual nations, 33
countries and jurisdictions outside the OECD committed to improve the transparency of their tax
systems and to facilitate information exchange. As of 2004 there remained five tax havens not
making such commitments,10 but the vast majority of the world’s tax havens rely on low tax rates
and other favorable tax provisions to attract investment, rather than using the prospect that local
transactions will not be reported.

3.      Evidence

        Most tax havens are small countries. Thus, the data used in this study pay particular
attention to including smaller countries and territories. GDP and population data are available
from the various sources detailed in the Data Appendix for 227 countries and territories in 2004.
The governance measure described below is available for 209 of these countries and territories.
Although a basic criterion for inclusion is some degree of fiscal autonomy, a number of the


10
   These tax havens are Andorra, Liberia, Liechtenstein, the Marshall Islands, and Monaco (OECD, 2004). It is
noteworthy that the commitments of other tax haven countries to exchange information and improve the
transparency of their tax systems is often contingent on OECD member countries doing the same. Given the variety
of experience within the OECD, and the remaining differences between what countries do and what they have
committed to do, the ultimate impact of the OECD initiative is still uncertain. The OECD (2006) reports
considerable progress in commitments to information exchange, though there remain many gaps, particularly among
tax havens.


                                                       7
jurisdictions in the dataset (including many of the tax havens) are not independent sovereign
states, as that term is generally understood. To take account of this, the models below include a
control for membership in the United Nations (UN) organization, a status closely associated with
state sovereignty. In addition, consistent results are obtained when samples are restricted to UN
members.
         While there are many alternative notions of what constitutes a tax haven, the analysis in
this paper uses as its basic definition the list of 41 countries and territories provided in Appendix
2 of Hines and Rice (1994, p. 178), which is based on the coexistence of low business tax rates in
a jurisdiction in 1982 and its identification as a tax haven by multiple authoritative sources. All
41 of these countries reappear in the subsequent Diamond and Diamond (2002) listing of the
world’s tax havens for 2002, and there have been no significant additions to this list. Of these 41
countries, 39 can be linked to currently existing entities for which GDP and population data for
2004 exist; governance data are available for 33 of these jurisdictions. Thus, the dependent
variable in the basic analysis below is an indicator variable for whether a country is classified as
a tax haven both in Hines and Rice (1994) and in Diamond and Diamond (2002). A list of
countries and territories classified as tax havens under this definition, and under the OECD’s
criteria, is presented in Table 1.11 As tax haven status is highly stable over time, there is no
meaningful longitudinal variation in this measure, and the analysis is necessarily restricted to
cross-sectional methods.
         The primary explanatory variable of interest is a measure of countries’ governance
institutions. Drawing on the many indices that have been proposed as indicators of country-level
institutional quality, Kaufmann, Kraay and Mastruzzi (2005) use a principal components analysis
to construct 6 measures of different elements of country-level governance. These are labeled
“voice and accountability” (VA), “political stability” (PS), “government effectiveness” (GE),
“regulatory quality” (RQ), “rule of law” (RL), and “control of corruption” (CC). Each of these
measures takes values from approximately -2.5 to 2.5 (with higher values indicating better
governance), and is normalized so that the mean across all countries is 0 and the standard
deviation is 1. These data are available at 2-year intervals for the period 1996-2004, and have


11
 There are 40 countries and territories in the dataset that satisfy the criteria for tax haven status established in
OECD (2000); more details are provided in the Data Appendix. The basic results below are robust to using the
OECD definition rather than that of Hines and Rice (1994), and to combining the two definitions.



                                                            8
been used widely in recent research (e.g. Fisman and Miguel, 2006; Rose and Spiegel,
forthcoming). The 2004 data are used in the basic analysis below,12 as this includes significantly
expanded coverage, relative to previous years, of smaller countries and territories (both tax
havens and nonhavens). One or more of these governance measures for 2004 is available for 209
countries (of which 33 are tax havens by the Hines-Rice definition).
        For the purposes of this paper, the individual measures described above are aggregated
into a composite governance index for each country, using the (unweighted) mean of the
available measures in 2004.13 Note, however, that this calculation only includes VA, PS, GE, RL
and CC; the regulatory quality (RQ) measure is excluded from the composite index. A few of the
underlying surveys and measures used by Kaufmann et al. (2005) to calculate RQ are directly
related to countries’ tax systems, and so may be mechanically correlated with tax rates and tax
haven status.14 However, a detailed examination of the surveys and measures underlying the
other 5 subindices (as described in Kaufmann et al. (2005, Appendix B)) does not suggest that
any of these are related in any direct way to the tax system.
        Control variables15 used in the analysis below include GDP per capita (in purchasing-
power-parity-adjusted US$) and population (both for 2004, obtained from the World Bank’s
World Development Indicators (WDI) database), and an indicator variable for membership in the
United Nations organization. Another set of variables captures exogenous elements of each
country’s degree of international openness, constructed by Gallup, Sachs and Mellinger (1999).
These include the physical distance (by air) from the country’s capital city to the closest major
capital exporting region (specifically, the closest of Rotterdam, New York or Tokyo), an
indicator variable for whether the country is landlocked, and the fraction of the country’s
population that lives within 100km of the coast. Other geographical variables are the country’s
land area and an indicator variable for whether the country is an island.

12
   However, the analysis of investment elasticities in Section 5 uses governance data from 2000 for consistency with
the investment data, which cover 1999.
13
   Note that a country’s governance index is missing only if all of the individual measures (VA, PS, GE, RL, and
CC) are missing in 2004. However, the results are robust if the sample is restricted to countries for which all 5
individual measures are available.
14
   For example, RQ includes country investment profiles in which taxation is a component, and surveys that (among
other things) ask respondents how distortionary they perceive the tax system to be (Kaufmann et al., 2005,
Appendix B, pp. 106-7).
15
   All these variables and their sources are described in more detail in the Data Appendix. Some country
characteristics (notably GDP per capita; see Hines (2005)) may be endogenous to tax haven status, but the vast




                                                         9
         The instrumental variables analysis described in Section 4 below uses a set of (arguably)
exogenous determinants of institutional quality, obtained from La Porta et al. (1999; hereafter
LLSV). Of central importance is a set of indicator variables for each of five origins – British,
French, German, Scandinavian and Socialist – of countries’ systems of commercial law. In
addition, the analysis uses a country’s latitude (in absolute value, scaled to lie between 0 and 1),
and its degree of ethnolinguistic fractionalization.
         The robustness checks use a number of additional variables. These include World Bank
data on government expenditures as a percentage of GDP, the number of telephone mainlines in
a country (as a proxy for the level of development of communications infrastructure) and the
value (in US$ per capita) of the deposits of oil, gas, coal, and ten metals known to exist in each
country in 2000 (as a proxy for the country’s exogenous natural resource endowment). In
addition, the nature of the political system in each country is captured by an indicator variable
for countries with parliamentary systems in 2004, using the World Bank’s Database of Political
Institutions (Beck et al., 2001), while another dummy variable indicates whether each country
uses English as one of its official languages. Summary statistics for all of the variables described
above are presented in Table 2, compiled separately for tax havens and nonhavens (using the
Hines-Rice definition).
         The summary statistics in Table 2 confirm some well-known facts about tax havens –
they are smaller in population and area, and more affluent, than nonhavens. Most striking,
however, is the difference in the quality of governance institutions. Tax havens have a mean
governance index of about 0.73, almost one standard deviation higher than that for nonhavens (-
0.13), and substantially higher than the global mean of the measure (normalized to 0). Moreover,
this difference is not entirely attributable to the greater affluence of tax havens. Figure 1a plots
the governance index against the log of GDP per capita for all countries in the dataset, with tax
havens represented by squares, and all other countries represented by dots. While havens tend to
have relatively high GDP, they are also clustered predominantly above the fitted line, reflecting
their generally higher governance quality at any given level of per capita GDP. (Figure 1b
depicts the haven observations only, with the same fitted line as in Figure 1a). Thus, havens
appear to be better governed than would be expected on the basis of their relative affluence.


majority of the (very wide) cross-country variation in GDP per capita, and other variables, captures differences in
underlying wealth and other characteristics, rather than reflecting differences in tax policy.


                                                         10
         There are other notable patterns in the data. Tax havens tend to have open economies (in
that they are physically closer to major capital exporters, less likely to be landlocked, more likely
to be islands, and have a larger proportion of their populations living close to the coast). They are
also more likely to have British legal origins and parliamentary systems, and to use English as an
official language, than are nonhavens. Conversely, they are less likely to have French,
Scandinavian or Socialist legal origins than are nonhavens. Tax havens have more homogenous
populations than nonhavens, and their governments’ levels of spending relative to GDP are
similar to those of nonhavens (consistent with Hines (2005)). Finally, tax havens have
substantially smaller natural resource endowments than nonhavens, consistent with the
discussion of locational rents in Section 2.
         These statistics compare tax havens to all nonhavens. Clearly, however, this is not the
most appropriate comparison group. For example, tax havens tend to have small populations
(with only 8 of the 39 havens having populations of more than one million). Thus, Table 3a
reports the means of selected variables separately for small havens and small nonhavens (where
“small” is defined as having a population of less than one million), along with t-tests for the
differences in these means. The difference in the mean governance index for havens and
nonhavens is somewhat smaller than in Table 2; however, it remains statistically significant. The
same pattern as in Figure 1a – with havens being clustered above the fitted line – also holds
when looking only at small countries (as depicted in Figures 2a and 2b).16

4.       Characteristics of Tax Haven Countries

         The basic empirical specification used to model the determinants of tax haven status
includes the governance index along with the following controls: GDP per capita, population,
indicators for UN membership and landlocked status, distance by air from major capital
exporters, and regional dummies (based on World Bank regional classifications). The sample
includes all countries for which the required data exist.17 Probit, logit and linear probability

16
   Many of the general patterns noted above continue to hold in Table 3a. Small tax havens are significantly more
affluent and less distant from major capital exporters than small nonhavens, and are more likely to use English as an
official language. The greater linguistic homogeneity and greater propensity for parliamentary government of small
havens are both of borderline statistical significance. However, small havens are more likely to be landlocked and to
be sovereign states (although neither difference is statistically significant).
17
   The sole exception is Liberia, a tax haven which is not included in the data set used for the regressions. Liberia
was a tax haven long prior to its recent social unrest and civil war, which triggered a dramatic reduction in the
quality of its governance. As a result, it is difficult to know whether the current or prior level of governance quality
is more appropriately used in the regressions. Including Liberia in the data at its current (very low) level of


                                                          11
models all lead to highly consistent results. However, Table 4 presents only the probit results,
using robust standard errors, for consistency with the instrumental variable probit results
discussed below.
         The estimated 0.814 coefficient in Column 1 of Table 4 implies that the governance
index has a positive and highly significant effect on the probability of being a tax haven.
Moreover, this effect is robust to removing dependent territories from the sample by restricting
observations to UN members, as the estimated 0.924 coefficient in Column 2 of Table 4
indicates. Africa has virtually no tax havens, and has many countries with low governance
scores; however, this does not appear to drive the results, as consistent findings appear when
African countries are excluded from the sample (Table 4, Column 3). The results are similarly
unaffected by excluding from the sample the poorest countries, those with GDP per capita below
$1000 (Table 4, Column 4), suggesting that nonlinear income effects in the range of very low
incomes do not account for the apparent impact of governance on tax haven status.
         As noted earlier, the most appropriate comparison group for havens is likely to be the set
of small countries. Restricting the sample to small countries and territories (those with
populations of less than one million) also leads to consistent findings (Table 4, Column 5),
despite the much smaller sample size. Moreover, the magnitude of the estimated effect of
governance is substantial: for a country with the average characteristics of jurisdictions with
populations below one million, a one standard deviation increase in governance quality from 0 to
1 (corresponding to the difference between Brazil and Portugal) increases the probability of
being a tax haven from 0.24 to approximately 0.63.
         A view that is frequently expressed in both scholarly and popular writings is that tax
havens are “outlaw” countries that disregard international norms.18 The results in Table 4 may


governance quality reveals it to be an outlier on the basis of different tests for influential observations (e.g. Belsley,
Kuh and Welsch, 1980). For instance, when a linear probability model is estimated on a sample that includes
Liberia, it (Liberia) has by far the largest raw, standardized and studentized residuals. The DFBETA measure also
identifies Liberia as the most influential observation, in terms of its effect on the coefficient on the governance
index. In addition, using an iterative robust estimation procedure that downweights influential observations (Li,
1985) leads to Liberia having the lowest weight of any country. It is noteworthy, however, that including Liberia in
the sample makes no difference to the significance of the estimated effect of governance in the linear probability
model; the logit and probit results are also in the same direction, although weaker. Omitting other countries that are
also relatively influential (albeit less so than Liberia) leads to results that are highly consistent with those reported in
Table 4. Moreover, the selection criteria would, in any case, omit Liberia from the samples used in the regressions
reported in Columns 3, 4 and 5 of Table 4.
18
   Kudrle and Eden (2005) describe tax havens as “renegade states,” and Hampton and Christensen (2002) refer to
tax havens as “offshore pariahs;” see also Hishikawa (2002).


                                                            12
appear surprising from this perspective. It should be noted that there is indeed some degree of
overlap between the set of tax haven countries and those countries alleged by the OECD to
facilitate money laundering activity, and with those countries that provide “flags of convenience”
for international shipping.19 However, the mean of the governance index for tax havens (0.73) is
considerably higher than that for “money laundering” countries and for “flag of convenience”
countries (0.51 and 0.38, respectively). “Pure” tax havens (i.e. those tax havens that are not also
alleged by the OECD to facilitate money laundering or identified as providing “flags of
convenience”) are even better-governed than tax havens as a group. Consequently, restricting
attention to these “pure” havens would only strengthen the association between tax haven status
and good governance.
           It is noteworthy that the interpretation of tax havens as vendors of tax avoidance services
(e.g., Slemrod and Wilson, 2006) appears largely inconsistent with the evidence presented in
Table 4. The type of tax avoidance envisioned in this class of models involves tax havens
receiving fees from taxpayers in return for assistance in avoiding home country taxes. Since
adherence to existing laws and treaty obligations would otherwise prevent this type of behavior,
it would require the complicity of corrupt government officials in tax havens. In fact, tax havens
appear not to have corrupt governments, but, on the contrary, governments that score very well
on measures of corruption and other indicators of governance quality.
           The results reported in Table 4 are consistent with the recent noteworthy findings of Rose
and Spiegel (forthcoming) on the determinants and economic effects of offshore financial centers
(OFCs). Rose and Spiegel observe that OFCs are frequently tax havens, and present regressions
in which, after controlling for tax haven status, governance quality measures are largely
insignificant in explaining whether a country is an OFC. Combining these findings with the
results presented in Table 4, it would appear that any significant governance effects on a
country’s choice to become an OFC take the form of influencing whether it becomes a tax haven.
Rose and Spiegel report that a country’s regulatory quality is positively associated with levels of
foreign asset holdings, controlling for other attributes, which may reflect the value that investors




19
     Both of these variables are obtained from Rose and Spiegel (forthcoming).



                                                          13
attach to confidence in a country’s regulatory institutions.20 The focus of Rose and Spiegel
(forthcoming), however, is on the impact of OFCs on the banking sectors of nearby economies, a
topic that is beyond the scope of the present study.
         The control variables in Table 4 generally have the expected effects. Population size has
a negative and highly significant effect on the likelihood of being a tax haven,21 except when the
sample is restricted to small countries. Distance has a negative effect that is significant in some
specifications; the effects of GDP and landlocked status are insignificant. Interestingly, UN
membership has a positive (albeit insignificant) effect, from which it appears that, controlling for
other variables, dependent territories (who are not UN members) are if anything less likely than
other jurisdictions to become tax havens. Dependent political status may commit territories not
to expropriate foreign investors (who could seek recourse in courts of the sovereign country).
The evidence, however, suggests that sovereign states with sufficiently high governance quality
are at no particular disadvantage relative to dependent territories in making credible
commitments of nonexpropriation.
         The positive association between the governance index and the probability of being a tax
haven is robust to a variety of additional (unreported) checks. The result is unchanged when
additional geographical variables (land area or population density, and an indicator variable for
island countries) are included; none of these additional variables are themselves significant. It is
also unaffected by the addition of indicator variables for parliamentary systems and for the use of
English as an official language (the coefficients on these variables are positive but insignificant).
Adding a measure of ethnolinguistic fractionalization reduces the sample size considerably, but
the coefficient on the governance index remains positive and significant (while the coefficient on
the fractionalization index is negative but insignificant).
         The results in Table 4 are also robust to using alternative definitions of tax havens. In
particular, using the OECD (2000) list of tax havens as the dependent variable (instead of the
Hines-Rice list) leads to highly consistent results. Combining the Hines-Rice and OECD criteria




20
   Recall that the governance quality variable used in the empirical work presented in Tables 4-7 is based on only
five of the six governance measures reported by Kaufman et al. (2005), excluding the regulatory quality measure
since it may be based partly on perceptions of tax burdens.
21
   This is consistent with the theoretical predictions of Kanbur and Keen (1993), Hansen and Kessler (2001), and
Slemrod and Wilson (2006).


                                                         14
(by defining as a tax haven any country or territory that appears on at least one of those lists) also
does not affect the results. The results are also robust to reclassifying Estonia as a tax haven.22
        The basic results hold under a number of alternative specifications. As noted earlier,
using a logit model leads to consistent results, as does OLS estimation of a linear probability
model. Including higher-order (squared and cubed) terms for per capita GDP and population, or
using the logs of those variables, does not affect the results. Treating the governance index as a
purely ordinal variable also does not affect the results; for instance, replacing the numerical
governance index with an indicator variable that equals one for a country whose governance lies
in the top 25% of countries (and zero otherwise) leads to consistent findings. Replacing the
governance index by any one of its component measures leads to generally consistent results –
i.e. each component of the governance index is strongly positively related to tax haven status,
apart from VA (voice and accountability), which has an insignificant (positive) effect.
        The regression analysis in Table 4 strongly supports the initial impression from Tables 2
and 3a that tax havens are better-governed than nonhavens. Moreover, it suggests that this
finding is robust to controlling for a variety of observable country characteristics, and to various
alternative specifications. However, a central concern that remains is that because havens and
nonhavens differ along a number of other dimensions, the results may be attributable to
correlated omitted variables. The remainder of the analysis largely focuses on using a variety of
empirical approaches to address this and other concerns.
4.1     Matching Estimation
        The potential concern about the comparability of havens and nonhavens is partially
addressed by restricting attention solely to countries with small populations (as in Table 3a and
Table 4, Column 5). However, this exercise uses only one dimension of variation, and leaves
only a rather small sample. A more systematic strategy for finding the optimal comparison group
of nonhavens is to use a matching estimation approach (e.g. Dehejia and Wahba, 2002).
However, an important caveat is that the number of possible matches, and their closeness, is
necessarily constrained by the number of countries in the world, and are thus severely limited
relative to those in a typical application of this methodology.



22
  In 2000, Estonia reformed its income tax system to eliminate corporate taxes on corporate income that is not
distributed – see Funke (2002) for details.


                                                        15
         The first step in this procedure is to generate propensity scores (i.e. estimated
probabilities of being a tax haven) using a logit model of the indicator variable for tax haven
status, with the following independent variables: GDP per capita, population, UN membership,
landlocked status, distance, and the regional dummies (note that this includes all the independent
variables in the specification in Table 4, except for the governance index).23 Given these
propensity scores, stratifying the observations into 3 blocks is sufficient to ensure that there is no
significant difference between the mean propensity scores of havens and nonhavens within each
block (this is shown by the t-tests in Column 5 of Table 5). Moreover, the balancing property –
i.e. that there is no significant difference between the means of each of the covariates within each
block – is satisfied for these blocks.
         This procedure enables the identification of those nonhavens that have estimated
propensity scores that are within the same range as the estimated propensity scores for the 38
havens used in the analysis.24 In total, there are 76 nonhavens that fall into this category (i.e.
have estimated propensity scores that exceed approximately 0.05), and these constitute the most
appropriate comparison group for the tax havens on the basis of the multi-dimensional vector of
observed country characteristics. Column 6 of Table 4 reports the results of the logit regression
model, with the sample being restricted to the “common support” – the havens, plus those
nonhavens within this comparison group (missing data for the governance index reduces the
sample size to 99). Clearly, the coefficient of the governance index is highly significant, and its
magnitude is very similar to that in Table 4, Column 1 (using the full sample of countries).
         Column 7 of Table 5 reports the difference between the mean governance index values
for havens and nonhavens for countries in this common support, using the stratification method
(based on the 3 blocks identified in Table 5). This difference (approximately 0.3) is somewhat

23
   Formally, this approach involves viewing tax haven status as the “treatment” and the governance index as the
“outcome” measure, and so appears to reverse the assumption about causality that is implicit in the regression
reported in Table 4. However, recall that the primary aim of that regression is to document the positive association
between the two variables; issues of causality are addressed more fully in the instrumental-variables analysis below.
Similarly, the aim of the matching estimation is simply to measure whether there is a difference in the mean
governance quality of havens and of the subset of nonhavens that are most closely matched in terms of observables.
Because tax haven status is dichotomous while the governance index is continuous, and because the Table 4
regression already suggests a reasonable specification of the covariates of tax haven status, it proves more
convenient to view governance as the “outcome.”
24
   Recall that (as discussed above) Liberia is omitted from the analysis. Intuitively, the matching procedure seeks to
identify nonhavens that are closely matched on observable variables with havens. The inclusion in the analysis of a
haven with exceptionally low GDP makes low-GDP nonhavens appear better-matched than is perhaps truly the case




                                                         16
smaller than the raw difference in Tables 2 and 3a. However, it is positive, and is of borderline
statistical significance, using a standard error that is generated by bootstrapping with 500
replications. Thus, it appears that, notwithstanding the caveats above regarding the small number
of observations, tax havens have a substantially higher governance quality than do comparable
nonhavens.
4.2      Instrumental Variables Estimation
         The regression and matching approaches used above establish a positive association
between tax haven status and governance quality, controlling in different ways for observable
country characteristics. However, the methods used above do not rule out the possibility that this
apparent relationship is driven by unobserved correlated omitted variables. Moreover, even
accepting the existence of the relationship does not settle the issue of the direction of causality:
in particular, do better-governed countries choose to become tax havens, or does becoming a tax
haven lead to an improvement in the quality of governance?
         An instrumental variables approach is used to address these issues. LLSV (1999) identify
legal origin as a determinant of various measures of countries’ governance quality. Legal origins
are typically determined by historical events that occurred centuries ago, long before the
introduction of modern tax systems. Thus, it is reasonable to think of legal origins as exogenous
with respect to current tax haven status. Legal origins have been used in the literature to
instrument for a variety of different country characteristics, but the notion of governance
institutions used here is sufficiently broad that the exclusion restriction (that a country’s legal
origin does not affect its tax policy other than through governance) is likely to be satisfied.
         The results reported in Table 6 use an instrumental-variable probit model with a
continuous endogenous regressor (e.g. Wooldridge, 2002, pp. 472-77), namely the governance
index. In Column 1, the indicator variables for legal origins are used as instruments (they are
jointly significant in the (unreported) first-stage regression). Clearly, the use of these instruments
strengthens the basic result. The results are highly consistent when a linear specification is used
instead of the IV probit model (in effect, this involves running two-stage least squares on the




(at least with respect to havens other than Liberia), creating a bias towards finding differences in governance
between havens and nonhavens.


                                                          17
linear probability model, with legal origins as the instruments). Moreover, the results are also
unchanged when latitude is included as an additional instrument (Column 2).25
4.3      Alternative Explanations
         The results in Table 6 suggest a causal interpretation of the effect of governance on tax
haven status – in particular, it appears that better governance leads countries to become tax
havens. There remain, however, a number of concerns about omitted correlated variables, and
especially about the validity of the exclusion restriction implicit in the IV approach. For instance,
unobserved tastes for government expenditures may differ across countries. A taste for
government spending may be correlated with good governance (e.g. citizens may demand more
government activity when the government is more effective and less corrupt) and also cause tax
rates to be high (thereby reducing a country’s willingness to become a tax haven). Another
possibility is that a more sophisticated communications infrastructure (which may be positively
correlated with governance quality) may increase the willingness of foreign investors to invest,
and hence raise the returns to becoming a tax haven.
         To a large extent, the IV strategy in Section 4.2 addresses concerns about omitted
correlated variables. However, it is possible that these omitted variables may be correlated with
the instruments (i.e. legal origins) as well. For example, suppose that Socialist legal origins are
associated with stronger tastes for government spending, and are also (as is apparent from Table
2) negatively correlated with being a tax haven. Then, the apparent causal effect of governance
may be driven by the omitted taste variable. To address these concerns, the specification in
Column 3 of Table 6 adds two controls to the basic IV probit model. The first is a proxy for
countries’ tastes for government spending: government expenditures as a percentage of GDP.
The second is a proxy for countries’ communications infrastructure: the number of telephone
lines, scaled by area (both variables use World Bank data). Because of limited coverage for these
variables, the sample size falls substantially. Even so, while both the additional controls are
significant and in the expected direction, the governance index remains positive and highly
significant.



25
  LLSV argue that governance quality also depends on ethnolinguistic fractionalization and religious composition.
However, unlike legal origins and latitude, these variables are not significant in the first-stage regression with this
sample, and are hence not used as instruments.



                                                          18
        The exclusion restriction may also be invalid if legal origins are correlated with cultural
or linguistic links that facilitate cross-border investment and thus raise the returns to being a tax
haven. For instance, suppose (as argued by LLSV) that British legal origins lead to higher
governance quality. If British legal origins are also correlated with the use of the English
language, then the apparent causal effect of governance on tax haven status found in Table 6 may
instead be due to the effects on investment of the use of English. However, adding an indicator
variable for the use of English as an official language in the regression reported in Column 3
actually strengthens the effect of governance. Thus, it does not seem that these omitted variables
drive the basic results.
        Among the other possible explanations for the observed correlation between governance
quality and tax haven status, two warrant further discussion and analysis. The first relates to the
effects of corruption on tax structure. It may be argued that countries that have high levels of
corruption will tend to impose higher statutory tax rates on firms (whether foreign or domestic)
in order to increase the bargaining power of corrupt government officials in negotiating bribes
from taxpayers. This would make more corrupt countries less likely to become tax havens, while
also having intrinsically worse governance scores. It is not possible to test this story simply by
finding a proxy for the omitted variable, as the crucial issue is how the empirical link between
governance and tax structure is interpreted.
        Another important alternative explanation relates to the role of natural resources. There is
a substantial literature on the effects of natural resource abundance on economic performance
(e.g. Sachs and Warner, 1995). An argument that has been made in this literature is that the
availability of natural resources may raise the returns to rent-seeking activity, and lower the
quality of institutions. On the other hand, natural resource abundance is also a source of
locational rents, which imply that optimal corporate taxes are relatively high; thus, natural
resource abundant countries will be less likely to become tax havens. Because of the limited
sample of countries for which data on natural resources (specifically, the value of subsoil assets
per capita) are available, testing this explanation by adding subsoil assets to the model leads to
inconclusive results.
        Although neither of the last two alternative explanations can be readily tested within the
confines of the model of tax haven status, both carry implications for the distribution of
corporate tax rates across countries. In particular, they are premised on corporate tax rates being



                                                  19
higher in more corrupt and more resource-abundant countries, respectively. These implications
are testable with the available data.
4.4     The Determinants of Corporate Tax Rates
        The factors that determine cross-country and longitudinal variation in corporate tax rates
are the subject of a growing empirical literature (e.g. Slemrod, 2004; Kenny and Winer, 2006;
Hines, 2007). The analysis in this section uses data from the World Tax Database maintained by
the Office of Tax Policy Research at the University of Michigan on the top statutory corporate
tax rate for 2002 (the latest year for which there are data with extensive coverage). As reported in
the first row of Table 3b, these data are available for 148 countries (although the number of
countries for which all independent variables are available is somewhat smaller); the mean tax
rate is approximately 29%. Figure 3 plots this tax rate against the governance index. There is a
definite, albeit weak, negative relationship: i.e. better-governed countries tend to have lower top
statutory corporate tax rates. Particularly noteworthy is what might be characterized as the empty
southwest quadrant – i.e. the virtual absence of countries that have both low governance scores
and low tax rates.
        The determinants of these tax rates are reported in Table 7. A Tobit specification is used,
as tax rates are potentially left-censored at zero. The sample is restricted throughout to UN
members, to ensure that the tax rates are chosen by sovereign governments that enjoy fiscal
autonomy. Column 1 of Table 7 reports results using the same set of independent variables as in
Table 4, Column 1 (the basic logit model of tax haven status). The negative coefficient (-2.998)
on the governance index is consistent with the estimated positive effect of governance on tax
haven status. The controls are generally insignificant (although landlocked status is negative and
of borderline significance). In Column 2, a number of additional controls are introduced.26 In
particular, the value of subsoil assets appears unrelated to the corporate tax rate (with the point
estimate being very small and negative). Although missing data for these additional variables
reduces the sample size to just 60, the effect of governance is stronger than in Column 1.



26
  The fraction of the population that lives within 100 km of the coast (a measure of openness constructed by Gallup,
Sachs and Mellinger (1999) that was not used in the basic model in Table 4 because of its limited coverage) has a
negative and significant effect. This reinforces the broader finding that openness tends to be associated with lower
tax rates (as suggested by the negative coefficients on distance and landlocked status). Unobserved tastes for
government spending are proxied by government expenditure as a percentage of GDP (which has a strongly positive
effect, as expected). The indicator variable for parliamentary systems has a positive, albeit insignificant, effect.


                                                        20
         In order to test the alternative explanation relating to corruption, the specification in
Column 3 replaces the governance index with its various components. Generally, these have
negative effects on corporate tax rates, with government effectiveness being significant despite
the strong multicollinearity among the subindices. However, VA (voice and accountability) and
CC (control of corruption) both have positive point estimates (though neither is significant). The
latter implies that more corrupt countries tend to have (weakly) lower tax rates. Hence, the
evidence clearly does not suggest that (controlling for other relevant factors) countries with
higher levels of corruption have higher statutory corporate tax rates, as implied by the alternative
explanation outlined in Section 4.3.
         In order to shed more light on the nature of the causal relationship between governance
and tax rates, Column 4 of Table 7 reports the results of an instrumental-variable Tobit model
(using legal origins as instruments for the governance index). The effect of governance remains
significant, and indeed is of dramatically larger magnitude. The point estimate of -23.130
suggests that (for uncensored observations) a one standard deviation increase in the governance
index from its mean of zero would lead to a fall in the corporate tax rate from the maximum
observed in the sample (55% in Kuwait) to below the U.S. rate of 35%. A linear 2SLS
specification leads to consistent results, with a smaller but nonetheless comparable point estimate
(of approximately -16).27 The effects of the control variables in the IV Tobit specification are
generally similar to those in the previous columns.28 Most importantly (given the discussion in
Section 4.3), the effect of subsoil assets remains insignificant, with a negative coefficient (as in
Column 2).
         This analysis thus provides no evidence to suggest that (controlling for other relevant
factors) countries with larger natural resource endowments have higher corporate rates. This
casts doubt on the natural resource hypothesis discussed in Section 4.3 above. Another piece of
evidence in the same direction is reported in the final row of Table 3a. This examines the
difference in the mean governance index for small tax havens and small nonhavens, restricting

27
   This large effect of governance on tax rates (relative to that in Column 1) suggests that improvements in
governance may lead to a substantial positive effect on the unobserved taste for government activity; in turn, this
leads to higher tax rates, thus dampening the fall in tax rates caused by better governance per se. Moreover, the
effect on tastes for government activity is apparently not fully captured by the government expenditures variable,
possibly because this variable combines both beneficial government activities and government overspending.
28
   The variables capturing openness (notably landlocked status) have a negative effect on tax rates, and GDP per
capita has a positive effect. The positive impact of having a parliamentary system is now of borderline significance.



                                                         21
the sample to only those countries that have zero subsoil assets (i.e. no discernible natural
resource wealth); “small” countries are defined as those with populations below one million. The
number of countries is very small (7 havens and 4 nonhavens). Nonetheless, the mean
governance index for the havens is substantially higher than that for the nonhavens, and (despite
the small sample) the difference is of borderline statistical significance. As none of the countries
involved in this comparison have valuable subsoil assets, it appears unlikely that the wider
differences in governance characteristics between havens and nonhavens are likely to be
explained by the effects of natural resource abundance.

5.       Interpretation

         The evidence that tax havens are better-governed than comparable nonhavens does not
identify the mechanism through which governance affects the propensity to become a tax haven.
There are two possible alternative channels through which this relationship might operate. The
first possibility is that better-governed countries may make better policy choices. As discussed in
Section 2, the welfare-maximizing (source-based) corporate tax rate for a small economy facing
a perfectly elastic supply of capital is zero (Diamond and Mirrlees, 1971; Gordon, 1986). Better-
governed countries may choose policies that are closer to this optimum for a variety of reasons
(such as greater weight being attached to social welfare in formulating government policy). The
second possibility is that all small countries ideally would like to be tax havens, independent of
their governance characteristics, but that only better-governed countries can credibly commit not
to expropriate foreign investors (either directly or through higher future taxes). Since this
commitment is necessary for low taxes to induce high levels of foreign investment, the returns to
being a tax haven would be sufficiently high only for better-governed countries.
         It is possible to shed some light on these explanations by analyzing how the effect of tax
rates on FDI varies with governance.29 This analysis uses data from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis (BEA) on FDI by U.S. firms in 60 countries in 1999. For each of these countries, it is
possible to observe the total assets owned by U.S. firms in 1999, and to compute the tax rate
faced by these firms. Following Hines and Rice (1994), the tax rate for a country is defined as
the minimum of the average effective tax rate for U.S. firms observed in the sample, and the


29
  Goodspeed et al. (2006) find that higher levels of corruption reduce FDI inflows; the focus here, however, is on
the interaction of governance and tax rates.



                                                         22
country’s statutory corporate tax rate. These data are matched with the governance index, GDP
per capita and population for each country.30 The summary statistics are reported in Table 3b.
Note that the mean tax rate for these 60 countries is approximately 21%, and their average
governance score (about 0.7) is considerably higher than the zero mean for all countries.
         In Table 8, the countries in this sample are divided at the median governance index to
form two subsamples of better-governed and less well-governed countries (each consisting of 30
countries). Column 1 reports results for the former subsample: controlling for GDP and
population, there is a substantial and highly significant negative effect of the tax rate on US FDI
in better-governed countries. The -0.0712 coefficient in Column 1 implies that one percent
lower tax rates are associated with seven percent greater investment in these countries. Column
2 reports the results for less well-governed countries, for which the estimated tax effect is again
negative (-0.0162), but considerably smaller in magnitude and statistically indistinguishable from
zero. Thus, it appears that the elasticity of FDI with respect to taxes is greater in better-governed
countries.

         Figure 4 illustrates this pattern. The bars depict mean ratios of US FDI (i.e. assets owned
by U.S. firms in 1999) to GDP for four groups of countries: those with below-median
governance indices and below-median tax rates, those with below-median governance indices
and above-median tax rates, those with above-median governance indices and below-median tax
rates, and those with above-median governance indices and above-median tax rates. The barchart
suggests that for a well-governed country, moving from a high to a low tax rate has a substantial
effect on FDI. However, for a less well-governed country, the gains in terms of additional FDI
from reducing tax rates appear to be considerably smaller. It appears that the returns to being a
tax haven are greater for better-governed countries, as such countries are able to attract FDI by
offering credible commitments to future policies necessary to induce FDI inflows to respond to
lower announced tax rates.




30
  The governance index is for 2000 or the closest available year, rather than for 2004 as in the earlier analysis, in
order to match the 1999 FDI data more closely. GDP and population are obtained from the Penn World Tables.



                                                          23
6.     Conclusion

       Tax havens are small countries, they are affluent countries, and they have high-quality
governance institutions. While all of these characteristics are to some extent associated with
each other, it is noteworthy that poorly governed countries, of which the world has many,
virtually never appear as tax havens. Their absence cannot easily be attributed to the desire on
the part of poorly governed countries to conform to international tax norms, since these countries
are not otherwise known for their conformity, and international tax norms are in any case not
very well established. Instead, the most likely explanation is that tax havens are unsuccessful in
the absence of high quality governance, and anticipating that, poorly run governments do not
even attempt to become tax havens. Whether the absence of more tax havens is a good or a bad
thing for the world as a whole is a fascinating question that lies beyond the scope of this paper,
but from the standpoint of individual countries, the inability to tailor tax policies to maximum
national advantage simply adds to the many woeful costs of poor governance.




                                                 24
References

Altshuler, R. and H. Grubert (2003) “Repatriation Taxes, Repatriation Strategies and
       Multinational Financial Policy” Journal of Public Economics, 87, 73-107.

Altshuler, R. and H. Grubert (2004) “Taxpayer Responses to Competitive Tax Policies and Tax
       Policy Responses to Competitive Taxpayers: Recent Evidence” Tax Notes International,
       34, 1349-1362.

Altshuler, R., H. Grubert and T. S. Newlon (2001) “Has U.S. Investment Abroad become More
       Sensitive to Tax Rates?” in J.R. Hines Jr. (ed.) International Taxation and Multinational
       Activity Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 9-32.

Beck, T., G. Clarke, A. Groff, P. Keefer and P. Walsh (2001) “New Tools in Comparative
       Political Economy: The Database of Political Institutions” World Bank Economic Review,
       15, 165-176.

Belsley, D. A., E. Kuh and R. E. Welsch (1980) Regression Diagnostics New York: John Wiley
       & Sons.

Borck, R. and M. Pfluger (2006) “Agglomeration and Tax Competition” European Economic
       Review, 50, 647-668.

Curry, J. and M. K. Kahr (2004) “Individual Foreign-Earned Income and Foreign Tax Credit,
       2001” Statistics of Income Bulletin, 23, 98-120.

Dehejia, R. H. and S. Wahba (2002) “Propensity Score-Matching Methods for Nonexperimental
       Causal Studies” Review of Economics and Statistics, 84, 151-161.

Desai, M. A., C. F. Foley and J. R. Hines Jr. (2003) “Chains of Ownership, Tax Competition,
       and the Location Decisions of Multinational Firms” in H. Herrmann and R. Lipsey, eds.
       Foreign Direct Investment in the Real and Financial Sector of Industrial Countries
       Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 61-98.

Desai, M. A., C. F. Foley and J. R. Hines Jr. (2006a) “The Demand for Tax Haven Operations”
       Journal of Public Economics, 90, 513-531.

Desai, M. A., C. F. Foley and J. R. Hines Jr. (2006b) “Do Tax Havens Divert Economic
       Activity?” Economics Letters, 90, 219-224.

Devereux, M. P. (2006) “The Impact of Taxation on the Location of Capital, Firms and Profit: A
      Survey of Empirical Evidence” Mimeograph, University of Warwick.

Diamond, W. H. and D. B. Diamond (2002) Tax Havens of the World Newark, NJ: Matthew
      Bender Books.

Diamond, P. and J. Mirrlees (1971) “Optimal Taxation and Public Production, I: Production


                                               25
       Efficiency; II: Tax Rules” American Economic Review, 61, 8-27, 261-278.

Fisman, R. and E. Miguel (2006) “Cultures of Corruption: Evidence from Diplomatic Parking
      Tickets” NBER Working Paper 12312.

Funke, M. (2002) “Determining the Taxation and Investment Impacts of Estonia’s 2000 Income
       Tax Reform” Finnish Economic Papers, 15, 102-109.

Gallup, J. D., J. D. Sachs and A. Mellinger (1999) “Geography and Economic Development”
       CID Working Paper No. 1.

Goodspeed, T., J. Martinez-Vasquez and L. Zhang (2006) “Are Other Government Policies More
      Important than Taxation in Attracting FDI?” Andrew Young School of Policy Studies,
      Georgia State University, Working Paper 06-28.

Gordon, R. H. (1986) “Taxation of Investment and Savings in a World Economy” American
      Economic Review, 76, 1086-1102.

Gordon, R. H. (1992) “Can Capital Income Taxes Survive in Open Economies?” Journal of
      Finance, 47, 1159-1180.

Gordon, R. H. and J. R. Hines, Jr. (2002) “International Taxation” in A. J. Auerbach and M.
      Feldstein, eds. Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 4, Amsterdam: North-Holland,
      1395-1995.

Hampton, M. P. and J. Christensen (2002) “Offshore Pariahs? Small Island Economies, Tax
      Havens, and the Re-configuration of Global Finance” World Development, 30, 1657-
      1673.

Hansen, N. A. and A. S. Kessler (2001) “The Political Geography of Tax H(e)avens and Tax
      Hells” American Economic Review, 91, 1103-1115.

Hines, J. R., Jr. (1997) “Tax Policy and the Activities of Multinational Corporations” in A. J.
       Auerbach, ed. Fiscal Policy: Lessons from Economic Research, Cambridge, MA: MIT
       Press, 401-445.

Hines, J. R., Jr. (1999) “Lessons from Behavioral Responses to International Taxation” National
       Tax Journal, 52, 305-322.

Hines, J. R., Jr. (2005) “Do Tax Havens Flourish?” in J. M. Poterba (ed.) Tax Policy and the
       Economy, Vol. 19, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 65-99.

Hines, J. R., Jr. (2006) “Will Social Welfare Expenditures Survive Tax Competition?” Oxford
       Review of Economic Policy, 22, 330-348.

Hines, J. R., Jr. (2007) “Corporate Taxation and International Competition” in A. J.



                                               26
       Auerbach, J. R. Hines, Jr., and J. Slemrod, eds. Taxing Corporate Income in the 21st
       Century, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Hines, J. R., Jr. and E. M. Rice (1994) “Fiscal Paradise: Foreign Tax Havens and American
       Business” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 149-182.

Hishikawa, A. (2002) “The Death of Tax Havens” Boston College International and
       Comparative Law Review, 25, 389-417.

Holik, D. S. (2005) “Foreign Trusts, 2002” Statistics of Income Bulletin, 25, 134-150.

Kanbur, R. and M. Keen (1993) “Jeux Sans Frontieres: Tax Competition and Tax Coordination
      When Countries Differ in Size” American Economic Review, 83, 877-892.

Kaufmann, D., A. Kraay and M. Mastruzzi (2005) “Governance Matters IV: Governance
      Indicators for 1996-2004” World Bank working paper.

Keen, M. and D. Wildasin (2004) “Pareto-Efficient International Taxation” American Economic
      Review, 94, 259-275.

Kenny, L. W. and S. L. Winer (2006) “Tax Systems in the World: An Empirical Investigation
      into the Importance of Tax Bases, Administration Costs, Scale and Political Regime”
      International Tax and Public Finance, 13, 181-215.

Kind, H. J., K. H. M. Knarvik and G. Schjelderup (2000) “Competing for Capital in a ‘Lumpy’
       World” Journal of Public Economics, 78, 253-274.

Kudrle, R. T. and L. Eden (2005) “Tax Havens: Renegade States in the International Tax
       Regime?” Law and Policy, 27, 100-127.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer and R. Vishny (1999) “The Quality of
       Government” Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization, 15, 222-279.

Li, G. (1985) “Robust Regression” in D. C. Hoaglin, F. Mosteller and J. W. Tukey, eds.
        Exploring Data Tables, Trends, and Shapes New York: John Wiley & Sons, 281-340.

Masters, M. and C. Oh (2006) “Controlled Foreign Corporations, 2002” Statistics of Income
       Bulletin, 25, 193-232.

OECD (1998) Harmful Tax Competition: An Emerging Global Issue Paris: OECD.

OECD (2000) Towards Global Tax Cooperation: Progress in Identifying and Eliminating
     Harmful Tax Practices, Paris: OECD.

OECD (2004) The OECD’s Project on Harmful Tax Practices: The 2004 Progress Report, Paris:
     OECD.



                                               27
OECD (2006), Tax Co-operation: Towards a Level Playing Field, Paris: OECD.

Rose, A. K. and M. Spiegel (forthcoming) “Offshore Financial Centers: Parasites or Symbionts?”
       Economic Journal.

Sachs, J. D. and A. M. Warner (1995) “Natural Resource Abundance and Economic Growth”
       NBER Working Paper 5398.

Slemrod, J. (2004) “Are Corporate Tax Rates, Or Countries, Converging?” Journal of Public
      Economics, 88, 1169-1186.

Slemrod, J. and J. D. Wilson (2006) “Tax Competition with Parasitic Tax Havens” NBER
      Working Paper 12225.

Wooldridge, J. M. (2002) Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, MIT Press,
      Cambridge, MA.

World Bank (2006) Where is the Wealth of Nations? Measuring Capital for the 21st Century,
      World Bank, Washington, DC.




                                             28
Data Appendix

Tax Haven Status:
Source: based on Hines and Rice (1994, Appendix 2, p. 178)
Indicator variable (=1 if the country appears on the list of tax havens in Hines and Rice (1994). 39 of the
41 countries and territories on their list (i.e. all apart from “UK Caribbean islands” and St. Martin), can be
matched with current jurisdictions for which data on the other variables is available.31
The alternative (OECD) measure of tax haven status is based on the list of 35 countries and territories in
OECD (2000, p. 17). However, this list does not include 6 countries and territories that were deemed by
the OECD to satisfy its criteria for tax haven status, but which made “advance commitments” to eliminate
allegedly harmful tax practices. The dataset in this paper adds these 6 jurisdictions (as listed in various
sources, such as Hishikawa (2002, fn. 72, p. 397)) to the 35 in OECD (2000, p. 17) to form a combined
list of 41 jurisdictions that are tax havens according to the OECD definition.32

Governance Index:
Source: Kaufmann, Kraay and Mastruzzi (2005)
This index is obtained by taking the (unweighted) mean of 5 of the 6 governance measures constructed by
Kaufmann et al. (2005) for the year 2004, as specified in Equation (1). It is a continuous variable over the
approximate interval (-2.5, 2.5), normalized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1 (across all countries
and territories), with higher values indicating better governance. The analysis of investment elasticities in
Table 8, however, uses governance measures for the year 2000, in the interests of consistency with the
investment data (which cover 1999).

GDP per capita:
Source: the World Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI), available at http://econ.worldbank.org
GDP per capita is expressed in thousands of US$, in PPP terms, for 2004. For countries and territories for
which GDP data are missing in WDI, estimates of GDP per capita (also in thousands of US$, in PPP
terms, for 2004 or the nearest available year) provided in the CIA’s World Factbook (available at
https://www.cia.gov/cia/publications/factbook/) are used.33

Population:
Source: the World Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI), available at http://econ.worldbank.org
Population is expressed in thousands, for 2004. For countries and territories for which population data are
missing in WDI, estimates of population (also in thousands, for 2004 or the nearest available year)
provided in the CIA’s World Factbook are used.34

UN Member:


31
   The omission of “UK Caribbean islands” and St. Martin, for which no matching data could be found, does not
appear to be a serious problem. “UK Caribbean islands” is a general term used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis
(BEA) for British dependencies in the Caribbean, most of which (Anguilla, Montserrat, Cayman Islands, and Turks
and Caicos Islands) are included separately in the dataset. St. Martin is a Caribbean island that is divided between
the Netherlands Antilles and Guadeloupe (both of which are included in the dataset).
32
   However, the OECD lists the Channel islands of Jersey and Guernsey as separate entities, while in this paper they
are combined together (as the Channel Islands) for consistency with the classification of Hines and Rice (1994).
Thus, the OECD criteria actually define a list of 40 tax havens.
33
   Note, however, that the analysis in Table 8 uses GDP per capita for 2000, obtained from the Penn World Tables,
for greater consistency with the investment data (which covers 1999).
34
   Note, however, that the analysis in Table 8 uses population for 2000, obtained from the Penn World Tables, for
greater consistency with the investment data (which covers 1999).



                                                        29
Source: obtained from the list of member states provided on the UN’s website, at
http://www.un.org/Overview/unmember.html
An indicator variable (= 1 if the country was a member of the United Nations Organization in 2004).35

Distance by Air:
Source: Gallup, Sachs and Mellinger (1999)
Measured in km, this variable represents the “the smallest distance of the country’s capital city to one of
the following three cities: New York, Rotterdam, or Tokyo.” (Gallup et al., 1999, fn. 13, pp. 4-5). For
countries with missing values of this variable, but with nonmissing values for a close neighboring
country, the latter is used as a proxy.

Landlocked:
Source: Gallup, Sachs and Mellinger (1999)
Indicator variable (=1 if the country is landlocked). For countries with missing values of this variable in
Gallup, Sachs and Mellinger (1999), the data are supplemented using the similar variable in the Centre
d’Etudes Prospectives et D’Informations Internationale (CEPII) dataset (available on Thierry Mayer’s
website at: http://team.univ-paris1.fr/teamperso/mayer/data/data.htm), and using information in the CIA’s
World Factbook.

Area:
Source: the CEPII dataset (available on Thierry Mayer’s website); measured in square km.

Island:
Source: Coded using information in the CIA’s World Factbook; indicator variable (=1 if the country is an
island).

Fraction of Population within 100km of Coast:
Source: Gallup, Sachs and Mellinger (1999); defined as: “The proportion of a country’s total land area
within 100 km. of the ocean coastline, excluding coastline in the arctic and sub-arctic region above the
winter extent of sea ice” (Gallup, Sachs and Mellinger, 1999, p. 35).

Parliamentary System:
Source: The World Bank’s Database of Political Institutions (Beck et al., 2001)

Use of English as an Official Language:
Source: based on information in the CEPII dataset (available on Thierry Mayer’s website)
Indicator variable (=1) if English is listed as one of the country’s official languages (note that the CEPII
dataset lists up to 3 official languages for each country).

Ethnolinguistic Fractionalization:
Source: LLSV (1999); defined as the average value of 5 different indices of ethnic and linguistic
fractionalization; the values range from 0 to 1, with higher values indicating greater heterogeneity. See
LLSV (p. 238) for more details.

Latitude:
Source: LLSV (1999); the absolute value of the country’s latitude, scaled to lie in the interval [0, 1].

Legal Origins:

35
  Note that Montenegro, which was admitted to the UN in 2006, is not included (and is considered as part of Serbia
and Montenegro in the dataset).


                                                        30
Source: LLSV (1999); indicator variables for each of 5 origins of the country’s commercial law: British,
French, German, Scandinavian, and Socialist. For missing values, the data is extended by coding current
UK and French dependent territories as having British and French legal origins, respectively (based on
information in the CIA’s World Factbook).

Government Expenditures:
Source: the World Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI), available at http://econ.worldbank.org;
expressed as a % of GDP, for 2004 (for missing 2004 data, 2002 data is used instead, when available).

Telephone Lines:
Source: the World Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI), available at http://econ.worldbank.org;
the number of telephone mainline connections in the country (for missing 2004 data, 2002 data are used
instead, when available). WDI reports the number of telephone lines per 1000 population, but in Table 6,
the telephone lines variable is scaled by area (as this is arguably a better measure of the ability of a
foreign investor to communicate with the outside world).

Subsoil Assets:
Source: World Bank (2006, Appendix 2); the value of the stocks of subsoil mineral assets (oil, gas and
coal, together with 10 metals and minerals - bauxite, copper, gold, iron ore, lead, nickel, phosphate rock,
silver, tin, and zinc) per capita in US$ for the year 2000 (see World Bank (2006, p. 147) for more details).

Corporate Tax Rates:
Source: the World Tax Database maintained by the Office of Tax Policy Research at the University of
Michigan, available at: http://www.bus.umich.edu/OTPR/

Assets Owned by U.S. Firms:
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA); available at http://www.bea.gov

Tax Rate Faced by U.S. Firms:
Source: based on data available through the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) at http://www.bea.gov

Offshore Financial Centers (OFCs)
Source: Rose and Spiegel (forthcoming)

Countries Alleged by the OECD to Facilitate Money Laundering
Source: Rose and Spiegel (forthcoming)

“Flag of Convenience” Countries
Source: Rose and Spiegel (forthcoming)

Regional Dummies:
Source: World Bank classifications; regions are Europe and Central Asia, Asia/Pacific, Americas, Middle
East and North Africa (MENA), and Africa.36



36
  Note that in Tables 4-6, MENA and Africa are combined into one region to avoid perfect collinearity between the
Africa dummy and nonhaven status (given the exclusion of Liberia).




                                                       31
                                       Table 1: List of Tax Havens
 Country or Territory                   World Bank Tax Haven                         Tax Haven (OECD)
                                        Code             (Hines-Rice)
 Andorra                                ADO                             1                          1
 Anguilla                               AIA                             1                          1
 Antigua and Barbuda                    ATG                             1                          1
 Aruba                                  ABW                             0                          1
 Bahamas                                BHS                             1                          1
 Bahrain                                BHR                             1                          1
 Barbados                               BRB                             1                          1
 Belize                                 BLZ                             1                          1
 Bermuda                                BMU                             1                          1
 British Virgin Islands                                                 1                          1
 Cayman Islands                         CYM                             1                          1
 Channel Islands                                                        1                          1
 Cook Islands                           COK                             1                          1
 Cyprus                                 CYP                             1                          1
 Dominica                               DMA                             1                          1
 Gibraltar                                                              1                          1
 Grenada                                GRD                             1                          1
 Hong Kong                              HKG                             1                          0
 Ireland                                IRL                             1                          0
 Isle of Man                                                            1                          1
 Jordan                                 JOR                             1                          0
 Lebanon                                LBN                             1                          0
 Liberia                                LBR                             1                          1
 Liechtenstein                          LIE                             1                          1
 Luxembourg                             LUX                             1                          0
 Macao                                  MAC                             1                          0
 Maldives                               MDV                             1                          1
 Malta                                  MLT                             1                          1
 Marshall Islands                       MHL                             1                          1
 Mauritius                              MUS                             0                          1
 Monaco                                 MCO                             1                          1
 Montserrat                                                             1                          1
 Nauru                                  NRU                             0                          1
 Netherlands Antilles                   ANT                             1                          1
 Niue                                   NIU                             0                          1
 Panama                                 PAN                             1                          1
 Saint Kitts and Nevis                  KNA                             1                          1
 Saint Lucia                            LCA                             1                          1
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines       VCT                             1                          1
 Samoa                                  SAM                             0                          1
 San Marino                             SMR                             0                          1
 Seychelles                             SYC                             0                          1
 Singapore                              SGP                             1                          0
 Switzerland                            CHE                             1                          0
 Tonga                                  TON                             0                          1
 Turks and Caicos Islands                                               1                          1
 Vanuatu                                VUT                             1                          1
 Virgin Islands (U.S.)                  VIR                             0                          1
Note: 1 = tax haven and 0 = nonhaven. The third column uses the definitions in Hines and Rice (1994) and Diamond
and Diamond (2002). The fourth column uses the definition in OECD (2000), as described in the Data Appendix.

                                                      32
                    Table 2: Summary Statistics (All Countries and Territories)
                                        Tax Havens                               Nonhavens

                               Mean         St. dev.        N         Mean         St. dev.        N
Governance Index               0.7284        0.7152          33       -0.1338        0.8984        176
GDP per capita (PPP;            18.51          14.68         39           9.55         10.22       188
in thousands of US$)
Population                    1145.69        2043.9          39     33354.08       126475.9        189
(thousands)

UN Member (=1)                 0.6667        0.4776          39        0.8730        0.3338        189
Distance by air (km)          2965.00        1899.1          39       4424.00       2652.59        189
Landlocked (=1 )               0.1026        0.3074          39        0.1958        0.3978        189
Area (sq. km)                   83395        365478          35       721188       1955140         185
Island (=1)                    0.6667        0.4776          39        0.2751        0.4478        189
Fraction of population         0.7204        0.4031             8      0.4159        0.3584        142
within 100km of coast
Parliamentary System           0.6111        0.5016          18        0.3052        0.4620        154
(=1)
English as an Official         0.6857        0.4710          35        0.2663        0.4432        184
Language (=1)
Ethnolinguistic                0.2082        0.2231          24        0.3562        0.3110        131
Fractionalization
Latitude (abs. value)          0.2765        0.1732          31        0.2809        0.1919        176
British legal origin           0.7179        0.4559          39        0.3011        0.4600        186
French legal origin            0.2308        0.4268          39        0.4624        0.4999        186
German legal origin            0.0513        0.2235          39        0.0269        0.1622        186
Scand. legal origin            0.0000        0.0000          39        0.0269        0.1622        186
Socialist legal origin         0.0000        0.0000          39        0.1828        0.3875        186
Govt. Expenditures (%           26.77            8.28           9       27.80          11.08        83
of GDP)
Telephone Lines                0.6163         1.2497         27           6.99         29.02      166
(millions)
Subsoil Assets (US$            100.14         275.19         14       2737.22       6976.83        105
per capita)
Note: Tax havens are defined as in Table 1, Column 3 (i.e. the Hines-Rice definition). The variables in
the table are defined as in the text and the Data Appendix. "N" is the number of observations.


                                                       33
   Table 3a: Summary Statistics (Small Countries and Territories; population < 1 million)
                                  Mean: Havens             Mean: Nonhavens             Diff. in Means
                                      (N)                        (N)                        (s.e.)
Governance Index                      0.7974                      0.2097                   0.5876
                                        (25)                       (31)                 (0.1519)***
GDP per capita (PPP;                   18.46                      11.34                     7.12
in thousands of US$)                    (31)                       (43)                  (3.1474)**
Population                            181.62                      271.34                    -89.72
(thousands)                            (31)                        (44)                    (56.20)
UN Member (=1)                        0.6129                     0.5227                    0.0902
                                        (31)                       (44)                   (0.1171)
Distance by air (km)                 2921.77                     5486.30                  -2564.52
                                       (31)                        (44)                 (570.84)***
Landlocked (=1 )                      0.0968                     0.0455                    0.0513
                                        (31)                       (44)                   (0.0626)
Parliamentary System                  0.7273                     0.3571                   0.3701
(=1)                                    (11)                       (14)                  (0.1936)*
English as an Official                0.7407                     0.4000                    0.3407
Language (=1)                           (27)                       (40)                 (0.1164)***
Ethnolinguistic                       0.1814                     0.3673                   -0.1859
Fractionalization                       (16)                       (18)                  (0.0956)*
Governance Index if                   0.6417                     -0.0620                  0.7037
Subsoil Assets=0                        (7)                         (4)                  (0.2541)*

Note: This table reports the results of t-tests of the equality of means of selected variables for tax havens
and nonhavens (allowing for unequal variances). Tax havens are defined as in Table 1, Column 3 (i.e. the
Hines-Rice definition). The variables in the table are defined as in the text and the Data Appendix. In the
first two columns, the number of observations is in parantheses; in the final column, the standard error is in
parantheses.




                                                                                                        34
                              Table 3b: Additional Summary Statistics

                                                      Mean                 St. dev.              N
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate in 2002                  28.93                 9.32                  148
(%)
Tax Rate faced by US Firms in 1999                    21.34                 11.57                    60
(%)
Log of Assets Owned by US Firms in                    9.79                  1.56                     60
1999 (US$)
Governance Index in 2000 (for                        0.7050                0.8779                    60
countries with FDI by US Firms)
Log of GDP in 1999 (US$;                              4.69                  1.69                     60
for countries with FDI by US Firms)
Log of Population in 1999 (for                        16.52                 1.90                     60
countries with FDI by US Firms)
Note: This table reports summary statistics for the variables used in the regressions reported in Table
8, and for the corporate tax rate variable used in Table 7. The statutory corporate tax rate data are from
the Worldwide Tax Database maintained by the Office of Tax Policy Research at the University of
Michigan. The data on assets of US firms are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). GDP and
population data are from the Penn World Tables, as described in the Data Appendix.




                                                                                                      35
                       Table 4: Determinants of Tax Haven Status – Probit Estimates

                          (1)                (2)                 (3)                  (4)               (5)                 (6)
                     All Countries       UN Members          Non-African         Countries and         Small              Common
                    and Territories                          Countries and        Territories        Countries            Support
                                                              Territories        with GDP per           and
                                                                                    capita           Territories
                                                                                     $1000

                    Dependent Variable: Indicator for Tax Haven Status (= 1 for Tax Havens)

Governance               0.814                0.924              0.824               0.796             1.039                 0.899
Index                 (0.284)***           (0.344)***          (0.366)**          (0.290)***         (0.504)**            (0.313)***

GDP                      0.008                0.009               0.004              0.006             -0.001               0.002
per capita              (0.015)              (0.017)             (0.020)            (0.015)           (0.017)              (0.016)

Population              -0.0002             -0.0002             -0.0002             -0.0002            -0.001               -0.0002
                    (0.00005)***        (0.00006)***        (0.00006)***        (0.00005)***          (0.001)           (0.00006)***

UN member                0.348                                    0.356              0.363             0.707                0.270
(=1)                    (0.491)                                  (0.453)            (0.495)           (0.506)              (0.510)

Landlocked               0.173                0.327               0.319              0.147             0.100                0.362
(=1)                    (0.399)              (0.444)             (0.467)            (0.405)           (0.804)              (0.478)

Distance                -0.0002             -0.0004             -0.0002             -0.0002           -0.00005              -0.0002
by air                (0.0001)**          (0.0001)***          (0.0001)*          (0.0001)**          (0.0001)             (0.0001)

Regional                    Y                   Y                   Y                  Y                 Y                    Y
Dummies?

Observations              208                  190                 163                191                56                  99

Maximized                -48.99              -35.96              -46.76              -48.23            -28.76               -47.96
Log Pseudo
Likelihood

Pseudo R2                0.4514              0.5139              0.4207              0.4413            0.2529              0.2301

Note: This table reports estimated coefficients from probit models, in which the dependent variable equals one for tax havens, and
zero otherwise. The sample of countries used in the regression reported in column five consists of countries with populations below
one million in 2004. The sample of countries used in the regression reported in column six consists of countries with characteristics
other than governance that make them reasonable candidates to become tax havens. The governance index is the mean of 5
governance measures constructed by Kaufmann et al. (2005), taking values roughly in the (-2.5, 2.5) interval, with a zero mean and
unit variance in the whole sample, higher values corresponding to better governance. GDP per capita is measured in thousands of
U.S.$, in purchasing power parity terms, for 2004. Population is thousands of residents in 2004. UN member is a dummy variable
equal to one for UN members and zero otherwise. Landlocked is a dummy variable taking the value one for landlocked countries and
zero otherwise. Distance by air is the distance (in km) from a country’s capital city to the nearest of New York, Rotterdam, or Tokyo.
The regression includes regional dummy variables for Europe and Central Asia, Asia/Pacific, the Americas, and the Middle East and
Africa. Robust standard errors are in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                   36
Table 5: Governance Characteristics of Tax Havens and Nonhavens: Matching Estimation


   (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)              (6)         (7)
Propensity        Minimum            Mean             Mean           Difference        Balancing  Difference
  Score           Propensity       Propensity       Propensity        in Mean          Property        in
  Block             Score            Score:           Score:         Propensity        Satisfied  Governance
                                    Havens          Nonhavens          Scores           for All     Index
                                      (N)              (N)              (s.e.)        Covariates?   (s.e.)

      1             0.0486           0.1188           0.1118            0.0070              Y
                                       (6)             (46)            (0.0287)

      2              0.25            0.3827           0.3678           0.0149               Y
                                      (13)             (19)            (.0257)

      3               0.5            0.6469           0.6293            0.0176              Y
                                      (19)             (11)            (0.0411)

  Overall                                                                                                  0.2982
                                                                                                         (0.1800)*

Note: This table reports the results of a propensity-score matching procedure, as described in the text. In Columns 3
and 4, the number of countries in each block, by tax haven status, is reported in parentheses. Column 5 reports the
results of t-tests of the equality of mean propensity scores for havens and nonhavens within each block, with
standard errors in parantheses. Column 7 reports the matching estimate of the difference in the governance index
between havens and nonhavens. The standard error in Column 7 is bootstrapped, using 500 replications; *
significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                              37
   Table 6: Determinants of Tax Haven Status – Instrumental Variable Probit Estimates

                                (1) Using Legal          (2) Using Legal             (3) Using Legal
                                   Origins as          Origins and Latitude             Origins as
                                  Instruments             as Instruments               Instruments

                              Dependent Variable: Indicator for Tax Haven Status (= 1 for
                              Tax Havens)

Governance                              1.956                       1.998                    1.926
Index                                (0.285)***                  (0.329)***               (0.437)***

GDP per capita                         -0.078                       0.041                    0.054
                                       (0.042)                     (0.047)                  (0.069)

Population                            -0.00007                    -0.0001                  -0.0003
                                      (0.0001)                    (0.0001)               (0.0001)***

UN Member (=1)                          0.473                      -0.382
                                       (0.305)                   (0.192)**

Landlocked (=1)                         0.327                      -0.257                    -0.106
                                       (0.294)                     (0.386)                  (0.649)

Distance by Air                       -0.0001                     -0.0002                  -0.0006
                                      (0.0001)                    (0.0002)               (0.0002)***

Govt. Expenditure                                                                           -0.153
(% of GDP)                                                                                (0.042)**

Telephone Lines                                                                              0.001
(scaled by area)                                                                          (0.0002)**

Regional Dummies?                         Y                           Y                        Y

Observations                             205                         197                       90

Maximized                             -206.914                    -187.254                  -53.871
Log Pseudo
Likelihood

Note: This table reports estimated coefficients from the second stage of instrumental variable probit
models, in which the dependent variable equals one for tax havens, and zero otherwise. The instruments in
Columns 1 and 3 are indicator variables for each of 5 origins (British, French, German, Scandinavian, and
Socialist) of a country’s commercial law. The instruments in Column 2 include both legal origins and a
country’s latitude. The governance index is the mean of 5 governance measures constructed by Kaufmann
et al. (2005), taking values roughly in the (-2.5, 2.5) interval, with a zero mean and unit variance in the
whole sample, higher values corresponding to better governance. GDP per capita is measured in thousands



                                                                                                              38
of U.S.$, in purchasing power parity terms, for 2004. Population is thousands of residents in 2004. UN
member is a dummy variable equal to one for UN members and zero otherwise. Landlocked is a dummy
variable taking the value one for landlocked countries and zero otherwise. Distance by air is the distance
(in km) from a country’s capital city to the nearest of New York, Rotterdam, or Tokyo. Govt. expenditure
is the ratio of government expenditures to GDP in 2004, expressed as a percentage. Telephone lines is the
number of telephone lines per square km. The regression includes regional dummy variables for Europe
and Central Asia, Asia/Pacific, the Americas, and the Middle East and Africa. Note that all countries in
Column 3 are UN members, so the UN member variable is dropped. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                                             39
     Table 7: Determinants of Statutory Corporate Tax Rates – Tobit and Instrumental
                                 Variable Tobit Estimates

                               (1) Tobit Model           (2) Tobit Model          (3) Tobit Model             (4) IV Tobit
                                                                                                                 Model

                                          Dependent Variable: Top Statutory Corporate Tax Rate (as %)

Governance                           -2.998                   -5.889                                            -23.130
Index                              (1.428)**                (2.519)**                                          (9.778)**
Voice and                                                                                2.768
Accountability                                                                          (1.744)
Political Stability                                                                      -0.349
                                                                                        (1.722)
Government                                                                               -6.642
Effectiveness                                                                         (2.752)**
Rule of Law                                                                              -1.039
                                                                                        (5.062)
Control of                                                                               2.111
Corruption                                                                              (2.941)
GDP per capita                       0.147                      0.432                    0.217                    1.650
                                    (0.128)                  (0.198)**                 (0.122)*                (0.676)**
Population                         0.000002                -0.00000003                0.000004                 0.000003
                                  (0.000003)                (0.000003)               (0.000002)               (0.000003)
Landlocked (=1)                      -3.184                    -7.686                    -2.036                  -8.947
                                   (1.656)*                 (2.886)***                  (1.674)               (3.380)***
Distance by Air                     -0.0003                   -0.00004                  -0.0003                   0.001
                                   (0.0004)                   (0.0004)                 (0.0004)                 (0.001)
Fraction of Pop.                                               -5.658                                            -0.738
within 100km of                                              (2.420)**                                          (4.386)
Coast
Government                                                     0.387                                              0.446
Expenditure (%)                                             (0.128)***                                        (0.147)***
Parliamentary                                                  3.073                                             10.851
System (=1)                                                   (2.180)                                           (5.903)*
Subsoil Assets                                              -0.0000008                                          -0.00021
                                                             (0.00007)                                         (0.00014)

Regional Dummies?                       Y                        Y                         Y                       Y
Observations                           135                       60                       134                      60
Maximized Log
Pseudo                              -470.977                 -183.252                  -464.613                 -193.856
Likelihood
Note: Columns 1-3 report estimated coefficients from Tobit models in which the dependent variable is a country’s top statutory
corporate tax rate. Column 4 reports estimated coefficients from the second stage of instrumental variable Tobit model,
in which the instruments are indicator variables for each of 5 origins (British, French, German, Scandinavian, and
Socialist) of a country’s commercial law. The governance index is the mean of 5 governance measures constructed by
Kaufmann et al. (2005), taking values roughly in the (-2.5, 2.5) interval, with a zero mean and unit variance in the
whole sample, higher values corresponding to better governance. The regression reported in column 3 separately
includes each of the five governance measures. GDP per capita is measured in thousands of U.S.$, in purchasing
power parity terms, for 2004. Population is thousands of residents in 2004. Landlocked is a dummy variable taking


                                                                                                                     40
the value one for landlocked countries and zero otherwise. Distance by air is the distance (in km) from a country’s
capital city to the nearest of New York, Rotterdam, or Tokyo. Fraction of Pop. within 100km of coast is the fraction of
a country’s total land area within 100km of an ocean coast. Govt. expenditure is the ratio of government expenditures
to GDP in 2004, expressed as a percentage. Parliamentary System is a dummy variable taking the value one for
countries with parliamentary governments, and zero otherwise. Subsoil Assets is the per capita value (U.S.$) of a
country’s stock of mineral assets in 2000. The regression includes regional dummy variables for Europe and Central
Asia, Asia/Pacific, the Americas, the Middle East and North Africa, and Africa. The sample in all columns includes
UN members only. Robust standard errors are in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%.




                                                                                                            41
             Table 8: Governance and the Tax Elasticity of Investment by US Firms


                                                                (1)                              (2)
                                                                                            Less Well-
                                                         Well-Governed                      Governed
                                                          Countries                         Countries


                                                        Dependent Variable: Log of Assets Owned by US
                                                                        Firms in 1999

Constant                                                     16.4437                          9.5360
                                                           (4.9307)***                     (2.3080)***

Tax Rate faced by US Firms in 1999                           -0.0712                         -0.0162
                                                           (0.0214)***                       (0.0163)

Log of GDP in 1999                                            1.4014                          0.6014
                                                           (0.2735)***                     (0.2110)***

Log of Population in 1999                                    -0.7224                         -0.1608
                                                            (0.3900)*                        (0.1626)


R-squared                                                     0.6221                          0.3463

Number of Observations                                           30                              30


Note: This table reports regressions in which the dependent variable is the log of assets owned locally by U.S. firms.
Countries with available data are divided into two subsamples. "Well-governed" countries are defined as those with
a governance index greater than the median in this sample (which is 0.705); "less well-governed" countries are those
with a governance index less than the median in this sample. The data on assets owned by U.S. firms (in 1999) is
from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The tax rate faced by U.S. firms (following Hines and Rice (1994)) is
defined as the minimum of the average effective tax rate for U.S. firms observed in the sample, and the country’s
statutory corporate tax rate. The governance index (from Kaufmann et al. (2005)) is for the year 2000 or the closest
available year. GDP and population data are from the Penn World Tables. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
*, ** and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                                                            42
Fig. 1a: Governance and GDP: All Countries
            2         1
     Governance Index
   -1       0
            -2




                          6   7            8            9                  10              11
                                         Log of GDP per capita
                                            Nonhavens           Havens
                                            Fitted values


Note: This figure plots the governance index for 2004 against the log of GDP per capita in 2004 (in PPP terms,
expressed in US$) for all countries in the dataset. Tax haven countries are represented by squares, all other
countries by dots.




                                                                                                            43
Fig. 1b: Governance and GDP: All Tax Havens
           2        1
   Governance Index
          0-1
           -2




                        6   7               8            9                   10              11
                                          Log of GDP per capita
                                      Havens                 Fitted Line


Note: This figure plots the governance index for 2004 against the log of GDP per capita in 2004 (in PPP terms,
expressed in US$) for the tax haven countries (as defined in Column 3 of Table 1) in the dataset. The fitted line is
calculated using all countries in the dataset, and is identical to that in Figure 1a.




                                                                                                               44
Fig. 2a: Governance and GDP: Small Countries (Population < 1 million)
          2
   Governance Index
     0    -1     1




                      6    7               8            9                  10              11
                                         Log of GDP per capita
                                             Nonhavens          Havens
                                             Fitted values


Note: This figure plots the governance index for 2004 against the log of GDP per capita in 2004 (in PPP terms,
expressed in US$) for small countries (defined as those with populations less than 1 million). Tax haven countries
are represented by squares, all other countries by dots.




                                                                                                            45
Fig. 2b: Governance and GDP: Small Tax Havens (Population < 1 million)
          2
          1.5
   Governance Index
    0     .5
          -.5    1




                      6      7               8            9                    10               11
                                           Log of GDP per capita
                                       Havens                  Fitted Line


Note: This figure plots the governance index for 2004 against the log of GDP per capita in 2004 (in PPP terms,
expressed in US$) for the small tax haven countries (as defined in Column 3 of Table 1, with “small” being defined
as having a population less than 1 million) in the dataset. The fitted line is calculated using all small countries in the
dataset, and is identical to that in Figure 2a.




                                                                                                                  46
Fig. 3: Governance and Statutory Corporate Tax Rates
                60
   Statutory Corporate Tax Rate
        20      0       40




                                  -2   -1          0                     1                    2
                                            Governance Index

Note: This figure plots the top statutory corporate tax rate for each country (from the Worldwide Tax Database
maintained by the Office of Tax Policy Research at the University of Michigan) against the governance index.




                                                                                                            47
Fig. 4: Ratio of Total US FDI to GDP for Four Groups of Countries

      0.7




      0.6




      0.5




      0.4


                                                                                                                      Ratio of Total FDI to
                                                                                                                      Total GDP
      0.3




      0.2




      0.1




       0
            Poorly-Governed, Low Tax   Poorly-Governed, High Tax   Well-Governed, Low Tax   Well-Governed, High Tax



Note: The bars depict mean ratios of assets owned by US firms in 1999 to GDP for four groups of countries: those
with below-median governance indices and below-median tax rates, those with below-median governance indices
and above-median tax rates, those with above-median governance indices and below-median tax rates, and those
with above-median governance indices and above-median tax rates. These medians are calculated for the 60
countries for which data on FDI by U.S. firms are available from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.




                                                                                                                                              48
