                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 DO U.S. FIRMS HAVE THE BEST CORPORATE GOVERNANCE? A CROSS-COUNTRY
    EXAMINATION OF THE RELATION BETWEEN CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
                       AND SHAREHOLDER WEALTH

                                          Reena Aggarwal
                                             Isil Erel
                                           Rene M. Stulz
                                         Rohan Williamson

                                        Working Paper 12819
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12819


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2007




Respectively, Professor, Georgetown University, Assistant Professor, Ohio State University, Reese
Chair of Banking and Monetary Economics, Ohio State University, NBER, and ECGI, and Associate
Professor, Georgetown University. We are grateful for comments from Jerome Taillard. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Reena Aggarwal, Isil Erel, Rene M. Stulz, and Rohan Williamson. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do U.S. Firms Have the Best Corporate Governance? A Cross-Country Examination of the
Relation between Corporate Governance and Shareholder Wealth
Reena Aggarwal, Isil Erel, Rene M. Stulz, and Rohan Williamson
NBER Working Paper No. 12819
January 2007
JEL No. G30,G32,G34,G38,K22

                                             ABSTRACT

We compare the governance of foreign firms to the governance of similar U.S. firms. Using an index
of firm governance attributes, we find that, on average, foreign firms have worse governance than
matching U.S. firms. Roughly 8% of foreign firms have better governance than comparable U.S. firms.
The majority of these firms are either in the U.K. or in Canada. When we define a firm's governance
gap as the difference between the quality of its governance and the governance of a comparable U.S.
firm, we find that the value of foreign firms increases with the governance gap. This result suggests
that firms are rewarded by the markets for having better governance than their U.S. peers. It is therefore
not the case that foreign firms are better off simply mimicking the governance of comparable U.S.
firms. Among the individual governance attributes considered, we find that firms with board and audit
committee independence are valued more. In contrast, other attributes, such as the separation of the
chairman of the board and of the CEO functions, do not appear to be associated with higher shareholder
wealth.

Reena Aggarwal                                      Rene M. Stulz
Georgetown University                               Fisher College of Business
Finance Group                                       The Ohio State University
McDonough School of Business                        806A Fisher Hall
G 04, Old North                                     2100 Neil Avenue
Washington, DC 20057                                Columbus, OH 43210-1144
aggarwal@georgetown.edu                             and NBER
                                                    stulz_1@cob.osu.edu
Isil Erel
Department of Finance                               Rohan Williamson
The Ohio State University                           Georgetown University
832 Fisher Hall                                     Finance Group
2100 Neil Avenue                                    McDonough School of Business
Columbus, OH 43210                                  G 04 Old North
erel_1@cob.osu.edu                                  Washington, DC 20057
                                                    WILLIARG@georgetown.edu
    Using the well-known definition of Shleifer and Vishny (1997), governance consists of the

mechanisms which insure that shareholders receive a return on their investment. Governance depends

both on country-level mechanisms and firm-level mechanisms. The country-level governance

mechanisms include a country’s laws and the institutions that enforce the laws, its culture and norms, and

the various formal and informal monitors of corporations. Firm-level or internal governance mechanisms

are the mechanisms that operate within the firm. These mechanisms are heavily influenced by a firm’s

choice of governance attributes through its charter and policies. There is a considerable literature that

compares the quality of institutions across countries. Surprisingly, while there are many studies of firm-

level governance, there is no systematic comparison of firm-level governance quality between the U.S.

and foreign countries. In this paper, we investigate how a foreign firm’s firm-level governance compares

to the firm-level governance it would have if it were a U.S. firm and whether the foreign firm’s

shareholders suffer or benefit when their firm’s governance differs from what it would be if it were a U.S.

firm.

    Corporate governance differs across countries. In some countries, many view the objective of

corporations to maximize the welfare of a collection of stakeholders, while in others, especially the U.K.

and the U.S., it is more commonly believed that corporations should be run to maximize the wealth of

shareholders. Further, it is often argued that shareholder wealth maximization can require different

models of governance in different countries or regions, so shareholders may actually benefit from

governance differences across countries. With this view, some firm-level governance attributes that are

useful in the U.S. may not be as useful or even be detrimental in other countries because institutions,

economic and financial development differ across countries. For instance, Scott and Dallas (2006)

conclude that “no one system of corporate governance is the benchmark for all companies in all

jurisdictions.” Similarly, Gilson (2005) concludes that “within limits, different corporate governance

systems may solve the same monitoring problem through different institutions.” An alternative view is

that there is a dominant common standard of governance. As Hansmann and Kraakman (2000) put it: “we



                                                    2
make the claim that no important competitors to the standard model of corporate governance remain

persuasive today.” If a firm’s adherence to that common standard can be measured, firms that rank better

according to that standard should be worth more to their shareholders.

    To conduct our investigation, we need information about firm-level corporate governance attributes

for a large number of firms across a large number of countries. Further, we would like measures of

individual governance attributes to be computed in the same way across all these firms. Two widely

known governance rankings include both U.S. and foreign firms. One of these two rankings, the Standard

and Poor's ranking, focuses on disclosure. The other one, produced by Institutional Shareholder Services

(ISS), uses a comprehensive inventory of governance attributes. We use the ISS governance attributes in

this paper. By doing so, we can analyze 44 common governance attributes for 2,235 non-U.S. firms and

5,296 U.S. firms covering 23 developed countries. To compare governance quality across the U.S. and

foreign countries, we have to create our own index making sure that the governance attributes included

are relevant both for U.S. firms and foreign firms. We call it the Global Governance Index, or GOV

Index.

         One can reasonably disagree both with the governance attributes ISS focuses on and with the

computation of the index. It is obviously true, as Jack and Suzy Welch argue, that “Good governance

comes down to a lot more than a point system.”1 However, if the point system were to convey no

information, we would simply find that the ranking we use is not related to firm value. A criticism

advanced by some is that the index takes a U.S. view of governance. For our purpose, we would like a

ranking that takes such a view since we want to evaluate whether a foreign firm’s value is related to

governance attributes that are important from a U.S. firm’s perspective. If the U.S. governance approach

were not value relevant or if the ISS index were of poor quality, we would find that the attributes recorded

by ISS are not related to firm value. In that case, foreign firms would not lose value by having a worse

ranking than their U.S. counterparts.


1
 “A dangerous division of labor,” by Jack and Suzy Welch, Business Week, November 6, 2006. For an academic
version of this argument, see Arcot and Bruno (2006).


                                                     3
    The GOV index satisfies our requirement of providing a firm-level governance measure that is

comparable across countries. Based on this index, we find that firm-level governance is worse on average

in foreign countries. However, firm characteristics differ across countries as well. Since governance

attributes of U.S. firms are related to firm characteristics, it could be that governance is worse in foreign

countries simply because firm characteristics differ. We use a propensity score matching method and

show that, when we compare the governance of foreign firms to comparable U.S. firms, their governance

is typically worse. In fact, we find that 92% of the foreign firms have worse governance than comparable

U.S. firms. We define the governance gap to be the difference between the governance index of a foreign

firm and the governance index of a comparable U.S. firm, so that a firm with a positive governance gap

has better governance than its matching U.S. firm. Consequently, only 8% of foreign firms have a positive

governance gap.

    Having compared the governance of foreign and U.S. firms, we turn to the question of whether the

governance gap helps explain a firm’s valuation. It could be that the governance differences are unrelated

to firm value because the governance attributes that make a foreign firm different from a U.S. firm are not

valuable in the country of the foreign firm. Alternatively, the governance attributes we use might not

capture the dimensions of governance that are important for shareholder wealth maximization. In either

case, there would be no relation between firm value and the governance gap. We find that the value of

foreign firms, measured by Tobin’s q, increases as their governance gap increases. In other words,

foreign firms with better governance than their comparable U.S. firms are worth more. Importantly, this

result means that foreign firms should not simply emulate the governance of comparable U.S. firms

because it does not follow that U.S. firms have necessarily chosen the best governance mechanisms.

    In addition to investigating the value relevance of differences in the governance index between

foreign firms and comparable U.S. firms, we also consider the value relevance of specific governance

provisions. We focus on provisions that have attracted considerable attention in the literature and among

policy makers. We find that firms with an independent board, a board elected annually (instead of a

staggered board), an audit committee ratified annually, and an audit committee comprised solely of


                                                     4
outsiders, have higher value. In contrast, firms are not valued more highly when they have a particular

board size or when the functions of chairman of the board and CEO are separated.

    To the extent that adopting better governance is costly for a firm’s insiders, we expect firms to adopt

better governance only if the associated benefits offset the costs to insiders. Better governance enables

firms to access capital markets on better terms, a benefit which is not as valuable for firms in countries

with poorly developed markets and for firms with poor growth opportunities. The cost of better

governance for insiders is that it restricts their ability to expropriate minority shareholders, an ability that

is worth more in countries with poorer institutions. Consequently, we expect firms with better growth

opportunities to have better governance, firms in countries in which shareholders are poorly protected to

have worse governance, and firms from countries with poorly developed capital markets to have worse

governance. The quality of firm-level governance therefore depends crucially on country characteristics

(e.g., Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2006), and Fulghieri and Suominen (2006)). We find further evidence

on the importance of country characteristics in that firms with better governance than comparable U.S.

firms are not scattered randomly across the globe. Almost all firms that have better governance than

comparable U.S. firms are either from Canada or from the U.K. Another way to put this is that almost no

firms in civil law countries have better governance than comparable U.S. firms.

    Our paper contributes to a growing literature on the value relevance of firm-level governance

attributes by examining the value relevance of governance quality for U.S. versus foreign firms. In the

U.S., authors have shown that firm value is related to indices of firm-level governance attributes (e.g.,

Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003), Bebchuk and Cohen (2005), Bebchuk, Cohen, and Ferrell (2005)).

Most importantly, from our perspective, Brown and Caylor (2006) show that the ISS index is value-

relevant in the U.S. and Aggarwal and Williamson (2006) demonstrate that changes in the index are

associated with changes in firm value in the U.S. In an international setting, Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz

(2004) show that foreign firms with ADR programs, which differ in governance from other firms from the

same country, have higher value. Durnev and Kim (2005) use the CSLA corporate governance ratings and

demonstrate that they are value relevant. The CLSA ratings cover 24 emerging countries and newly-


                                                       5
emerging countries for 2000 and provide ratings for 494 companies. Francis, Khurana, and Pereira (2005)

show that disclosure-related governance attributes affect firms’ cost of capital across the world. Finally,

Dahya, Dimitrov, and McConnell (2006) present evidence that firm value is positively related to board

independence for a sample of firms with a controlling shareholder in countries with poor investor

protection.

      The paper proceeds as follows. In Section II, we describe the governance data we use and the sample

of firms. In Section III, we show that average governance quality in foreign countries is always worse

than in the U.S. when using propensity matching but not when using country averages. We report in

Section IV that firm value is positively related to the governance gap after controlling for firm

characteristics. In Section V, we investigate how firms differ across the world in relation to specific

governance attributes and show that board independence and audit committee independence lead to

higher firm value. We investigate the robustness of our results in Section VI and conclude in Section VII.



II.      Firm-level governance attributes and the governance index

      In this section, we first describe the sample of firms covered by ISS. We then summarize the

governance attributes used in our study and show how we aggregate these attributes to form an index.



II. A.   Sample firms

      ISS started providing the Corporate Governance Quotient (CGQ) for international companies in 2003.

The CGQ rankings are a relative measure of a firm’s quality of governance and indicate the quality of a

firm’s governance relative to firms in its industry or within an index in which the firm is included. For

example, a CGQ index ranking of 97 implies that the firm’s governance is better than that of 97% of the

firms in the applicable index or industry. The international coverage includes non-U.S. firms that are part

of the following indices: 1) the MSCI EAFE index which covers 1000 stocks in 21 developed countries

outside North America and captures 85% of the total market capitalization for these countries; 2) the

FTSE All Share Index which consists of the FTSE 100, FTSE 250 and FTSE SmallCap indices and


                                                    6
captures 98% of the U.K. market; 3) the FTSE All World Developed index which includes the largest

firms in the developed markets; and 4) the S&P/TSX index which represents 71% of the market

capitalization of the Toronto Stock Exchange. There is considerable overlap among the indices. In this

paper, we focus exclusively on the 2005 sample because it includes more firms and has fewer missing

attributes for individual firms than the earlier samples. The three countries with the largest number of

firms covered are Japan (589), U.K. (530) and Canada (168). The three countries with the smallest

number of firms covered are Portugal (14), Ireland (16) and New Zealand (18).

    ISS started providing CGQ for U.S. firms in 2002. The coverage was substantially expanded in 2003.

Firms are covered if they are included in any of the following indices: the Standard and Poor’s 500 index,

the Standard and Poor’s SmallCap 600 index, and the Russell 3000 index. The Russell 3000 index

captures 98% of the market capitalization of the U.S. markets. In addition, a number of firms are covered

as long as they file on EDGAR. ISS excludes firms that have not filed a proxy in the last 18 months. In

order to be included, a company has to both be a U.S. company and also be incorporated in a U.S. state.

This means that companies like Tyco and Ingersoll-Rand that are part of the S&P 500 are not included

because they are incorporated in Bermuda. In 2005, on average more than 5,296 U.S. companies are

covered. The U.S. sample is described in greater detail in Aggarwal and Williamson (2005).



II. B. Governance attributes

    ISS compiles 64 governance attributes for each U.S. firm and 55 attributes for foreign firms. How a

firm fares for each attribute is determined by an examination of the firm’s regulatory filings, annual

reports, and website. Firms do not pay to get rated but can access their ratings and check for accuracy.

Firms can only change their ratings by making and publicly disclosing changes to their governance

structure. For each attribute, ISS has a minimally acceptable level of governance and it evaluates whether

a firm meets that threshold. We exclude 11 of the 55 attributes from our analysis because either none of

the firms satisfied minimally accepted criteria for these attributes or ISS replaced them with some other




                                                    7
attributes for the U.S. sample in 2005. Our GOV index therefore includes 44 attributes that are common

for both U.S. and foreign firms.

    The 44 attributes we select cover four broad sub-categories: 1) Board (25 attributes), 2) Audit (three

attributes), 3) Anti-takeover (six attributes), and 4) Compensation and Ownership (10 attributes). Board

attributes attempt to capture the aspects of the functioning of the board of directors that relate to board

independence, composition of committees, size, transparency, and how work is conducted; Audit includes

questions regarding the independence of the audit committee and the role of auditors; Anti-takeover

provisions are from the firm’s charter and bylaws and refer to dual-class structure, role of shareholders,

poison pill and blank check preferred; and Compensation and Ownership deals with executive and

director compensation on issues related to options, stock ownership and loans, and how these types of

compensation are determined and monitored.

    Table 1 provides a description of the threshold used by ISS for each of the 44 governance attributes

for the full sample of non-U.S. firms for a firm to have an acceptable level of governance for that

attribute.   The governance attributes are arranged by sub-categories.       There are several minimally

accepted standards that are met by most firms. For example, seven of the 25 board-related criteria are met

by more than 80 percent of the non-U.S. firms in our sample. These standards include: the CEO serves on

the board of two or fewer companies, board size is greater than five but less than 16, the CEO is not listed

as having a related-party transaction, the chairman and the CEO are separated or there is a lead director,

shareholders vote on directors selected to fill vacancies, the board typically cannot amend bylaws without

shareholder approval, and the board does not ignore shareholder proposals. For the three audit-related

attributes, 83.9% of the firms in our sample pay consulting fees to auditors that are lower than audit fees;

for 35.3% of the firms the audit committee is comprised solely of independent directors; and for 58.4% of

the firms auditors are ratified at the most recent meeting.

    More than 90% of the firms meet four of the six anti-takeover provisions: a single class of common

stock, shareholders can call special meetings, and the company either has no poison pill or has a poison

pill that was approved by shareholders, the company is not authorized to issue blank check preferred.


                                                      8
Only 7% of the firms require a simple majority to approve mergers implying that the remaining 93% of

firms require a supermajority. Shareholders can act by written consent in 11.5% of our sample firms.

More than half the firms meet compensation and ownership attributes on four of the ten attributes: no

interlocks among compensation committee members (98.9%), all stock-incentive plans adopted with

shareholder approval (92.8%), all directors with more than one year of service own stock (55.4%), and

repricing is prohibited (54%).



II. C.   Corporate governance index construction

    We use the 44 individual attributes to create a composite governance index, GOV44, for each

company. GOV44 assigns a value of one to a governance attribute if the company meets minimally

acceptable standard on that attribute and zero otherwise. It is common in the literature to use additive

indices (e.g., Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003), Bebchuk, Cohen and Ferrell (2004), Bebchuk and

Cohen (2005)). Brown and Caylor (2006) use this approach to construct a governance index based on ISS

governance attributes for the U.S. We express our index as a percentage. If a firm satisfies all 44

governance attributes, its GOV44 index would equal 100%. If an attribute is missing then the attribute is

eliminated and the value represents the percentage of non-missing attributes that the firm satisfies.

    We also consider the individual governance attributes that have received the most attention in the

academic literature and from observers. Admittedly, these attributes are arbitrary. We also construct an

alternative index that is focused on these seven individual governance attributes, resulting in the GOV7

index. The seven attributes include, Board Independence: board is controlled by more than 50%

independent outside directors; Board Size: the board has more than five members but less than 16;

Chairman/CEO Separation: chairman and CEO are separated or there is a lead director; Board Structure:

annually elected board (no staggered board); Audit Committee Independence: audit committee comprised

solely of independent outsiders; Auditor Ratification: auditors ratified at most recent annual meeting; and

Stock Classes: only one class of common stock (no dual class).




                                                     9
III.       Cross-country comparisons of firm-level governance

       We first describe the sample of firms for which the firm-level corporate attributes are available. We

then investigate how governance differs across countries focusing on a comparison between the U.S. and

foreign firms.



III. A. Characteristics of sample firms

       Table 2 provides descriptive statistics (medians) on a number of firm-specific variables by country

including market capitalization (Mkt. Cap.) in millions of U.S. dollars, total assets (Assets) in millions of

U.S. dollars, whether a firm is cross-listed in the U.S. (ADR is a dummy variable that takes a value of one

if the firm is cross-listed in the U.S.), and Tobin’s q. Tobin’s q is defined as ((total assets + market value

of equity – total common equity – deferred taxes)/ total assets). All firm-level data are obtained from

Worldscope and Datastream. We use stock prices at the end of 2004 and 2004 accounting data, taking the

perspective that the governance attributes published by ISS in 2005 were in effect in 2004.

       The median market capitalization and total assets are $1,767 million and $2,561 million respectively

for the non-U.S. sample. There is considerable variation in the size of the firms in a country based on

these two size proxies. Firms in Greece, New Zealand, the U.K., and the U.S. tend to be the smallest.

However, U.K. and U.S. have low median size values because the coverage for these two countries is

much broader and, therefore, captures a much more diverse set of firms compared to other countries

where mostly large firms are covered. On average, French and Swedish firms are the largest based on

market capitalization; French and Italian firms are the largest based on total assets. The median q for the

non-U.S. sample ranges from a low of 1.10 for Italy to a high of 1.49 for both Norway and Sweden and

1.51 for U.K. The U.S. has the largest median q at 1.52. In our sample, more than half the firms from

Austria, Canada and Ireland are cross-listed. Our sample covers more than 70% of the Worldscope

market capitalization for all countries except Hong Kong (60%) and the Netherlands (52%).




                                                      10
III. B. Differences in governance across countries: Comparison of country averages

    The average values of GOV44 for non-U.S. firms and for U.S. firms are 49% and 61%, respectively,

as seen in Table 3. Figure 1 and Table 3 show that Canada (69%), the U.S. (61%), Finland (57%) and the

U.K. (56%) are the countries with the highest average governance index. Countries with the lowest

average governance index are Belgium (39%), Portugal (39%), Italy (41%) and Japan (42%). These

results indicate that there is a wide degree of variation in the average value of GOV44 across countries.

Every country except Canada has a lower average index than the U.S. and the difference is statistically

significant at the 1% level.

    On average, non-U.S. companies have a score of 58% with the GOV7 index. Countries with the

highest scores are Canada (92%), Finland (81%), Switzerland (75%) and the U.S. (73%). The lowest

scores are for France (36%), Japan (37%), Italy (42%) and Portugal (43%). Based on the broader

measure, GOV44, only Canada had a score higher than the U.S. but based on the narrower measure, GOV7,

four countries have a score that is equal to or higher than the U.S. Japan, Portugal and Italy are among

the lowest scoring countries based on both measures of governance.



III. C. Differences in governance across countries: Comparison using matched pairs

    There is an obvious problem of interpretation when one compares country averages of the GOV

index: we are comparing governance for firms with different characteristics. As shown in Table 2, median

firm size differs widely across countries. Differences in firm size can result from differences in country-

level governance attributes. Perhaps more importantly, firm-level governance attributes have costs and

benefits. If costs of better firm-level governance have a fixed component but benefits are proportional to

firm size, one would expect larger firms to have better firm-level governance. In fact, in the U.S. there is a

strong correlation between GOV and firm size measured by assets (approximately, 0.50). Consequently,

by comparing GOV across countries with different types of firms, we may be comparing apples to

oranges.




                                                     11
      To make our comparison of the governance of U.S. firms with the governance of foreign firms more

precise, we use two matching methods. The first method matches a foreign firm with a U.S. firm that is

closest in asset size and in the same industry. The second method matches based on industry and closest

propensity scores (p-scores). Drucker and Puri (2005) argue that this econometric method is superior

because this matching employs fewer restrictions. Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983), Rubin (1997), and

Conniffe, Gash, and O’Connell (2000), among others, have shown this approach to be more accurate. In

order to implement this method, we calculate each firm’s propensity score, which is simply equal to the

probability that a firm with given characteristics is a foreign firm. This probability is calculated by using

observable firm characteristics of both U.S. and non-U.S. firms, namely log of total assets (SIZE), two-

year average sales growth (SGROWTH), two-year average research and development expense to sales

(R&D/SALES), cash to assets (CASH/ASSETS), capital expenditures to assets (CAPEX/ASSETS),

property, plant and equipment to sales (PPE/SALES), earnings before interest and taxes to sales

(EBIT/SALES), total debt to assets (DEBT/ASSETS) as well as industry dummies, in a probit regression.

      Of the 2,138 foreign firms that could be matched to U.S. counterparts based on industry and p-scores,

490     firms   that   operate   in   regulated   industries   (specifically,   in   Utilities,   Transportation,

Telecommunication Service, Insurance, Energy, and Banking) are excluded from the analysis.

      Table 4 also shows the average difference between the GOV44 index of foreign firms and their

matching U.S. counterparts for both matching methods. It is immediately clear that comparing country

averages leads to misleading results. Strikingly, when we use propensity matching, all countries have a

worse average than the average of the matching firms. In other words, governance in each foreign country

is significantly worse than the governance of comparable U.S. firms. Further, when we match firms, the

governance gap of foreign firms is worse than when we compare averages of the GOV44 index across

countries. Part of the reason is that the U.S. sample contains a large number of smaller firms and smaller

firms typically have worse governance when measured by an index like GOV44.

      We show in Table 4 the number of firms in each country that have worse governance than their

matching U.S. firm, the number of firms in each country that have better governance than their matching


                                                      12
U.S. firm, and, finally, the percentage of firms in a country that have better governance than their

matching U.S. firm based on the propensity score method. Across the world, 92% of firms have worse

governance than their matching U.S. firm. Our sample has 22 non-U.S. countries. Only 12 countries have

at least one firm that has better governance than its matching U.S. firm. Stunningly, only two countries

have more than five firms with better governance than comparable U.S. firms. These countries are Canada

and the U.K. In Canada, 38% of the firms have better governance than similar U.S. firms. In the U.K.,

15% do so. The other countries where 10% or more of the firms have better governance than their

matching U.S. firms are Finland, the Netherlands, and Switzerland.

    Though we do not report the results in a table, we also examined governance differences using the

GOV7 when foreign firms are matched to U.S. firms using propensity scores. We find that firms from

Canada and Finland have better governance on average than comparable U.S. firms.



III. D. Characteristics of foreign firms with better governance than their U.S. matches

    What makes it likely that a foreign firm will have better governance than its matching U.S. firm?

Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2006) show theoretically and empirically that country characteristics are an

important determinant of firm-level governance. 2 The reason for this finding is that the benefits and costs

of good governance depend on country characteristics. Firms benefit from good governance because it

allows them to access external markets on better terms, but that benefit is not of much value in countries

with weak and inefficient capital markets. Good governance is also expected to be cheaper to put in place

in countries with better institutions. We find further evidence on the importance of country

characteristics: 79% of the firms that have better governance than their U.S. counterparts are in less than

10% of the countries in our sample.

    Table 5 compares firm and country characteristics for firms with a positive governance gap with the

same characteristics for firms with a negative governance gap. In this table, we require information to


2
 See also Fulghieri and Suominen (2006) for a theoretical model of the determinants of firm-level governance in
which both country and industry characteristics are important.


                                                      13
compute Tobin’s q, which reduces the sample size slightly. The percentage of firms with a positive gap is

still 8%. The first two columns of Table 5 report the medians for the firms with a negative governance

gap, i.e., firms with worse governance than their U.S. counterpart, and for the firms with a positive

governance gap. Similar to previous work in the corporate governance literature (e.g., Gompers, Ishii, and

Metrick (2003), Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004), and Durnev and Kim (2005)), we use Tobin’s q as the

measure of firm value. It has the interpretation of the value created in excess of the cost of the assets. The

prediction is that firms with better governance create more wealth for shareholders. We find that the q of

firms with better governance than their matching U.S. firms is significantly greater than the q of firms

with worse governance. In the next section, we examine this valuation difference in greater detail.

    Strikingly, the firms with better governance have a market capitalization and total assets that are

roughly a third smaller than the firms with worse governance. Sales growth, capital expenditures, cash to

assets, and earnings are not significantly different for the two groups. R&D to sales, and PPE to sales are

higher for the firms with worse governance. Finally, firms with better governance have more foreign

sales, more debt, greater insider ownership, and are more likely to be cross-listed.

    We also investigate how country characteristics differ between firms with a positive gap and firms

with a negative gap. The firms with better governance than their U.S. counterparts come from countries

with greater stock market capitalization to GDP, with common law, with a better judicial system, and

with better laws and regulations to curb self-dealing by insiders. For comparison with Durnev and Kim

(2005), we use the product of the index of rule of law and of the anti-director index of La Porta, Lopez-

de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998) (as revised in Djankov, La Porta, Lopes-de-Silanes, and Shleifer

(2006)) as a measure of the quality of the judicial system. We also use the anti-self dealing index from

Djankov et al. (2006). Firms with a positive governance gap come from countries where these variables

have higher values.

    We report in Table 5 estimates of probit regressions in which the dependent variable takes a value of

one if a foreign firm has better governance than its matching U.S. counterpart and equals zero otherwise.

We find that in these regressions the measures of investor protection are significant predictors of a firm’s


                                                     14
governance relative to its U.S. matching firm. The only other variables that are significant in all

regressions are a firm’s assets and leverage.



IV.       Firm value and governance

      We have now seen that the typical foreign firm has worse governance than a comparable U.S. firm,

but some foreign firms have better governance than comparable U.S. firms. We showed that firms with

better governance are valued more, in the sense that they have a higher Tobin’s q. However, a plausible

explanation for the valuation difference could be that firms with better governance have characteristics

that make them more valuable. It is therefore necessary to examine the relation between firm value and

governance in a regression where we control for other firm characteristics.

      Tobin’s q can differ across firms because of industry and country characteristics rather than because

of differences in firm characteristics. To account for industry and country sources of heterogeneity, we

use industry and country fixed-effects. We control for firm characteristics generally used in the literature.

We control for firm size as proxied by log of total assets (SIZE) in all the models. We also estimate

models that control for two-year average sales growth (SGROWTH), two-year average research and

development expense to sales (R&D/SALES), two-year average foreign sales to total sales (FOREIGN

SALES/SALES), cash to assets (CASH/ASSETS), capital expenditures to assets (CAPEX/ASSETS),

property, plant and equipment to sales (PPE/SALES), earnings before interest and taxes to sales

(EBIT/SALES), total debt to assets (DEBT/ASSETS), and percentage of shares closely held (CLOSELY

HELD). In separate regressions, we also include the ADR dummy. Cross-listing enables a firm to have

better governance by borrowing external governance attributes from the U.S. (e.g., Stulz (1999)). It is

well-known that there is a positive relation between firm value and whether a firm has adopted an ADR

program (Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004)). We therefore want to make sure that firm-level governance

plays a distinct role. Similar to prior work we winsorize extreme percentiles (1st and 99th) of q,

SGROWTH, R&D/SALES, and FOREIGN SALES/SALES. We use an estimator that allows for clustering

of the residuals at the country level.


                                                     15
    Regression (1) of Table 6 shows estimates when we regress Tobin’s q on the governance index a firm

would have if it were a U.S. firm, GOV44 _US, the governance index gap, GOV GAP, and on firm size

measured by total assets, SIZE. Tobin’s q is negatively related to firm size. A firm’s Tobin’s q is

positively related to GOV44 _US. If a foreign firm’s matching U.S. firm has a governance index 10

percentage points higher (in the regression, the governance index is expressed in decimals, so a change of

0.10 in the governance index), the foreign firm’s Tobin’s q is 0.11 higher. A firm’s value is positively

related to the governance gap as a firm that has better governance than its matching U.S. firm is valued

more. In this regression, however, we cannot reject that the coefficient on GOV44 _US is equal to the

coefficient on GOV GAP at the 10% level. Consequently, a specification with just the GOV44 would be

appropriate.

    In Regression (2), we split the governance gap between a positive governance gap – i.e., the firm’s

governance index is better than the governance index of its matching U.S. firm – and a negative

governance gap. Strikingly, there is an asymmetry. An F-test testing the equality of the coefficients on

NEGATIVE GAP and POSITIVE GAP rejects the hypothesis of equality at the 10% level. A foreign firm

gains much more from having better governance than the U.S. matching firm than it loses by having

worse governance. If a foreign firm’s governance index is higher by 10 percentage points than the index

of its matching U.S. firm, its Tobin’s q is higher by 0.33. In contrast, if the foreign firm’s governance

index is lower by 10 percentage points, its Tobin’s q is lower by 0.11.

    Regressions (1) and (2) only control for size. The other four regressions in Table 6 control for a wide

range of firm characteristics. Controlling for all these firm attributes reduces the coefficient on GOV44

_US, but has no meaningful impact on the governance gap coefficients. It is therefore not surprising that

an F-test rejects the equality of GOV44 _US and GOV GAP at the 10% level. It follows that a regression

with control variables relating Tobin’s q to GOV44 instead of allowing for different coefficients on GOV44

_US and GOV GAP would be misspecified. When we use NEGATIVE GAP and POSITIVE GAP instead

of GOV GAP, we find that the asymmetry noted in regression (2) persists. The coefficients on the control

variables are generally as expected. Firms with more R&D, more capital expenditures, and greater


                                                    16
earnings have a higher Tobin’s q. One would expect that firms with greater sales growth would have a

higher Tobin’s q since sales growth is a measure of growth opportunities, but sales growth is only

significant in Regression (6). The coefficient on the fraction of the firm’s shares held by blockholders is

not significant in regressions (3) and (4) but significant in regressions (5) and (6). As expected from

Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004), cross-listed firms have a higher Tobin’s q.

      The regression estimates show that the shareholders of foreign firms with better governance than their

U.S. counterparts are better off. Such a result raises the question of why all firms do not choose to have

better governance than their U.S. counterpart. Existing models of firm governance provide a

straightforward explanation for why so few firms have better governance than their matching U.S. firms. 3

In most countries, firms are controlled by large shareholders who derive private benefits from control.

Consequently, the controlling shareholders get to decide whether the firm has better or worse governance

than its matching U.S. firm. By improving firm-level governance, the controlling shareholders lose

private benefits. However, they also make it possible for the firm to raise funds on better terms. Not

surprisingly, we would expect firms to embrace better governance in countries in which private benefits

are low since in that case, the controlling shareholder gives up less by selecting better governance for the

firm. We saw in Section IV that firms in countries with higher quality investor protection are more likely

to have better governance than their U.S. matching firm. Countries in which private benefits are high

generally have less well-developed capital markets and poor institutions. As a result, as argued by

Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2006), good governance is more expensive to implement in such countries

and benefits firms less. Firms in countries in which private benefits are high are therefore less likely to

have good governance.

      One might argue that our estimation procedure does not take into account that firms choose their level

of governance. When we re-estimate the regressions in Table 5 using two-stage least squares where the

first stage equation is an equation for GOV GAP, we find similar results. Our first-stage regression uses as

independent variables firm size, sales growth, the ADR dummy, shares closely held, a dummy variable if

3
    See Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2006) for a model and references.


                                                          17
the country is a common law country, log GDP per capita, the ratio of the country’s market cap to GDP,

and industry dummy variables. The only firm characteristic that is significant is the fraction of shares

closely held. That variable has a negative significant coefficient as expected from Doidge, Karolyi, Lins,

Miller, and Stulz (2006). Not surprisingly, common law has a positive significant coefficient. Both the log

GDP per capita and the ratio of the country’s market cap to GDP have negative significant coefficients. In

the second stage, we regress q on the firm-specific variables, country dummy variables, industry dummy

variables, and GOV GAP. The coefficient on GOV GAP is 1.069 with a t-statistic of 3.34.

     There is an alternative interpretation of the regression results. One could argue that the governance

gap simply reflects firm characteristics not included in the regression. Hence, firms with a negative

governance gap are not worth less because of that gap but they are worth less because of an omitted

determinant of firm value. In a sense, this interpretation is necessarily correct. If the controlling

shareholder finds that it is worth it for the firm to have good governance, then the omitted variable is

whatever explains why the controlling shareholder concludes that better governance makes him better off.

Strikingly, however, the controlling shareholder is much more likely to decide that the firm should have

better governance than its U.S. counterpart in Canada and the U.K. It seems unreasonable to argue that

unobserved firm characteristics that make it worthwhile for firms to have better governance than their

U.S. counterparts are almost exclusively observed in these two countries. A more reasonable

interpretation is that good governance is more valuable in developed countries with good institutions. In

that sense, U.S. firms have better governance because governance pays better in the U.S.



V.       Individual Governance Attributes

     So far, we have focused on the governance index and the relation between firm value and that index.

When academics and other observers focus on corporate governance, they do not pay close attention to 44

attributes. Instead, they tend to focus on a handful of attributes that draw considerable attention. As

discussed in Section II, we select seven such attributes and compute an index of these attributes which we

call GOV7. Though we do not report the regression here, we estimate the regression in the last column of


                                                    18
Table 6 with the GOV7 index instead of the GOV44 index. We find a significant relation between firm

value and the difference between a firm’s GOV7 index and the GOV7 index of its matching U.S. firm.

However, the adjusted R-square of the regression is slightly less, the GOV7 index for the matching U.S.

firm is not significant, and the coefficients on the positive gap and the negative gap are smaller.

Consequently, the GOV7 index is value-relevant, but the broader index, GOV44, explains slightly more of

the variation in firm value.

    The GOV7 index includes a handful of governance attributes, which should be considered individually

to assess whether a firm’s differences from its U.S. matching firm are related to value. For that purpose,

we first report in Table 7 the country averages for the governance attributes of the GOV7 index. We see in

that table that U.S. firms rate highly on board independence and audit committee independence. In

contrast, as expected, U.S. firms tend to rate poorly compared to most countries on the separation of the

functions of the chairman of the board and of the CEO. Though most countries have a lower proportion of

firms without a staggered board than the U.S., four countries (Canada, Denmark, Finland, and Sweden)

have a much higher proportion of such firms than the U.S. More than half the countries have a higher

proportion of firms than the U.S. meeting the minimum satisfactory threshold for board size. Finally,

fifteen countries have a higher percentage of firms with one class of stock than the U.S.

    Are these governance attributes related to firm value? Or, to put it differently and to use an example,

are the foreign firms that separate the functions of chairman of the board and of CEO worth more? To

examine this issue, we re-estimate the last regression of Table 6 in two different ways. First, we re-

estimate the regression substituting individual governance attributes for GOV44. Second, we re-estimate

the regression including all the individual governance attributes. As in Table 6, we use the governance

attribute of the matching firm, the positive governance gap, and the negative governance gap.

    Panel A of Table 8 shows the regression estimates when we introduce one individual attribute at a

time. We see that separation of the functions of chairman of the board and CEO is not related to firm

value. Neither are board size and stock classes. Board independence is significantly related to firm value.

A firm whose board does not meet the board independence requirement is worth less when its matching


                                                    19
U.S. firm meets that requirement. Our evidence is related to the evidence of Dahya, Dimitrov, and

McConnell (2006). They find that board independence is positively related to firm value in the countries

with poor investor protection when firms have a controlling shareholder. However, their sample includes

less developed countries in contrast to ours.4 We find that board independence matters for developed

countries. The strength of the board independence result is surprising in light of the U.S. evidence which

fails to find a strong relation between board independence and firm value.5 Not having a staggered board

when the matching U.S. firm has a staggered board is also associated with higher value. Bebchuk and

Cohen (2005) document the costs associated with entrenched boards. We also find that audit committee

independence is associated with higher value. Finally, not having annual audit ratification when the

matching U.S. firm has it is costly, but having annual audit ratification when the matching U.S. firm does

not does not lead to higher firm value. Panel B of Table 8 shows the estimates for the coefficients of the

individual governance attributes when all the attributes are included as explanatory variables. The only

difference worth noting is that board independence is no longer significant. This may be because that

attribute is highly correlated with other attributes included in the regression. Nevertheless, the other

attributes that were individually significant are still significant here.



VI.       Alternative specifications

      In this Section, we investigate the robustness of the results presented so far. We present some of the

results of that investigation in Table 9.

      Our analysis has focused on comparing the governance of foreign firms to the governance of

matching U.S. firms. An alternative approach would be to compare the governance/value relation for

foreign and U.S. firms. In columns (1) and (2), we report regression (6) of Table 6 where GOV44 is the

governance variable. Since the regression controls for firm characteristics, the coefficient of GOV44 is a

measure of the value of governance given firm characteristics. We see that the coefficient of GOV44 is

4
  Our sample differs from theirs also because we do not limit firms to those with a controlling shareholder and
because we have many more firms than they do.
5
  See Bhagat and Black (2002).


                                                         20
positive and significant in both regressions. Further, the coefficient is roughly the same for foreign and

U.S. firms.

    A concern is that only selected firms have a GOV index. We investigate (but do not report regression

estimates) whether the significance of the GOV index could be accounted for by a selection bias. Using

all firms for which data is available on Worldscope to estimate regression (1), we estimate a probit

regression for which the dependent variable is one if the firm has a GOV index. The explanatory variables

are a firm’s asset size and its number of employees. Using Heckman’s two-stage approach, we find that

the GOV index is still significant when we account for selection.

    In regression (3), we use an alternative matching approach which does not rely on the propensity

score. For each foreign firm, we choose as a matching firm the U.S. firm in the same industry that has the

closest amount of assets. We see that the results are similar to the results obtained when we use

propensity matching, though the coefficient on the governance gap when it is positive is markedly

smaller.

    A legitimate concern is whether our results depend on the inclusion of some countries with a large

number of firms in our sample. In particular, the three countries with the largest number of firms, in

descending order, are Japan, the U.K., and Canada. We estimate our regressions removing one of these

countries at a time (in columns (4)-(6) of Panel A in Table 9). It is immediately clear that removing one of

these countries has no impact on our conclusions.

    So far, our regressions have not controlled for a valuation benchmark. We would expect a firm to be

worth more if it is in an industry that has a higher q. We add as an explanatory variable the median q of

the firm’s industry globally in column (7) of Panel A. We find that our results are essentially the same

with that added variable.

    Earlier literature (for instance, Durnev and Kim (2005)) controls explicitly for country characteristics

rather than using fixed effects. We investigate here whether our results are sensitive to how we control for

country characteristics. In the next three regressions, we remove the country fixed effects. To control for

country characteristics, we use a country’s GDP per capita, the ratio of stock market capitalization to


                                                    21
GDP, and a proxy for investor protection. The proxies for investor protection are a dummy variable that

takes value one for a common law country, the variable used by Durnev and Kim (2005), namely the

product of the rule of law index and the anti-director index, and finally the Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-

Silanes, and Shleifer (2006) anti-self-dealing index. 6 None of the proxies for investor protection are

significant. Surprisingly, GDP per capita has a significant negative coefficient. The coefficient on the

positive gap is positive and significant in all regressions. However, the other coefficients become

insignificant. Part of the explanation is that there is a strong correlation between the governance index and

investor protection. The correlation between common law and a firm’s governance index is the highest

correlation at 0.51.



VII.    Conclusion

    In this paper, we compare the governance of foreign firms to the governance of comparable U.S.

firms. We call the difference in governance between a foreign firm and a comparable U.S. firm the

governance gap. For the typical foreign firm, the governance gap is negative in that the foreign firm’s

governance is worse than the governance of its matching U.S. firm. We then examine the relation

between firm value and the governance gap.

    We find that it is quite important, when comparing the governance of foreign firms and U.S. firms, to

do so by comparing apples to apples – namely firms with similar characteristics. When one does not do

so, one might erroneously conclude, for instance, that Canadian firms have better governance than U.S.

firms. With an apples-to-apples comparison, firms in each foreign country have, on average, worse

governance than comparable U.S. firms.

    The governance gap is strongly related to firm value. A foreign firm’s value directly increases with

the governance gap, but there is an asymmetry in the relation between firm value and the governance gap.

Firms gain more by having better governance than their matching U.S. firm than they lose by having


6
  Note that Durnev and Kim (2005) use the anti-director index of La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny
(1998). We use the updated index from Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2006).


                                                        22
worse governance. Most of the firms with better governance than their matching U.S. firm are Canadian

and British firms. Country characteristics therefore play an extremely important role in explaining why

some firms have better governance than U.S. firms. In Canada and the U.K., insiders give up fewer

private benefits by supporting better governance than they do in countries with weaker investor

protection. Unfortunately, in many countries, because of poor institutions, better governance is often not

advantageous for controlling shareholders even though, as we have seen minority shareholders benefit

from better governance.




                                                   23
References

Aggarwal, Reena, and Rohan G. Williamson, 2006, Did new regulations target the relevant corporate
     governance attributes? Working Paper, Georgetown University.

Arcot, Sridhar R., and Valentina G. Bruno, 2006, One size does not fit all, after all: Evidence from
      corporate governance, Working Paper, London School of Economics.

Bebchuk, Lucian A., and Alma Cohen, 2005, The costs of entrenched boards, Journal of Financial
     Economics 78, 409-433.

Bebchuk, Lucian A., Alma Cohen, and Allen Ferrell, 2005, What matters in corporate governance?,
     Working Paper, Harvard Law School.

Bhagat, Sanjay, and Bernard Black, 2002, The non-correlation between board independence and long-
     term firm performance, Journal of Corporation Law 27, 231-273.

Brown, Lawrence D., and Marcus L. Caylor, 2006, Corporate governance and firm valuation, Journal of
    Accounting and Public Policy July-Aug, 409-434.

Conniffe, Denis, Vanessa Gash, and Philip J. O’Connell, 2000, Evaluating state programmes: “Natural
     experiments” and propensity scores, The Economic and Social Review, 31, 283-308.

Dahya, Jay, Orlin Dimitrov, and John J. McConnell, 2006, Dominant shareholders, corporate boards and
     corporate value: A cross-country analysis, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 2006, The law and
     economics of self-dealing, Working Paper, Harvard University.

Doidge, Craig, G. Andrew Karolyi, and René M. Stulz, 2004, Why foreign firms that list in the U.S. are
     worth more?, Journal of Financial Economics 71, 205-238.

Doidge, Craig, G. Andrew Karolyi, and René M. Stulz, 2006, Why do countries matter so much for
     corporate governance?, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Drucker, Steven and Manju Puri, 2005, On the benefits of concurrent lending and underwriting, Journal
     of Finance, 60, 2763-2799.

Durnev, Art, and E. Han Kim, 2005, To steal or not to steal: Firm attributes, legal environment, and
     valuation, Journal of Finance 60, 1461-1493.

Francis, Jere R., Inder K. Khurana, and Raynolde Pereira, 2005, Disclosure incentives and effects on cost
      of capital around the world, Accounting Review, 80, 1125-1162.

Fulghieri, Paolo, and Matti Suominen, 2006, Corporate governance, finance, and the real sector, Working
     Paper, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.

Gilson, Ronald J., 2005, Controlling shareholders and corporate governance: Complicating the
      comparative taxonomy, ECGI–Law Working Paper No. 49/2005.

Gompers, Paul A., Joy L. Ishii, and Andrew Metrick, 2003, Corporate governance and equity prices, The
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 107-155.


                                                   24
Hansmann, Henry, and Reinier Kraakman, 2003, The end of history for corporate law, in J. Gordon and
     M. J. Roe eds.: Are Corporate Governance Systems Converging?, University of Chicago Press.

Hermalin, Benjamin E. and Michael S. Weisbach, 2003, Boards of Directors as an endogenously
    determined institution: A survey of the economic literature, Economic Policy Review 9, 7-26.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998, Law and
     finance, Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.

Rosenbaum, Paul, and Donald Rubin, 1983, The central role of the propensity score in observational
     studies for causal effects, Biometrika 70, 41-55.

Rubin, Donald, 1997, Estimating causal effects from large data sets using propensity scores, Annals of
     Internal Medicine 127, 757-763.

Scott, Hal S., and George S. Dallas, 2006, Mandating corporate behavior: Can one set of rules fit all?
      Working Paper, Standard and Poor’s.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny, 1997, A Survey of Corporate Governance, Journal of Finance 52,
      737-783.

Stulz, René M., 1999, Globalization, Corporate Finance and Cost of Capital, Journal of Applied
      Corporate Finance 12, 8-25.




                                                 25
                                             Figure 1
                                    Governance Scores by Country

Values on the vertical axis represent the mean of the firm level governance index for a particular country.
GOV44 (GOV7) is the percentage of 44 (7) governance attributes that a firm meets based on the attributes
that have non-missing data. GOV7 is constructed by using the following seven attributes: Board
Independence: board is controlled by more than 50% independent outside directors; Board Size: board size
is at greater than five but less than 16; Chairman/CEO Separation: chairman and CEO are separated or
there is a lead director; Board Structure: annually elected board (no staggered board); Audit Committee
Independence: audit committee comprised solely of independent outsiders; Auditor Ratification: auditors
ratified at most recent annual meeting; and Stock Classes: only one class of common stock. Mean
governance scores are reported for each of the 23 countries as of 2005. The information is based on 2,234
non-U.S. firms and 5,296 U.S. firms.


                                                   GOV 44
80%
70%

60%
50%
40%
30%
20%

10%
 0%
         Au tria




          S w ng
        G nds




                     lia
         it z om




                       n
  i te Fin s




             Fr y




            en in
                       a




                       e




                     ay



          Be ly

          Po m

                      al
          he nd




            G k




                     en
             Au e




          Ze e
        Ki nd




          ng d
                    nd
                     e




                   an




                   ec
      ite nad




                    ar
                     c




       w por




                   pa
      Ho la n




                 ug
                  Ita

                   iu
                 pa
                  ra
                  at




                Ko
                an




                  w
                   a




                ed
                  a



                 la
     Sw g d




                  s




                m
              rla




               re
               m




              Ja
                 l




                 l




               lg
              st




              or
              St




               rt
             Ire




               S
             er




               a
   Ne ga
  Un Ca




            er
             n




           N
           d




         in
        D
      et




       S
      d




     N
Un




                                                   GOV 7
100%
 90%
 80%
 70%
 60%
 50%
 40%
 30%
 20%
 10%
  0%
                         a




                         g
              Ir s




                       lia
            Sw m




              Fr n
  ni De es




              Au y




                        ly
           Po m
                         d




           Be in
                      da




                         e

          Au ay




                        al
          Ki ark




                      ce
                      nd




           ng en




             G d
          G ore
                      nd




         th tri
                     nd
                     an




                     on



                     ec




                     pa
         on n



                   an
                   do




                   I ta
                   ug
                    iu
                   pa
                   ra
                   at




                  an
                   w
                  na




      H el a
                 ed
     S w nla

                   a




                   s
               nm




                ap




                 la




                re
   Ne g K
                m




               Ja
                lg
                  l




                al



               or
               St




               st
              ng




                rt
                S
   Un zer
             Ca




             er
             er
             Fi




           Ze



             N
            d
          it
       ite




       Si




       w
     Ne
       d
    te
 U




                                                      26
                                                  Table 1
                    Foreign Firms Satisfying Minimally Acceptable Governance Standards

The 44 governance attributes in the GOV44 index are divided into four sub-categories: Board, Audit, Anti-takeover,
and Compensation & Ownership. The seven individual attributes included in the GOV7 index are indicated by an
asterisk. For each attribute we report the percentage of firms that satisfy the minimally acceptable governance
standard in 2005. The sample consists of 2,234 foreign firms.

      Minimally Acceptable Corporate Governance Standard                              % of Foreign Firms
                                                                                      Meeting Criterion
      BOARD
 1.   All directors attended 75% of board meetings or had a valid excuse                     77.8%
 2.   CEO serves on the boards of two or fewer public companies                              91.7%
 3.   Board is controlled by more than 50% independent outside directors*                    32.6%
 4.   Board size is at greater than five but less than 16*                                   84.3%
 5.   CEO is not listed as having a related-party transaction                                93.5%
 6.   No former CEO on the board                                                             75.1%
 7.   Compensation committee comprised solely of independent outsiders                       28.9%
 8.   Chairman and CEO are separated or there is a lead director*                            89.8%
 9.   Nominating committee comprised solely of independent outsiders                         15.8%
10.   Governance committee exists and met in the past year                                   14.0%
11.   Shareholders vote on directors selected to fill vacancies                              83.5%
12.   Governance guidelines are publicly disclosed                                           53.9%
13.   Annually elected board (no staggered board)*                                           24.9%
14.   Policy exists on outside directorships (four or fewer boards is the limit)              4.0%
15.   Shareholders have cumulative voting rights                                              1.6%
16.   Shareholder approval is required to increase/decrease board size                       56.8%
17.   Majority vote requirement to amend charter/bylaws (not supermajority)                   3.5%
18.   Board has the express authority to hire its own advisors                               44.7%
19.   Performance of the board is reviewed regularly                                         44.7%
20.   Board approved succession plan in place for the CEO                                    21.5%
21.   Outside directors meet without CEO and disclose number of times met                    10.1%
22.   Directors are required to submit resignation upon a change in job                       1.9%
23.   Board cannot amend bylaws without shareholder approval or can only do
      so under limited circumstances                                                        98.1%
24.   Does not ignore shareholder proposal                                                  100.0%
25.   Qualifies for proxy contest defenses combination points                                0.2%

      AUDIT
26.   Consulting fees paid to auditors are less than audit fees paid to auditors             83.9%
27.   Audit committee comprised solely of independent outsiders*                             35.3%
28.   Auditors ratified at most recent annual meeting*                                       58.4%

      ANTI-TAKEOVER
29.   Single class, common*                                                                  93.2%
30.   Majority vote requirement to approve mergers (not supermajority)                        7.0%
31.   Shareholders may call special meetings                                                 99.7%
32.   Shareholder may act by written consent                                                 11.5%
33.   Company either has no poison pill or a pill that was shareholder approved              98.6%
34.   Company is not authorized to issue blank check preferred                               95.0%


                                                          27
      COMPENSATION & OWNERSHIP
35.   Directors are subject to stock ownership requirements                         12.2%
36.   Executives are subject to stock ownership guidelines                          15.0%
37.   No interlocks among compensation committee members                            98.9%
38.   Directors receive all or a portion of their fees in stock                     17.5%
39.   All stock-incentive plans adopted with shareholder approval                   92.8%
40.   Options grants align with company performance and reasonable burn rate        78.5%
41.   Company expenses stock options                                                42.6%
42.   All directors with more than one year of service own stock                    55.4%
43.   Officers’ and directors’ stock ownership is at least 1% but not over 30% of
      total shares outstanding                                                      28.1%
44.   Repricing is prohibited                                                       54.0%




                                                         28
                                                       Table 2
                                                 Descriptive Statistics

The table provides descriptive statistics for each country. The first column, # of firms, is the number of firms from
each country that are in the sample in 2005. Median values are reported for market capitalization (Mkt. Cap.) and
Assets in millions of U.S. dollars, and q is Tobin’s q defined as ((total assets + market value of equity – total
common equity – deferred taxes)/ total assets). % ADR is the percentage of firms that are cross-listed. The total row
refers only to non-U.S. firms in the sample.

                               # of                                                                   % of WScope
 Country                                     q           Mkt. Cap.        Assets        % ADR
                              firms                                                                    Mkt Cap.
 Australia                     119         1.41            1,513          1,846           27%             77%
 Austria                        19         1.21            1,874          4,542           53%             81%
 Belgium                        25         1.16            2,831          4,010           16%             80%
 Canada                        168         1.38            1,864          2,443           64%             77%
 Denmark                        22         1.39            2,314          1,481           9%              80%
 Finland                        31         1.24            1,634          2,363           16%             87%
 France                         83         1.27            6,593          9,295           39%             84%
 Germany                        85         1.27            3,954          7,524           29%             74%
 Greece                         44         1.14             719            779            9%              79%
 Hong Kong                     110         1.28            1,780          2,497           45%             60%
 Ireland                        16         1.24            4,376          3,553           56%             85%
 Italy                          71         1.10            4,216          12,222          14%             82%
 Japan                         589         1.15            2,019          3,795           13%             81%
 Netherlands                    47         1.28            2,702          3,124           40%             52%
 New Zealand                    18         1.48             817            741            17%             71%
 Norway                         21         1.49            1,343          1,335           43%             77%
 Portugal                       14         1.13            3,400          5,168           29%             86%
 Singapore                      67         1.11            1,033          1,368           16%             95%
 Spain                          54         1.34            3,822          4,049           17%             88%
 Sweden                         43         1.49            4,461          4,293           21%             85%
 Switzerland                    58         1.31            2,824          3,253           28%             89%
 U.K.                          530         1.51             690            907            18%             88%
 U.S.A.                       5,296        1.52             317            386
 World excluding U.S.A.       2,234        1.28            1,767          2,561           24%




                                                          29
                                                 Table 3
                                          Governance by Country

Mean governance percentage scores are reported for each country as of 2005. The governance score for a
firm represents the percentage of governance attributes for which the firm meets or exceeds the minimum
satisfactory standard. The percentage represents the mean percentage in each country based on the 44 or 7
ISS attributes. The attributes are described in Table 1. The sample consists of 2,234 non-U.S. firms and
5,296 U.S. firms. t-statistic measures the difference between the governance index, for firms in a country
relative to the U.S. *, **, *** reflects significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels.

                                         t-stat GOV44                                    t-stat GOV7
 Country                 GOV44                                       GOV7
                                        relative to U.S.                                relative to U.S.
 Australia                48%              -23.49***                  52%                 -15.24***
 Austria                  48%              -15.51***                  64%                  -5.32***
 Belgium                  39%              -14.94***                  45%                 -10.10***
 Canada                   69%              14.71***                   92%                  22.70***
 Denmark                  46%               -3.28***                  73%                    -0.09
 Finland                  57%              -10.81***                  81%                   2.36**
 France                   49%              -15.60***                  36%                 -19.61***
 Germany                  50%              -21.51***                  65%                  -8.38***
 Greece                   45%              -20.80***                  59%                  -8.49***
 Hong Kong                45%              -35.93***                  60%                 -10.82***
 Ireland                  53%               -4.05***                  62%                  -2.40**
 Italy                    41%              -34.50***                  42%                 -20.80***
 Japan                    42%              -99.20***                  37%                 -67.20***
 Netherlands              51%               -8.24***                  63%                  -3.93***
 New Zealand              45%              -12.64***                  59%                  -4.99***
 Norway                   44%               -9.76***                  56%                  -5.92***
 Portugal                 39%              -18.19***                  43%                  -9.07***
 Singapore                45%              -22.73***                  67%                  -3.52***
 Spain                    47%              -14.72***                  51%                 -10.38***
 Sweden                   44%              -19.84***                  69%                   -1.70*
 Switzerland              55%               -5.71***                  75%                    1.31
 U.K.                     56%              -16.22***                  71%                  -2.84***
 U.S.                     61%                                         73%


 Total (w/o U.S.)         49%                                         58%
 Total (with U.S.)        58%                                         68%




                                                       30
                                                    Table 4
                              Quality of Governance Relative to U.S.-Matched Firms

 The table examines the difference in the quality of governance relative to a matching U.S. firm. The matching of
 the firm is done using two methods: 1) size and industry match, and 2) propensity score (P-score) and industry
 match as described in the paper. We calculate the difference in the GOV44 score of the foreign country and the
 U.S. matched firm. GOV44 Gap is the average for all firms in a country. # of Pos. Gap and # of Neg. Gap
 represents the number of firms that are better/worse than the U.S. matched firm in terms of the quality of
 governance. The last column represents the percentage of firms in each country whose quality of governance is
 better that its U.S. match. *, **, *** reflects significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels.


           Size & Industry Matching                                   P-score and Industry Matching
                                                                                                         Pos. Gap as
Country                GOV44 Gap          t-stat    GOV44 Gap         t-stat # of Neg. Gap # of Pos. Gap % of Firms
Australia                -18%          -17.18***      -25%         -21.92***       82            0           0%
Austria                  -27%           -7.90***      -26%          -6.18***        9            0           0%
Belgium                  -29%          -11.89***      -29%          -9.01***       19            0           0%
Canada                    2%             1.75**        -4%          -3.88***       70            42         38%
Denmark                  -22%          -10.46***      -23%          -7.82***       13            0           0%
Finland                  -13%           -5.80***      -16%          -6.43***       19            3          13%
France                   -20%          -17.91***      -20%         -12.55***       42            4           6%
Germany                  -19%          -16.00***      -19%         -13.48***       61            3           5%
Greece                   -21%          -12.65***      -21%          -7.65***        8            0           0%
Hong Kong                -22%          -17.63***      -26%         -21.86***       72            2           3%
Ireland                  -16%           -3.09***      -10%          -2.51***        8            2          20%
Italy                    -27%          -18.28***      -26%         -16.16***       35            0           0%
Japan                    -27%          -67.64***      -25%         -52.17***       478           1           0%
Netherlands              -18%           -8.54***      -18%          -8.51***       35            4          10%
New Zealand              -22%           -6.76***      -24%          -4.87***       11            0           0%
Norway                   -23%           -9.37***      -27%          -7.74***       12            0           0%
Portugal                 -25%           -5.51***      -32%         -18.72***        7            0           0%
Singapore                -21%          -14.33***      -23%         -12.83***       47            1           2%
Spain                    -18%           -9.06***      -23%          -9.34***       27            2           6%
Sweden                   -24%          -13.05***      -28%         -14.20***       34            0           0%
Switzerland              -13%           -8.35***      -13%          -9.34***       41            5          11%
United Kingdom           -10%          -18.39***      -12%         -20.28***       344           62         15%
Total                    -18%          -55.91***      -19%         -58.77***      1516          131          8%




                                                         31
                                                       Table 5
                         Comparison of Firms with Better Governance than U.S. Matching Firms

The reported median values of firm characteristics for negative and positive gap firms are based on industry and propensity score
matching. Estimates of probit regressions for non-regulated firms where the dependent variable takes a value of one for positive
gap firms. SGROWTH (sales growth), R&D/SALES, FOREIGN SALES/SALES are two-year averages and are winsorized at 1%
and 99%; SIZE (natural log of total assets), CASH/ASSETS, CAPEX/ASSETS, PPE/SALES, EBIT/SALES, DEBT/ASSETS,
CLOSELY HELD, ADR dummy, GDPPC (GDP per capita) and MarketCap/GDP are included. Common Law dummy equals one
for a country with common law; the Rule of Law and the Anti-Director indices are from LLSV (1998) and DLLS (2006),
respectively; the Anti-Self Dealing Index is also from DLLS (2006). p-values obtained from chi-squared tests for differences in
medians are in parentheses for the descriptive statistics. Probit regressions include industry dummies and standard errors are
corrected for country-level clustering (t-statistics are in parentheses). *, **, *** reflects significance at 10%, 5% and 1% .levels.

                                                 Descriptive Statistics                                 Probit Regressions
                                Negative Gov. Gap Positive Gov. Gap Difference between                LHS: Positive Gap Dummy
                                # of Firms.= 1474   # of Firms = 127 Neg. and Pos. Gap                       (N=1584)
Q                                      1.31                1.59             -0.28
                                                                         (0.00)***
MKT. CAP ($ millions)                1530.97             1059.03           471.94
                                                                          (0.03)**
GOV44                                  0.46                0.62             -0.16
                                                                         (0.00)***
SIZE, assets ($ millions)            2129.19             1309.73           819.46                    -0.065    -0.092    -0.136
                                                                         (0.01)***                  (1.76)* (2.73)*** (4.17)***
SGROWTH                                0.05                0.06             -0.01                     0.043     0.070     0.172
                                                                           (0.58)                    (0.29)    (0.54)     (1.57)
R&D/SALES                              0.00                0.00              0.00                     0.799     0.874     0.862
                                                                          (0.03)**                   (0.68)    (0.75)     (0.75)
FOREIGN SALES/SALES                    0.24                0.44             -0.21                     0.319     0.368     0.405
                                                                          (0.02)**                   (1.50)   (1.79)* (1.98)**
CASH/ASSSETS                           0.10                0.08              0.03                     0.364     0.272     0.032
                                                                           (0.20)                    (0.88)    (0.64)     (0.07)
CAPEX/ASSSETS                          0.03                0.03              0.00                    -1.125    -1.036    -1.314
                                                                           (0.74)                    (1.33)    (1.28)    (1.67)*
PPE/SALES                              0.26                0.21              0.05                    -0.029    -0.021    -0.018
                                                                          (0.02)**                  (1.96)*   (1.66)*     (1.62)
EBIT/SALES                             0.08                0.10             -0.02                     0.009     0.009     0.009
                                                                           (0.14)                    (1.60)   (1.87)* (1.97)**
DEBT/ASSETS                            0.20                0.30             -0.10                     2.122     2.112     2.021
                                                                         (0.00)***                 (6.72)*** (6.77)*** (6.04)***
CLOSELY HELD                           0.41                0.48            -0.065                    -0.481    -0.412    -0.156
                                                                          (0.02)**                   (1.06)    (1.08)     (0.42)
ADR                                     0                    0                 0                      0.158     0.285     0.334
                                                                         (0.00)***                   (1.27)   (1.72)*    (1.73)*
GDPPC                                 10.19               10.19                0                     -0.213    -0.584    -0.629
                                                                         (0.00)***                   (0.34)    (0.86)     (0.95)
MarketCap/GDP                         107.80             131.53            -23.73                    -0.001    -0.001    -0.000
                                                                         (0.00)***                   (0.88)    (0.60)     (0.32)
Common Law                              0                    1                -1                      1.209
                                                                         (0.00)***                 (3.31)***
Rule of Law*Anti-Director             31.43               41.10             -9.67                               0.077
                                                                         (0.00)***                           (3.80)***
Anti-SelfDealing Index                 0.48                0.93             -0.45                                         0.970
                                                                         (0.00)***                                      (2.07)**
Adj. R-squared                                                                                        0.27      0.25       0.21
                                                                 32
                                                          Table 6
                                              Firm Value and Governance Index

The table shows estimates of regressions of firm value (Tobin’s q, winsorized at 1% and 99%) on differences in governance
between a foreign firm and a matched U.S. firm based on industry and propensity scores obtained from a probit analysis.
GOV44_US is the governance index for the matched U.S. firm. NEGATIVE GAP and POSITIVE GAP are the governance gap
of a firm from its matching U.S. counterpart if negative and if positive, respectively. GOV. GAP includes both negative and
positive gap. SGROWTH (sales growth), R&D/SALES, FOREIGN SALES/SALES are two-year averages and winsorized at
1% and 99%; SIZE (natural log of total assets), CASH/ASSETS, CAPEX/ASSETS, PPE/SALES, EBIT/SALES and
DEBT/ASSETS are included for control. CLOSELY HELD is the percentage of shares closely held and ADR dummy equals
one if for firms cross-listed in the U.S. All regressions include industry and country dummies, and standard errors are
corrected for clustering of observations at the country level (t-statistics are in parentheses). F-statistics test the hypothesis that
the corresponding coefficients are equal to each other. *, **, *** reflects significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels.


                                                     (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
GOV44_US                                           1.126          1.158         0.879         0.900        0.816        0.836
                                                 (3.39)***      (3.44)***     (3.15)***      (2.81)**    (2.86)***     (2.51)**
GOV. GAP                                           1.339                        1.350                      1.297
                                                 (3.94)***                    (4.15)***                  (3.81)***
NEGATIVE GAP                                                      1.120                       1.139                       1.074
                                                                (3.12)***                   (3.34)***                  (2.98)***
POSITIVE GAP                                                      3.326                       3.349                       3.391
                                                                (3.14)***                   (3.76)***                  (4.10)***
SIZE                                               -0.149         -0.150        -0.084        -0.085     -0.103           -0.105
                                                 (6.05)***      (5.97)***     (3.36)***     (3.33)*** (3.44)***        (3.44)***
SGROWTH                                                                          0.253        0.258      0.282            0.288
                                                                                (1.44)        (1.50)     (1.62)          (1.70)*
R&D/SALES                                                                        2.265        2.272      2.049            2.049
                                                                              (3.28)***     (3.21)*** (2.89)***         (2.80)**
FOREIGN SALES/SALES                                                              0.115        0.123      0.077            0.085
                                                                                (1.21)        (1.31)     (0.82)           (0.91)
CASH/ASSSETS                                                                     2.280        2.255      2.232            2.204
                                                                              (7.25)***     (7.13)*** (6.83)***        (6.72)***
CAPEX/ASSSETS                                                                    3.039        3.070      3.021            3.053
                                                                              (3.79)***     (3.84)*** (3.87)***        (3.92)***
PPE/SALES                                                                       -0.009        -0.008     -0.008           -0.008
                                                                                (0.92)        (0.87)     (0.89)           (0.84)
EBIT/SALES                                                                       0.027        0.027      0.027            0.026
                                                                              (8.64)***     (8.54)*** (8.53)***        (8.40)***
DEBT/ASSETS                                                                     -0.004        -0.035     -0.005           -0.038
                                                                                (0.01)        (0.12)     (0.02)           (0.14)
CLOSELY HELD                                                                     0.196        0.203      0.219            0.228
                                                                                (1.52)        (1.55)    (1.75)*          (1.78)*
ADR                                                                                                      0.169            0.175
                                                                                                       (2.51)**         (2.59)**
Constant                                           3.235          3.195         1.639         1.603      1.943            1.915
                                                 (7.24)***      (7.63)***     (3.97)***     (4.10)*** (4.15)***        (4.30)***
F Stat.: GOV44_US and GOV GAP                       0.67                        5.50*                    5.71*
F Stat.: GOV44_US, NEG. GAP, POS. GAP                             2.00                        4.05*                      4.45*
F Stat.: NEG. GAP and POS. GAP                                    3.74*                       5.08*                      6.13*
Adj. R-squared                                      0.24          0.24          0.37           0.37       0.38           0.38
Number of Observations                              1602          1602          1584          1584        1584           1584
                                                                33
                                                         Table 7
                              Individual Attributes by Country and Differences from the U.S.

The table represents the percentage of firms (using all firms reported) in each country that meets or exceeds the minimum
satisfactory threshold for each governance attribute. The seven attributes are: Board Independence: board is controlled by
more than 50% independent outside directors; Board Size: board size is at greater than five but less than 16;
Chairman/CEO Separation: chairman and CEO are separated or there is a lead director; Board Structure: annually elected
board (no staggered board); Audit Committee Independence: audit committee comprised solely of independent outsiders;
Auditor Ratification: auditors ratified at most recent annual meeting; and Stock Classes: only single class, common stock
(no dual class). Italics are used if the mean difference in the attribute for a country with the U.S. is negative and is
statistically significant at the 5% level. If the difference is positive and significant, it is shown in bold. Significance is not
reported if zero percent or 100 percent of firms satisfy an attribute in a country.

                    Board       Board Size    Chairman/CEO           Board      Audit Comm.         Auditor            Stock
 Country
                  Independ.                     Separation          Structure    Independ.         Ratification       Classes
 Australia           41%          89%              97%                 2%            26%              12%               97%
 Austria             11%          84%             100%                 5%             0%              89%              100%
 Belgium             20%          76%              68%                 0%            16%              20%               96%
 Canada              93%          93%              94%                98%            90%              99%               74%
 Denmark             68%          82%             100%                59%             9%              95%               73%
 Finland             68%          81%             100%                87%            48%             100%               71%
 France              29%          76%              46%                 1%            22%              35%               42%
 Germany             44%          86%             100%                 0%             4%              95%              100%
 Greece               5%          91%              89%                 2%             9%              98%              100%
 Hong Kong            7%          86%              67%                 5%            55%             100%              100%
 Ireland             38%          81%              81%                 6%            38%              88%              100%
 Italy                3%           65%             79%                 0%             7%              31%               99%
 Japan                1%           78%              0%                41%             2%               2%              100%
 Netherlands         85%          74%              98%                 6%            57%              51%               64%
 New Zealand         33%          94%             100%                 0%            17%              67%              100%
 Norway              71%           57%            100%                19%            29%               5%              100%
 Portugal            36%          71%              64%                 0%            21%              14%               86%
 Singapore           43%          100%             87%                 0%            43%             100%               99%
 Spain                7%           69%             63%                 2%             9%              89%               96%
 Sweden              65%          98%             100%                98%            26%              19%               70%
 Switzerland         71%          81%              98%                16%            57%              98%               98%
 U.K.                35%          91%              97%                 7%            68%              98%               99%
 U.S.A.              90%          82%              42%                48%            88%              66%               94%




                                                               34
                                                     Table 8
          Individual Governance Attributes and Differences in Firm Value based on U.S. Matched-Firms

The table shows the relation between firm value (Tobin’s q, which is winsorized at 1% and 99%) and differences in
individual governance attributes between a foreign firm and a matched U.S. firm based on industry and propensity scores
obtained from a probit analysis. The seven attributes are: Board Independence: board is controlled by more than 50%
independent outside directors; Board Size: board size is at greater than five but less than 16; Chairman/CEO Separation:
chairman and CEO are separated or there is a lead director; Board Structure: annually elected board (no staggered board);
Audit Committee Independence: audit committee comprised solely of independent outsiders; Auditor Ratification: auditors
ratified at most recent annual meeting; and Stock Classes: only one class of common stock. Panel A reports results from
seven different models that include one attribute at a time. Panel B reports results from one model that includes all seven
attributes at the same time. ATTRIBUTE_US is the governance attribute for the matched U.S. firm. NEGATIVE GAP and
POSITIVE GAP are the governance gap of a firm from its matching U.S. counterpart if negative and if positive,
respectively. The following control variables are included but their coefficients are not reported here: SIZE (natural log of
total assets); SGROWTH (sales growth), R&D/SALES, FOREIGN SALES/SALES are two-year averages and are winsorized
at 1% and 99%; CASH/ASSETS, CAPEX/ASSETS, PPE/SALES, EBIT/SALES and DEBT/ASSETS are also included.
CLOSELY HELD is the percentage of shares closely held and ADR dummy equals one if the firm is cross-listed in the U.S.
All regressions include industry dummies, country FE, and standard errors are corrected for country-level clustering. F-
statistics test the hypothesis that the corresponding coefficients are equal to each other. *, **, *** reflects significance at
the 10%, 5% and 1% levels. Number of observations is 1584 for each model.

                                                                     Chairman/              Audit
                                               Board                   CEO       Board     Comm.       Audit                 Stock
                                             Independ.    Board Size Separation Structure Independ. Ratification            Classes

                                 Panel A: Regressions Using Individual Governance Attributes

ATTRIBUTE_US                                    0.182        -0.598        0.007         0.022     0.230         0.052      0.181
                                               (1.94)*       (1.13)        (0.07)       (0.31)   (2.84)***      (0.88)      (0.96)
NEGATIVE GAP                                    0.217         0.004        0.073        -0.033     0.138        0.160       0.099
                                             (6.63)***       (0.05)        (0.68)       (0.94)    (2.39)**     (2.28)**     (1.21)
POSITIVE GAP                                    0.237        -0.689        0.055         0.089     0.959        -0.001      0.071
                                              (2.21)**       (1.33)        (0.58)      (1.71)*   (4.41)***      (0.01)      (0.38)

F Stat.: ATTR_US, NEG. GAP, &
POS. GAP                                        0.22          0.93          1.73        1.81     6.22***        2.26         1.52
F Stat.: NEG. GAP and POS. GAP                  0.03          1.61          0.07        2.88     12.42***       3.18*        0.02
Adj. R-squared                                  0.37          0.37          0.37        0.37       0.38         0.37         0.37

                                         Panel B: Regression Using All Seven Attributes
ATTRIBUTE_US                                  0.181       -0.614        0.019       0.037          0.176        0.037       0.154
                                              (1.57)       (1.22)      (0.19)      (0.54)         (2.13)**      (0.44)      (0.81)
NEGATIVE GAP                                  0.168       -0.005        0.060      -0.021          0.085        0.157       0.080
                                            (3.93)***      (0.06)      (0.60)      (0.56)          (1.38)      (2.26)**     (0.96)
POSITIVE GAP                                  0.250       -0.733        0.044       0.066          0.888        0.020       0.043
                                             (2.34)**      (1.47)      (0.55)      (1.25)        (3.82)***      (0.19)      (0.24)

F Stat.: ATTR_US, NEG. GAP & POS.
GAP                                          98.84***
Adj. R-squared                                 0.38
                                                           Table 9
                                                    Robustness Estimations

The relationship between firm value and differences in governance between a foreign firm and a matched U.S. firm is estimated.
GOV44 is the governance index for the foreign firm and GOV44_US is the index for the matched U.S. firm. NEGATIVE GAP and
POSITIVE GAP are the governance gap from the U.S. matched firm if negative and if positive, respectively. Panel A includes
only firm-specific controls and Panel B also includes country-level controls. Firm-level controls are (coefficients not reported):
SIZE (natural log of total assets); SGROWTH (sales growth), R&D/SALES, CASH/ASSETS, CAPEX/ASSETS, PPE/SALES,
EBIT/SALES, DEBT/ASSETS, FOREIGN SALES/SALES, CLOSELY HELD, and ADR for the foreign firms. Last three variables
are excluded and S&P 500 dummy are added for the U.S. firms in Column (2). Median Industry Q is median Q for the firm’s
industry. Panel B also controls for GDP per capita and Market Cap/GDP. Common Law dummy equals one for common law
countries; the Rule of Law and the Anti-Director indices are from LLSV (1998) and DLLS (2006), respectively; the Anti-Self
Dealing index is also from DLLS (2006). All regressions, include industry dummies (except col. 7, Panel A), and country FE (in
Panel A only). Standard errors are corrected for country-level clustering (t-statistics are in parentheses). F-statistics test the
hypothesis that the corresponding coefficients are equal to each other. *, **, *** reflects significance at the 10%, 5% and 1%
levels.

                                             Panel A: With Firm-Level Controls
                             (1)           (2)            (3)         (4)              (5)             (6)             (7)
                          Foreign         U.S.       Size & Ind    Foreign           Foreign        Foreign          Median
                           Firms         Firms         Matched    Ex. Japan          Ex. U.K.      Ex. Canada       Industry Q
GOV44                      1.269         1.156
                         (3.75)***     (3.56)***
GOV44_US                                                1.248       0.996             0.517          0.801            0.891
                                                       (1.98)*    (3.04)***           (1.19)        (2.23)**        (3.23)***
NEGATIVE GAP                                            1.162       1.302             0.782          1.039            1.117
                                                      (3.10)***   (4.52)***          (1.65)*        (2.65)**        (3.14)***
POSITIVE GAP                                            2.264       3.843             4.078          4.222            3.008
                                                      (3.48)***   (3.84)***          (1.85)*       (3.02)***        (3.93)***
Median Industry Q                                                                                                     0.596
                                                                                                                    (5.49)***
F Stat.:GOV44_US,
NEG. & POS. GAP                                          1.02          4.82**          1.43          4.36**           4.80**
F Stat.: NEG. &
POS. GAP                                                 1.85          5.26**          2.05           4.00*           4.53**
Adj. R-squared              0.38          0.30           0.37           0.35           0.38           0.38             0.37
# of Observations           1584          2576           1584           1107           1184           1476             1584
                  Panel B: With Firm-Level and Country-Level Controls for all 1584 Foreign Firms
                                                     (1)                   (2)                        (3)
GOV44_US                                           0.536                  0.186                     0.388
                                                  (1.55)                 (0.45)                     (1.1)
NEGATIVE GAP                                       0.673                  0.342                     0.537
                                                 (1.91)*                 (0.83)                    (1.49)
POSITIVE GAP                                       2.786                  2.424                     2.621
                                                (2.87)***               (2.59)**                  (2.61)**
GDPPC                                              -0.44                 -0.416                    -0.404
                                                (3.65)***              (3.14)***                 (3.31)***
MarketCap/GDP                                         0                     0                          0
                                                  (0.02)                 (1.09)                    (0.12)
COMMON LAW                                        -0.122
                                                  (1.31)
Rule-of-law*Anti-Director                                                 0.003
                                                                         (0.44)
AntiSelf-Dealing Index                                                                             -0.189
                                                                                                   (1.22)
F Stat.: GOV44_US, NEG.& POS. GAP                  3.35*                  3.37*                     3.34*
F Stat: NEG. GAP and POS. GAP                    5.47**                  5.61**                    5.36**
R-squared                                           0.36                  0.36                       0.36
