                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               TRADE IN BUSINESS SERVICES IN GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM

                                          James R. Markusen
                                            Bridget Strand

                                         Working Paper 12816
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12816


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2007




Prepared for the conference "Globalization of services - implications for small open economies", sponsored
by the Research Institute for Industrial Economics, Stockholm, to be held on November 20, 2006.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by James R. Markusen and Bridget Strand. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Trade in Business Services in General Equilibrium
James R. Markusen and Bridget Strand
NBER Working Paper No. 12816
January 2007
JEL No. F0,F2,F23

                                            ABSTRACT

Trade in business services has been attracting attention from academic researchers, policy makers,
and business journalists. While there are many anecdotes, there has been little in the way of formal
theory applied to this issue. In this paper, we adapt a general model of fragmentation of production
activities to try to capture the specific features of business services. Following a general discussion,
we calibrate a numerical general-equilibrium simulation model to a situation in which both trade and
foreign investment in services are initially banned to technically infeasible. We then compute three
counter-factual scenarios: one in which trade but not investment in services is feasible or allowed,
one in which investment but not trade is allowed, and onein which both trade and investment in services
are allowed.

James R. Markusen
Department of Economics
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309-0256
and NBER
james.markusen@colorado.edu

Bridget Strand
Department of Economics
University of Colorado
Boulder CO 8-0309-0256
bridget.strand@colorado.edu
1.      Introduction

        A great deal has been written about the outsourcing and offshoring of services over the

last few years.1 Much concern in the high-income countries has been focused on the offshoring

of white-collar services, particularly to countries like India. It was one thing when low to

moderately skilled manufacturing jobs were gradually lost to lower-income countries over the

last two decades, but somehow the potential competition for and loss of white-collar jobs seems

just as threatening.

        Not much has been written about this phenomenon at the theory level, however.

Possibly, no new theory is needed, and the new trade in services is just a particular case of our

more general models. But at very least, a more detailed development of this “particular case”

seems warranted given the empirical and policy attention it has received. The purpose of this

paper is thus to inquire how theory might be adapted and developed to shed light on the new

offshoring of white-collar services. Particular attention will be paid to small open high-skilled

economies, and how they might be affected by increased trade in skilled services.

        Defining services has always proved difficult and ambiguous, and I will instead simply

indicate a range of activities that I have in mind. The policy debate in particular is not about

things like transportation, tourism, or trade in capital. It is about business services provided to

firms or in some cases directly to the purchasing firms’ customers. These range from call centers

and technical support, to business-process outsourcing (henceforth BPO), to software services



        1
          Terminology has not yet been standardized. “Outsourcing” is unfortunately often used to refer
both to moving an activity overseas (even to an owned subsidiary) and to moving an activity outside of
the firm to a (local) independent contractor. I will use “offshoring” to refer to moving an activity
overseas and “outsourcing” to refer to moving an activity outside the ownership boundaries of the firm.
Moving an activity to a foreign subsidiary is thus offshoring but not outsourcing.

                                                    1
                                                   2

such as programming to higher-end services including software design and medical services

(e.g., reading and interpreting X-rays and MRI scans).

        My starting point will be that increased trade in services is due to changes in

communications and information technology that allow for the geographic fragmentation of a

formally integrated multi-stage production process. These services have always been produced

by firms, but they have traditionally been produced in-house or at least in-country (outsourced

but not offshored). The ability to fragment production means that individual stages may be

located in countries where cost and other conditions are most advantageous.

        I think that there are really two separate questions here. The first is what sorts of

activities can be offshored? This is not as easy as simply classifying them by skill intensity, for

example. Evidence indicates that activity characteristics like codifiability , routinization, and the

lack of need for face-to-face interaction are of great importance. This need some thought and

analysis. I have not seen any attempt to incorporate these features in a formal model, and it is

important to do so to the extent that they are repeatedly emphasized in the international business

literature.

        The second is what activities would a firm in a high-income country chose to offshore

among those which are feasible to offshore? A trade economist’s first reaction on this is to think

about activities differing in factor intensities and locations differing in factor prices. Cost is

minimized by locating activities where the factors they use intensively are cheap. A second

reaction, derived from the theory of the multinational enterprise, is that activities (in the presence

of scale economies) will be located where the market is large (Markusen, 1984, 2002).

        These factors seem to work well for manufacturing, but they are somewhat less clear for
                                                 3

white-collar services. In particular, we seem to have the problem that some skilled workers in

information technology, for example, are cheap where they are scarce. Data and specific

examples (e.g., Indian computer programmers) of this phenomenon are found in several of the

articles in Brainard and Collins (2006). Second, the offshoring is often not to serve the local

market, but to serve the firm’s back home.

       I begin my analysis with a description of what I feel are crucial empirical characteristics

of the (newly traded) white-collar business services that need to be captured in theoretical

models in section 2. Then I turn to the task of proposing such a model in section 3. There I

develop a two-country model (us versus the rest of the world) which tries to incorporate some of

the features from the “wish list” of section 2. Two types of fragmentation, both initially

infeasible, are considered. First, service production can be geographically fragmented from final

goods production which uses the services as intermediates. Second, services themselves can be

fragmented into an upstream headquarters activity and a downstream production activity.

       The findings of the model are relatively optimistic for small, skilled-labor-abundant

counties in an increasingly integrated world. At some basic level, increased ability to fragment

production and trade services frees small economies of constraints. Fragmentation allows firms

in the high-skilled, small economy (henceforth North) crucial access to cheaper production of

less skilled phases of production, which increases the competitiveness of North final goods

producers, allowing an expansion that maintains or drives up demand for skilled labor. Second,

I assume scale economies and firm-level production differentiation in services, and so access to

foreign service providers for domestic final-goods producers and access to foreign producers by

domestic service firms increases real productivity in North. The larger the range of services
                                                  4

available, the higher the productivity of final goods producers or alternatively, the lower the

price index for a composite service input.

       I believe that some progress is made with respect to tying together country

characteristics, such as size and skilled-labor abundance, with technology characteristics such as

factor intensities across activities, scale economies complementarities, trade costs, and

investment (or fragmentation) costs. Somewhat less progress is made on other issues, especially

the notions of codifiability and routinization, and thus on the problem of what activities is it

feasible to offshore. I simply assume that service production requires an upstream, skilled-labor

intensive activity that is the core of the firm. Then there is a routinized, downstream, less-

skilled-labor-intensive activity that may (or may not) be geographically fragmented away from

the headquarters. In a second theoretical section, I try to capture some of these ideas by

introducing two classes of skilled workers: entrepreneurs or managers, and more routine skilled

workers. The jobs of the latter are the downstream jobs that can be outsourced, and hence these

are the workers who are vulnerable to offshoring. In some experiments, the wages of the

entrepreneurs and the skilled workers change in opposite directions.

       I can offer some loose speculation about what the analysis suggests for the future of a

small, high-skilled economy. It seems possible that what will happen in services will resemble

what has happened in manufacturing over the last two decades. In particular, it may be that

middle-skilled activities, ones that can be codified and routinized, will tend to migrate to

offshore locations like India. Higher skilled activities and ones that require judgement,

discretionary actions, and/or face-to-face interactions will like stay and expand in the high-

income countries.    This suggest difficulties for middle-skilled white-collar workers, particularly
                                                   5

those with specific skills in codifiable and routinized activities. This has some analogy to the

loss of relatively routine production and assembly jobs over the last two decades in North

America and Europe. Other policy implications of the theory are briefly discussed: within the

context of the model, for example, foreign market access for the small-country’s firms is crucial.



2.      Empirical Characteristics of Offshoring of White Collar Services to Capture in Theory
        Models

        There are a few things missing in most conventional trade models for our purposes. Most

models used for theoretical, policy and empirical analysis tend to focus on a fixed number of

tradable goods and services and border barriers that raise the cost of trade. Often missing in

particular are: (1) the potential for trading new things, (2) the possibility of reversals in the

direction of trade, (3) the modeling and importance of barriers to establishing foreign

subsidiaries as opposed to simply border barriers to trade, (4) the possibility that factors of

production can be cheap in countries where they are very scarce.

        With respect to this last point, the simplest off-the-shelf two-good, two-factor Heckscher-

Ohlin model is not going to offer insights as to why relatively skilled-labor-intensive services are

being offshored to very skilled-labor-scarce countries. One of the most important tasks of

theory, in my opinion, is to develop richer, but empirically-plausible models as to why this

phenomenon is taking place. Yet it is not necessarily the case that the factor-proportions

approach to trade has to be abandon, just that it must be enriched to include multiple goods

and/or factors, scale economies, complementarities, or other factors to explain the skilled-wage /

skill-abundance puzzle.

        Reversals in the direction of trade is another phenomenon that traditional models are
                                                  6

poorly equipped to handle. Trade in white-collar services is not new. The modern theory of the

multinational has emphasized that parents are exporters of white-collar services, including

management and engineering consulting, marketing, finance and so forth to their subsidiaries.

One thing that is relatively new and which has generated much of the current interest is the

reversal in the direction of trade that we are seeing. In some ways this is closely related to the

previous point. Many traditional modeling frameworks, relying on marginal comparative-statics

analysis, are ill equipped to tackle this type of problem (Markusen, 2002).

       Here is a wish list of characteristics we might like to have in theoretical models of

offshoring of white-collar services. Much of this is a revision and extension of a similar section

in Markusen (2006), since the focus and objectives of the present conference are quite similar to

those of the 2005 Brookings Trade Forum

       (A)     Expansion of trade at the extensive margin: new things traded due to innovations
               in communications and technology or institutions (e.g., legal restrictions).

       This poses a number of challenges to theory, especially the fact that we are talking about

non-marginal changes and discrete movements of something being non-traded to potentially lots

of trade. Traditional comparative-statics analysis is of little use: it focuses on marginal changes

in activities which are already in use in the benchmark.

       (B)     Vertical fragmentation of production: the new traded services tend to be
               intermediates, may be upstream, downstream, or not part of a sequence.

       Traded white-collar services often have a number of important characteristics that cannot

be captured in the simplest off-the-shelf models which assume a set of final goods. One is that

they may be firm-specific rather than bought and sold on arm’s-length markets. Another is that

they may form part of a particular production sequence, such as being a well-defined upstream
                                                  7

(design) or downstream (after sales service) component of overall production.

         (C)    Location-specific and other complementarities

         A third is that there may be crucial complementarities among different elements of the

production chain, such as between skilled labor and telecommunications equipment and

infrastructure. In some cases, it may be the case that services must be produced in the same

location as where they are used in downstream or upstream manufacturing activities. I am

coining the term “location-specific complementarities” to describe this. This doesn’t mean that

services, or at least the downstream end product, cannot be traded. But it does suggest that a

national presence may be required; that is, a firm has to open a local office or branch in a foreign

country in order to service that country. These considerations may also imply another type of

complementarity, that between liberalization in services and increase trade in goods (Markusen,

1983).

         (D)    Firms or specifically owners of knowledge-based assets may offshore skilled-
                labor intensive activities that are complements to these assets

         A plausible worry is that skilled workers in the high-income countries are being hurt,

while their companies are profiting from offshoring. This cannot be dismissed and requires

investigation. To me, it calls for at least a three-factor model, or alternatively one in which firms

possess specific factors or other assets which are complements to skilled labor. An example

mentioned above is software engineers as complements to telecommunications equipment and

network infrastructure, in which the third factor is physical capital. Or it could be that software

engineers are complementary with managerial sophistication, organization infrastructure, and

marketing channels. The complementary input is knowledge-based assets.

         Without services trade, you can train an engineer in India, but there is no demand for his
                                                  8

or her skills: there is nothing useful to do. The necessary complementary physical or knowledge

capital is missing. The implication is that, in the absence of offshoring, these skilled workers are

cheap even though they are relatively scarce in comparison with the country with the

complementary factors. Offshoring allowing trade in the third factor (or services of knowledge-

based assets) causes that factor (or its services) to move to the skilled-labor-scarce country to

combine with cheap skilled labor there. This set up obviously has the elements of a story in

which skilled labor is harmed in the high-income country, while owners of the complementary

physical or knowledge-based assets benefit.

       (E)     Agglomeration of complementary intermediate services

       Related to but somewhat distinct from point (C) is the issue of whether or not the

intermediate business services themselves are more productive when located near to each other,

as opposed to just being located near the final user which was the focus of (C). It might be

beneficial for a user firm to be located near to both a firm specializing in networking hardware

and one specializing in the networking software, but it may also be beneficial for the latter firms

to be located near one another. This could be modeled using an input-output structure among the

service firms, as in Venables (1996). This is going to be somewhat beyond the scope of this

paper, but it does raise some concerns for small economies. In particular, it raises the possibility

of multiple equilibria and that whatever location gets a head start remains ahead. There is a

potentially large market failure here that could call for strong government support for creating a

local agglomeration (e.g., the business park concept).
                                                   9

3.     A model of services and service-trade liberalization

       The preceding section indicates the need for a modeling approach that is more

sophisticated than many standard trade models and, in particular, an approach that allows for

large discrete changes in the things that can be traded. In this section, I will specify a theoretical

approach, which can be coded into a numerical simulation model, that attempts to capture many

of the ideas outlined in the previous section.

       Suppose we begin with a simple two-final-good, two-factor, two-county Hecksher-Ohlin

model and then allow one good to geographically fragment into two separate production

activities, one in each country. Further, one of those two activities, denoted services (S) may be

allowed to geographically fragment into a more skilled-labor-intensive “headquarters” activity

and a less-skilled-labor-intensive “office” activity.

        If we assume free trade in goods, just considering free versus prohibitive fragmentation

costs in services means that we do not need to specify which is the upstream and which is the

downstream activity. For a much more comprehensive treatment of this case, see Markusen and

Venables (2005). Here are the principal features of the model.

       (1)     Two factors of production: skilled (H) and unskilled (L) labor

       (2)     Two final goods, three production activities

               AG      -       unskilled-labor intensive agriculture (no offense to farmers)

               MAN -           skilled-labor intensive manufacturing, can fragment into

                       VA      value added by skilled and unskilled labor

                       SER     services

       (3)     SER     -       can fragment into
                                        10

             HQ      headquarters, may serve several offices

             OF      office, produces the deliverable for the client

(4)   Two competitive, constant returns economies

      North -        high-skilled abundant

      South -        low-skilled abundant

(5)   There are three generic “types” of services firms, each of which may be located in

      either country, hence there are six firm types in total

      N      -       national firms, provide services to domestic manufactuers, may

                     possibly be allowed to “export” to other country

      M      -       multinational firms, have physical production presence in both

                     countries, essentially a “horizontal” multinational

      V      -       vertical firm, with headquarters in one country, a single office

                     located in the other, may possibly be allowed to export back to the

                     home country.

(6)   -      There are “trade costs” for M and V firms supplying services abroad

             (skilled workers have to fly abroad in one direction or the other).

(7)   -      There are firm-level scale economies arising from jointness of knowledge-

             based assets: fixed costs for an M firm are less than double the fixed costs

             of N or V firms.

(6)   -      Services are differentiated or “specialized”, each produced with increasing

             returns to scale. A wider range of available services increases real

             productivity for final manufacturers, or lowers their price index for
                                                 11

                       composite services.

       To expand on the last point a bit, it is assumed that one unit each of two different services

is more beneficial to X firms than two units of only one of the services. Using two specialized

lawyers for a day (e.g., one taxation and one contracts specialist) is better than having two days

from a general-purpose lawyer than does both.      But fixed costs limit the degree of

specialization and diversity than can exist in equilibrium for a small country, and thus access to

the larger world market is always productive.

       The model and the two types of fragmentation are illustrated in Figure 1. Consumption

comes from the final goods agriculture and manufacturing. Manufacturing is composed of

“value added” (direct contributions of skilled and unskilled labor) and services. It may be

possible to do these in different locations, implying that trade in services is feasible. Services

consist of a headquarters and an office. It may be possible to do these in different locations,

implying that foreign investment in services is feasible.

       We are interested in four equilibria, referred to as “regimes”. Some regimes may not be

technologically feasible or profitable, or they may not be allowed by regulation. The four are as

follows:

       NN      -       No trade, no foreign investment (i.e., no M or V firms) allowed

       TN      -       Trade in services (exports by N firms) allowed, no investment allowed

       NI      -       No trade in services feasible or allowed, but investment feasible/allowed.

       TI      -       Trade and investment in services both allowed

We can think of TN as allowing geographic fragmentation between services and manufacturing,

but not allowing fragmentation within a service into headquarters and office. Under NI trade
                                                  12

but not investment is feasible/allowed. Regime TI allows both to occur. TN permits what WTO

terminology refers to as Mode 1 trade in services: cross border trade that does not involve an

investment and involves minimal movement of persons. NI and TI permit what is called Mode

3, the establishment of a commercial presence (typically by a foreign direct investment) abroad.

NI could occur, for example, if there are no government restrictions, but face-to-face contact is

required so that investment via a foreign office is possible but exports of services are infeasible.

       Figure 2 gives an example of the service provision by one firm, located in the North. The

top box is a manufacturing firm located in the North and the bottom an manufacturing firm

located in the South. The domestic service firm has a headquarters in North (middle box of the

diagram). It may have a domestic office in North which provides services to Northern firms (this

is always allowed). That Northern office may provide services to Southern manufacturing firms,

if trade in services (Mode 1) is allowed.   The Northern firm may also establish a Southern

office if investment in services is allowed (Mode 3). It can then provide services to local firms

under regimes NI or TI. It can also provide exports services back to the Northen manufacturing

firms under TI, but not under NI.

       This completes the general description of the model. One crucial feature of the model is

choice of factor intensities for the different activities. I have experimented with this a lot, and

there are some differences in results of course. But many of the choices that seem “reasonable”

tend to yield similar results. In this paper, I will concentrate on a particular case which I find

reasonable after reading a great deal of literature on offshoring of white-collar services,

especially papers in the Brookings Trade Forum 2005 (2006). Here is my ranking of factor

intensities (H/L intensity ratios), with the most skilled-labor intensive at the top, and the least-
                                                 13

skilled-labor intensive at the bottom. Numbers are the values used in the numerical simulation

model to follow, with the overall “world” endowment normalized to 1.0

       Fixed costs of service firm headquarters                                      4.4

       Value added in manufacturing (direct use of H and L)                          2.2

       Overall manufacturing (value added plus intermediate services)                1.9

       Overall service provision (headquarters plus office)                          1.5

       Service office (office)                                                       1.1

       World factor endowment ratio                                                  1.0

       Agriculture                                                                   0.5

       My choice for a base case is that all activities in manufacturing and services are more

skilled-labor intensive than the world endowment ratio at the calibration point (discussed below).

Integrated or overall manufacturing is a bit more skilled-labor intensive than integrated services

production. But the two components of services production lie on at the extremes of the

manufacturing-sector intensities. Headquarters is the most skilled-labor intensive and office

activity is the least among the manufacturing-sector activities. I suppose that I am thinking

about something like business-process outsourcing, one of the most common forms of offshored

while-collar services. The high-end activity is quite sophisticated, whereas the downstream

processing centers are only moderately skilled-labor intensive.

       The second step is to calibrate a numerical model use to solve for these equilibria. I do

this by assuming that the countries are identical, and that foreign production (type M and V

firms) is not allowed, and that trade in services by N firms is prohibitively costly. This is then a

benchmark equilibrium in which there is no geographic fragmentation of service production.
                                                  14

Services are supplied solely to manufacturers in the same country. Units are chosen such that

the number of national firms in each country is equal to one, and production of manufacturers

and production of services in each country is equal to one. There is no trade in services allowed

and, since the countries are identical, there is no trade in manufacturers either in this benchmark.

Thus all trade quantities are zero in the calibrated equilibrium.

       The focus of this conference is on small, skilled-labor abundant economies. Thus I will

focus here on simulation results where North is smaller than South. Simulation results are

reported in Tables 1 and 2. In the first of these, Table 1, North is skilled-labor abundant, having

an endowment ratio H/L of 2.78, where the world as a whole has a ratio of one. North has a 0.16

share of total world income. The first block of rows gives the number of service firms active in

equilibrium in North, the second block gives production quantities for manufacturing and

services, the third block gives trade flows, and the final block gives factor prices and welfare.

       Before looking at the specific results, let me try to summarize the intuition. Despite the

very different nature of the three liberalization experiments, skilled labor in North benefits

significantly, unskilled labor has a smaller loss, and aggregate welfare of the North rises in all

cases. (1) in TN where headquarters and office are bound together, liberalization allows North

to access the wide range of South services (by imports). This leads to a substitution from

services to manufacturing, the latter being more skilled-labor intensive overall than services, and

so raises the return to skilled labor. (2) in the NI scenario, horizontal multinational services firms

replace the national firms. There is a large increase in the number of service firms headquartered

in North, but a small fall in final (office) service production, and this again pulls up the wage of

skilled labor in North. (3) in the full TI liberalization scenario, there is even a larger increase in
                                                 15

the number of services firms headquartered in North, both horizontal and vertical. But there is a

big fall in final service production, as much of this is offshored to the subsidiaries of the North

firms. Final X production rises and this, combined with the large increase in headquarters, gives

a big boost to the skilled wage in the North.

       The first column of Table 1 computes a general-equilibrium for regime NN with no trade

or investment in services allowed. Factor prices and welfare are renormalized to one in the

initial equilibrium. There are national firms in both countries; their numbers are similar (South

not shown), reflecting the fact that country North’s small size is offset by its greater skilled-labor

abundance. Manufacturing production and service production are also similar across the two

countries (recall that these production quantities would all equal one when the countries are

identical). Country North is a net exporter of manufacturing.

       The intermediate liberalization case TN, where trade but not investment in services is

liberalized, is shown in the second column of Table 1. There is a significant fall in the number

of service firms headquartered in North, and North becomes more specialized in manufacturing

and less in services. Instead, North benefits from being able to import differentiated services

from South, which increases productivity in final manufacturing production.

       The substitution of manufacturing for final service production benefits skilled labor in

North, which has a real income increase of 21 percent. Unskilled labor loses 7 percent, but

North as a whole get an aggregate welfare gain of 6 percent.

       The third column of Table 1 gives the NI scenario in which it is not feasible to trade

services (mode 1 not feasible or allowed), but foreign investment (mode 3) is feasible. This

could be due, for example, for the need for face-to-face contact between the service firm and the
                                                  16

manufacturing firm. Now there is a regime switch to horizontal firms in both countries, each

having an office in both countries. The number of firms headquartered in North rise

significantly relative to the base (NN) case: the small domestic market is no longer a constraint

for North service firms. Production of both services and final manufacturers are not very

different from the base case. Changes in factor prices and total welfare in North are very similar

to those in scenario NI, despite the very different patterns of production and trade in the two

cases.

         The right-hand column of Table 1 shows the full liberalization scenario TI. Now the

regime shifts to a combination of horizontal and vertical service firms in the North, with the

latter dominating. The North is once again more specialized in manufacturing production and

less in final (office) services than in the NN equilibrium. North remains a net exporter of X and

imports some services from the South affiliates of North firms. This is the type of offshoring

(but not outsourcing) often discussed in the business press: location of in-house service

production in the foreign country used to serve the home market.

         North is now the dominant location for the headquarters of service firms, though not

production (office activities). This gives a further boost to manufacturing production and a big

boost to the return to skilled labor. The latter now rises by 32 percent over the benchmark NN

equilibrium. Unskilled labor now has a bigger loss, and aggregate welfare gains for North

remain at 6 percent.

         I believe that the results in Table 1 emphasize a couple of points. The first is being able

to draw on foreign sources for intermediate inputs in a world of scale economies, product

differentiation, and complementarities. In the first transition, from NN to TN, North draws on
                                                  17

foreign “varieties”, making it much more competitive in manufacturing production, which is

itself very skilled-labor intensive by assumption. Both production and exports of manufacturing

from North increase substantially. The ability to draw on the full range of foreign services

lowers the aggregate price index for services in North and hence increases competitiveness in

manufacturing.

       Second, integration allows for foreign market access for domestic service firms, and

allows them the advantage of specializing in the very skilled-labor-intensive headquarters

activity only. In the TN case as just noted, there are a small number of service firms

headquartered in North. But with full liberalization (TI), almost all service firms are

headquartered in North. Foreign market access for these firms, giving them the ability to

actually produce in South where the demand for services is concentrated, makes a world of

difference. Most of that foreign production of services by North type V and M firms goes to

manufacturing production in country South with only a small proportion being exported back to

North. The best jobs not only stay in North, they significantly increase in number, leading to a

large increase in the real return to North skilled labor.



4.     Fragmentation and specialization in headquarter services

       The model outlined above has a couple of limitations that are likely important in the

context of service trade/investment liberalization. One is that it is generally the case that, in

equilibrium, a small, skilled-labor abundant country will have a lower wage for skilled labor than

a large, skilled-labor scare country. But part of the puzzle that is leading us to work on this trade

is precisely that the latter countries seem to have much lower wages for workers with equivalent
                                                 18

skills. There are many stories and indeed hard evidence that some computer-industry workers

are paid much less in India than workers with equal skills in the US or Europe. So why is skilled

labor expensive where it is abundant? Of course, one simple answer is that they are not equally

skilled, and US/European workers are either better or the firms they work for are better at

extracting output.

       The other empirical idea that has not been addressed here is the notion of some tasks

being more tradable than others, especially those that are routine and codifiable. Workers may

be equally skilled in the two activities, but those who work on routine tasks may be more

vulnerable in the face of globalization that the non-routine workers.

       In this section, I present an extension to my basic model which tries to hit these two birds

with one stone. I am going to assume that there are in fact two types of skilled workers. One

type we continue to denote by H, and these will be routine workers who can work at a

geographic distance from the firm’s headquarters. The second type is denoted by E (as in

entrepreneur), upper level workers who are involved in tasks that are fundamental to the firm.

Furthermore, we will assume that the E workers are “upstream”: they produce the firm-specific

assets or alternatively they are used in the fixed costs of firm creation, the headquarters activity.

H workers are “downstream” in the office activity, involved in producing the actual firm output

like computer code, call centers, business processing and so forth. To keep things fairly simple,

H workers are also used in manfacturing (or more correctly value added) and agriculture

production. E workers are only used in service industry headquarters activities, and are vital to

supporting domestic service firms in equilibrium (for all types N, M, and V). Horizontal type M

firms are assumed to need E workers from both countries, but mostly from the home country.
                                                19

For H workers in North working in a national firm, for example, their jobs can be “offshored” by

the E workers switching the firm to a M or V type, hiring foreign H workers to replace the

domestic ones. Thus H workers are vulnerable to having their jobs offshored, but of course the

domestic E workers must themselves compete against foreign firms.

       Suppose that our small North is not only skilled labor abundant, now referring to the total

of H and E workers relative to unskilled workers, but also has a higher proportion of E workers

in the total of H + E. The important thing to note in this context is that, when trade and

especially foreign investment are not allowed, E and H workers are bound together in producing

services: they are location-specific complements, meaning that they must not only be used

together, but in the same location. Under our assumptions about factor endowments across the

two countries, it is now the case that North will be better positioned for headquarters of type N

services firms. However, service delivery is H-worker intensive, and the consequence of this is

that country North will have higher wages for H workers than South. This is the result we need

to capture the empirical fact that skilled workers (H type) are cheaper where they are more

scarce, in South.

       We can now do the same experiment we did in Table 1. The proportions of total skilled

(E+H) to unskilled workers is the same in Table 2, but North has a higher E/H ratio than South.

One difference now is that the number of North services firms will not be able to adjust much,

since the E workers are only used in service headquarters production by assumption, and so they

cannot be drawn in from other parts of the economy. But the increased demand for their services

though exports or foreign investment in services is going to give a big boost to their wages. The

North H workers, who must now compete with offshore H workers in South, may lose or may
                                                 20

get a small boost through switching to the manufacturing sector.

       The first column of Table 2 gives the NN regime. Even though North is small (16%

income share), its endowment makes it the center for service firms. Final manufacturing

production is similar in the two countries as is final service production (South not shown).

Taken together, these results mean a smaller output per service firm in North, which sacrificing

some scale economies but allows a greater degree of differentiation. North is the manufacturing

exporter. Although we again normalize factor prices and welfare to equal one in the NN base

case, the real wage of skilled labor is actually about eighteen percent higher in North. This is the

result I wanted to capture: skilled labor is cheap in South where it is scarce.

       The introduction of trade but not investment in services in the second column of Table 2

does not actually change the types and numbers of active firms much. There is however some

substitution in North away from manufacturing production and toward final service production,

with North exporting most of that increased S production. Recall that value added in

manufacturing is more skilled-labor intensive than final service production. The consequence of

these changes is that there is a redistribution within North away from skilled labor H toward the

E workers. The former lose 1 percent while the latter gain 33 percent.

       The intuition behind this redistribution is probably that, in the absence of trade in

services, the complementary bundling of H and E workers needed for service production and the

complementary bundling of services and manufacturing value added supports higher wages for

the H workers. When trade in services is permitted, the substitution of more final service

production for final manufacturing production lowers the aggregate demand for H workers at the

old wage. But the E workers benefit from this change as their expertise is in more demand for
                                                 21

service production. There is a welfare gain of 5 percent for North.

       In the second experiment (third column) of Table 2 (NI), we see a shift away from

national firm production, with M multinationals dominating in North. There is virtually no

change in manufacturing and service production in North. E workers are big gainers in the

North as they provide services to both the North and South offices of their firms. But the general

efficiency gain also increases the wages of H workers in the North and unskilled workers are

small losers. The welfare gain of 3 percent for North is largely coming from the efficiency gains

of having a larger variety of services to use in production.

       The final experiment in Table 2 liberalizes both service trade and investment (TI). As

was the case in Table 1, we now have a mix of horizontal and vertical firms headquartered in

North. There is now a shift toward manufacturing and away from final (office) service

production relative to the base case. One again, there is a big gain for E workers yet H workers

also gain. The losers are again unskilled labor while the country as a whole gains a significant 7

percent.

       The results for the wages of H workers in South in Table 2 are interesting and contrast

with those in Table 1. In allowing only trade in S, H workers now suffer a very small wage loss

and earn only a very modest gain when investment in services is introduced. This is essentially

an efficiency gain that overwhelms a relative price change against H workers relative to E

workers. When investment in services is not allowed, North suffers from a relatively inefficient

service sector passed on in high costs to manufacturing producers due to the lack of service

variety. Access to a broader range of services through investment (or to cheaper foreign services

by not paying the trade cost) allows essentially an efficiency gain for the small country. This
                                                      22

shows up in the increased final manufacturing production in Table 2 which is associated with an

increased demand for skilled H workers. The tends to lift all real factor prices and now H

workers are better off. The shift toward more X production, however, now reduces the wages of

unskilled workers in North.

           Again, I feel that the intuition for the results in Table 2 lie in the fact that, in the absence

of trade or investment in services, North is handicapped in not having an efficient production

sector for S due to its small size in Table 2 (i.e., lack of efficiency-increasing diversity), which is

passed on in higher real costs (higher price index for services) to the manufacturing sector.



5.         Summary and conclusions

           This paper approaches the phenomenon of increased trade and foreign investment in

white-collar services from the point of view of theory. The paper concerns how we want to think

about these services and how we might model them.

           After developing a list of characteristics that I think a reasonable theory might capture, I

develop a two-country general-equilibrium model. This model has one final goods sector,

manufacturing, that uses services as intermediates. Intermediates in turn have an upstream

“headquarters” activity and a downstream “office” activity. The headquarters activity is

assumed the most skilled-labor intensive, followed by value added in manufacturing production,

followed by downstream service production, followed by agriculture (the other final goods

sector).

           In one experiment, manufacturing production is geographically bound together with

service production and headquarters and downstream production must similarly occur in the
                                                  23

same location. Two types of fragmentation are possible. First, we allow services to be traded,

used as input into manufacturing production in the other country. Second, we allow services

themselves to geographically fragment into a headquarters and office location (termed

investment in services). A numerical simulation approach compares the no trade no investment

scenario (NN) to service trade but not investment feasbile/permitted (TN), to trade infeasible but

investment feasible (NI), and then to a full liberalization scenario (TI) in which both trade and

investment are permitted.

       Liberalization, or technical/institutional changes that allow trade and investment in

services tend to benefit a small, skilled-labor-abundant economy. There are several sources of

these gains.

       (1) offshoring allow service firms to source from abroad the downstream part of service

production that is costly at home. This improves their competitiveness in both markets.

       (2) access to foreign service providers through trade or investment increases the range of

services available to domestic manufacturing producers, increasing their productivity or

lowering the cost of the aggregate service intermediate.

       (3) access to foreign markets for the domestic services firms makes them more

competitive, allowing them to spread their fixed costs over a larger output.

       All three of these effects tend to favor skilled labor over unskilled labor. However, while

the relative wage of skilled labor rises, the level of the real wage of unskilled labor can rise as

well (not true for all scenarios) reflecting the fact that the real productivity gains from effects (2)

and (3) above can lift all workers’ real wages.

       In a second experiment, I divide skilled labor into two types, entrepreneures (E) or
                                                 24

managers, and more general or routine skilled workers (H). I assume that E workers are only

used in the upstream headquarters activity, whereas H workers are used in the downstream

activity, in manufacturing and in agricultural production. Domestic service firm requires local E

workers, but the downstream tasks performed by the H workers can be done offshore by foreign

H workers. Our small, skilled-labor-abundant North has a higher ratio of all skilled to unskilled

workers than South and also a higher ratio of E workers to H workers.

       For many variables, the results of this experiment are not that different from the

experiment with only two types of labor. The big difference is with respect to factor rewards.

Liberalization now leads to an increase in the real price of E workers relative to H workers in the

small economy. In some scenarios, the real wages of H workers actually fall, due to their having

to compete with offshore H workers.

       This is exactly the scenario that some researchers and policy analysts have feared. The

more routine skilled workers have their wages reduced at the expense of the top level

management and other workers. But when North is very small, there are some parameter values

such that the efficiency gains dominate the relative wage changes, and all factors in the small,

skilled-labor-abundant country can gain from liberalization. But the E workers continue to gain

much more.

       I think that the intuition behind these results is that the lack of trade and investment in

services “bundles” E and H workers together in producing services and manufacturing: they are

location-specific complements in fancier jargon. The relative abundance of E workers in North

pulls up the return to H workers. Fragmentation means that the E workers can seek out foreign

H workers instead (offshore the H workers’ jobs) and so the latter may (but not must) lose.
                                              25

REFERENCES

Antràs, Pol. 2003. “Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure”. Quarterly Journal of Economics

       118: 1374-1418.

Bhagwati, Jagdish, Arvind Panagariya and T.N. Srinivasan.2004. “The Muddles over

       Outsourcing”. Journal of Economic Perspectives 18: 93-114.

Brainard, S. Lael. 1997. "An Empirical Assessment of the Proximity-Concentration Tradeoff

       between Multinational Sales and Trade". American Economic Review 87: 520-544.

Brainard. S Lael and Susan Collins, editors. 2006. Brookings Trade Forum 2005: Offshoring

       White-Collar Work, Washington: the Brookings Institution.

Deardorff, Alan V. 2001. “Fragmentation in Simple Trade Models”. North American Journal of

       Economics and Finance 12: 121-137.

Ethier, Wifred. 1982. “National and International Returns to Scale in the Modern Theory of

       International Trade”. American Economic Review 72: 389-405.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson. 1996. “Globalization, Outsourcing, and Wage

       Inequality”. American Economic Review 86: 240-245.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson.1997. "Foreign Direct Investment and Relative

       Wages: Evidence from Mexico's Maquiladoras". Journal of International Economics 42:

       371-393.

Francois, Joseph F. 1990. “Production Services, Scale, and the Division of Labor”, Oxford

       Economic Papers 42, 715-729.

Francois, Joseph F. 1990.,Trade in Producer Services and Returns due to Specialization under

       Monopolistic Competition”, Canadian Journal of Economics 23, 109-124.
                                              26

Grubel, Herbert. 1987. “All Traded Services are Embodied in Materials or People”. The World

       Economy 10.

Hoekman, Bernard. 2006. “Liberalization of Trade in Services: A Survey”, World Bank working

       paper.

Hummels, David, Jun Ishii and Kie-Mu Yi. 2001. “The Nature and Growth of Vertical

       Specialization in World Trade”. Journal of International Economics 54: 75-96.

Jones, Ronald W., I. Coelho, and Stephen T. Easton.1986. "The Theory of International Factor

       Flows: the Basic Model". Journal of International Economics, 1986: 313-327.

Markusen, James R.1983. “Factor Movements and Commodity Trade as Complements”. Journal

       of International Economics 14: 341-356.

Markusen, James R.1984. “Multinationals, Multi-Plant Economies, and the Gains from Trade”.

       Journal of International Economics 16: 205-226.

Markusen, James R.1989. "Trade in Producer Services and in Other Specialized Intermediate

       Inputs". American Economic Review 79: 85-95.

Markusen, James R. 1990. "Derationalizing Tariffs with Specialized Intermediate Inputs and

       Differentiated Final Goods," Journal of International Economics 28: 375-384.

Markusen, James R 2002. Multinational Firms and the Theory of International Trade,

       Cambridge: MIT Press.

Markusen, James R. 2006 .“Modeling the offshoring of while-collar services: from comparative

       advantage to the new theories of trade and FDI”, in S. Lael Brainard and Susan Collins,

       editors, Brookings Trade Forum 2005: Offshoring White-Collar Work, Washington: the

       Brookings Institution, 1-34.
                                              27

Markusen, James R., Thomas Rutherford and David Tarr. 2005. “Trade and Foreign Direct

       Investment in Producer Services and the Market for Domestic Expertise”, Canadian

       Journal of Economics 38, 758-777.

Markusen, James R., and Anthony J. Venables. 2005. “A Multi-country Approach to Factors

       Proportions Trade and Trade Costs”. NBER working paper 11051.

McGee, Stephen P. and Kwang-Yeol Yoo. 2005. “The United States is a Small Country in World

       Trade: Further Evidence and Implications for Globalization”. University of Texas

       working paper.

Mundell, Robert A. 1957. "International Trade and Factor Mobility. "American Economic

       Review 47: 321-335.

Neary, J. Peter 1995. "Factor Mobility and International Trade". Canadian Journal of Economics

       28: 1995, S4-S23.

Norman, V.D and A.J. Venables. 1995. “International Trade, Factor Mobility and Trade Costs”.

       Economic Journal 105: 1488-1505.

Venables Anthony J. 1996. “Equilibrium Locations of Vertically Linked Industries”.

       International Economic Review 37, 341-359.

Yi, Kei-Mu. 2003. “Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade”. Journal of

       Political Economy 111: 52-102.

Zhang, Kevin Honglin and James R. Markusen. 1999. “Vertical Multinational and Host Country

       Characteristics”. Journal of Development Economics 59: 233-252.
         Figure 1: Structure of production

                                 final consumption



 agriculture                                             manufacturing




if these two activities can be            value added by                 business
geographically separated,                 skilled and unskilled          services
we have trade in services                 labor


         if these two activities can be
         geographically separated, we
         have foreign investment in                      headquarters           office
         services




         Figure 2: Types of trade in services for a North service firm

                     Services provided to North manufacturing firms


                    always                                         mode 1        feasible
                    feasible                                       and 3         under TI
                                                                   trade in S
         North office                 Headquarters of a
                                                                         South office
                                      service firm
                                      headquartered in North

    mode 1         feasible                                       mode 3        feasible
    trade in S     under TN                                       trade in S    under NI
                   and TI                                                       and TI


                     Services provided to South manufacturing firms
 Table 1: North small and skilled-labor abundant, simulation results under
 different service trade/investment restrictions (two-factor model)
North's H/L ratio = 2.78                  NN      TN                NI               TI
North's income share = 0.16
                                                          %                %                %
                                         level   level   change   level   change   level   change

National firms North                     0.81    0.20
Horizontal firms North                                            1.43             0.62
Vertical firms North                                                               1.10
Total firms headquartered in North       0.81    0.20             1.43             1.72

X production in North                    0.63    1.02      +60    0.65       +3    0.73      +15
Final service production in North        0.63    0.17      -74    0.59       -7    0.36      -44

Exports of X by North                    0.32    0.67             0.31             0.39
Exports of S from North by North firms           0.01
Exports of S from South by North firms                                             0.09

Skilled wage in North                    1.00    1.21      +21    1.20      +20    1.32      +32
Unskilled wage in North                  1.00    0.93       -7    0.95       -5    0.84      -16
Welfare in North                         1.00    1.06       +6    1.06       +6    1.06       +6




 Table 2: North small and skilled-labor abundant, simulation results under
 different service trade/investment restrictions (three-factor model)
North's H/L ratio = 2.78                  NN      TN                NI               TI
North's income share = 0.16
                                                          %                %                %
                                         level   level   change   level   change   level   change

National firms North                     1.15    1.18
Horizontal firms North                                            1.30             0.72
Vertical firms North                                              0.01             0.45
Total firms headquartered in North       1.15    1.18             1.31             1.17

X production in North                    0.66    0.60       -8    0.68       +4    0.74      +12
Final service production in North        0.61    0.72      +17    0.62       +2    0.51      -17

Exports of X by North                    0.33    0.25             0.33             0.37
Exports of S from North by North firms           0.13
Exports of S from South by South firms           0.07
Exports of S from South by North firms                                             0.04

Skilled wage in North                    1.00    0.99       -1    1.03       +3    1.05       +5
Entre / management wage in North         1.00    1.33      +33    2.21     +121    3.11     +211
Unskilled wage in North                  1.00    1.08       +8    0.95       -5    0.93       -7
Welfare in North                         1.00    1.05       +5    1.03       +3    1.07       +7
