                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        DEBT AND THE EFFECTS OF FISCAL POLICY

                                             Carlo Favero
                                          Francesco Giavazzi

                                         Working Paper 12822
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12822


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2007




We thank Olivier Blanchard, Eric Leeper and Roberto Perotti for useful comments. Francesco Giavazzi
thanks the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston for its hospitality while this paper was completed. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Carlo Favero and Francesco Giavazzi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Debt and the Effects of Fiscal Policy
Carlo Favero and Francesco Giavazzi
NBER Working Paper No. 12822
January 2007, Revised May 2007
JEL No. E62,H60

                                             ABSTRACT

A shift in taxes or in government spending (a "fiscal shock") at some point in time puts a constraint
on the path of taxes and spending in the future, since the government intertemporal budget constraint
will eventually have to be met. This simple fact is surprisingly overlooked in analyses of the effects
of fiscal policy based on Vector AutoRegressive models. We study the effects of fiscal shocks keeping
track of the debt dynamics that arises following a fiscal shock, and allowing for the possibility that
taxes, spending and interest rates might respond to the level of the debt, as it evolves over time. We
show that omitting a debt feedback can result in incorrect estimates of the dynamic effects of fiscal
shocks. In particular, the absence of an effect of fiscal shocks on long-term interest rates -- a frequent
finding in studies that omit a debt feedback -- can be explained by their mis-specification. Using data
for the U.S. economy and two alternative identification assumptions we reconsider the effects of fiscal
policy shocks correcting for these shortcomings.

Carlo Favero
IGIER, Universita' Bocconi
Via Salasco 5
20136 Milano, ITALY
carlo.favero@uni-bocconi.it

Francesco Giavazzi
IGIER
Universita' L.Bocconi
5, via Salasco
20136 - Milano ITALY
and NBER
giavazzi@MIT.EDU
1     Introduction
A shift in taxes or in government spending (a ”fiscal shock”) at some point
in time puts a constraint on the path of taxes and spending in the future,
since the government intertemporal budget constraint will eventually have
to be met. This simple fact is surprisingly overlooked in analyses (at least
those of which we are aware) of the eﬀects of fiscal policy based on Vector
AutoRegressive models.
    Consider for example a positive shock to government spending. Following
the shock the government may respect its budget constraint by adjusting
taxes and spending so as to keep the ratio of public debt-to-GDP stable, or
it may delay the adjustment and in the meantime let the debt ratio grow.
It may even plan to use the inflation tax or to default. The eﬀects of the
fiscal shock on taxes, spending, inflation and interest rates are likely to diﬀer
depending on the path the government chooses.
    Another way to put this is that the Vector AutoRegressive models that
are typically used to estimate the eﬀects of fiscal shocks on various macroe-
conomic variables (such as output and private consumption) share two weak-
nesses: (i) they fail to keep track of the debt dynamics that arises following
a fiscal shock, and (ii) as the debt ratio evolves over time they overlook the
possibility that taxes and spending might respond to the level of the debt.
In other words, following a fiscal shock, taxes and spending are assumed to
respond to various macroeconomic variables but not to the level of the public
debt. This omission is particularly surprising in the case of countries where
the data reveal a positive correlation between the government surplus-to-
GDP ratio and the government debt-to-GDP ratio and thus indicate that
fiscal variables respond to the level of the debt. Bohn (1998) finds such a
correlation in a century of U.S. data.
    The consequence of omitting a feedback from the debt level is that the
error terms in the equations that are estimated include, along with truly ex-
ogenous fiscal shocks, the responses of taxes, government spending and other
variables–such as (importantly) long term interest rates–to the level of the
debt ratio along the path induced by the fiscal shock. The coeﬃcients that
are estimated and then used to compute impulse responses are thus typically
biased. An eﬀect of such a bias is that impulse responses are sometimes
computed along unstable debt paths, i.e. paths along which the debt-to-
GDP ratio diverges. The omission of a feedback from the level of the debt to


                                       1
long-term interest rates, combined with the failure to keep track of the debt
dynamics, could also be the reason why in some experiments interest rates
do not appear to respond significantly to fiscal shocks.
     One could argue that omitting the level of the debt is not a problem be-
cause the Vector AutoRegressive models that are typically estimated already
include all the variables that enter the government intertemporal budget
constraint and thus determine the evolution of the debt over time: what is
missing is at most an initial value for the debt level. We show that is would
not be enough: failure to explicitly include the debt level in the estimated
equation–and keep track of its path when computing impulse responses–
can result in biased estimates of the eﬀects of fiscal policy shocks on macro
variables.
     The point we make sheds light on a common empirical finding: the eﬀects
of fiscal shocks seem to change across time. For instance, Perotti (2007) finds
that the eﬀect on U.S. consumption of an increase in government spending
is positive and statistically significant in the 1960’s and 1970’s, but became
insignificant in the 1980’s and 1990’s. We find a sharp diﬀerence in the
way U.S. fiscal authorities responded to the accumulation of debt in the
two samples: since the early 1980’s, following a shock to spending or taxes,
both fiscal policy instruments are adjusted over time in order to stabilize
the debt ratio. This does not appear to have happened in the 1960’s and
1970’s, when there is no evidence of a stabilizing response of fiscal policy.
This evidence can explain the heterogeneity of impulse responses to fiscal
shocks in the pre-1980 and the post-1980 samples for two reasons. First, the
dynamic behavior of taxes and spending following a fiscal shock depends on
the importance of the debt stabilization motive in the fiscal reaction function.
Second, it should not be surprising that consumers respond diﬀerently to an
innovation in taxes or government spending depending on whether or not
they expect the government to meet its intertemporal budget constraint by
adjusting taxes and/or spending in the future.
     Our findings are also related to the evidence of a non-linearity in the re-
sponse of private consumption to fiscal shocks–documented among others
by Giavazzi, Jappelli and Pagano (2000) for a group of OECD countries.
Romer and Romer (2007) also find that the eﬀect of a U.S. tax shock on
output depends on whether the change in taxes is motivated by the gov-
ernment’s desire to stabilize the debt, or is unrelated to the stance of fiscal
policy.

                                       2
    The point we make is independent of the assumption adopted to iden-
tify fiscal shocks—whether imposing enough constraints on a Structural VAR
(such as in Blanchard and Perotti, 2002 or Mountford and Uhlig, 2002) or
identifying shocks from the narrative record, as Ramey (2006), or in Romer
and Romer (2007). This paper is agnostic as to the best strategy to identify
fiscal shocks: we experiment with alternative identification approaches and
document the importance of omitting the debt-deficits dynamics in all cases.
    The plan of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we explain why estimating
the eﬀects of fiscal policy shocks omitting the response of taxes and spending
to the level of the public debt is problematic. Section 3 describes our data. In
Sections 4 and 5 we evaluate the empirical relevance of our point computing
impulse responses to fiscal shocks in models in which the variables are allowed
to respond to the level of the debt—whose evolution over time is determined
by the intertemporal government budget constraint. We then compare these
impulse responses with those obtained from models that omit the debt level.
In Section 4 we use the identification technique proposed by Blanchard and
Perotti (2002). In Section 5 we use the tax shocks identified by Romer and
Romer (2007).
    We close by observing that the methodology described in this paper to
analyze the impact of fiscal shocks by taking into account the stock-flow
relationship between debt and fiscal variables could be applied to other dy-
namic models which include similar identities. One example are the recent
discussions on the importance of including capital as a slow-moving variable
to capture the relation between productivity shocks and hours worked (see
e.g. Christiano et al, 2005 and Chari et al. 2005).


2    Why standard fiscal policy VAR’s are mis-
     specified
The study of the dynamic response of macroeconomic variables to shifts in
fiscal policy is typically carried out estimating a vector autoregression of the
form

                                 X
                                 k
                            Yt =   Ci Yt−i + ut                             (1)
                                   i=1




                                         3
   where Y includes government spending, taxes, output and other macroe-
conomic variables such as interest rates, consumption and inflation.
   The level of the debt-to-GDP-ratio is never included in (1). This variable,
however, is an important factor in determining the eﬀects of fiscal policy for
two reasons (at least):

   • a feedback from the level of debt ratio to taxes and government spend-
     ing is necessary for stability of the debt, unless the rate of growth of
     the economy is exactly equal to the average cost of financing the debt.
     Such a feedback is a feature of the data: Bohn (1998) finds that a cen-
     tury of U.S. data reveal a positive correlation between the government
     surplus-to-GDP ratio and the government debt-to-GDP ratio;

   • interest rates, a central variable in the transmission of fiscal shocks,
     depend on future expected monetary policy and on the risk premium:
     both may be aﬀected by the debt dynamics—for instance if a growing
     stock of debt raises fears of future monetization or, in the extreme case,
     of debt default. The impact of a given fiscal shock on interest rates will
     be very diﬀerent depending on whether the shock produces a path of
     debt that is stable or tends to become explosive.

    If the level of the debt ratio is significant in explaining at least some
of the variables included in (1), omitting it implies that the error terms u
will include, along with truly exogenous shocks, the responses of Y, and in
particular of taxes, spending and interest rates, to the level of the debt: this
will result in biased estimates of the Ci coeﬃcients. The analysis of the
eﬀects of fiscal shocks using (1) can thus be problematic.
    Once the level of the debt ratio is included in (1), one must allow for
the fact that taxes, government spending, output, inflation and the rate of
interest—in other words the variables entering Y—are linked by an identity,
the equation that determines how the debt ratio evolves over time. These
observations naturally lead to replacing (1) with


                   X
                   k           X
                               k
            Yt   =   Ci Yt−i +   γ i dt−i + ut                              (2)
                     i=1            i=1
                           1 + it                 exp (gt ) − exp (tt )
            dt =                           dt−1 +
                     (1 + ∆pt ) (1 + ∆yt )             exp (yt )

                                          4
              0  £                      ¤
    where Yt = gt tt yt ∆pt it . d is the debt-to-GDP ratio, i is the
nominal rate of interest (the average cost of debt financing), ∆y is real GDP
growth, ∆p is inflation, t and g are, respectively, (the logs of) government
revenues and government expenditure net of interest. (We use logs because
it is the log of output, taxes and spending that enters Y). Note that the
presence of dt−i amplifies the dynamic eﬀect of fiscal shocks, which cumulate
in (2), while they do not in (1): the diﬀerence between impulse responses
computed using (2) and (1) might thus diverge as the horizon increases.
    Before discussing how fiscal policy shocks can be studied in the context
of (2) we pause and ask a question. Y already contains all the variables that
enter the government intertemporal budget constraint in (2): isn’t this good
enough ? Do we need to insert the debt level directly? Why are the impulse
responses biased if the model does not explicitly include d and the identity
describing debt accumulation? The reason why d cannot be dropped is that
it is unlikely that the short lags of g, t, ∆p, ∆y and i that enter (linearly)
(1) can trace the evolution of the debt ratio accurately enough. To convince
yourself notice that dt is the result of a long and non-linear lag dynamics

          K µ
          X                            ¶i K µ                                  ¶
              exp (gt−i ) − exp (tt−i ) Y                 1 + it−i
  dt =                                                                             +
           i=0
                        exp (yt−i )          i=o
                                                   (1 + ∆pt−i ) (1 + ∆yt−i )
             K µ
             Y                                ¶
                           1 + it−i
          +                                     dt−i−1
              i=o
                    (1 + ∆pt−i ) (1 + ∆yt−i )


    But the best way to convince the reader is to show that impulse responses
computed using (2) diﬀer from those computed using (1) and produce dif-
ferent paths for dt . We show this using U.S. data and two diﬀerent ways to
identify fiscal shocks, that are representatives of alternative paths researchers
have followed (in this paper we remain agnostic as to the preferred identi-
fication strategy): the technique proposed by Blanchard and Perotti (2002)
and the ”exogenous” tax shocks identified by Romer and Romer (2007) with
a narrative approach. We start by describing our data.




                                         5
3       The data
We begin using quarterly data for the U.S. economy since 1960:1, the sample
analyzed in Blanchard and Perotti (2002) and extended to 2005:4 in Perotti
(2007). Our approach requires that the debt-dynamics equation in (2) tracks
the path of dt accurately: we thus need to define the variables in this equation
with some care.
    The source for the diﬀerent components of the budget deficit and for all
macroeconomic variables are the NIPA accounts (available on the Bureau of
Economic Analysis website, downloaded on December 7th 2006). yt is (the
log of) real GDP per capita, ∆pt is the log diﬀerence of the GDP defla-
tor. Data for the stock of U.S. public debt and for population are from the
FRED database (available on the Federal Reserve of St.Louis website,also
downloaded on December 7th 2006). Our measure for gt is (the log of)
real per capita primary government expenditure: nominal expenditure is ob-
tained subtracting from total Federal Government Current Expenditure (line
39, NIPA Table 3.2 ) net interest payments at annual rates (obtained as the
diﬀerence between line 28 and line 13 on the same table). Real per capita
expenditure is then obtained by dividing the nominal variable by population
times the GDP chain deflator. Our measure for tt is (the log of) real per
capita government receipts at annual rates (the nominal variable is reported
on line 36 of the same NIPA Table).
    The average cost servicing the debt, it , is obtained by dividing net interest
payments by the federal government debt held by the public (FYGFDPUN
in the Fred database) at time t − 1. The federal government debt held
by the public is smaller than the gross federal debt, which is the broadest
definition of the U.S. public debt. However, not all gross debt represents
past borrowing in the credit markets since a portion of the gross federal
debt is held by trust funds—primarily the Social Security Trust Fund, but
also other funds: the Trust Fund for Unemployment Insurance, the Highway
Trust Fund, the pension fund of federal employees, etc.. The assets held by
these funds consist of non-marketable debt.1 We thus exclude it from our
definition of federal public debt.
    Figure 1 reports, starting in 1970:1 (the first quarter for which the debt
data are available in FRED), this measure of the debt held by the public as
    1
     Cashell (2006) notes that ”this debt exists only as a book-keeping entry, and does not
reflect past borrowing in credit markets.”


                                            6
a fraction of GDP (this is the dotted line). We have checked the accuracy
of the debt dynamics equation in (2) simulating it forward from 1970:1 (this
is the continuous line in Figure 1). The simulated series is virtually super-
imposed to the actual one: the small diﬀerences are due to approximation
errors in computing inflation and growth rates as logarithmic diﬀerences, and
to the fact that the simulated series are obtained by using seasonally adjusted
measures of expenditures and revenues. Based on this evidence we have used
the debt dynamics equation to extend dt back to 1950:1. (A quarterly series
for dt extending back to 1950:1 will become necessary when we compare our
results with those in Romer and Romer (2007) whose sample starts just after
World War II.) Figure 1 shows that this series tracks the annual debt level
accurately, at least up to the early 1950’s. 2


4     Fiscal shocks identified from SVAR’s
We start by comparing (2) with the Structural VAR (SVAR) estimated in
Blanchard and Perotti (2002) and extended in Perotti (2007) (B&P in what
follows).
    SVAR’s identify fiscal shocks imposing restrictions that allow the two
structural fiscal shocks in (1) to be recovered from the reduced form resid-
uals, u. The innovations in the reduced form equations for taxes and gov-
ernment spending, ugt and utt , contain three terms: (i) the response of taxes
and government spending to fluctuations in macroeconomic variables, such
as output and inflation, that is implied by the presence of automatic stabiliz-
ers; (ii) the discretionary response of fiscal policy to news in macro variables
and (iii) truly exogenous shifts in taxes and spending, the shocks we wish to
identify. B&P exploit the fact that it typically takes longer than a quarter
for discretionary fiscal policy to respond to news in macroeconomic variables:
at quarterly frequency the contemporaneous discretionary response of fiscal
policy to macroeconomic data can thus be assumed to be zero. To identify
the component of ugt and utt which corresponds to automatic stabilizers they
use institutional information on the elasticities of tax revenues and govern-
ment spending to macroeconomic variables. They thus identify the structural
   2
     We are unable to build the debt series back to 1947:1, the start of the Romer and
Romer sample, because data for total governemnt spending, needed to buld the debt series,
are available on a consistent basis only from 1950:1.



                                           7
shocks to g and t by imposing on the A and B matrices in Au = Be the
following structure 3 :

⎡                               ⎤⎡             ⎤   ⎡                           ⎤⎡          ⎤
     1   0    agy ag∆p agi             ugt             b11 0 0 0 0                   egt
⎢    0   1    aty at∆p ati      ⎥⎢     utt     ⎥ ⎢     b21 b22 0 0 0           ⎥⎢    ett   ⎥
⎢                               ⎥⎢             ⎥ ⎢                             ⎥⎢          ⎥
⎢   a31 a32    1   0    0       ⎥⎢     uyt     ⎥=⎢      0 0 b33 0 0            ⎥⎢    e1t   ⎥
⎢                               ⎥⎢             ⎥ ⎢                             ⎥⎢          ⎥
⎣   a41 a42   a43  1    0       ⎦⎣    u∆p
                                       t
                                           t   ⎦ ⎣      0 0 0 b44 0            ⎦⎣    e2t   ⎦
    a51 a52   a53 a54 1                uit              0 0 0 0 b55                  e3t

    where eit (i = 1, 2, 3) are non-fiscal shocks and have no structural inter-
pretation. Since agy , ag∆p , agi , aty , at∆p and ati are identified using external
information 4 , there are only 15 parameters to be estimated. As there are
also 15 diﬀerent elements in the variance-covariance matrix of the 5-equation
VAR innovations, the model is just identified. The eit (i = 1, 2, 3) are de-
rived by imposing a recursive scheme on the bottom three rows of A and
B; however, the identification of the two fiscal shocks—the only ones that we
shall use to compute impulse responses—is independent of this assumption.
Finally, the identification assumption imposes b12 = 0. 5
    Although we use the same identifying assumptions, our choice of variables
diﬀers slightly from those used in B&P, because, as discussed above, we
need to use variables that allow the debt dynamics equation to track the
path of dt accurately. In particular, our measure of i is the average cost of
debt financing rather than the yield to maturity on long-term government
   3
     Mountford and Uhlig (2002) identify government spending and revenue shocks by
imposing restrictions on the sign of impulse responses. Fatas and Mihov (2001) rely on a
simple Choleski ordering.
   4
     The elasticities of taxes and government spending with respect to output, inflation
and interest rates used in the identification have been updated in Perotti (2007) and are

                  Elasticities of government revenues   and expenditures
                                    agy ag∆p agi        aty   at∆p ati
                  Entire sample 0        -0.5    0      1.85 1.25 0
                  1960:1-1979:4 0        -0.5    0      1.75 1.09 0
                  1980:1-2006:2 0        -0.5    0      1.97 1.40 0
    5
     B&P provide robustness checks for this assumption by setting b21 = 0 and estimating
b12 . We have also experimented with this alternative option. In practice, as the top left
corner of the B matrix is not statistically diﬀerent from a diagonal matrix, the assumption
b12 = 0 is irrelevant to determine the shape of impulse response functions.


                                               8
bonds used in B&P. Our definitions of g and t are also slightly diﬀerent: we
follow the NIPA definitions by considering net transfers as part of government
expenditure, rather than subtracting them from taxes.
    To check that our slight diﬀerences in data definitions do not change the
results we have first estimated (1) as in B&P. Following Perotti (2007) who
finds diﬀerences in the impulse response functions before and after 1980, the
sample is split in two sub-samples 1960:1-1979:4 and 1980:1-2006:2. The
impulse responses are reported in Figures A1 and A2 in the Appendix and
are consistent with those reported in B&P. In particular:

   • an (exogenous) increase in public expenditure has an expansionary ef-
     fect on output, while an (exogenous) increase in revenues is contrac-
     tionary. The impact of fiscal policy weakens in the second sub-sample,
     in particular the eﬀects of tax shocks become insignificant;

   • after 1980 fiscal shocks become less persistent;

   • the eﬀect of fiscal shocks on interest rates is insignificant in the first sub-
     sample; it is small, significant but counterintuitive in the second sub-
     sample when an increase in public spending lowers the cost of servicing
     the debt;

   • fiscal shocks have consistently no significant eﬀect on inflation.

4.1    The debt dynamics implied by a standard SVAR
To assess the importance of omitting d, we start with a simple exercise. After
having estimated the parameters Ci in (1) we use the identity which describes
debt accumulation to simulate the system out-sample for 80 quarters starting
from the conditions prevailing in the last observation of the estimation period.
The path for dt so constructed reveals the steady state properties of the
estimated empirical model.
    When (1) is estimated over the first sub-sample (1960:1-1979:4) the sim-
ulated out-of-sample path for dt diverges (Figure 2). When (1) is estimated
over the second sub-sample (1980:1-2006:2) the simulated debt ratio tends,
eventually, to fall below zero.
    This exercise naturally raises a number of questions:



                                        9
• does the apparent instability depend on the underlying behavior of the
  government, or is it simply the result of a mis-specified model? Debt
  stabilization requires that the primary budget surplus reacts to the
  accumulation of debt, but such a reaction—if it were in the data—would
  not be captured by (1). Hence the simulated path may very well be
  the result of a mis-specification of the empirical model rather than a
  description of the actual behavior of the government;

• it is obviously diﬃcult to interpret impulse response functions when
  they are computed along unstable paths for the debt ratio, as they
  would eventually diverge. An unstable dynamics becomes particularly
  problematic when the eﬀects of fiscal shocks are computed over rela-
  tively long horizons, or when identification is obtained imposing long
  run restrictions on the shape of impulse responses. This is not the case
  in the B&P identification, that is achieved imposing restrictions on the
  simultaneous eﬀects of fiscal policy shocks. However, the interpreta-
  tion of the responses to shocks along an unstable debt path remains
  problematic;

• impulse response functions appear to diﬀer over the two sub-samples.
  Does this depend on the diﬀerent dynamics for the debt-to-GDP ratio
  implied by the SVAR estimated over the two sub-periods? In particu-
  lar (1) often produces a puzzling response of interest rates to a fiscal
  shock. Consider for example the response to an expansionary fiscal
  shock over the first sub-sample. The path of the debt ratio eventually
  becomes explosive: how can this be reconciled with the evidence that
  the estimated response of it is small and insignificant?

• impulse responses are often used to discriminate between competing
  DSGE models, or to provide evidence on the stylized facts to include in
  theoretical models used for policy analysis. It is obviously impossible to
  compare the empirical evidence from a model that delivers an explosive
  path for the debt, with the paths of variables generated by forward
  looking models, since such models do not have a solution when the
  debt dynamics is unstable.

We now turn to the model described in (2).



                                   10
4.2    Estimating the eﬀects of fiscal shocks in a SVAR
       with debt dynamics
The identification problem does not change when the debt level is included
in the model. Since we treat the debt-deficit relationship as an identity,
the number of shocks remains the same, so that the identification assump-
tions discussed in the previous section remain valid. Also, since there are
no parameters to be estimated in the debt-dynamics equation, (2) can be
estimated excluding that equation. The identified system is therefore

                   X
                   k           X
                               k
            Yt   =   Ci Yt−i +   γ i dt−i + A−1 Bet                         (3)
                     i=1           i=1
                         1 + it                 exp (gt ) − exp (tt )
            dt   =                       dt−1 +
                   (1 + ∆pt ) (1 + ∆yt )             exp (yt )
    Table 1 reports the estimated coeﬃcients of the first and the second lags
of dt in the five equations (taxes, spending, output, inflation and the cost of
debt service) in the two sub-samples.

                           [INSERT TABLE 1 HERE]

    In all equations the restriction that the two coeﬃcients are of equal mag-
nitude and of opposite sign cannot be rejected, suggesting that the five vari-
ables respond to the lagged change in the debt ratio. The last two rows in
the Table report the coeﬃcients (and their standard errors) when this re-
striction is imposed. For instance, government spending is reduced when the
lagged change in the debt ratio is positive. (dt−1 − dt−2 ) measures the gap
between the actual primary surplus (as a fraction of GDP) and the surplus
that would stabilize d: the magnitude of the coeﬃcient indicates that the
gap between the surplus that would stabilize the debt ratio and the actual
surplus acts as an error correction mechanism in the fiscal reaction function:
current expenditures are decreased when last period’s primary surplus was
below the level that would have kept the debt ratio stable.
    The response of gt to a change in the debt-ratio is significant after 1980,
not before. Taxes do not respond significantly to a change in the debt ratio,
however the diﬀerence between the point estimates between the two sub-
periods is close to being significant and the response is stabilizing only after
1980. The average interest cost of the debt also depends on the gap between

                                         11
the actual surplus and the debt stabilizing surplus. This result is particularly
strong in the second sub-sample. Finally, the direct eﬀect of lags in dt on
inflation and output is never significant in any of the samples.
    Summing up. Before 1980 U.S. fiscal policy does not seem to have been
aimed at stabilizing the debt-to-GDP ratio: this probably reflects the will
of the fiscal authorities to reduce the debt ratio from the high initial level
inherited after World War II. Only after 1980 does fiscal policy become sta-
bilizing. Using the coeﬃcients estimated up to 1980 to simulate the eﬀects of
a fiscal policy shock is thus inappropriate, since such a shock would put the
debt ratio on a diverging path, while the coeﬃcients have been estimated on
a sample characterized by a decreasing debt ratio.
    The results in Table 1 raise a question. We argued that (1) is mis-specified
because it overlooks the possibility that fiscal policy reacts to the level of
the debt ratio. In other words, the mis-specification would arise from the
omission of a low-frequency variable. But according to Table 1 what matters
is the change in the debt ratio, thus a high-frequency variable. Does this
make the omission of dt irrelevant? No, for the following reason. The first
diﬀerence of dt is itself a (non-linear) function of dt . Diﬀerencing the debt
dynamics equation we obtain

                   (it − ∆pt − ∆yt − ∆yt ∆pt )        exp (gt ) − exp (tt )
          ∆dt =                                dt−1 +                                     (4)
                       (1 + ∆pt ) (1 + ∆yt )               exp (yt )


    the change in the debt ratio is equal to the diﬀerence between the actual
surplus-to-GDP-ratio and the ratio that would keep the debt stable—which is
a function of the level of the debt. Hence, the change in debt ratio depends
on the level of the debt via a time-varying relationship—because the first term
on the right hand side of (4)—the ratio of the average cost of debt financing
to nominal GDP growth—varies over time. Figure 3 shows that this time
variation is empirically relevant over the sample we consider. In other words,
our empirical model is an error correction model consistent with cointegration
between the primary surplus and the debt-stabilizing surplus.6 Therefore,
   6
    This cointegrating relation is diﬀerent from those experimented in standard SVAR’s.
In particular, the cointegrating relation implied by (4) is diﬀerent from the cointegrating
relation between gt and tt , with a cointegrating vector (1, −1), proposed in their robustness
check by B&P. This could explain why estimating a cointegrated model, or a simple model
specified in first diﬀerences, makes no substantial diﬀerence for the evidence reported by


                                             12
including the change in d in a VAR is virtually equivalent to augmenting the
VAR with a time-varying function of the level of the debt-to-GDP ratio, that
is indeed a slow moving variable7 .

   Computing impulse responses
   The presence of the intertemporal budget constraint makes computing the
responses of the variables in Yt to innovations in et diﬀerent from computing
impulse responses in a standard VAR. Impulse responses comparable to those
obtained from the traditional moving average representation of a VAR can
be constructed going through the following steps:

    • generate a baseline simulation for all variables by solving (3) dynam-
      ically forward (this requires setting to zero all shocks for a number of
      periods equal to the horizon up to which impulse responses are needed),

    • generate an alternative simulation for all variables by setting to one—
      just for the first period of the simulation—the structural shock of in-
      terest, and then solve dynamically forward the model up to the same
      horizon used in the baseline simulation,

    • compute impulse responses to the structural shocks as the diﬀerence
      between the simulated values in the two steps above. (Note that these
      steps, if applied to a standard VAR, would produce standard impulse
      responses. In our case they produce impulse responses that allow for
      both the feedback from dt−i to Yt and for the debt dynamics),

    • compute confidence intervals.8

B&P. Of course, if the debt stabilizing surplus were stationary, the data would support—up
to a logarithmic transformation—the cointegrating vector in B&P, but the long-run solution
of their cointegrating system would still be diﬀerent from the one implied by a system in
which there is tight relation between the actual surplus and the debt stabilizing surplus.
The cointegrating relation implied by (4) is also diﬀerent from the error correction model
proposed in Bohn (1988): Bohn includes the level of the debt ratio in the fiscal reaction
function but does so without allowing for the time variation of the coeﬃcient multiplying
the debt level.
    7
      As a robustness check we have re-run our SVAR augmenting it with the debt stabi-
lizing surplus-to-GDP ratio lagged once and twice. The coeﬃcients on the two lags where
equaly signed and their sum was not statistically diﬀerent from the coeﬃcient on the first
diﬀerence of d, our proposed model.
    8
      Bootstrapping requires saving the residuals from the estimated VAR and then iterating


                                            13
    We now turn to the results.

    Debt dynamics in a model with feedbacks
    Figure 4 reports out-sample simulations of dt obtained from (2). In the
second sub-sample, allowing Yt to respond to past debt growth stabilizes the
path of dt . This is not the case in the first sub-sample—not surprisingly, since
we have found, in Table 1, that the feedbacks from dt to gt and tt only start
being significant after 1980.
    Thus omitting a feedback from the debt level to fiscal policy can result
in impulse responses to fiscal shocks that are based on biased estimates and
are computed along implausible paths for the debt ratio. Whether including
such a feedback is suﬃcient to produce stable debt paths obviously depends
on the size of the feedbacks. If they are too small—as they were in the U.S.
up to the early 1980’s—unstable paths will not be eliminated.

   The eﬀects of fiscal shocks in a model with feedbacks
   Figures 5.1 and 5.2 compare the impulse responses obtained from (2) with
those obtained in a SVAR without a debt feedback. In both cases we use
the same identifying assumptions. Figure 5.1 refers to the first sub-sample,
1960:1-1979:4; Figure 5.2 to the later period. In each figure the left-hand
panels refer to a one percent shock to g; the right-hand side panels refer
to an equivalent shock to t. In each column the graphs show, from top to
bottom, the impulse response of g, t, y, inflation, and the average cost of
debt service. The reported confidence bounds are for the impulse responses
without a debt feedback.

    Pre-1980, when fiscal policy does not respond to d

    • following a positive shock to g, allowing for a debt feedback results
      in a larger response of interest rates and inflation (outside the 95%
      confidence bounds). For interest rates the divergence widens over time,
      as debt accumulates,
the following steps: a) re-sample from the saved residuals and generate a set of observation
for Yt and dt , b) estimate the VAR and identify strucutral shocks, c) compute impulse
responses going thorough the steps described in the text, d) go back to step 1. By going
thorugh 1,000 iterations we produce bootstrapped distributions for impulse responses and
compute confidence intervals.



                                            14
   • following a positive shock to t, interest rates fall more in the model
     with feedbacks and the diﬀerence also widens over time,
   • the output eﬀects of shocks to g and t are larger in the model with a
     debt feedback.


   Post-1980, when fiscal policy is stabilizing

   • following positive t shock output rises. In the model without a debt
     feedback the eﬀect on output of a shock to t is never statistically signif-
     icant. The larger increase in output in the model with a debt feedback
     is partly explained by the response of spending to a tax shock: g ini-
     tially falls as taxes rise, but eventually it rises—a feature of the stability
     of fiscal policy in this sub-sample,
   • g shocks are less persistent in the model with a feedback and t responds
     oﬀsetting g shocks—again a feature of stability,
   • the response of interest rates to a positive g shock is still negative at
     the beginning, but rises over time in the presence of a feedback,
   • following a shock to t interest rates rise more in the presence of a
     feedback, mirroring the larger increase in y.

    Table 2 complements the result in Figures 5 by computing the cumulative
response of interest rates and output to a fiscal shock over three horizons, (4,
12 and 20 quarters) and comparing them with the responses in the absence
of a debt feedback. The eﬀect of a 1% g shock on interest rates, cumulated
over 20 quarters, in the first sub-sample, is 0.118 in the model with feed-
back, 0.032 without: the larger reaction of interest rates to a fiscal shock is
consistent with the finding that in the first sub-sample fiscal policy is not
stabilizing. This is confirmed by the observation that the diﬀerences in the
cumulated responses of interest rates vanish in the second sub-sample where
fiscal policy is stabilizing. The expansionary eﬀect of a tax increase in the
second-subsample is confirmed by the cumulated responses. Following a 1%
increase in taxes output rises (over a 20 quarters horizon) by 0.288 in the
model with feedback, as opposed to 0.170 in the model without a feedback.

                         [INSERT TABLE 2 HERE]

                                       15
5       Fiscal shocks identified from the narrative
        record
Romer and Romer (2007) (R&R in what follows) use the U.S. narrative
record—presidential speeches, executive-branch documents, and Congressional
reports—to classify the size (defined as the estimated revenue eﬀect of a new
tax bill), timing, and principal motivation for all major postwar tax policy
actions.9 They then identify, among all documented tax actions, those that
could be classified as ”exogenous”, as opposed to those that were counter-
cyclical, i.e. motivated by a desire to return output growth to normal. Ex-
ogenous tax changes are further divided into two groups: those that appear
to be motivated by a desire to raise the potential growth rate of the econ-
omy, and those aimed at reducing a budget deficit inherited from previous
administrations.
    Since 1947 U.S. Federal laws changed taxes in 82 quarters. A number
of these quarters had tax changes of multiple types. Among the 104 sepa-
rate quarterly tax changes identified, 65 are classified as exogenous. In this
Section we use these 65 tax changes (the R&R exogenous tax shocks) and
ask what diﬀerence it makes if the debt channel is, or is not, included in the
transmission mechanism.
    R&R estimate the impact of tax shocks on output using a single-equation
approach:

                               X12        ex
                                      ∆Tt−1    Xk
                   ∆yt = β 0 +     βi        +     γ j Zt−j + et                   (5)
                               i=1
                                       Yt−1    j=1

                                                    t−1  ∆T ex
    where ∆yt is real quarterly output growth, Yt−1     are the tax shocks,
measured as a percent of nominal GDP, and Zt−j are controls (lags of ∆yt ,
monetary policy shocks, government spending, oil prices). The Z 0 s are as-
sumed to be exogenous, and in particular unaﬀected by the tax shocks, not
even with a lag. The R&R exercise should thus be interpreted as asking the
following (hypothetical) question: Assume that the transmission mechanism
    9
    Early attempts at applying to fiscal policy the methodology proposed by Romer and
Romer (1989) to identify monetary policy shocks were Edelberg, Eichenbaum and Fisher
(1999), Burnside, Eichenbaum and Fisher (2004), Ramey (2006). These papers used a
dummy variable which identifies characterizes episodes of significant and exogenous in-
creases in government spending (typically wars).


                                          16
of tax shocks is shut down and that such shocks only aﬀect output directly,
rather than, for instance, also via their eﬀect on interest rates. What is their
eﬀect on output under this hypothesis? R&R find that ”exogenous” tax in-
creases have a larger negative eﬀect on output than countercyclical tax hikes.
Among the exogenous tax increases, those motivated by the aim to rein in a
budget deficit are less contractionary.—in fact the negative impact on output
is statistically insignificant.
    To estimate the eﬀects of the R&R tax shocks when fiscal policy is allowed
to respond to the level of the debt we first need to embed these shocks in a
model that doesn’t shut down the transmission mechanism. We do this using
the R&R shocks in the two VAR’s analyzed above: (1) and (2).10 Therefore,
we estimate the following two models:

                               Xk
                                                ∆Ttex
                          Yt =     Ci Yt−i + δi       + ut                              (6)
                               i=1
                                                 Tt


                     Xk            Xk
                                                     ∆Ttex
             Yt    =     Ci Yt−i +     γ i dt−i + δi       + ut                         (7)
                     i=1           i=1
                                                      Tt
                              1 + it                 exp (gt ) − exp (tt )
              dt =                            dt−1 +
                        (1 + ∆pt ) (1 + ∆yt )             exp (yt )

    where the variables in Y are, as before, taxes, government spending,
output, inflation and interest rates.
    Including the R&R tax shocks in a VAR is a natural way of computing
the dynamic response of macro variables to shocks identified outside the VAR
because what matters are the impulse responses generated by the diﬀerent
shocks, not the correlation of the shocks themselves. 11 The R&R shocks are
valid shocks to taxes because we find that they are uncorrelated with all lags
of the variables included in the VAR’s and are significant only in the equation
  10
     R&R scale their shocks by the level of GDP. We scale them by taxes to allow direct
comparability of the eﬀects of these shocks with those identified in a SVAR. In a SVAR tax
shocks are extracted from a specification in the logarithms of the levels of real variables.
Innovations thus have the dimension of a percentage change in taxes. A one per cent
change in taxes is much smaller than a one per cent shock in the tax-to-GDP ratio. The
re-scaling aﬀects the size of the eﬀects but not the shape of the impulse responses.
  11
     VAR’s have been used to compute impulse responses to shocks identified outside the
VAR in the analysis of the eﬀects of monetary shocks in Bagliano and Favero (1999).


                                            17
for t. Thus they satisfy the properties that exogenous shocks identified in a
structural VAR should fulfill.
    Figure 6 shows the impulse response of output to an exogenous R&R tax
shock equivalent to 1% of taxes. Impulse responses are computed using
three diﬀerent models:
                                                                     ex
                                                                   ∆Tt−1
   • (5), the equation estimated by R&R where we have replaced     Yt−1
                                                                           with
        ex
      ∆Tt−1
      Tt−1
            ,

   • (6), a VAR that excludes a debt feedback
   • (7), a model that allows the variables in the VAR to respond to the
     level of the debt.

    The R&R shocks start in 1947, while our data, for the reasons noted in
footnote 2, only start in 1950:1: we thus miss the exogenous shocks that
occurred between January 1947 and December 1949. As in the previous
Section we split the sample in two parts: 1950:1-1979:4 and 1980:1-2006:2.
    The eﬀects on output of the exogenous R&R tax shocks are quite diﬀerent
in the two sub-samples and depending on the model they are embedded in.
In the first sub-sample (1950:1-1979:4) the contractionary. eﬀect of a tax
hike is larger when Z is endogenized in a model that includes the level of the
debt and the government intertemporal budget constraint. This probably
happens because—as documented in the previous Section—debt stabilization
does not appear to have been a concern for the U.S. fiscal authorities in the
first part of the sample. A tax increase thus did not call for a compensating
change in the budget. Fiscal shocks could cumulate over time amplifying the
eﬀect on output of an initial shock. This may explain why tax hikes have
larger eﬀects in the models that allow the variables in Z to respond to the
shock.
    In the second sub-sample, when fiscal policy becomes stabilizing–-a pos-
itive shock to taxes is compensated by a subsequent fiscal accommodation.
This explains why, analyzing the eﬀects of shocks in a model where Z is en-
dogenous and fiscal policy responds to the debt level, produces much smaller
output eﬀects compared with the R&R single equation model. Figure 7
shows that in fact, in the second sub-sample, an initial positive tax shock
is accompanied by further tax changes in the opposite direction. Following
the initial shock taxes fall: when this happens the eﬀect on the budget is

                                     18
compensated by increases in spending. These responses are not captured in
(5) because the equation sets to zero the dynamic response of all variables,
with the only exception of output growth, to tax shocks.


6    Conclusions
We have analyzed the eﬀects of fiscal shocks allowing for a direct response
of taxes, government spending and the cost of debt service to the level of
the public debt (as a ratio to GDP). We have shown that omitting such
a feedback can result in incorrect estimates of the dynamic eﬀects of fiscal
shocks. We suggested in particular that the absence of an eﬀect of fiscal
shocks on long-term interest rates—a frequent finding in research based on
Vector Autoregressions that omit a debt feedback and do not endogenize
debt dynamics—can be explained by their mis-specification, especially over
samples in which the debt dynamics appears to be unstable.
    The methodology described in this paper to analyze the impact of fiscal
shocks by taking into account the stock-flow relationship between debt and
fiscal variables could be extended to other dynamic models which include
similar identities. For instance, the recent discussions on the importance of
including capital as a slow-moving variable to capture the relation between
productivity shocks and hours worked (see e.g. Christiano et al, 2005 and
Chari et al. 2005) could benefit from an estimation technique that tracks
the dynamics of the capital stock generated by the relevant shocks. The
same applies to open economy models that study, for instance, the eﬀects
of a productivity shock on the current account (see e.g. Corsetti et al.,
2006) and that typically omit a feedback from the stock of external debt on
macroeconomic variables.
    This approach could also be used in the analysis of the eﬀects of fiscal
shocks on debt sustainability, an issue which cannot be addressed in the
context of a VAR that fails to keep track of the debt dynamics. Stochastic
simulations of (2) could also be used to evaluate the sustainability of current
systematic fiscal policy and to compute the risk of an unstable debt dynamics
implied by the current policy regime.




                                      19
7   References
Bagliano, Fabio and C. Favero [1999]: ”Information from financial mar-
    kets and VAR measures of monetary policy”, The European Economic
    Review, 43, 825-837.
Blanchard, Olivier and R. Perotti [2002]: ”An Empirical Characterization
    of the Dynamic Eﬀects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes
    on Output”, Quarterly Journal of Economics

Bohn, Henning [1998]: ”The Behaviour of U.S. public debt and deficits”,
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, 949-963.

Burnside, Craig, M. Eichenbaum and J.D.M. Fisher [2003]: “Fiscal Shocks
    and Their Consequences”, NBER Working Paper No 9772

Cashell, Brian W. [2006]: ”The Federal Government Debt: its size and
    economic significance” CRS Report for Congress.

Chari V.V., P.J. Kehoe and E.R. McGrattan [2005]: ”A Critique of Struc-
    tural VARs Using Business Cycle Theory”, Federal Reserve Bank of
    Minneapolis Research Department Staﬀ Report 364

Christiano, Lawrence J., M.Eichenbaum and R.Vigfusson [2005]: ”Assessing
    Structural VARs”, mimeo

Corsetti, Giancarlo, L. Dedola and S. Leduc [2006]: ”Productivity, External
    Balance and Exchange Rates: Evidence on the Transmission Mecha-
    nism Among G7 Countries, forthcoming

Edelberg, Wendy, M. Eichenbaum and J. D.M. Fisher [1999]: ”Understand-
    ing the Eﬀects of a Shock to Government Purchases”, Review of Eco-
    nomics Dynamics, pp.166-206, 41

Fatás, Antonio and I. Mihov [2001]: ”The Eﬀects of Fiscal Policy on Con-
     sumption and Employment: Theory and Evidence”, mimeo, INSEAD

Giavazzi, Francesco, T. Jappelli and M. Pagano [2000]: ”Searching for Non-
    Linear Eﬀects of Fiscal Policy: Evidence from Industrial and Develop-
    ing Countries”, European Economic Review, 44, no. 7, June.

                                   20
Mountford, Andrew and H. Uhlig [2002]: ”What Are the Eﬀcets of Fiscal
   Policy Shocks?” CEPR Discussion Paper 3338

Perotti, Roberto [2007]: “In Search of the Transmission Mechanism of Fiscal
    policy”; NBER Macroeconomic Annual, forthcoming

Ramey, Valerie [2006]: ”Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s All
   in the Timing”, mimeo, July

Romer, Christina and David H. Romer [1989]: “Does Monetary Policy Mat-
   ter? A new test in the spirit of Friedman and Schwartz” in Blanchard,
   O. and S. Fischer, (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Cambridge,
   MIT Press, 4, 121-170

Romer, Christina and David H. Romer [2007]: The Macroeconomic Eﬀects
   of Tax Changes: Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks”,
   mimeo, March.




                                   21
      1 .0


      0 .8


      0 .6


      0 .4


      0 .2


      0 .0
              5 5     6 0         6 5     7 0    7 5        8 0     8 5         9 0         9 5    0 0   0 5

                                                 D Y                D Y _ I


 Figure 1: Actual (DY) and simulated (DY I) (dynamically backward and
 forward starting in 1970:1) debt-GDP ratio. Actual data are observed at
quarterly frequency from 1970 onwards and at annual frequency from 1970
   backward. The simulated data are constructed using the government
    intertemporal budget constraint (2) with observed data and initial
           conditions given by the debt-to-GDP ratio in 1970:1.



      .8

      .7

      .6

      .5

      .4

      .3

      .2

      .1

      .0
             6 5    7 0     7 5     8 0    8 5   9 0    9 5       0 0     0 5         1 0    1 5   2 0   2 5

                    A c tu a l D e b t to G D P R a tio
                    S im u la te d D e b t to G D P R a tio                 (s m p l 1 9 6 0 -1 9 7 9 )
                    S im u la te d D e b t to G D P R a tio                 (s m p l 1 9 8 0 -2 0 0 6 )


Figure 2: Actual and simulated (out of sample) debt-to-GDP ratio starting
from conditions in 1980:1, and in 2006:2 respectively. Simulations are based
                                  on (1) .



                                                       22
   .2 5


   .2 0


   .1 5


   .1 0


   .0 5


   .0 0


  -.0 5
          60        65      70        75         80         85        90        95        00           05

                     a v e r a g e c o s t o f f i n a n c i n g th e d e b t ( a n n u a li z e d )
                     q u a r t e r l y n o m i n a l G D P g r o w t h ( a n n u a li z e d )


Figure 3: Average cost of debt financing and quarterly (annualized)
                       nominal GDP growth



  1 .0

  0 .9

  0 .8

  0 .7

  0 .6

  0 .5

  0 .4

  0 .3

  0 .2
               65    70     75     80      85    90        95    00    05     10     15     20     25

                     A c tu a l D e b t to G D P R a ti o
                     S i m u l a te d D e b t to G D P R a ti o ( s m p l 1 9 6 0 - 1 9 7 9 )
                     S i m u l a te d D e b t to G D P R a ti o ( s m p l 1 9 8 0 - 2 0 0 6 )


Figure 4: Actual and simulated out-of sample debt-GDP dynamics
 (starting from conditions in 1980:1, and in 2006:2 respectively).
                  Simulations are based on (2).



                                                      23
                                       s h o c ks to l _ g g                                                   s h o c ks to l _ tt

             .0 1 2                                                                      .0 0 3

             .0 1 0                                                                      .0 0 2

                                                                                         .0 0 1
             .0 0 8
                                                                                         .0 0 0
             .0 0 6
                                                                                        -. 0 0 1
             .0 0 4
                                                                                        -. 0 0 2
             .0 0 2
                                                                                        -. 0 0 3
             .0 0 0
                                                                                        -. 0 0 4
            -. 0 0 2                                                                    -. 0 0 5

            -. 0 0 4                                                                    -. 0 0 6
                       2   4   6   8         10       12       14   16   18   20                   2   4   6          8       10      12   14   16   18   20




             .0 0 8                                                                      .0 1 2

             .0 0 6
                                                                                         .0 0 8
             .0 0 4

             .0 0 2                                                                      .0 0 4


             .0 0 0
                                                                                         .0 0 0

            -. 0 0 2
                                                                                        -. 0 0 4
            -. 0 0 4

            -. 0 0 6                                                                    -. 0 0 8
                       2   4   6   8         10       12       14   16   18   20                   2   4   6          8       10      12   14   16   18   20




             .0 0 3                                                                      .0 0 0


             .0 0 2                                                                     -. 0 0 1


             .0 0 1                                                                     -. 0 0 2


             .0 0 0                                                                     -. 0 0 3


            -. 0 0 1                                                                    -. 0 0 4


            -. 0 0 2                                                                    -. 0 0 5
                       2   4   6   8         10       12       14   16   18   20                   2   4   6          8       10      12   14   16   18   20




           .0 0 0 3                                                                     .0 0 0 8

           .0 0 0 2
                                                                                        .0 0 0 6
           .0 0 0 1
           .0 0 0 0                                                                     .0 0 0 4

          -. 0 0 0 1
                                                                                        .0 0 0 2
          -. 0 0 0 2
          -. 0 0 0 3                                                                    .0 0 0 0

          -. 0 0 0 4
                                                                                    -. 0 0 0 2
          -. 0 0 0 5

          -. 0 0 0 6                                                                -. 0 0 0 4
                       2   4   6   8         10       12       14   16   18   20                   2   4   6          8       10      12   14   16   18   20




           .0 0 0 8                                                                     .0 0 0 2


           .0 0 0 6
                                                                                        .0 0 0 0

           .0 0 0 4
                                                                                    -. 0 0 0 2
           .0 0 0 2
                                                                                    -. 0 0 0 4
           .0 0 0 0

                                                                                    -. 0 0 0 6
          -. 0 0 0 2


          -. 0 0 0 4                                                                -. 0 0 0 8
                       2   4   6   8         10       12       14   16   18   20                   2   4   6          8       10      12   14   16   18   20




Figure 5.1: Fiscal shocks identified from a SVAR (dotted line) and in model
 with feedbacks (solid line). Sample 1960:1 1979:4. The first column shows
 responses to shocks to gt ; the second column to shocks to tt .The responses
reported along the rows refer, respectively, to the eﬀects on gt , tt , yt , ∆pt , it .


                                                                                   25
                                                                                                             s h o c ks to l_ tt
                                s h o c ks to l_ g g

          .0 1 2                                                                       .0 0 3

                                                                                       .0 0 2
          .0 1 0
                                                                                       .0 0 1
          .0 0 8
                                                                                       .0 0 0

          .0 0 6                                                                      -. 0 0 1

                                                                                      -. 0 0 2
          .0 0 4
                                                                                      -. 0 0 3
          .0 0 2
                                                                                      -. 0 0 4

          .0 0 0                                                                      -. 0 0 5
                    2   4   6    8      1 0      1 2   1 4   1 6   1 8   2 0                     2   4   6     8       1 0         1 2   1 4   1 6   1 8   2 0




          .0 0 5                                                                       .0 1 2

          .0 0 4                                                                       .0 1 0

          .0 0 3                                                                       .0 0 8

          .0 0 2                                                                       .0 0 6

          .0 0 1                                                                       .0 0 4

          .0 0 0                                                                       .0 0 2

         -. 0 0 1                                                                      .0 0 0

         -. 0 0 2                                                                     -. 0 0 2

         -. 0 0 3                                                                     -. 0 0 4
                    2   4   6    8      1 0      1 2   1 4   1 6   1 8   2 0                     2   4   6     8       1 0         1 2   1 4   1 6   1 8   2 0




        .0 0 3 5                                                                     .0 0 1 5

        .0 0 3 0
                                                                                     .0 0 1 0

        .0 0 2 5
                                                                                     .0 0 0 5
        .0 0 2 0
                                                                                     .0 0 0 0
        .0 0 1 5
                                                                                    -. 0 0 0 5
        .0 0 1 0

        .0 0 0 5                                                                    -. 0 0 1 0


        .0 0 0 0                                                                    -. 0 0 1 5
                    2   4   6    8      1 0      1 2   1 4   1 6   1 8   2 0                     2   4   6     8       1 0         1 2   1 4   1 6   1 8   2 0




        .0 0 0 2                                                                 .0 0 0 1 6

                                                                                 .0 0 0 1 2
        .0 0 0 1
                                                                                 .0 0 0 0 8
        .0 0 0 0
                                                                                 .0 0 0 0 4
       -. 0 0 0 1                                                                .0 0 0 0 0

       -. 0 0 0 2                                                               -. 0 0 0 0 4
                                                                                -. 0 0 0 0 8
       -. 0 0 0 3
                                                                                -. 0 0 0 1 2
       -. 0 0 0 4
                                                                                -. 0 0 0 1 6

       -. 0 0 0 5                                                               -. 0 0 0 2 0
                    2   4   6    8      1 0      1 2   1 4   1 6   1 8   2 0                     2   4   6     8       1 0         1 2   1 4   1 6   1 8   2 0




        .0 0 0 0                                                                     .0 0 0 4
       -. 0 0 0 1
                                                                                     .0 0 0 3
       -. 0 0 0 2

       -. 0 0 0 3                                                                    .0 0 0 2

       -. 0 0 0 4
                                                                                     .0 0 0 1
       -. 0 0 0 5

       -. 0 0 0 6                                                                    .0 0 0 0

       -. 0 0 0 7
                                                                                    -. 0 0 0 1
       -. 0 0 0 8

       -. 0 0 0 9                                                                   -. 0 0 0 2
                    2   4   6    8      1 0      1 2   1 4   1 6   1 8   2 0                     2   4   6     8       1 0         1 2   1 4   1 6   1 8   2 0




Figure 5.2: Fiscal shocks identified from a SVAR (dotted line) and in model
 with feedbacks (solid line). Sample 1980:1 2006:2. The first column shows
 responses to shocks to gt ; the second column to shocks to tt .The responses
reported along the rows refer, respectively, to the eﬀects on gt , tt , yt , ∆pt , it .



                                                                               26
                      195 0:1 -198 0:4                                              19 81:1 -20 06: 2

  .002

  .000

  -.002

  -.004

  -.006

  -.008

  -.010

  -.012

  -.014
          2   4   6      8     10    12   14   16   18   20         2     4     6   8    10     12      14   16   18   20




                                                         R& R
                                                         V A R without IG B C
                                                         V A R with IG B C


Figure 6: Using the Romer and Romer (2007) tax shocks. Eﬀect on output
                          in diﬀerent models




                                               27
    .0 1 2

    .0 0 8

    .0 0 4

    .0 0 0

   - .0 0 4

   - .0 0 8

   - .0 1 2

   - .0 1 6
              2       4      6      8      1 0    1 2     1 4    1 6    1 8   2 0

                                    g            y              i
                                    t            D p            d


Figure 7: Dynamic response of all variables to an R&R tax shock, in a VAR
      with a debt feedback estimated over the sample 1950:1-1980:1.




                                   28
                                  s h o c ks to l _ g g                                                        s h o c ks t o l _ t t

            .0 1 2                                                                       .0 0 3

                                                                                         .0 0 2
            .0 1 0
                                                                                         .0 0 1
            .0 0 8
                                                                                         .0 0 0
            .0 0 6                                                                      -. 0 0 1

            .0 0 4                                                                      -. 0 0 2

                                                                                        -. 0 0 3
            .0 0 2
                                                                                        -. 0 0 4
            .0 0 0
                                                                                        -. 0 0 5

           -. 0 0 2                                                                     -. 0 0 6
                      2   4   6       8       10          12   14   16   18   20                   2   4   6           8        10      12   14   16   18   20




            .0 0 6                                                                       .0 1 2

            .0 0 5

            .0 0 4                                                                       .0 0 8

            .0 0 3
                                                                                         .0 0 4
            .0 0 2

            .0 0 1
                                                                                         .0 0 0
            .0 0 0

           -. 0 0 1                                                                     -. 0 0 4
           -. 0 0 2

           -. 0 0 3                                                                     -. 0 0 8
                      2   4   6       8       10          12   14   16   18   20                   2   4   6           8        10      12   14   16   18   20




          .0 0 2 8                                                                       .0 0 0

          .0 0 2 4

          .0 0 2 0                                                                      -. 0 0 1

          .0 0 1 6
                                                                                        -. 0 0 2
          .0 0 1 2

          .0 0 0 8
                                                                                        -. 0 0 3
          .0 0 0 4

          .0 0 0 0                                                                      -. 0 0 4
         -. 0 0 0 4

         -. 0 0 0 8                                                                     -. 0 0 5
                      2   4   6       8       10          12   14   16   18   20                   2   4   6           8        10      12   14   16   18   20




          .0 0 0 3                                                                      .0 0 0 6

          .0 0 0 2
                                                                                        .0 0 0 4
          .0 0 0 1

          .0 0 0 0
                                                                                        .0 0 0 2
         -. 0 0 0 1

         -. 0 0 0 2                                                                     .0 0 0 0

         -. 0 0 0 3
                                                                                    -. 0 0 0 2
         -. 0 0 0 4

         -. 0 0 0 5                                                                 -. 0 0 0 4
                      2   4   6       8       10          12   14   16   18   20                   2   4   6           8        10      12   14   16   18   20




          .0 0 0 4                                                                      .0 0 0 3

          .0 0 0 3                                                                      .0 0 0 2

          .0 0 0 2                                                                      .0 0 0 1

          .0 0 0 1                                                                      .0 0 0 0

          .0 0 0 0                                                                  -. 0 0 0 1

         -. 0 0 0 1                                                                 -. 0 0 0 2

         -. 0 0 0 2                                                                 -. 0 0 0 3

         -. 0 0 0 3                                                                 -. 0 0 0 4
                      2   4   6       8       10          12   14   16   18   20                   2   4   6           8        10      12   14   16   18   20




Figure A.1: Fiscal shocks identified from a SVAR::1960:1-1979:4. The first
 column shows responses to shocks to gt ; the second column to shocks to
tt .The responses reported along the rows refer, respectively, to the eﬀects
                            on gt , tt , yt , ∆pt , it .


                                                                                   29
                                                                                                               s h o c k s to l _ tt
                                  s h o c ks to l _ g g
            .0 1 2                                                                       .0 0 1


            .0 1 0
                                                                                         .0 0 0

            .0 0 8
                                                                                        -. 0 0 1
            .0 0 6
                                                                                        -. 0 0 2
            .0 0 4

                                                                                        -. 0 0 3
            .0 0 2


            .0 0 0                                                                      -. 0 0 4
                      2   4   6       8       10          12   14   16   18   20                   2   4   6      8        10          12   14   16   18   20




            .0 0 5                                                                       .0 1 2

            .0 0 4
                                                                                         .0 1 0
            .0 0 3
                                                                                         .0 0 8
            .0 0 2

            .0 0 1                                                                       .0 0 6

            .0 0 0                                                                       .0 0 4
           -.0 0 1
                                                                                         .0 0 2
           -.0 0 2
                                                                                         .0 0 0
           -.0 0 3

           -.0 0 4                                                                      -. 0 0 2
                      2   4   6       8       10          12   14   16   18   20                   2   4   6      8        10          12   14   16   18   20




          .0 0 3 6                                                                      .0 0 1 6

          .0 0 3 2
                                                                                        .0 0 1 2
          .0 0 2 8
                                                                                        .0 0 0 8
          .0 0 2 4

          .0 0 2 0                                                                      .0 0 0 4

          .0 0 1 6                                                                      .0 0 0 0
          .0 0 1 2
                                                                                      -.0 0 0 4
          .0 0 0 8
                                                                                      -.0 0 0 8
          .0 0 0 4

          .0 0 0 0                                                                    -.0 0 1 2
                      2   4   6       8       10          12   14   16   18   20                   2   4   6      8        10          12   14   16   18   20




          .0 0 0 3                                                                   .0 0 0 1 5

          .0 0 0 2                                                                   .0 0 0 1 0

                                                                                     .0 0 0 0 5
          .0 0 0 1
                                                                                     .0 0 0 0 0
          .0 0 0 0
                                                                                    -. 0 0 0 0 5
         -. 0 0 0 1
                                                                                    -. 0 0 0 1 0
         -. 0 0 0 2
                                                                                    -. 0 0 0 1 5

         -. 0 0 0 3                                                                 -. 0 0 0 2 0

         -. 0 0 0 4                                                                 -. 0 0 0 2 5
                      2   4   6       8       10          12   14   16   18   20                   2   4   6      8        10          12   14   16   18   20




          .0 0 0 0                                                                      .0 0 0 4

         -. 0 0 0 1
                                                                                        .0 0 0 3
         -. 0 0 0 2
                                                                                        .0 0 0 2
         -. 0 0 0 3

         -. 0 0 0 4                                                                     .0 0 0 1

         -. 0 0 0 5
                                                                                        .0 0 0 0
         -. 0 0 0 6
                                                                                      -.0 0 0 1
         -. 0 0 0 7

         -. 0 0 0 8                                                                   -.0 0 0 2
                      2   4   6       8       10          12   14   16   18   20                   2   4   6      8        10          12   14   16   18   20




Figure A.2: Fiscal shocks identified from a SVAR: 1980:1 2006:2. The first
 column shows responses to shocks to gt ; the second column to shocks to
tt .The responses reported along the rows refer, respectively, to the eﬀects
                            on gt , tt , yt , ∆pt , it .



                                                                                   30
Table 1        Feedbacks from dt−i      (st. errors in parenthesis)
                             gt          tt       yt      ∆pt      it

dt−1          1960:1-1979:4   −5.83 −3.55 −1.59 −0.88 0.079
                               (5.14)    (2.17)    (2.17)    (0.71)   (0.25)
              1980:1-2006:2   −3.94     1.63      0.83      0.13      0.62
                               (2.58)   (4.27)    (1.06)    (0.34)    (0.32)


dt−2          1960:1-1979:4   5.90      4.18      1.75      0.87      −0.049
                              (5.11)    (5.89)    (2.16)    (0.72)      (0.25)
              1980:1-2006:2   3.82      −1.59 −0.85 −0.14 −0.63
                              (2.60)     (4.30)    (1.06)    (0.34)    (0.33)


dt−1 − dt−2   1960:1-1979:4   −6.12 −6.07 −2.21 −0.84 −0.038
                               (5.04)    (6.22)    (2.19)    (0.70)     (0.27)
              1980:1-2006:2   −6.48     2.44      0.25      −0.12     0.56
                               (2.50)   (3.97)    (0.99)     (0.32)   (0.30)




                                 31
                               Table 2
        Cumulative responses of y and i to a g and a t shock
Cumulative responses (annualized) to g and t shocks equal to 1 per cent
     (annualized). Bootstrapped confidence intervals in brackets


     Horizon              without debt feedback                                                          with debt feedback
     quarters   60:1-79:4     80:1-06:2     60:1-79:4     80:1-06:2                        60:1-79:4    80:1-06:2      60:1-79:4      80:1-06:2
                        g shock                      t shock                                      g shock                     t shock
yt   4             0.073        0.164         −0.231        −0.004                            0.056       0.127          −0.249          0.016
                (0.005    0.12)    (0.12    0.19)      (−0.32   −0.14)   (−0.08    0.06)   (−0.013      0.11)   (0.077    0.16)     (−0.35   −0.16)    (−0.07    0.06)
     12           0.440              0.805                −0.987            0.170            0.463                0.712                −0.994             0.288
                (0.17    0.60)     (0.55    0.84)      (−1.25   −0.55)   (−0.13 0.38)      (0.10     0.58)      (0.48    0.75)      (−1.31    −0.59)   (−0.18 0.34)
     20            0.585             1.431                −1.577            0.272              0.475              1.280                −1.590             0.654
                (0.06    0.85)     (0.95    1.50)      (−2.03   −0.83)   (−0.46 0.65)      (−0.12      0.73)    (0.77    .1.31)     (−2.11   −0.86)    (−0.48 0.57)
it   4             −0.004             −0.045              0.003             0.011             −0.009               −0.056             −0.007              0.016
                (−0.02    0.007)   (−0.07    −.0.02)   (−0.01   0.013)   (−0.005 0.02)     (−0.02     0.001)    (−0.07    −.0.04)   (−0.02   0.002)    (0.002   0.02)
     12           −0.010             −0.141              −0.013             0.058             0.022               −0.161              −0.075             0.081
                (−0.05    0.05)    (−0.20 −0.08)       (−0.06   0.05)    (0.004    0.10)   (0.001     0.52)     (−0.20 −0.09)       (−0.10 −0.34)      (0.02    0.11)
     20             0.032            −0.232              −0.054            0.125              0.118               −0.212              −0.205             0.160
                (−0.02    −0.10)   (−0.32 −0.14)       (−0.13   0.03)    (0.03    0.15)    (0.04      0.13)     (−0.29 −0.13)       (−0.26   −0.11)    (0.03    0.18)
