                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          WHY ARE BUYOUTS LEVERED:
               THE FINANCIAL STRUCTURE OF PRIVATE EQUITY FUNDS

                                          Ulf Axelson
                                         Per Stromberg
                                       Michael S. Weisbach

                                       Working Paper 12826
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12826


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2007




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Ulf Axelson, Per Stromberg, and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Why are Buyouts Levered: The Financial Structure of Private Equity Funds
Ulf Axelson, Per Stromberg, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 12826
January 2007
JEL No. G31,G32

                                                ABSTRACT

This paper presents a model of the financial structure of private equity firms. In the model, the general
partner of the firm encounters a sequence of deals over time where the exact quality of each deal cannot
be credibly communicated to investors. We show that the optimal financing arrangement is consistent
with a number of characteristics of the private equity industry. First, the firm should be financed by
a combination of fund capital raised before deals are encountered, and capital that is raised to finance
a specific deal. Second, the fund investors' claim on fund cash flow is a combination of debt and levered
equity, while the general partner receives a claim similar to the carry contracts received by real-world
practitioners. Third, the fund will be set up in a manner similar to that observed in practice, with investments
pooled within a fund, decision rights over investments held by the general partner, and limits set in
partnership agreements on the size of particular investments. Fourth, the model suggests that incentives
will lead to overinvestment in good states of the world and underinvestment in bad states, so that the
natural industry cycles will be multiplied. Fifth, investments made in recessions will on average outperform
investments made in booms.

Ulf Axelson                                            Michael S. Weisbach
Stockholm Institute for Financial Research             University Of Illinois
ulf.axelson@sifr.org                                   340 Wohlers Hall
                                                       1206 S. Sixth Street
Per Stromberg                                          Champaign, IL 61820
Swedish Institute for Financial Research               and NBER
Saltmätargatan 19A                                     weisbach@uiuc.edu
SE-113 59 Stockholm
Sweden
and NBER
per.stromberg@gsb.uchicago.edu
      Practitioner: “Things are really tough because the banks are only lending 4 times cash flow,
when they used to lend 6 times cash flow. We can’t make our deals profitable anymore.”
      Academic: “Why do you care if banks will not lend you as much as they used to? If you are
unable to lever up as much as before, your limited partners will receive lower expected returns on
any given deal, but the risk to them will have gone down proportionately.”
      Practitioner: “Ah yes, the Modigliani-Miller theorem. I learned about that in business school.
We don’t think that way at our firm. Our philosophy is to lever our deals as much as we can, to
give the highest returns to our limited partners.”


1. Introduction

Private equity funds are responsible for a large and increasing quantity of investment in the economy.
According to a July 2006 estimate by Private Equity Intelligence, investors have allocated more
than $1.3 trillion globally for investments in private equity funds.1 These private equity funds
are active in a variety of diﬀerent types of investments, from small startups to buyouts of large
conglomerates to investments in real estate and infrastructure. Private equity investments are now
of major importance not just in the United States, but internationally as well; for example, the
Wall Street Journal recently reported that private equity firms are responsible for 40% of M&A
activity in Germany (WSJ, Sept. 28, 2004, p. C1). Yet while a massive literature has developed
with the goal of understanding the financing of corporate investments, very little work has been
done studying the financing of the increasingly important investments of private equity funds.
      Private equity investments are generally made by funds that share a common organizational
structure (see Sahlman (1990), or Fenn, Liang and Prowse (1997) for more discussion). Typically,
these funds raise equity at the time they are formed, and raise additional capital when investments
are made. This additional capital usually takes the form of debt when the investment is collateral-
izable, such as in buyouts, or equity from syndication partners when it is not, as in a startup. The
funds are usually organized as limited partnerships, with the limited partners (LPs) providing most
of the capital and the general partners (GPs) making investment decisions and receiving a substan-
tial share of the profits (most often 20%). While the literature has spent much eﬀort understanding
some aspects of the private equity market, it is very surprising that there is no clear answers to
the basic questions of how funds are structured financially, and what the impact of this structure
is on the funds’ choices of investments and their performance. Why is most private equity activity
undertaken by funds where LPs commit capital for a number of investments over the fund’s life?
Why are the equity investments of these funds complemented by deal-level financing from third
parties? Why do GP compensation contracts have the nonlinear incentive structure commonly ob-
served in practice? What should we expect to observe about the relation between industry cycles,

  1
      Ass reported by Financial Times, July 6 2006.


                                                      2
bank lending practices, and the prices and returns of private equity investments? Why are booms
and busts in the private equity industry so prevalent?
       In this paper, we propose a new explanation for the financial structure of private equity firms.
Private equity firms rely on the ability of their general partners to make value-increasing invest-
ments. To do so, these managers must have suﬃcient freedom to be able to negotiate deals when
the GP becomes aware of them. Yet, this very freedom creates a fundamental governance problem;
limited partners commit capital to private equity funds with no right to sell their position or an
ability to vote out the fund’s managers.2 As such, governance issues in private equity funds are
potentially even more problematic than in public corporations. We argue in this paper that one
reason why a number of institutions commonly observed in private equity contracts arise is as
partial solutions to this fundamental governance problem.
       We present a model based on this idea in which a number of features of private equity markets
arise as equilibrium outcomes. First, the model suggests that private equity investments should be
done through funds that pool investments across the fund. Second, funds should raise some capital
at the fund level, prior to discovering individual deals, and supplement fund-level capital with
additional, deal-specific capital. This additional capital takes the form of highly risky debt, and
should be raised from diﬀerent investors than the once who supply fund capital. Third, the payoﬀs to
GPs should be a nonlinear profit-sharing arrangement similar to those observed in practice. Fourth,
somewhat paradoxically, the optimal fund structure involves giving complete discretion to the GPs
to undertake investments, without LPs being able to veto or otherwise interfere with investment
decisions. Fifth, the model predicts that the commonly-observed pattern of investments made
during busts outperforming investments made during booms on average is a natural consequence
of the contracting ineﬃciencies between GPs and LPs.
       The model is in a sense a dynamic extension of the standard adverse selection model of Myers
and Majluf (1984) and Nachman and Noe (1994), in which informed firms raising capital from un-
informed investors have an incentive to overstate the quality of potential investments and therefore
cannot credibly communicate their information to the market. We assume that the GP faces two
potential investment opportunities over time which require financing. The intertemporal element
of this problem leads to a new financing decision for the GP relative to the static case considered
by the standard adverse selection model. We consider regimes when the GP raises capital on a deal
by deal basis (ex post financing), raises a fund of capital to be used for several future projects (ex
ante financing), or uses a combination of the two types of financing.
       With ex post financing, the solution is the same as in the static adverse selection model. Debt
is be the optimal security, and GPs will choose to undertake all investments they can get financing
for, even if those investments are value-decreasing. Whether deals will be financed at all depends

   2
    Limited partners often do have the right to terminate the partnership; however it typically takes 80% of the
value-weighted claims of the limited partners to do so. Sales of partnership interests require the approval of the GP.


                                                          3
on the state of the economy — in good times, where the average project is positive NPV, there is
overinvestment, and in bad times there is underinvestment.
   Ex ante financing, however, can alleviate some of these problems. By tying the compensation
of the GP to the collective performance of a fund, the GP has less of an incentive to invest in bad
deals, since bad deals dilute his returns from the good deals. Tying pay-oﬀs of past and future
investments together is in a sense a way to create inside wealth endogenously and to circumvent the
problems created by limited liability. Thus, a fund structure often dominates deal-by-deal capital
raising. Furthermore, debt is typically not the optimal security for a fund. Since the capital is
raised before the GP has learned the quality of the deals he will have an opportunity to invest in,
there is no such thing as a “good” GP who tries to minimize underpricing by issuing debt. Indeed,
issuing debt will maximize the risk shifting tendencies of a GP since it leaves him with a call option
on the fund. We show that instead it is optimal to issue a security giving investors a debt contract
plus a levered equity stake, leaving the GP with a “carry” at the fund level that resembles contracts
observed in practice.
   The downside of pure ex ante capital raising is that it leaves the GP with substantial freedom.
Once the fund is raised, he does not have to go back to the capital markets, and so can fund deals
even in bad times. If the GP has not encountered enough good projects and is approaching the end
of the investment horizon, or if economic conditions shift so that not many good deals are expected
to arrive in the future, a GP with untapped funds has the incentive to “go for broke” and take bad
deals.
   We show that it is therefore typically optimal to use a mix of ex ante and ex post capital. Giving
the GP funds ex ante preserves his incentives to avoid bad deals in good times, but the ex post
component has the eﬀect of preventing the GP from being able to invest in bad deals in bad times.
This financing structure turns out to be optimal in the sense that it is the one that maximizes the
value of investments by minimizing the expected value of negative NPV investments undertaken
and good investments ignored. In addition, the structure of the securities in the optimal financing
structure mirrors common practice; ex post deal funding is done with highly risky debt that has
to be raised from third parties such as banks, the LP’s claim is senior to the GP’s, and the GP’s
claim is a fraction of the profits.
   Even with this optimal financing structure, investment nonetheless deviates from its first-best
level. In particular, during good states of the world, firms are prone to overinvestment, meaning
that some negative net present value investments will be undertaken. In addition, during bad states
of the world, there will be underinvestment, i.e., valuable projects that cannot be financed. During
recessions, there not only will not be as many valuable investment opportunities, but those that
do exist will have diﬃculty being financed. Similarly, during boom times, not only will there be
more good projects than in bad times, but bad projects will be financed in addition to the good
ones. The implication of this pattern is that the informational imperfections we model are likely

                                                  4
to exacerbate normal business cycle patterns of investment, creating a cyclicality multiplier. Thus,
the investment distortions described by our model are a potential explanation for the common
observation that the private equity investment process is extremely procyclical (see Gompers and
Lerner (1999b)). This logic also suggests that there is some validity to the common complaint from
GPs that during tough times it is diﬃcult to get financing for even very good projects, but during
good times many poor projects get financed.
       An empirical implication of this result is that returns to investments made during booms will
be lower on average than the returns to investments made during poor times. Consistent with this
implication is anecdotal evidence about poor investments made during the internet and biotech
bubbles, as well as some of the most successful deals being initiated during busts. More formally,
academic studies have found evidence of such countercyclical investment performance in both the
buyout (Kaplan and Stein, 1993) and the venture capital market (Gompers and Lerner, 2000).
       Our paper relates to a theoretical literature that analyzes the eﬀect of pooling on investment
incentives and optimal contracting. Diamond (1984) shows that by changing the cash flow dis-
tribution, investment pooling makes it possible to design contracts that incentivizes the agent to
monitor the investments properly. Bolton and Scharfstein (1990) and Laux (2001) show that tying
investment decisions together can create “inside wealth” for the agent undertaking the investments,
which reduces the limited liability constraint and helps design more eﬃcient contracts. Unlike our
model, neither of these papers consider project choice under adverse selection, or have any role for
outside equity in the optimal contract. Our paper also relates to an emerging literature analyzing
private equity fund structures.3 Jones and Rhodes-Kropf (2003) and Kandel, Leshchinskii, and
Yuklea (2006) also argue that fund structures can lead GPs to make ineﬃcient investments in risky
projects. Unlike our paper, however, these papers take fund structures as given and do not derive
investment incentives resulting from an optimal contract. Inderst and Muennich (2004) argue that
pooling private equity investments together in a fund helps the GP commit to eﬃcient liquidation
decisions in a manner similar to the winner-picking model of Stein (1997). However, the Inderst
and Muennich mechanism relies on always making the fund capital constrained, which we show is
not optimal in our model. Most importantly, none of the previous theoretical papers analyze the
interplay of ex ante pooled financing and ex post deal-by-deal financing, which lies at the heart of
our model.
       The next section presents the model and its implications. There is a discussion and conclusion
following the model.


   3
    Lerner and Schoar (2003) also model private equity fund structures, but focus on explaining the transfer restric-
tions of limited partnership shares.




                                                         5
2. Model

There are three types of agents in the model: General partners (GPs), limited partners (LPs) and
fly-by-night operators. All agents are risk-neutral, and have access to a storage technology yielding
the risk-free rate, which we assume to be zero.
         The timing of the model is summarized in Figure 2.1. There are two periods. Each period a
candidate firm arrives. We assume it costs I to invest in a firm. Firms are of two kinds: good (G)
and bad (B). The quality of the firm is only observed by the GP. A good firm has cash flow Z > 0
for sure, and a bad firm has cash flow 0 with probability 1 − p, and cash flow Z with probability p,
where:
                                                       Z > I > pZ

Good firms therefore have positive net present values, while bad firms have a negative NPV. All
cash flows are realized at the end of the second period.
         Each period a good firm arrives with probability α, and a bad firm with probability 1 − α.4
We think of α as representing the common perception of the quality of the type of deals associated
with the specialty of the GP that are available at a point in time. To facilitate the analysis, we
assume there are only two possible values for α, αH which occurs with probability q each period,
and αL which occurs with probability 1 − q each period. Also, we assume αH > αL . Since we would
like α to reflect possibly unmeasureable perceptions in the marketplace, we assume it is observable
but not verifiable, so it cannot be contracted on directly.
         Furthermore, we assume that there is an infinite supply of unserious fly-by-night operators that
investors cannot distinguish from a serious GP. Fly-by-night operators can only find useless firms
with a maximum payoﬀ less than capital invested, or store money at the riskless rate.

2.1. Securities

We assume the GP has no money of his own and finances his investments by issuing a security
wI (x) backed by the cash flow x from the investments, and keeps the residual security wGP (x) =
x − wI (x) .5 The securities have to satisfy the following monotonicity condition:

Monotonicity wI (x), wGP (x) are non-decreasing.

     4
         Equivalently, we can assume that there are always bad firms available, and a good firm arrives with probability
α.
     5
    If the GP had suﬃcient capital, the agency problems would be alleviated if he were to finance a suﬃciently large
part of the investments himself. In practice, GPs typically contribute 1% of the partnership’s capital personally.
However, so long as the GP cannot finance such a large part of investments that the agency problems completely
disappear, allowing for GP wealth does not change the qualitative nature of our results.




                                                             6
       This assumption is standard in the security design literature and can be formally justified on
grounds of moral hazard.6 An equivalent way of expressing the monotonicity condition is

                                                 ¡ ¢
                           x − x0 ≥ wGP (x) − wGP x0 ≥ 0                 ∀x, x0 s.t. x > x0

       However, if the security issued pays oﬀ less than the total cash flow whenever the cash flow is
below the invested capital K, the fly-by-night operators can store the money and earn rents. Since
the supply of fly-by-night operators is potentially infinite, there cannot be an equilibrium where
fly-by-night operators earn positive rents and investors break even. Any candidate equilibrium
security design therefore has to satisfy:

Fly-by-night For invested capital K, wGP (x) = 0 whenever x ≤ K.

       The existence of fly-by-night operators also implies that GPs should be contractually prohibited
from investing in any public capital market securities, such as stocks or options. Otherwise, there
would always be some chance for a fly-by-night operator to earn a positive surplus by gambling in
securities markets, so that limited partners could never break even.7

2.2. Forms of Capital Raising

In a first best world, the GP will invest in all good firms and no bad firms. Because the GP
has private information about firm type, this investment policy will not be achievable - there will
typically be overinvestment in bad projects and underinvestment in good projects. Our objective is
to find a method of capital raising that minimizes these ineﬃciencies. We consider three methods
of capital raising:

       • Pure ex post capital raising is done in each period after the GP encounters a firm. The
         securities investors get are backed by each individual investment’s cash flow.

       • Pure ex ante capital raising is done in period zero before the GP encounters any firm. The
         security investors get is backed by the sum of the cash flows from the investments in both
         periods.

   6
     See, for example, Innes (1990) or Nachman and Noe (1994). Suppose an investor claim w (x) is decreasing on
a region a < x < b, and that the underlying cash flow turns out to be a. The GP then has an incentive to secretly
borrow money from a third party and add it on to the aggregate cash flow to push it into the decreasing region,
thereby reducing the payment to the security holder while still being able to pay back the third party. Similarly, if
the GP’s retained claim is decreasing over some region a < x ≤ b and the realized cash flow is b, the GP has an
incentive to decrease the observed cash flow by burning money.
   7
     This assumption also distinguishes our results from the model of Myers and Majluf (1984). In their model, a
firm would never raise financing and invest in a negative net present value project, because they implicitly assume
that there is also the possibility of investing in zero net present value assets with similar risk as the investment being
considered, such as stocks of publicly traded companies.



                                                            7
          t: 0                        1                                 2                            3


       Raise ex ante         • All agents observe              • All agents observe            • Cash flows
       capital?              pd. 1 state H or L                pd. 2 state H or L              realized
                             • Firm 1 arrives. GP              • Firm 2 arrives. GP
                             observes firm type G              observes firm type G
                             or B.                             or B.
                             • Raise ex post capital?          • Raise ex post capital?


                                               Figure 2.1: Timeline


    • Ex ante and ex post capital raising uses a combination of the two approaches. Investors
       supplying ex post capital in a period receive a security backed by the cash flow from the
       investment in that period only. Investors supplying ex ante capital receive a security backed
       by the cash flows from both investments combined.

    We now analyze and compare each of these financing arrangements.8


3. Pure ex post capital raising

We now characterize the pure ex post capital raising solution. We start by analyzing the simpler
static problem in which the world ends after one period, and then show that the one period solution
is also an equilibrium period by period in the dynamic problem.
    In a one-period problem, the timing is as follows: After observing the firm’s quality, the GP
decides whether to seek financing. After raising capital, he decides whether to invest in the firm or
in the riskless asset.
    Given these assumptions, the GP has an incentive to seek financing regardless of the firm’s
quality, since he receives nothing otherwise. To invest in a firm, the GP must raise I by issuing a
security wI (x), where x ∈ {0, I, Z} . Also, in any equilibrium where the GP receives financing and
investors break even, the GP cannot get anything if the cash flow from his investment is below I.
Otherwise, there will be an infinite supply of fly-by-night operators who can earn a positive return
by raising money and investing in the riskfree asset. Therefore, the security design has wI (I) = I.
But this in turn implies that the GP will invest both in bad and good firms whenever he can raise

   8
     This is not an exhaustive list of financing methods. We briefly discuss slightly diﬀerent forms below as well, such
as raising ex ante capital for only one period, raising only one unit of capital for the two periods, and allowing for ex
post securities to be backed by more than one deal. None of these other methods improve over the once we analyze
in more detail.


                                                           8
capital, since his payoﬀ is zero if he invests in the riskless asset. A GP with a good firm cannot
separate himself from a GP with a bad firm, so the only equilibrium is a pooling one in which all
GPs issue the same security.
       The security pays oﬀ only if x = Z, so the break even condition for investors after learning the
expected fraction of good firms α in the period is

                                            (α + (1 − α) p) wI (Z) ≥ I

Thus, financing is feasible as long as

                                               (α + (1 − α) p) Z ≥ I

and in that case, the GP will invest in all firms. The payoﬀ wI (Z) will be set so that investors
just break even, and the security can be thought of as debt with face value wI (Z) . When it is
impossible to satisfy the break even condition, the GP cannot invest in any firms.
       We assume that the unconditional probability of success is too low for investors to break even:

Condition 3.1.
                                          (E (α) + (1 − E (α)) p) Z < I

       Condition 3.1 implies that ex post financing is not possible in the low state. Whether pure ex
post financing is possible in the high state depends on whether (αH + (1 − αH ) p) Z ≥ I holds.
       The two-period problem is somewhat more complicated, as the observed investment behavior in
the first period may change investors’ belief about whether a GP is a fly-by-night operator, which
in turn aﬀects the financing equilibrium in the second period. We show in the appendix, however,
that a repeated version of the one-period problem is still an equilibrium:9,10

Proposition 1. Pure ex post financing is never feasible in the low state. If

                                             (αH + (1 − αH ) p) Z ≥ I

   9
      The equilibrium concept we use is Bayesian Nash, together with the requirement that the equilibrium satisfies
the “Intuitive Criterion” of Cho and Kreps (1987).
   10
      The result only holds if we stick to the assumption that the GP is not allowed to invest in zero net present value
public market securities, such as the S&P500. Above, we argued that it is optimal to disallow such investments in
the presence of fly-by-night operators. However, this will no longer be true in the second period if it is assumed that
fly-by-night operators do not raise money and invest in the first period, since they are then screened out. But if it
was anticipated that such investments would be allowed in the second period for GPs who invested in the first period,
there would be no way to screen out fly-by-night operators. One can show that the whole market for financing would
therefore break down in period 1.




                                                           9
                                     (α   H   + (1- α H ) p ) Z > I            (α   H   + (1- α H ) p ) Z < I

                                                     State                                  State
                                              High           Low                    High            Low

                               Good             X            Ο          Good            Ο           Ο
                        Firm
                               Bad              X            Ο          Bad             Ο           Ο




Figure 3.1: Investment behavior in the pure ex post financing case. X denotes that an investment
is made, O that no investment is made.

it is feasible in the high state, where the GP issues debt with face value F given by

                                                                    I
                                                     F =
                                                             αH + (1 − αH ) p

       In the solution above, we assume that fly-by-night operators do not try to raise financing, or if
they do raise financing, that they invest in the risk free asset since they gain nothing regardless of
their investment strategy.11

3.1. Eﬃciency

The investment behavior with pure ex post financing is illustrated in Figure 3.1. Investment is
ineﬃcient in both high and low states. There is always underinvestment in the low state since good
deals cannot get financed. In the high state, there is underinvestment if the break even condition
of investors cannot be met, and overinvestment if it can, since then bad deals get financed.


4. Pure Ex Ante Financing

We now study the polar case in which the GP raises all the capital to be used over the two periods
for investment ex ante, before the state of the economy is realized. Suppose the GP raises 2I of

  11
     We could also have imagined period-by-period financing where the security is issued after the state of the economy
is realized, but before the GP knows what type of firm he will encounter in the period. In a one-period problem, the
solution would be the same as for the pure ex post case analyzed above. However, one can show that if there is more
than one period, the market for financing would completely break down except for the last period. This is because
if there is a financing equilibrium where fly-by-night operators are screened out in early periods, there would be an
incentive to issue straight equity and avoid risk shifting in later periods. (As we show in the proof of Proposition
1, straight equity does not survive the Cho and Kreps (1987) intuitive criterion when GPs know the type of their
project at the time of issuance, but this is no longer true when the security is issued ex ante.) But straight equity
leaves rents to fly-by-night operators, who therefore would profit from mimicking serious GPs in earlier periods by
investing in wasteful projects. Therefore, it is impossible to screen them out of the market in early periods, so there
can be no financing at all.


                                                                   10
ex ante capital in period zero, implying that the GP is not capital constrained and can potentially
invest in both periods.12
    We solve for the GP’s security wGP (x) = x − wI (x) that maximizes investment eﬃciency.
For all monotonic stakes, the GP will invest in all good firms he encounters over the two periods.
However, if no investment was made in period 1, it is impossible to motivate him to avoid investing
in a bad firm in period 2. This ineﬃciency follows from the fly-by-night condition, since the GP’s
payoﬀ has to be zero when fund cash flows are less than or equal to the capital invested.
    We show that it is possible to design wGP (x) so that the GP avoids all other ineﬃciencies.
Under this second-best contract, he avoids bad firms in period 1, and avoids bad firms in period 2
as long as an investment took place in period 1.
    To solve for the optimal security, we maximize the GP payoﬀ subject to the monotonicity, fly-by-
night, and investor break even conditions, and make sure that the second-best investment behavior is
incentive compatible. The security payoﬀs wGP (x) must be defined over the following potential fund
cash flows: x ∈ {0, I, 2I, Z, Z + I, 2Z} . Note that under a second-best contract, x ∈ {0, 2I, Z} will
never occur. These cash flows would result from the cases of two failed investments, no investment,
and one failed and one successful investment respectively, neither of which can result from the GP’s
optimal investment strategy. Nonetheless, we still need to define security payoﬀs for these cash flow
outcomes to ensure that the contract is incentive compatible.
    The fly-by-night condition immediately implies that wGP (x) = 0 for x ≤ 2I. The following
lemma shows that only one inequality has to be satisfied to induce the GP to follow the described
investment behavior above:

Lemma 1. For the pure ex ante case, a necessary and suﬃcient condition for a contract wGP (x)
to induce the GP to only invest in good firms in period 1 and, if an investment was made in period
1, to pass up a bad firm in period 2 is given by:

                                (E (α) + (1 − E (α)) p) wGP (Z + I)                                         (4.1)
                            ≥ ((1 − p) E (α) + 2p (1 − p) (1 − E (α))) wGP (Z)
                                +p (E (α) + (1 − E (α)) p) wGP (2Z)

Proof. In Appendix.
    The left hand side is the expected payoﬀ for a GP who encounters a bad firm in period 1,
passes it up, and then invests in any firm that appears in period 2. The right hand side is the
expected payoﬀ if he invests in the bad firm in period 1, and then invests in any firm in period

  12
     Below we show that in the pure ex ante case, it is never optimal to make the GP capital constrained by giving
him less than 2I.




                                                       11
2. Therefore, when Condition 4.1 holds, the GP will never invest in a bad firm in period 1.13 For
incentive compatibility, we also must ensure that the GP does not invest in a bad firm in period 2
after investing in a good firm in period 1. It turns out that this incentive compatibility constraint
holds whenever Condition 4.1 is satisfied.
    The full maximization problem can now be expressed as:

                     max E (wGP (x))
                    wGP (x)
                                   ³                                   ´
                = E (α)2 wGP (2Z) + 2E (α) (1 − E (α)) + (1 − E (α))2 p wGP (Z + I)

such that

                                           E (x − wGP (x)) ≥ 2I                                (BE)


                        (E (α) + (1 − E (α)) p) wGP (Z + I) ≥                                  (IC)
             ((1 − p) E (α) + 2p (1 − p) (1 − E (α))) wGP (Z)
                          +p (E (α) + (1 − E (α)) p) wGP (2Z)


                              x − x0 ≥ wGP (x) − wGP (x0 ) ≥ 0          ∀x, x0 s.t. x > x0     (M )


                                                      wGP (x) = 0       ∀x s.t. x ≤ 2I         (F BN )

    There are two possible payoﬀs to the GP in the maximand. The first payoﬀ, wGP (2Z), occurs
only when good firms are encountered in both periods. The second payoﬀ, wGP (Z + I), will occur
either (1) when one good firm is encountered in the first or the second period, or (2) when no good
firm is encountered in any of the two periods, and the GP invests in a bad firm in period 2 that turns
out to be successful. Condition BE is the investor’s break-even condition. Finally, the maximization
has to satisfy the monotonicity (M ) and the fly-by-night condition (F BN). The feasible set and
the optimal security design which solves this program is characterized in the following proposition:

Proposition 2. Pure ex ante financing is feasible if and only if it creates social surplus. An optimal
investor security wI (x) (which is not always unique) is given by
                                          (
                                                   min (x, F )         x≤Z +I
                               wI (x) =
                                              F + k (x − (Z + I)) x > Z + I

  13
     It could be that if the GP invests in a bad firm in period 1, he would prefer to pass up a bad firm encountered
in period 2. For incentive compatibility, it is necessary to ensure that the GP gets a higher pay oﬀ when avoiding a
bad period 1 firm also in this case. We show in the proof, however, that if 4.1 holds, this additional condition must
hold as well.



                                                         12
                                              wI(x)                                     wI(x)

                                                                                        wGP(x)
                                             wGP(x)

                                                     x                                          x
                   0        2I    Z+I 2Z                      0        2I    Z+I 2Z
                           =Z                                          =Z
                        Low funding need                          Medium funding need
                                             wI(x)




                                             wGP(x)
                                                         x
                   0          2I    Z+I 2Z
                              =Z
                       High funding need



Figure 4.1: GP securities (wGP (x)) and investor securities (wI (x)) as a function of fund cash flow
x in the pure ex ante case. The three graphs depict contracts under high (top left graph), medium
(top right graph), and low (bottom graph) levels of E (α) . A high level of E (α) corresponds to
high social surplus created, which in turn means that a lower fraction of fund cash flows have to
be pledged to investors.

where F ≥ 2I and k ∈ (0, 1).

   Proof: See appendix.
   Figure 4.1 shows the form of the optimal securities for diﬀerent levels of social surplus created,
where a lower surplus will imply that a higher fraction of fund cash flow has to be pledged to
investors. This structure resembles the structure of actual securities used by private equity funds,
in which investors get all cash flows below their invested amount and a proportion of the cash
flows above that. Moreover, as shown in the proof, the contracts tend to have an intermediate
region, where all the additional cash flows are given to the GP. This region is similar to a provision
referred to in practice as "Carried Interest Catch Up," which is commonly used in private equity
partnership agreements.
   The intuition for the pure ex ante contract is as follows. If the GP were to receive a straight
equity claim, he would make the first-best investments, i.e., take all positive net present value
investments and otherwise invests in the risk-free asset. However, the problem with straight equity
is that the GP receives a positive payoﬀ even if no capital is invested, allowing fly-by-night operators
to make money. To avoid this problem, GPs can be paid only if the fund cash flows are suﬃciently
high, introducing a risk-shifting incentive. The risk-shifting problem is most severe if investors
hold debt and the GP holds a levered equity claim on the fund cash flow. The optimal contract

                                                             13
                                                                               Period 2
                                                                          High       Low
                                                                          State      State

                                               Period 1            Good
                                                                          P,A             A
                                                                   Firm
                                          High       Low
                                          State      State
                                                                   Bad
                                                                           P
                                 Good                              Firm
                                          P,A             A
                                 Firm

                                 Bad                               Good
                                           P                              P,A             A
                                 Firm                              Firm

                                                                   Bad
                                                                          P,A             A
                                                                   Firm




Figure 4.2: Investment behavior in the pure ex ante (A) compared to the pure ex post (P) case
when ex post financing is possible in the high state.


minimizes the losses to risk shifting by reducing the levered equity claim of the GP and giving a
fraction of the high cash flows to investors.14
      Another way to why it is eﬃcient for investors to receive a fraction of high cash flows (and
hence make their payoﬀs more "equity-like") is by examining the IC constraint of the GP. When
Z ≤ 2I, the IC constraint simplifies to wGP (Z + I) ≥ pwGP (2Z) , implying an upper bound on
the fraction that the GP can receive of the highest fund cash flows.
      As the investors have to be given more rents (to satisfy their break-even constraint), it is
optimal to increase the payoﬀ to investors for the highest cash flow states (2Z) first, while keeping
the payoﬀs to GPs for the intermediate cash flow states (Z + I) as high as possible to reduce risk-
shifting incentives. While our model set up delivers an intermediate region where investor payoﬀs
are flat, we believe that this is not a generic feature of more general models. In particular, if we
were to allow good projects to also have some risk, this flat region will likely disappear in favor of
a more smooth equity piece given to investors.

4.1. Eﬃciency

The investment behavior in the pure ex ante relative to the pure ex post case is illustrated in Figure
4.2. In the ex ante case, the GP invests eﬃciently in period 1, meaning that he will accept good
projects and reject bad ones. If he has access to and invests in a good project in the first period,
then the investment will be eﬃcient in period 2 as well. The only ineﬃciency is that the GP will
invest in the bad firm in period 2 in the case where he encounters bad firms in each period.
      The ex ante fund structure can improve incentives relative to the ex post deal-by-deal structure

 14
      This is similar to the classic intuition of Jensen and Meckling (1976).



                                                              14
by tying the payoﬀ of several investments together and structuring the GP incentives appropriately.
In the ex post case, the investment ineﬃciency is caused by the inability to reward the GP for
avoiding bad investments, since any compensation system that did so would violate the fly-by-
night condition. In the ex ante case, the GP can be motivated to avoid bad firms as long as
there is a possibility of finding a good firm in the second period. By giving the GP a stake
that resembles straight equity for cash flows above the invested amount, he will make eﬃcient
investment decisions as long as he anticipates being “in the money”. Tying payoﬀs of past and
future investments together is in a sense a way to improve incentives to invest in only good firms.
When investment profits are tied together this way, bad investments dilute the returns from good
investments, motivating managers to avoid making bad investments.
      This logic suggests that one reason why investments are comingled within funds is that by
doing so, managers are motivated to pick better investments. The one time when these incentives
break down is when the firm faces a series of bad investments. The real-world counterpart to this
case is when a partnership approaches the end of the ’commitment period’ with a large pool of
still-uninvested capital. Our model formalizes the concern voiced by practitioners today that the
large overhang of uninvested capital can lead to partnerships overpaying for assets.
      So far we have restricted the analysis of the ex ante case to a situation where the GP raises
enough funds to invest in all firms. It turns out that this financing strategy dominates an ex ante
structure in which the GP is capital constrained. To see why, suppose the GP only raises enough
funds to invest in one firm over the two periods. He will then pass up bad firms in the first period
in the hope of finding a good firm in the second period. Just as in the previous case, there is no
way of preventing him from investing in a bad firm in the second period. However, there is an
additional ineﬃciency in the constrained case, however, in that good firms have to be passed up in
period 2 whenever an investment was made in period 1.15 Thus, investment eﬃciency is improved
if private equity funds are not constrained in the amount of equity capital they have access to.
This argument potentially explains the empirical finding of Ljungquist and Richardson (2003), who
document that private equity funds seldom use up all their capital before raising a new fund.
      Although the ex ante fund structure can improve eﬃciency over the pure ex post case, it
is clear from Figure 4.2 that it need not always be the case. Clearly, pure ex ante financing
always dominates when pure ex post financing is not even feasible in the high state, i.e. when
(αH + (1 − αH ) p) Z < I. Ex ante financing is feasible whenever it creates any positive surplus,
which occurs as long as investors break even for the contract wGP (x) = 0 for all x. When ex post

 15
      This result is in contrast with the winner picking models in Stein (1997) and Inderst and Muennich (2004).




                                                         15
financing is feasible in the high state, ex ante financing will still be more eﬃcient whenever:

                                     (1 − E (α))2 (I − pZ)
                               ≤ 2(q (1 − αH ) (I − pZ) + (1 − q) αL (Z − I))

   The left hand side is the NPV loss from investing in a bad project the second period, I − pZ,
times the likelihood of this happening (probability of two bad firms in a row), (1−E (α))2 . The right
hand side is the eﬃciency loss from ex post raising, which is that some bad firms are financed in the
high state (which happens with probability q (1 − αH ) in each period) and some good firms are not
financed in the low state (which happens with probability (1 − q) αL in each period). Intuitively,
ex post financing has the disadvantage that the GP will always invest in any firm he encounters in
high states and cannot be motivated to make use of his information about investment. However, ex
post financing also has the advantage that it is dependent on the realized value of α, which ex ante
financing cannot be, since α is not known when funds are raised and is not verifiable, so contracts
cannot be written contingent on its value.
   The relative eﬃiciency of ex post and ex ante financing depends on how informative α is about
project quality. If low states are very unlikely to have good projects (αL close to zero) and high
states have almost only good projects (αH close to one) the ineﬃciency with ex post fund raising
is small. When the correlation between states and project quality is not so strong, pure ex ante
financing will dominate.
   However, even when pure ex ante financing is more eﬃcient, it still may not be privately optimal
for the GP to use. The ex ante financing contract must be structured so that the LPs get some
of the upside for the GP to follow the right investment strategy, which sometimes will leave the
LPs with strictly positive rents. So, there are cases in which total rents are higher under ex ante
financing than under ex post financing, but the GP prefers ex post financing because he does not
have to share the rents with the LPs. The following proposition characterizes the circumstances
under which the GP leaves rents for the LP.
                           1
Proposition 3. If p >      2   and
                                      µ               ¶2
                                            E (α)               (1 − p) ZI
                                          1 − E (α)
                                                           >¡      ¢³      ´
                                                             1 − ZI 2 − 1p

then the LP gets a strictly positive rent in equilibrium with pure ex ante financing. Otherwise, the
GP captures all the rent.

Proof. See appendix.
   This result may shed some light on the seemingly puzzling finding in Kaplan and Schoar (2004)
that succesful GPs seem not to increase their fees in follow-up funds enough to force LPs down to

                                                           16
a competitive rent, but rather ration the number of LPs they let into the fund.


5. Mixed ex ante and ex post financing

We now examine the model when managers can use a combination of ex post and ex ante capital
raising. In the case when managers raise suﬃcient funding ex ante so they can potentially take all
investments, the resulting equilibrium includes bad as well as good investments. This overinvestment
occurs because when the GP does not invest in a bad firm in period 1, he will then invest in any
firm that comes along in period 2, regardless of its quality. The possibility of using a combination
of ex post and ex ante capital raising can limit this overinvestment in the second state without
destroying period 1 incentives. It does so by making the GP somewhat capital constrained by
limiting the funds that can be used for ex ante financing, and requiring him to go back to the
market for additional capital to be able to make an investment.
       To consider this possibility, we now assume that the GP raises 2K < 2I of ex ante fund capital
in period 0, and is only allowed to use K for investments each period.16 The remaining I − K has
to be raised ex post, after the investments are discovered. As we show below, it is critical that ex
post investors are distinct from ex ante investors.
       Ex post investors in period i get security wP,i (xi ) backed by the cash flow xi from the investment
in period i. Ex ante investors and the GP get securities wI (x) and wGP (x) = x−wI (x) respectively,
backed by the fund cash flow x = x1 − wP,1 (x1 ) + x2 − wP,2 (x2 ) (where wP,i is zero if no ex post
financing is raised). The fly-by-night condition is now that wGP (x) = 0 for all x ≤ 2K. Finally,
we also assume that whether the GP invests in the risk-free asset or a firm is observable by market
participants, but it is infeasible to write contracts contingent upon this observation.
       We characterize the contracts that lead to the most eﬃcient equilibrium. Given these assump-
tions, it is sometimes possible to implement an equilibrium in which the GP invests only in good
firms in period 1, only in good firms in period 2 if the GP invested in a firm in period 1, and only in
the high state if there was no investment in period 1.17 As is seen in Figure 5.1, this equilibrium is
more eﬃcient than the one arising from pure ex ante financing since it avoids investment in the low
state in period 2 after no investment has been done in period 1. It is also more eﬃcient than the
equilibrium in the pure ex post case, since pure ex post capital raising has the added ineﬃciencies
that no good investments are undertaken in low states, and bad investments are undertaken in high
states (if ex post capital raising is feasible).

  16
    It is common in private equity contracts to restrict the amount the GP is allowed to invest in any one deal.
  17
    Note that it is impossible to implement an equilibrium where the GP only invests in good firms over both periods,
since if there is no investment in period 1, he will always have an incentive to invest in period 2 whether he finds a
good or a bad firm.




                                                         17
                                                                       Period 2
                                                                  High       Low
                                                                  State      State

                                     Period 1              Good
                                                                  P,A,M      A,M
                                                           Firm
                                High       Low
                                State      State
                                                           Bad
                                                                   P
                         Good                              Firm
                                P,A,M      A,M
                         Firm

                         Bad                               Good
                                 P                                P,A,M           A
                         Firm                              Firm

                                                           Bad
                                                                  P,A,M           A
                                                           Firm



Figure 5.1: Investment behavior in the pure ex ante (A), pure ex post (P), and the postulated
mixed (M) case when ex post financing is possible in the high state.


5.1. Ex Post Securities

We first show that to implement the most eﬃcient outcome described above, the optimal ex post
security is debt. Furthermore, the required leverage to finance each deal should be suﬃciently high
so that ex post investors are unwilling to lend in circumstances where the risk-shifting problem is
severe.
   If the GP raises ex post capital in period i, the cash flow xi can potentially take on values in
{0, I, Z} , corresponding to a failed investment, a risk-free investment, and a successful investment.
If the GP does not raise any ex post capital, he cannot invest in a firm, and saves the ex ante
capital K for that period, so that xi = K. The security wP,1 issued to ex post investors in period
1 in exchange for supplying the needed capital I − K must satisfy a fly-by-night constraint and a
break-even constraint:

                                     wP,1 (I) − (I − K) ≥ 0                                      (5.1)
                                                   wP,1 (Z) ≥ I − K                              (5.2)

The fly-by-night constraint 5.1 ensures that a fly-by-night operator in coalition with an LP cannot
raise financing from ex post investors, invest in the risk-free security, and make a strictly positive
profit. The break even constraint 5.2 presumes that in equilibrium, only good investments are
made in period 1, so that the cash-flow will be Z for sure. For ex post investors to break even,
they require a payout of at least I − K when xi = Z. The ex post security that satisfies these two
conditions and leaves no surplus to ex post investors is risk-free debt with face value I − K.



                                                      18
   A parallel argument establishes debt as optimal for ex post financing in the second period in
the case when no investment was made in the first. The fly-by-night condition stays unchanged,
but the break even-condition becomes

                                                           I −K
                                           wP,2 (Z) ≥                                            (5.3)
                                                        α + (1 − α) p

The face value of the debt increases relative to the face value in the first period because when
no investment has been made in the first period, the GP will have an incentive to raise money
and invest even when he encounters a bad firm in period 2. To break even given this expected
                                                                                      I−K
investment behavior, the cheapest security to issue is debt with face value of      α+(1−α)p .
   The last and trickiest case to analyze is the situation in period 2 when there has been an
investment in period 1. The postulated equilibrium requires that no bad investments are then
made in period 2. Furthermore, since fly-by-night operators are not supposed to have invested in
period 1, ex post investors know that fly-by-night operators have been screened out. Therefore,
we cannot use the fly-by-night constraint in our argument for debt. Nevertheless, as we show in
the appendix, an application of the Cho and Kreps refinement used in the proof of Proposition 1
implies that wP,2 (I) ≥ I − K. To see why, if wP,2 (I) < I − K, GPs finding bad firms will raise
money and invest in the risk-free security. This in turn will drive up the cost of capital for GPs
finding good firms, who therefore have an incentive to issue a more debt-like security. Therefore,
risk-free debt is the only possible equilibrium security.
   To sum up, debt is the optimal ex post security, and it can be made risk free with face value
F = I − K in period 1, and in period 2 if an investment was made earlier. When no investment has
been made in period 1, optimal investment requires conditions on the quantity of ex post capital.
In particular, the amount of capital I − K the GP raises must be low enough so that the GP can
invest in the high state, but high enough such that the GP cannot invest in the low state. Using
the break even condition 5.3, the condition for this is:

                          (αH + (1 − αH ) p) Z ≥ I − K ≥ (αL + (1 − αL ) p) Z                    (5.4)

   We summarize our results on ex post securities in the following proposition:

Proposition 4. With mixed financing, the optimal ex post security is debt in each period. The
debt is risk-free with face value I − K in period 1 and in period 2 if an investment was made in
period 1. If no investment was made in period 1, and the period 2 state is high, the face value of
                       I−K
debt is equal to   αH +(1−αH )p .   The external capital I − K raised each period satisfies

                          (αH + (1 − αH ) p) Z ≥ I − K ≥ (αL + (1 − αL ) p) Z



                                                        19
If no investment was made in period 1 and the period 2 state is low the GP cannot raise any ex
post debt.

Proof. See appendix.

5.2. Ex Ante Securities

We now solve for the ex ante securities wI (x) and wGP (x) = x − wI (x), as well as the amount
of per period ex ante capital K. The security payoﬀs must be defined over the following potential
fund cash flows, which are net of payments to ex post investors:


                   Fund cash flow x         Investments
                   0                        2 failed investments.
                   Z − (I − K)              1 failed and 1 successful investment.
                   K                        1 failed investment.
                   2K                       No investment.
                            I−K
                   Z−   αH +(1−αH )p   +K   1 successful investment in period 2.
                   Z − (I − K) + K          1 successful investment in period 1.
                   2 (Z − (I − K))          2 successful investments.

   Note that the first two cash flows cannot happen in the proposed equilibrium and that the last
three cash flows are in strictly increasing order. In particular, as opposed to the pure ex ante case,
the expected fund cash flow now diﬀers for the case where there is only one succesful investment
depending on whether the firm is encountered in the first or second period. This diﬀerence occurs
because if the good firm is encountered in the second period, the GP is pooled with other GPs
who encounter bad firms, so that ex post investors will demand a higher face value before they are
willing to finance the investment.
   The following lemma provides a necessary and suﬃcient condition on the GP payoﬀs to imple-
ment the desired equilibrium investment behavior. Just as in the pure ex ante case, it is suﬃcient
to ensure that the GP does not invest in bad firms in period 1.

Lemma 2. A necessary and suﬃcient condition for a contract wGP (x) to be incentive compatible
in the mixed ex ante and ex post case is
                                  µ                      ¶
                                         I −K
      q (αH + (1 − αH ) p) wGP     Z−                +K                                          (5.5)
                                    αH + (1 − αH ) p
    > E(α) (pwGP (2 (Z − (I − K))) + (1 − p) wGP (Z − (I − K))) + (1 − E(α)) ∗
        ∗p max [wGP (Z − (I − K) + K) , pwGP (2 (Z − (I − K))) + 2 (1 − p) wGP (Z − (I − K))]

Proof. In appendix.

                                                 20
    The left hand side of the inequality in Lemma 1 is the expected payoﬀ to the GP if he passes
up a bad firm in period 1. He will then be able to invest in period 2 if the state is high (probability
q), and will be rewarded if the second period firm is successful (probability αH + (1 − αH ) p). If
the state in period 2 is low, he cannot invest, and will get a zero payoﬀ because of the fly-by-night
constraint. The right hand side is the expected payoﬀ if the GP deviates and invests in a bad firm
in period 1. In this case, he will be able to raise debt at face value F = I − K in both periods,
since the market assumes that he is investing eﬃciently. The first line on the right hand side is his
payoﬀ if he finds a good firm in period 2. The last line is his payoﬀ when he finds a bad firm in
period 2, in which case his investment decision will depend on the relative payoﬀs.
    Just as in the pure ex ante case, the incentive compatibility condition 5.5 shows that it is
necessary to give part of the upside to investors to avoid risk-shifting by the GP. In particular, the
GP stake after two successful investments (wGP (2 (Z − (I − K)))) cannot be too high relative to
                                                  ³                     ´
                                                           I−K
his stake if he passes up a period 1 bad firm (wGP Z − αH +(1−αH )p
                                                                    + K  ).
    To solve for the optimal contract, we maximize GP expected payoﬀ subject to the investor
break-even constraint, the incentive compatibility condition 5.5, the fly-by-night condition, the
monotonicity condition, and Condition 5.4 on the required amount of per period ex ante capi-
tal K. The full maximization problem is given in the Appendix. The optimal security design is
characterized in the following proposition.

Proposition 5. The ex ante capital K per period should be set maximal at K ∗ = I−(αL + (1 − αL ) p) Z.
An optimal contract (which is not always unique) is given by

                              wI (x) = min (x, F ) + k (max (x − S, 0))
         h                                 ´     h                                                  i
                           I−K ∗                            I−K ∗
where F ∈ 2K ∗ , Z −    αH +(1−αH )p   + K∗ , S ∈ Z −    αH +(1−αH )p   + K ∗ , Z − (I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ and
k ∈ (0, 1].

Proof. In appendix.
    The mixed financing contracts are similar to the pure ex ante contracts. As in the pure ex ante
case, it is essential to give the ex ante investors an equity component to avoid risk-shifting by the
GP, so that he does not pick bad firms whenever he has invested in good firms or has the chance
to do so in the future. At the same time, a debt component is necessary to screen out fly-by-night
operators.
    The intuition for why fund capital K per period should be set as high as possible is the following:
The higher GP payoﬀs are if he passes up bad firms in period 1, the easier it is to implement the
equilibrium. The GP only gets a positive payoﬀ if he reaches the good state in period 2 and succeeds
with the period 2 investment, so it would help to transfer some of his expected profits to this state
from states where he has two successful investments. This is possible to do by changing the ex


                                                  21
ante securities, since ex ante investors only have to break even unconditionally. However, ex post
investors break even state by state, so the more ex post capital the GP has to rely on, the less
room there is for this type of transfer, and the harder it is to satisfy the GP incentive compatibility
condition.

5.3. Optimality of third party financing

We now show that it is essential in the mixed financing solution that ex post and ex ante investors
be diﬀerent parties. One could have imagined that instead of going to a third party for ex post
capital, the GP can go back to the ex ante investor and ask for more capital. However, it will often
be ex post optimal for the limited partner to refuse financing in the second period if no investment
was made in the first period. This in turn undermines the GP’s incentive to pass up a bad firm in
period 1, so that the mixed financing equilibrium cannot be upheld.
   To show this result formally, suppose that the average project in the high state does not break
even:
                                       (αH + (1 − αH ) p) Z < I

Now suppose we consider a possible contract between the GP and the LP, in which the GP has
to ask the LP additional financing each period if he wants to invest in a firm. Any such contract
would specify a split of the final fund cash flows wGP (x) , wI (x) such that wGP (x) + wI (x) = x,
where possibly the structure of the securities are renegotiated depending on the outcome of the
bargaining between the GP and the LP when the GP asks for extra financing. In keeping with
the contracting limitations we have assumed before, the ex ante contract cannot be contingent on
the state of the economy. Therefore, in period 2, the contract would either specify that the LP is
forced to provide the extra financing regardless of state, or that the LP can choose not to provide
extra financing.
   Suppose no investment has been made in period 1, that the high state is realized in period 2,
and that the GP asks the LP for extra financing. Because of the fly-by-night condition, the GP
will ask the LP for extra financing regardless of the quality of the period 2 firm, since otherwise
he will earn nothing. If the LP refuses to finance the investment, whatever amount 2K that was
invested initially into the fund will have to revert back to the LP so as not to violate the fly-by-night
condition. If the LP agrees and allows an investment, the maximum expected pay oﬀ for the LP is

                                (αH + (1 − αH ) p) Z − I + 2K < 2K

Therefore, the LP will veto the investment. Clearly, he will also veto it in the low state since his
returns will be even lower. Thus, there can be no investment in period 2 if there was none in period
1. But then, the GP has no incentive to pass up a bad firm encountered in period 1, so the mixed



                                                   22
financing equilibrium breaks down.

Proposition 6. The mixed financing equilibrium cannot be implemented without a third party
financier.

   In light of this reasoning, we can see the benefit of using banks as a second source of finance
more clearly. We need ex post investors to make the contract more state contingent so that we can
cut oﬀ financing in the low state in the second period while preserving financing in the high state.
However, it may be necessary to subsidise the ex post investors in the high state if the average
project does not break even. This is not possible unless we have two sets of investors where the
ex ante investors commit to use some of the surplus they gain in other states to subsidise ex post
investors.
   This result separates our theory of leverage from previous theories, such as those relying on tax
or incentive benefits of debt. Those benefits can be achieved without two sets of investors. Also,
it shows that it will typically be ineﬃcient to give LPs the right to approve individual deals. If
LPs did have this right, their optimal strategy would be to veto any investment occuring in period
2 if an investment had not already been made in period 1. Of course, their ability to pursue this
strategy would cause the mixed strategy equilibrium to break down, and the result would be less
eﬃcient investment. The model therefore also provides an explanation for why GPs are typically
given complete control over their funds’ investment policies.

5.4. Feasibility

The equilibrium which combines ex ante and ex post financing is strictly more eﬃcient than either
the pure ex post or pure ex ante cases considered above. A shortcoming of the mixed financing
equilibrium is that, as opposed to the other cases, it is not always implementable, even when it
creates surplus. The diﬃculty in implementing the equilibrium occurs because it is now harder
than in the ex ante case to provide the GP with incentives to avoid investing in bad firms in the
first period. If he deviates and invests, not only will he be allowed to invest also in the low state
in period 2, but he will be perceived as being good in the high state, meaning that he can raise ex
post capital more cheaply.

   The following proposition gives the conditions under which the equilibrium is implementable:

Proposition 7. Necessary and suﬃcient conditions for the equilibrium to be implementable are
that it creates social surplus, that

                                       q (αH + (1 − αH ) p) ≥ p                                 (5.6)



                                                 23
and that                                            µ                             ¶
                         αL + (1 − αL ) p               I      I
                                          < min           , 1 − + αL + (1 − αL ) p
                         αH + (1 − αH ) p               Z      Z
       Proof : See appendix.
       This proposition implies that the equilibrium can be implemented if the average project quality
in high states (i.e. αH +(1 − αH ) p) is suﬃciently good, compared both to the overall quality of bad
projects (p) and the average in project quality in low states (αL +(1 − αL ) p). In other words, if the
project quality does not improve suﬃciently in high states, it will not be possible to implement this
equilibrium. If project quality does not improve much in the high state, however, the eﬃciency gain
from combining ex ante and ex post financing will be small compared to pure ex ante financing.
Hence, when the eﬃciency gain from this equilibrium is large, it will also be feasible to implement.
       It should also be noted that when the mixed financing equilibrium is not feasible, there may be
other less eﬃcient mixed financing equilibria that are. For example, there are equilibria in which
the GP uses a mixed strategy in the first period and sometimes invests even when he has a bad
project. These types of equilibria can still dominate pure ex ante and pure ex post financing. In
the interest of brevity we do not fully characerize these equilibria here, but the qualitative point is
the same: Mixed financing is likely to dominate because it combines the internal incentives of the
pure ex ante case with the external screening that ex post financing provides.

5.5. Features of the equilibrium and robustness


The mixed financing equilibrium has a number of features that are worth highlighting. First, even
though the solution is the most eﬃcient that can be implemented, there are still investment distor-
tions. As is seen in Figure 5.1, there is overinvestment in the good state since some bad investments
are made, and there is underinvestment in bad states since some good investments get passed up.
As a result, the natural industry cycles get multiplied, and private equity investment will exhibit
particularly large cyclicality.
       Second, this investment pattern will aﬀect the returns on the investments. The model predicts
that in bad times, some good investments are ignored and in good times, some bad investments are
undertaken. Thus, the average quality of investments taken in bad times will exceed that of those
taken in good times. This prediction is consistent with industry folklore, as well as with the evidence
of Gompers and Lerner (2000) and Kaplan and Stein (1993) that hot private equity markets are
associated with increased transaction prices and depressed subsequent investment performance.18
       Third, another essential feature of our equilibrium is that the GP is not allowed to invest more
than K of the fund’s capital in any given investment. In the case when the GP did not invest in

  18
    Also, Kaplan and Schoar (2005) show that private equity funds raised in periods with high fundraising tend to
underperform funds raised in periods with low fundraising. Although this finding seems consistent with our model,
they do not explicitly look at the performance of individual investments undertaken in hot versus cold markets.


                                                        24
period 1, the GP would otherwise have an incentive to use the whole fund capital, 2K, to finance a
deal in the second period, and the equilibrium would break down. Similarly, if the GPs were allowed
to back the ex post securities with total fund cash flows, rather than just the cash flows from an
individual deal, this would be equivalent to using the first period capital to back the second period
ex post debt. Hence, the model implies that contracts should impose restrictions on the amount of
fund capital that can be used in a given deal, and prohibit GPs from using total fund cash flows to
back financing for particular deals. In fact, both these restrictions are commonplace in real world
private equity partnership agreements, as has been shown in Gompers and Lerner (1996).
    Fourth, just as in the pure ex ante financing case, with mixed financing the ex ante investors
cannot always be held to their break-even constraint and will sometimes be left with some rents
in equilibrium. These rents should occur even if there is a competitive fund-raising market. Thus,
the model provides a potential explanation of the Kaplan and Schoar (2004) finding that limited
partners sometimes appear to earn predictable excess returns.
    Fifth, the model we have analyzed is a two-period model, and it is not clear to what extent our
results would hold up in a multi-period setup. Nonetheless, we can make some conjectures about
this case. First, it is clear that if we were to let the fund life go towards an infinite number of
periods, we would approach first best investment with pure ex ante financing. As the fund life goes
to infinity, the GP will be certain that he will eventually encounter enough good investments to
provide suﬃcient incentives to avoid all bad ones. Clearly infinitely-lived private equity funds are
not observed in practice; there are a number of reasons outside of the model such as LP liquidity
constraints, that are likely explain this observation.19 If we take a finite fund life as given, it is likely
that mixed ex ante and ex post financing will still be optimal, as long as the state of the world is
suﬃciently persistent. For example, suppose that the GP encounters a low state early in the fund’s
life, where good deals are very scarce, and that this low state is expected to last for a long time.
If such a GP had suﬃcient financing to invest without going to the capital market for additional
financing, then even in a multi-period setup, the GP potentially could have incentives to take bad
investments. Ex post financing, which implicitly takes account of the state of the economy, would
prevent such GPs from acting on these incentives.


6. Discussion and Conclusions

A voluminous literature in corporate finance concerns the capital structure of public firms and the
manner in which firms decide to finance investments. Yet, much financing today is done through
private capital markets, by private equity firms who receive funding from limited partners and use
this money to finance investments, including both new ventures and buyouts of existing companies.

  19
     One potential explanation for limited fund life is provided by Stein (2005), who develops a model where funds
are open-end rather than closed-end because of asymmetric information about fund manager ability.


                                                       25
These firms generally have a common financial structure: They are finite-lived limited partnerships
who raise equity capital from limited partners before any investments are made (or even discovered)
and then supplement this equity financing with third party outside financing at the individual deal
level whenever possible. General partners have most decision rights, and receive a percentage of
the profits (usually 20%), which is junior to all other securities. Yet, while this financial structure
is responsible for a very large quantity of investment, we have no theory explaining why it should
be so prevalent.
   This paper presents a model of the financial structure of a private equity firm. In the model,
a firm can finance its investments either ex ante, by pooling capital across future deals, or ex
post, by financing deals when the GP finds out about them. The financial structure chosen is
the one that maximizes the value of the fund. Financial structure matters because managers have
better information about deal quality than potential investors, leading to both underinvestment
and overinvestment in equilibrium. The value maximizing financial structure of the firm minimizes
the losses both from expected bad investments that are undertaken and good investments that are
ignored.
   Underlying the model is the notion that the governance problems inside private equity funds
are fundamentally problematic, even more so than those of a public corporation. Once funds are
committed, there is very little that limited partners can do if they become dissatisfied with fund
management. Unlike shareholders in public firms, limited partners in private equity funds do not
have the right to sell their partnership interests, nor do they have the right to vote out the general
partners. Our model suggests that a number of contractual features common to private equity
funds potentially arise as ways of partially alleviating these governance problems.
   First, the model suggests that fund managers will be compensated using a profit sharing arrange-
ment that balances the desire the to pay the GP for performance with the sharing of profits with
investors to mitigate excessive risk-taking. The optimal profit sharing arrangements are likely to
be somewhat nonlinear, as is illustrated in Figure 4.1. This prediction mimics common practice, in
which fund managers receive carried interest, or ‘carry’, usually of 20% (see Gompers and Lerner
(1999a)). In fact, most partnership contracts give managers a nonlinear profit-sharing schedule
similar to the one that is optimal in the model. In a typical scheme, limited partners receive all
the cash flows until they reach a specified level (usually the value of the equity originally commit-
ted, sometimes with a ‘preferred return’ on top of the return of capital), then a ‘General Partner’s
Carried Interest Catch Up’ region, in which general partners receive 100% of the profits, with the
profits split 80-20 between the limited and general partners above that region.
   Second, the model suggests that funds will be designed so that investments are pooled within
a fund. By pooling investments, fund managers will have incentives to avoid bad investments
because they will dilute the returns to the other investments in the fund. Probably because of this
reason, most private equity funds do pool investments within funds, and base the GPs carry on

                                                  26
the combined profits from the pooled investments rather than having an individual carry based on
the profits of each deal, a practice known as "aggregation". In fact, according to Schell (2006), it
was common for private equity funds in the 1970’s and early 1980’s to calculate carried interest on
a deal by deal basis. This practice was gradually replaced by aggregation, however, and today the
deal by deal approach is virtually non-existent. The reason for the disappearance of the deal by deal
approach was that it "...is fundamentally dysfunctional from an alignment of interest perspective.
It tends to create a bias in favor of higher risk and potentially higher return investments. The
only cost to a General Partner if losses are realized on a particular investment are reputational and
the General Partner’s share of the capital applied to the particular investment." (Schell, 2006, pp.
2.12-2.13). This observation is very much in line with the intuition of our theoretical model.
   Third, the model suggests that financial structure of private equity fund will be such that most
investments require a combination of ex ante financing, that is raised at the time the fund is formed,
and ex post financing, that is raised deal by deal. The advantage of ex ante financing is that it
improves incentives by for pooling across deals, while ex post financing implicitly relies on the
capital markets to take account of public information about the current state of the economy as a
whole, or even of a particular industry. In fact, investments financed by the private equity industry
typically do rely on both kinds of financing. Buyouts are typically leveraged to a substantial degree,
receiving debt from banks and other sources. Venture deals are often syndicated, with a lead venture
capitalist raising funds from partners, who presumably take account of, at a minimum, information
on the state of the economy and industry in the same way that banks providing financing to
buyouts do. Our model also implies that the third party financing has to be suﬃciently risky
for the availability of financing to be suﬃciently state-contingent. This provides an explanation
for some standard features of limited partnership agreements (see Gompers and Lerner, 1996).
In particular, standard covenants include restrictions on any one investment to no more than a
prespecified fraction of the fund’s capital (usually 20%), which forces the fund to seek third-party
financing for at least all investments larger than this level. Similarly, partnership agreements
typically prohibit taking on leverage at the fund level, which would make debt less risky and less
state-contingent relative to levering up each individual deal.
   Fourth, the model also provides an explanation of why GPs are left with so much discretion over
the investment decisions, a practice that at first may appear to be one that exacerbates potential
agency problems. In fact, we show that on the contrary the discretion is an important ingredient
of the fund incentive scheme, and that removing it by giving limited partners decision rights over
individual deals would lower the expected quality of investments that are undertaken.
   The model predicts that while these provisions will serve to mitigate governance problems
to some degree, investments nonetheless will deviate from the first best. In particular, observed
investments in the private equity market should be more cyclical than the first-best investments,
with the already procyclical nature of investment opportunities augmented by overinvestment in

                                                 27
good times and underinvestment in bad times. In addition, consistent with both casual observation
(the internet and biotech bubbles) as well as more formal empirical evidence, this overinvestment
and underinvestment predicts that average returns to investments made during booms will be worse
than returns to investments made during recessions.
   The intuitions coming from our model are also consistent with other common observations
about the private equity industry. First, general partners almost always are required to contribute
personally 1% of the ex ante capital raised by the funds. The incentives arising from this ownership
stake serve to align the interests of general and limited partners. In the context of our model, to the
extent the GPs have some wealth of their own, its investment in the fund would potentially mitigate
some agency problems. Still, as long as GP wealth is limited so that the fund has to rely largely on
the external capital from LPs, agency problems will remain and the fund structures derived above
will still be optimal. Second, there are indeed circumstances where investors do provide financing
for individual deals. Sellers sometimes provide partial financing of their firms, and GPs approach
LPs for coinvestment opportunities. Each of these types of financing can be thought of in terms of
our model in that they all occur in circumstances where the degree of information asymmetry is
likely to be low. For example, when a seller helps to finance a deal, it typically supplements bank
financing and is likely to occur when the seller has better information about his firm than the bank.
When funds ask LPs to coinvest, our model suggests that they should be more sophisticated LPs,
who can evaluate the deal themselves and be assured that it is a good investment. Finally, in those
circumstances where specific funds are raised to finance particular deals, there should be a good
reason why the initiating GP did not do the entire investment by himself. One potential reason is
that the fund could be constrained in the size of its investment by its charter; an example of such
a situation is Exxel’s acquisitions of Argencard and Norte (see Hoye and Lerner (1995), Ballve and
Lerner (2001)).
   However, our model falls short in that it fails to address a number of important features of
private equity funds. First, private equity funds tend to be finitely-lived; we provide no rationale
for such a finite life. Second, our model does not incorporate the role of general partners’ personal
reputations. Undoubtedly these reputations, which provide the ability for GPs to raise future
funds, are a very important consideration in private equity investment decisions. Third, while one
might expect much of our analysis to apply equally to hedge funds, it is not clear that it does.
Hedge funds are financed predominately by levered equity and we have no explanation for this
phenomenon. Fourth, we still do not fully understand the diﬀerent investment incentives of private
equity funds and regular firms. Indeed, if we relabel the GP as the CEO, and replace the private
equity investments with internal firm projects, it seems that we would have a model of internal
capital markets. Still, this analogy is limited by some important features of firms, such as the
fact that firms have infinite lives and that payoﬀs of individual projects within a firm are diﬃcult
to disentangle and contract on. Finally, while we identify potential investment distortions arising

                                                  28
even when funds use the optimal financial structure, we do not have a clear understanding of what
practitioners and policy-makers could conceivably do to minimize these distortions. Knowing about
any conceivable such policies clearly is a potentially valuable contribution to the study of, as well
as the practice of, private equity.




                                                 29
7. Appendix

7.1. Proof of Proposition 1

We show that the solution postulated in the proposition is Perfect Bayesian and also satisfies the
Intuitive Criterion of Cho and Kreps (1987) (defined below for our particular application). The
one-period problem is straight-forward and solved in the text. The repeated problem has the added
feature that investor beliefs about the type of the GP may change after observing financing and
investment behavior in the first period, which in turn gives an extra signalling incentive in the first
period.
   Therefore, we have to show that the static equilibrium solution is also an equilibrium in the
second period after fly-by-night operators have been screened out. In each period and state, the GP
decides whether to not seek financing, or seek financing with some security w = {wI (I) , wI (Z)}
satisfying monotonicity and limited liability. If the GP seeks financing, the investor then chooses
whether to accept and supply financing I in exchange for security w, or deny financing in which
case the game ends. If the investor accepts, the GP then decides whether to invest in a firm or the
risk-free asset.
   We start by analyzing the set of continuation equilibria in the second period. First, it is easy
to see that there can never be a separating equilibrium where diﬀerent types of GPs seek financing
with diﬀerent securities w. This is so since the investor never breaks even on a security issued by a
fly-by-nighter or a GP with a bad project, so those types will always have an incentive to mimic a
good type. In a financing equilibrium where GPs issue security w, the investor will have some set of
beliefs over the type of GPs that seek financing. Denote by μ the probability the investor attaches
to the GP being a fly-by-night operator, where we leave μ arbitrary for now. Given μ, however, we
require that in an equilibrium involving financing with security w the investor attaches probability
(1 − μ) α and (1 − μ) (1 − α) with α ∈ {αH , αL } for the probabilities that a GP seeking financing
has access to a good and a bad firm, respectively. We also use the following tie-breaking rules: If
the GP finds a bad firm and is indiﬀerent between investing in it or the riskfree security, he invests
in the bad firm. A fly-by-night operator always invests in the riskfree security, as he earns nothing
in the second period by investing in a wasteful project.
   We now state the Intuitive Criterion that a financing equilibrium must satisfy in the second
period. (The general definition can be found in Cho and Kreps (1987); We state the particular
version that applies to our setting). Suppose security w satisfies monotonicity and limited liability,




                                                  30
and that investors break even under the equilibrium beliefs:

                 μwI (I)
                                  ¡                                                                 ¢
                 + (1 − μ) (1 − α) wI (I) ∗ 1I−wI (I)>p(Z−wI (Z)) + pwI (Z) ∗ 1I−wI (I)≤p(Z−wI (Z))
                 + (1 − μ) αwI (Z)
         ≥ I

where the second row reflects the fact that GPs who find bad firms risk-shift unless I − wI (I) >
p (Z − wI (Z)) . The security design w is a financing equilibrium satisfying the intuitive criterion if
and only if there is no security design w0 satisfying monotonicity and limited liability such that:

  1. Investors would be willing to finance the deal in exchange for w0 if they believe the issuing
      GP is good:
                                                     wI0 (Z) ≥ I

  2. Fly-by-night operators and GPs finding bad firms are strictly worse oﬀ issuing w0 than they
      are in the postulated equilibrium, even if investors are willing to finance the deal in exchange
      for w0 :

                                                 wI0 (I) > wI (I)
                        ¡               ¡             ¢¢
                     max I − wI0 (I) , p Z − wI0 (Z)     < max (I − wI (I) , p (Z − wI (Z)))


  3. GPs finding good firms are strictly better oﬀ issuing w0 than they are in the postulated
      equilibrium if investors are willing to finance the deal in exchange for w0 :

                                                  wI0 (Z) < wI (Z)


   If there were such a security w0 , and it was issued out of equilibrium, we assume that investors
would conclude that the issuing GP must be good. If investors have that belief, good GPs would
indeed be better oﬀ issuing security w0 , so w cannot be an equilibrium. (To rule out w as an
equilibrium, it is essential that there is a w0 that is only preferred by GPs finding good firms. If
we cannot rule out that GPs finding bad firms might also be better oﬀ if financed by w0 , investors
could rationally believe that anyone oﬀering w0 out of equilibrium is bad, so that a best response
could be to not supply financing for w0 .)
   The following Lemma shows that it is impossible to have a financing equilibrium where GPs
who find bad projects pass it up in favor of a risk-free investment.

Lemma 3. Given beliefs μ about the set of fly-by-night operators who seek financing and invest in

                                                      31
the first period, necessary and suﬃcient conditions for a security design w satisfying monotonicity
and limited liability to be a financing equilibrium in the second period are:

                                     p (Z − wI (Z)) ≥ I − wI (I)

(GP’s who find bad firms prefer to risk-shift) and

                             μwI (I) + (1 − μ) (α + p (1 − α)) wI (Z) ≥ I

(Investors break even).

   Proof: To show necessity of the first condition, suppose, contrary to the claim in the lemma,
that there is an equilibrium security w such that

                                     p (Z − wI (Z)) < I − wI (I)

Then, GPs who find a bad firm prefer to pass it up and invest in the risk free asset. Also, suppose
that w satisfies the break even condition:

                          (μ + (1 − μ) (1 − α)) wI (I) + (1 − μ) αwI (Z) ≥ I

These two conditions together with limited liability and monotonicity imply that wI (I) < I <
wI (Z) . Then, there is always another security w0 such that wI0 (I) > wI (I) and I < wI0 (Z) <
wI (Z). It is easy to check that both fly-by-night operators and GPs who find bad firms are strictly
better oﬀ in the equilibrium than if they issue security w0 , while GPs who find good firms are
strictly better oﬀ with security w0 if investors provide financing for it. But the intuitive criterion
then says that investors should attach probability 1 to a GP having a good firm if he deviates and
issues security w0 , and would therefore provide financing for it. That in turn means that w cannot
be an equilibrium. Thus, in any financing equilibrium, GPs who find bad firms will risk-shift, and
this gives the necessary break even condition as in the lemma. To show that the two conditions in
the lemma are also suﬃcient, note that any security w0 such that GPs who find good firms would
strictly prefer to deviate to it must have wI0 (Z) < wI (Z) . But if p (Z − wI (Z)) ≥ I − wI (I) , that
means that any GP who finds a bad firm would also have an incentive to deviate to w0 . End proof.
   The lemma implies that there can be no financing in the low state in the second period, regardless
of what happened in the first period, since the unconditional project in the low state does not break
even. In the high state, debt as in the proposition is a financing equilibrium for any μ as long as
the unconditional project in the high state breaks even Thus, the static solution is an equilibrium
whatever happened in the first period. But then, the static solution is also an equilibrium in the
first period.

                                                  32
7.2. Proof of Lemma 1


To implement the investment behavior in Figure 4.2, we first check that the GP always invests in
good firms regardless of what other investments he has made. For any random variable y ∈ {0, I, Z}
resulting from investment behavior in a period, the condition for this is:

                                 E (wGP (Z + y)) ≥ E (wGP (I + y))

This holds automatically from the monotonicity condition. It remains to check that the GP does
not invest in bad firms in period 2 after investing in a good firm in period 1, and that the GP
does not invest in bad firms in period 1. Using that wGP (0) = wGP (I) = wGP (2I) = 0 from the
fly-by-night constraint, the incentive compatibility conditions are:

                            wGP (Z + I) ≥ (1 − p) wGP (Z) + p wGP (2Z)                       (7.1)



                              (E (α) + (1 − E (α)) p) wGP (Z + I)                            (7.2)
                          ≥ (1 − p) E (α) wGP (Z)
                              +p (1 − E (α)) wGP (Z + I) + pE (α) wGP (2Z)



                             (E (α) + (1 − E (α)) p) wGP (Z + I)                             (7.3)
                         ≥ ((1 − p) E (α) + 2p (1 − p) (1 − E (α))) wGP (Z)
                             ¡                         ¢
                           + pE (α) + p2 (1 − E (α)) wGP (2Z)

The first condition assures that the GP does not invest in a bad firm in period 2 after investing
in a good firm in period 1. The two last conditions assure that the GP does not invest in a bad
firm in period 1. The two conditions diﬀer only on the right hand side, corresponding to the two
possible oﬀ-equilibrium investment decisions in period 2: Only investing in good firms in period
2 after making a bad investment in period 1 (Condition 7.2), or investing in all firms in period 2
(Condition 7.3).
   Deducting (1 − E (α)) pwGP (Z + I) from both sides of Condition 7.2 and dividing by E (α) ,
we see that it is identical to Condition 7.1.
   Rearranging Condition 7.3, we get

                   (E (α) + (1 − E (α)) p) + (1 − E(α)) p
wGP (Z + I) ≥                                             (1 − p) wGP (Z) + p wGP (2Z)       (7.4)
                          (E (α) + (1 − E (α)) p)

Note that this implies Condition 7.1, and is therefore a necessary and suﬃcient condition for


                                                 33
incentive compatibility.

7.3. Proof of Proposition 2:

We need to solve for optimal values of wGP (Z) , wGP (Z + I) , and wGP (2Z) . We start by estab-
lishing the following lemma:

Lemma 4. Holding wGP (Z + I) fixed, we should set wGP (Z) as low as possible in an optimal
contract: wGP (Z) = max (0, wGP (Z + I) − I)

   Proof: First note that we must have wGP (Z) ≥ max (0, wGP (Z + I) − I) from monotonicity
and limited liability. Suppose contrary to the claim that wGP (Z) > max (0, wGP (Z + I) − I) in an
optimal contract. Then, we can relax the IC constraint by decreasing wGP (Z) without violating
M or F BN. The maximand and the break even constraint are unaﬀected by this, since x = Z
does not happen in equilibrium so that wGP (Z) does not enter the maximand or the break even
constraint. QED.
   Given this, the program now becomes
                                  ³                                   ´
             max E (α)2 wGP (2Z) + 2E (α) (1 − E (α)) + (1 − E (α))2 p wGP (Z + I)
            wGP (x)


such that

                                        E (α)2 (2Z − wGP (2Z))                               (BE)
    ³                                   ´
   + 2E (α) (1 − E (α)) + (1 − E (α))2 p (Z + I − wGP (Z + I))
                                        + (1 − E (α))2 (1 − p) I ≥ 2I


                               (E (α) + (1 − E (α)) p) wGP (Z + I) ≥                         (IC)
  ((1 − p) E (α) + 2p (1 − p) (1 − E (α))) max (0, wGP (Z + I) − I)
                                +p (E (α) + (1 − E (α)) p) wGP (2Z)


                                    x − x0 ≥ wGP (x) − wGP (x0 ) ≥ 0    ∀x, x0 s.t. x > x0   (M )
                                                        wGP (x) = 0     ∀x s.t. x ≤ 2I       (F BN )

Lemma 5. In the optimal contract under pure ex ante financing, we will either have (1) wGP (Z + I) =
Z − I and wGP (2Z) = Z − I + (1 − k) (Z − I), where 0 < k < 1 or (2) wGP (Z + I) < Z − I and
wGP (2Z) = wGP (Z + I).

   Proof : Suppose not. Then, we will show that you can relax the IC constraint by increasing
wGP (Z + I) and decreasing wGP (2Z) without violating F BN , M or BE. Note that if wGP (Z + I) =
Z−I or wGP (2Z) = wGP (Z + I) , wGP (Z + I) cannot be increased without violating monotonicity.

                                                  34
   Case 1: Suppose wGP (Z) = 0 > wGP (Z + I) − I. Then, increase wGP (Z + I) and decrease
wGP (2Z) to keep the break even constraint and the maximand constant:

                                  2E (α) (1 − E (α)) + (1 − E (α))2 p
                   −dwGP (2Z) =                                       dwGP (Z + I)
                                                E (α)2
This relaxes IC.
   Case 2: wGP (Z) = wGP (Z + I) − I. Doing the same perturbation, we show that IC is relaxed.
Moving all terms to the LHS of IC, the change in the LHS is equal to

                   E (α) + (1 − E(α)) 2p           2E (α) (1 − E (α)) + (1 − E (α))2 p
             1−                          (1 − p) +                                     p
                   E(α) + (1 − E(α)) p                           E (α)2

We show that this is positive. The derivative w.r.t. to p of the expression above is equal to

                  (1 − 2p) E(α) − p2 (1 − E(α)) 2E (α) (1 − E (α)) + 2 (1 − E (α)) (1 − E (α)) p
      1 − (1 − E(α))                           +
                     (E(α) + (1 − E(α)) p)2                         E (α)2
                     (1 − 2p) E(α)        2E (α) (1 − E (α))
  > − (1 − E(α))                      2 +
                 (E(α) + (1 − E(α)) p)         E (α)2
  > 0

This follows since E (α)2 ≤ (E(α) + (1 − E(α)) p)2 , and since (1 − 2p) < 2. Thus, if the change is
non-negative for p = 0, IC is relaxed. Substituting for p = 0, the change becomes zero. QED
   Using the above results and the fact that wI (x) = x − wGP (x), we see that the optimal
investor security wI is a combination of debt with face value wI (Z + I) ≥ 2I, and an equity piece
wI (2Z) − wI (Z + I) given by

                       wI (2Z) − wI (Z + I) = Z − I       if wI (Z + I) > 2I
                       wI (2Z) − wI (Z + I) ∈ [0, Z − I]     if wI (Z + I) = 2I

, so that wI (x) is as in the proposition.
   We now show that the equilibrium is always implementable as long as it generates social surplus.
Suppose you give the GP the following contract:

                                             wGP (Z) = 0
                                         wGP (Z + I) = ε
                                             wGP (2Z) = ε

For ε > 0, the IC condition holds strictly. Making ε small, an arbitrarily large fraction of cash
flows can be given to investors, and M and F BN hold. Therefore, the BE condition can always
be made to hold as long as the equilibrium creates social surplus.

                                                  35
      End proof.

7.4. Proof of Proposition 3:

First, we show that if p > 12 , the condition in the proposition is necessary and suﬃcient for the LP
to get positive rents. Then, we show that when p < 12 , the GP captures all the rents.
                    1
      Suppose p >   2.   Then, we must have Z < 2I, or else investing in the bad firm is a positive
NPV project. This also implies that wGP (Z) = 0 from the fly-by-night condition, so that the IC
constraint becomes
                                       wGP (Z + I) ≥ pwGP (2Z)

Suppose we set

                                        wGP (Z + I) = Z − I
                                                      Z −I
                                          wGP (2Z) =
                                                        p

Note that this is the maximal values of wGP (Z + I) and wGP (2Z) such that the IC constraint is
satisfied. In turn, that means that if the break even constraint of the LP is slack at this contract,
LPs will earn strictly positive rents for any incentive compatible contract. Plugging in the contract
above into the break even constraint gives
          µ          ¶ ³                                   ´
          2     Z −I
     E (α) 2Z −       + 2E (α) (1 − E (α)) + (1 − E (α))2 p 2I + (1 − E (α))2 (1 − p) I ≥ 2I
                  p

which can be rewritten as
                µ          ¶                            ³                             ´
               2      Z −I                2                   2              2
          E (α)  2Z −        + (1 − E (α))  (1 − p) I ≥  E (α)  + (1 − E (α))  (1 − p)  2I
                        p

Dividing by (1 − E (α))2 and gathering terms gives the condition in the proposition. If this condition
is not satisfied, decreasing wGP (Z + I) and wGP (2Z) while keeping the IC constraint constant can
be made until the LP just breaks even, so in that case the GP captures all the rent.
      We now show that for p < 12 , the GP captures all the surplus.
      Case 1: Z ≤ 2I. Again, wGP (Z) = 0 from the fly-by-night condition, so that the IC constraint
is
                                       wGP (Z + I) ≥ pwGP (2Z)

Note that if we set

                                      wGP (Z + I) = k (Z − I)
                                         wGP (2Z) = k2 (Z − I)


                                                   36
for k ∈ [0, 1] the IC constraint is satisfied since p < 12 . Then, there is always a k such that LPs just
break even if the social surplus is positive, since at k = 1 they do not break even and at k = 0 they
get the whole social surplus. Thus, the GP captures all the surplus.
    Case 2: Z > 2I. For this case, suppose we set wGP (Z + I) = Z − I and, according to Lemma
4, wGP (Z) = Z − 2I. The break even constraint of the LP then becomes
                         ³                                   ´
 E (α)2 (2Z − wGP (2Z)) + 2E (α) (1 − E (α)) + (1 − E (α))2 p 2I + (1 − E (α))2 (1 − p) I ≥ 2I

Suppose we force this to hold with equality and solve for wGP (2Z) :
                                                        ³                             ´
       E (α)2 (2Z − wGP (2Z)) + (1 − E (α))2 (1 − p) I = E (α)2 + (1 − E (α))2 (1 − p) 2I



                                     ⇔
                                                           µ               ¶2
                                                               1 − E (α)
                         wGP (2Z)    =       2 (Z − I) −                        (1 − p) I          (7.5)
                                                                 E (α)

First, suppose wGP (2Z) as defined above is lower than Z −I, in which case monotonicity is violated.
Then, it is easy to verify that there is always an x < Z − I such that we can set

                                   wGP (2Z) = wGP (Z + I) = x
                                    wGP (Z) = max (0, x − I)

and such that the break even constraint is satisfied with equality and the IC constraint is slack.
Suppose instead that wGP (2Z) as defined in Equation 7.5 is bigger than or equal to Z − I, so that
monotonicity is not violated. We now show that the IC constraint is satisfied for this contract, so
that the GP captures all the surplus. Plugging in for wGP (2Z) from above, the IC constraint is
slack if
                                          1−E(α)
                                    1+      E(α) 2p
                       Z −I ≥                         (1 − p) (Z − 2I)
                                     1   + 1−E(α)
                                            E(α) p
                                         Ã                 µ               ¶2               !
                                                               1 − E (α)
                                    +p 2 (Z − I) −                              (1 − p) I
                                                                 E (α)

                                                                            1−E(α)
Taking the derivative of the right hand side with respect to x ≡             E(α)      gives

                      2p (1 + xp) − p (1 + 2xp)
                                                (1 − p) (Z − 2I) − 2px (1 − p) I                   (7.6)
                              (1 + xp)2




                                                      37
which has the same sign as
                                                    Z − 2I
                                                             − 2xI
                                                   (1 + xp)2
This is decreasing in x. Thus, if it is negative for the lowest possible x, it is always negative. The
                       1−E(α)
lowest possible x ≡     E(α)      is derived from Condition 3.1 as

                                                                  I
                                                             1−   Z
                                                      x=     I
                                                             Z   −p

Plugging this into Expression 7.6 gives

                                                Z − 2I
                                                         − 2xI
                                               (1 + xp)2
                                                   Z − 2I        1 − ZI
                                        =      µ          ¶2 − 2 I
                                                                        I
                                                                 Z −p
                                                       I
                                                    1− Z
                                                1 + I −p p
                                                     Z

                                                   Z − 2I            Z −I
                                        =      µ             ¶2 − 2          <0
                                                        I
                                                     1− Z           1 − ZI p
                                                1+   I
                                                       −p
                                                            p
                                                     Z


                                     1−E(α)                                                          1−E(α)
Thus, the derivative w.r.t. to        E(α)      is everywhere negative, and we should set             E(α)    as low as
possible to make it hard to satisfy the IC constraint.
                              I
              1−E(α)       1− Z
   Plugging    E(α)    =   I
                             −p
                                  into the IC constraint gives
                           Z


                                                     I
                                                  1− Z
                                             1+   I
                                                    −p
                                                       2p
                                                  Z
                           Z −I ≥                    I      (1 − p) (Z − 2I)
                                                  1− Z
                                              1+  I
                                                    −p
                                                       p
                                                  Z
                                               ⎛                  Ã            !2            ⎞
                                                                           I
                                                                      1−
                                             +p ⎝2 (Z − I) −          I
                                                                           Z
                                                                                    (1 − p) I ⎠
                                                                      Z   −p

which can be rewritten as
                           µ            ¶2                                           µ          ¶
                                Z −I                     I − Zp                          Z −I
                                             (1 − p) I +        > (Z − 2I)
                               I − Zp                       p                              I
Noting that
                                                    Z −I    Z −I
                                                          >
                                                   I − Zp     I
                                                                               Z−I                          Z−I
it is harder to satisfy the constraint if we divide the LHS by                 I−Zp      and the RHS with    I ,   which




                                                            38
gives
                           µ            ¶
                                Z −I                I − Zp
                                            (1 − p) I +          > Z − 2I ⇐⇒
                               I − Zp                  p
                                          1−p       I − Zp
                                 (Z − I)          +              > Z − 2I
                                         1 − ZI p      p

This always holds, since
                                                    1−p
                                                            >1
                                                   1 − ZI p
. Thus, the IC constraint is always satisfied when the investor just breaks even, which shows that
the GP captures the whole surplus.

7.5. Proof of Proposition 4:

In the first period, and after no investment in the second, a necessary condition for the ex post
security is that wP,i (I) ≥ I − K. Otherwise, a fly-by-night operator can collude with LP’s, raise
money from ex post investors, and invest it in the risk-free asset so that the coalition between the
LPs and the fly-by-night operator gets strictly positive surplus. Thus, such a contract would attract
an infinite set of fly-by-night operators so that ex post investors cannot break even. This pins down
debt as the only feasible security in the first period under the postulated equilibrium investment
behavior, where wP,1 (Z) = I − K. For the second period, if no investment was made, any ex post
                                                   h           ³                  ´i
                             I−K                                     I−K
security with wP,2 (Z) = αH +(1−αH )p
                                      , wP,2 (I) ∈  I − K, min   αH +(1−αH )p , I    is equivalent, so we
might as well restrict attention to debt.
     It remains to analyze the situation in the second period where an investment was made in period
1. Under the equilibrium investment behavior, the period 1 investment should have been in a good
firm, and all fly-by-night operators should be screened out. Also, if the GP finds a bad firm, he
should either not raise financing, or raise financing and invest in the risk-free asset. For this to be
incentive compatible, it has to be the case that either

                                        wGP (Z − (I − K) + K) > 0                                  (7.7)

or
                                 wGP (Z − (I − K) + I − wP,2 (I)) > 0                              (7.8)

Otherwise, the GP is strictly better oﬀ investing in the bad project. Suppose first that wP,2 (I) <
I − K. Then, condition 7.8 holds automatically from monotonicity if condition 7.7 holds, and so




                                                          39
must always hold. Furthermore, we have to have

                 wGP (Z − (I − K) + I − wP,2 (I)) ≥ wGP (Z − (I − K) + K)
                   wI (Z − (I − K) + I − wP,2 (I)) ≥ wI (Z − (I − K) + K)

with at least one of these inequalities strict. Thus, the GP and LP individually are weakly better
oﬀ, and seen as a coalition are strictly better oﬀ raising capital I − K from the ex post investor and
investing it in the risk-free security than not raising any money. We therefore assume that the GP
will raise money in this situation. Assume that the GP does raise money and invests in the risk-free
asset by issuing security wP,2 . Then, we have to have wP,2 (Z) > I −K for ex post investors to break
even. But then we can apply the logic in the proof of Proposition 1 and show that this security
does not satisfy the Cho and Kreps intuitive criterion, because a GP finding a good firm always has
                                                   0 (Z) = w
an incentive to deviate and issue a security with wP,2                      0
                                                            P,2 (Z) − ε1 , wP,2 (I) = wP,2 (Z) + ε2
for some ε1 , ε2 > 0. Thus, we have to have wP,2 (I) = I − K. Since only GPs finding good firms are
supposed to invest, we have to have wP,2 (Z) = I − K. Thus, debt is the only possible security.

7.6. Proof of Lemma 2:

If the GP invested in a good firm in period 1, he will pass up a bad firm if:

                          wGP (Z − (I − K) + K)                                                  (7.9)
                      > pwGP (2 (Z − (I − K))) + (1 − p) wGP (Z − (I − K))

   The last term is the case where the bad firm does not pay oﬀ, and the fund defaults on its
period 2 ex post debt.
   We also have to check the oﬀ-equilibrium behavior where the GP invested in a bad firm in
period 1. If the GP invested in a bad firm in period 1 he will pass up a bad firm in period 2 if:



                         pwGP (Z − (I − K) + K) + (1 − p) wGP (K)
                     > p2 wGP (2 (Z − (I − K))) + p (1 − p) wGP (Z − (I − K))
                         + (1 − p) pwGP (Z − (I − K))

   The two last terms are, respectively, the case where the first bad firm pays oﬀ and the second
does not, and the case where the first bad firm does not pay oﬀ and the second does. Since




                                                 40
wGP (K) = 0 from the fly by night condition, this can be rewritten as

                         wGP (Z − (I − K) + K)                                                (7.10)
                      > pwGP (2 (Z − (I − K))) + 2 (1 − p) wGP (Z − (I − K))

Note that this is a stricter condition than condition 7.9.
   Given the period two incentive compatibility constraints, we can now consider the GP’s invest-
ment incentives in the first period. In period 1, it is always optimal to invest in a good project.
We must check that the GP does not want to invest in a bad project to sustain the separating
equilibrium.
   The condition for not investing in a bad project in period 1 becomes
                                 µ                         ¶
                                           I −K
        q (αH + (1 − αH ) p) wGP  Z−                   +K
                                      αH + (1 − αH ) p
      > E(α) (pwGP (2 (Z − (I − K))) + (1 − p) wGP (Z − (I − K))) + (1 − E(α)) ∗
         ∗p max (wGP (Z − (I − K) + K) , pwGP (2 (Z − (I − K))) + 2 (1 − p) wGP (Z − (I − K)))

The last line is the GP pay oﬀ when he has invested in a bad firm in period 1 and encounters
another bad firm in period 2, in which case he will either invest in it or not, depending on whether
Condition 7.10 holds or not. Note that this condition implies condition 7.9, since
                         µ                            ¶
                                   I −K
                   wGP    Z−                    +K        ≤ wGP (Z − (I − K) + K)
                               αH + (1 − αH ) p

and

                    E(α)
                                 (pwGP (2 (Z − (I − K))) + (1 − p) wGP (Z − (I − K)))
            q (αH + (1 − αH ) p)
                                       Ã                                                 !
                  (1 − E(α)) p            wGP (Z − (I − K) + K) , pwGP (2 (Z − (I − K)))
            +                      max
              q (αH + (1 − αH ) p)                 +2 (1 − p) wGP (Z − (I − K))


             (E(α) + (1 − E(α)) p)
           ≥                       (pwGP (2 (Z − (I − K))) + (1 − p) wGP (Z − (I − K)))
              q (αH + (1 − αH ) p)
           ≥ pwGP (2 (Z − (I − K))) + (1 − p) wGP (Z − (I − K))

Thus, the only relevant incentive constraint is the period 1 IC constraint.

7.7. Proof of Proposition 5:

The full maximization problem can now be expressed as



                                                 41
               max E (wGP (x))
            = E (α)2 wGP (2 (Z − (I − K))) + E (α) (1 − E (α)) wGP (Z − (I − K) + K)
                                                    µ                         ¶
                                                                I −K
              + (1 − E (α)) q (αH + (1 − αH ) p) wGP Z −                   +K
                                                          αH + (1 − αH ) p

such that
                                  E (x − wGP (x)) ≥ 2K           (BE)


                                 µ                        ¶
                                          I −K
      q (αH + (1 − αH ) p) wGP    Z−                  +K
                                     αH + (1 − αH ) p
  > E(α) (pwGP    (2 (Z − (I − K))) + (1 − p) wGP (Z − (I − K))) + (1 − E(α)) ∗
      ∗p max [wGP (Z − (I − K) + K) , pwGP (2 (Z − (I − K))) + 2 (1 − p) wGP (Z − (I − K))]                (IC)


                                        ¡ ¢
                  x − x0 ≥ wGP (x) − wGP x0 ≥ 0             ∀x, x0 s.t. x > x0    (M )

                           wGP (x) = 0        ∀x s.t. x ≤ 2K,        (F BN )

and
                     I − (αH + (1 − αH ) p) Z ≤ K ≤ I − (αL + (1 − αL ) p) Z

7.7.1. Proof that K = I − (αL + (1 − αL ) p) Z :

We want to show that the ex ante capital K should be set maximal at K ∗ = I− (αL + (1 − αL ) p) Z.
                                 I−K                                             I−K
First, we have to have Z −   αH +(1−αH )p   + K > Z − (I − K) and Z −        αH +(1−αH )p   + K > 2K for
the equilibrium to be feasible, or else the IC condition will not be satisfied. Suppose this is true,
so that cash-flow states are ordered by

                                          2 (Z − (I − K))
                                    > Z − (I − K) + K
                                               I −K
                                    > Z−                   +K
                                          αH + (1 − αH ) p
                                    > max (Z − (I − K) , 2K)
                                    > K

   Suppose contrary to the claim in the proposition that K < K ∗ at some candidate optimal
contract wI satisfying monotonicity and limited liability.



                                                  42
   Now suppose we increase K by ∆ arbitrarily small, increase wI (K) by ∆, increase wI (2K) by
2∆, increase wI (Z − (I − K)) by

                              ∆ if     wI (Z − (I − K)) = Z − (I − K)
                             2∆ if wI (Z − (I − K)) < Z − (I − K)
                ³                       ´
                           I−K
and increase wI Z − αH +(1−α   H )p
                                    + K   , wI (Z − (I − K) + K) , and wI (2 (Z − (I − K))) by B ∈
³                      ´
               ∆
 2∆, ∆ + αH +(1−α H )p
                         such that the break even constraint and the maximand are unchanged:

                       ³                                                             ´
               (B − 2∆) E (α)2 + E (α) (1 − E (α)) + (1 − E (α)) q (αH + (1 − αH ) p)
           = ∆ (1 − E (α)) q (1 − αH ) (1 − p)

Note that for small ∆, these changes do not violate monotonicity or the fly-by-night condition.
                                                       ³                      ´
                                                                I−K
However, the IC constraint is weakly relaxed, since wGP Z − αH +(1−αH )p + K goes up weakly
and wGP (Z − (I − K) + K) and wGP (2 (Z − (I − K))) go down weakly. Hence, the problem is
relaxed, and we can increase K without loss of generality. Thus, there is no loss of generality from
setting K = K ∗ in an optimal contract. End Proof.

7.7.2. Proof of optimal contract:

The second issue is how the investor and GP securities should be designed. We will derive the
securities under two diﬀerent cases.

7.7.3. Case 1: Z − (I − K ∗ ) ≤ 2K ∗

This is the case when the GP gets no payoﬀ if he fails with one project, so wGP (Z − (I − K ∗ )) = 0.
For this case, the IC condition reduces to


                                          µ                             ¶
                                                    I − K∗
               q (αH + (1 − αH ) p) wGP    Z−                    + K∗
                                                αH + (1 − αH ) p
           > E(α)pwGP (2 (Z − (I − K ∗ )))
               + (1 − E(α)) p max (wGP (Z − (I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ ) , pwGP (2 (Z − (I − K ∗ ))))

   Given a certain expected payoﬀ E (x − wGP (x)) to investors, the optimal contract should re-
lax the IC condition maximally without violating the fly-by-night condition or the monotonicity
constraints. Any decrease of wGP (2 (Z − (I − K ∗ ))) or wGP (Z − (I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ ) and increase of
     ³                        ´
              I−K ∗          ∗ that keeps the expected value of the security constant relaxes the
wGP Z − αH +(1−α    H )p
                         + K
constraint. The optimal contract is given in the following proposition:



                                                 43
Proposition 8. : Suppose Z − (I − K ∗ ) ≤ 2K ∗ . The optimal investor security wI (x) is debt
                           ³                             ´   h                              ´
                                      I−K ∗            ∗           ∗, Z −    I−K ∗         ∗ plus a carry
with face value F = wI Z − αH +(1−α         H )p
                                                   + K     ∈  2K          αH +(1−αH )p + K
                                    h                                                  i
                                                 I−K ∗
k (max (x − S, 0)) starting at S ∈ Z − αH +(1−αH )p + K , Z − (I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ . For F = 2K ∗ , we
                                                               ∗
                     h                                                  i
                              I−K ∗            ∗ , Z − (I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ and for F > 2K ∗ , we have k = 1
have k ∈ (0, 1) , S ∈ Z − αH +(1−α  H )p
                                         +  K
                                  I−K ∗
(call option) and S = Z −      αH +(1−αH )p   + K ∗ . For a fixed expected value E (wI (x)) given to
investors, F is set minimal.
                            ³                             ´
                                         I−K ∗
   Proof : First, suppose wI Z −      αH +(1−αH )p   + K ∗ > 2K ∗ . The optimal contract in the propo-
sition then claims that
                           µ                                   ¶
                  ∗       ∗               I − K∗                                I − K∗
wI (Z − (I − K ) + K ) = wI Z −                          + K + (I − K ∗ ) −
                                                             ∗
                                      αH + (1 − αH ) p                      αH + (1 − αH ) p
   wI (2 (Z − (I − K ∗ ))) = wI (Z − (I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ ) + Z − I

Suppose this is not true. First, suppose
                           µ                                   ¶
                  ∗       ∗               I − K∗                                I − K∗
wI (Z − (I − K ) + K ) < wI Z −                          + K + (I − K ∗ ) −
                                                             ∗
                                      αH + (1 − αH ) p                      αH + (1 − αH ) p
   wI (2 (Z − (I − K ∗ ))) ≤ wI (Z − (I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ ) + Z − I
                                                                  ³                     ´
                                                                        I−K ∗
Then, we can increase wI (Z − (I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ ) and decrease wI Z − αH +(1−α H )p
                                                                                   + K ∗ (which
                                                                ³                     ´
                                                                      I−K ∗
means we decrease wGP (Z − (I − K ) + K ) and increase wGP Z − αH +(1−αH )p + K ∗ ) to keep
                                   ∗       ∗

the break even constraint and the maximand constant without violating monotonicity. This relaxes
the IC constraint and so improves the contract.
   Now, suppose
                           µ                              ¶
                  ∗       ∗             I − K∗                              I − K∗
wI (Z − (I − K ) + K ) = wI Z −                      + K + (I − K ∗ ) −
                                                        ∗
                                    αH + (1 − αH ) p                    αH + (1 − αH ) p
                    ∗                    ∗     ∗
   wI (2 (Z − (I − K ))) < wI (Z − (I − K ) + K ) + Z − I

Then,
³     we can increase ´ wI (2 (Z − (I − K ∗ ))) by ε and decrease wI (Z − (I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ ) and wI
        I−K ∗
 Z − αH +(1−α H )p
                   + K ∗ by

                                                εE (α)2
                          E (α) (1 − E (α)) + (1 − E (α)) q (αH + (1 − αH ) p)

to keep the break even constraint and the maximand constant without violating monotonicity. This
relaxes the IC constraint and so improves the contract.
                      ³                        ´                  ³                               ´
                               I−K ∗          ∗ = 2K ∗ . Then, w               I−K ∗
    Next suppose wI Z − αH +(1−α     H )p
                                          + K                   I  Z−       αH +(1−αH )p   + K∗       cannot
be lowered without violating the fly by night condition.



                                                     44
   First, note that increasing wI (2 (Z − (I − K ∗ ))) by ε and reducing wI (Z − (I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ ) by

                                                    E (α)
                                             ε
                                                 (1 − E (α))

to keep the break even constraint constant leaves the IC constraint unchanged if

                        wGP (Z − (I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ ) > pwGP (2 (Z − (I − K ∗ )))

and relaxes it if
                        wGP (Z − (I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ ) < pwGP (2 (Z − (I − K ∗ )))

. Therefore, if such a transfer does not violate monotonicity, it (weakly) relaxes the IC constraint.
Thus, a contract that maximally relaxes the IC constraint keeping the expected value E (w) constant
should have
                     wI (2 (Z − (I − K ∗ ))) = wI (Z − (I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ ) + Z − I

if w (X (Z, K ∗ )) > 2K ∗ . However, for such a contract we have

     pwGP (2 (Z − (I − K ∗ ))) = p [2 (Z − (I − K ∗ )) − (wI (Z − (I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ )) + Z − I]
                                  = pwGP (Z − (I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ )
                                  < wGP (Z − (I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ )

and therefore the IC constraint is unchanged if we lower wI (2 (Z − (I − K ∗ ))) and increase wI
(Z − (I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ ) slightly so that

                    wI (2 (Z − (I − K ∗ ))) = wI (Z − (I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ ) + k (Z − I)

where k < 1. Thus, this contract can be expressed as a carry. End proof.

7.7.4. Case 2: Z − (I − K ∗ ) > 2K ∗

This is the case when the GP can get some payoﬀ even if he fails with one project, so it is possible to
have wGP (Z − (I − K ∗ )) > 0. It is always optimal to set wI (Z − (I − K ∗ )) as high as possible at
    ³                   ³                          ´´
                                  I−K ∗
min Z − (I − K ∗ ) , wI Z − αH +(1−α    H )p
                                             + K ∗    , so the contract will have a debt piece as before
                  ³                          ´
                            I−K ∗
with face value wI Z − αH +(1−α   H )p
                                       + K ∗ . However, it is no longer true that we want to set this
face value as low as possible given a fixed E (wI ) by increasing the higher pay oﬀs. This is because
when we reduce the face value, we also increase the pay oﬀ to the GP if he fails with one and
succeeds with one firm, which can worsen incentives. The following proposition characterizes the
optimal contract.



                                                    45
Proposition 9. Suppose Z − (I − K ∗ ) > 2K ∗ . The optimal investor security wI (x) is debt
                           ³                    ´   h                            ´
                                  I−K ∗       ∗         ∗, Z −    I−K ∗         ∗ plus a carry
with face value F = wI Z − αH +(1−α       + K     ∈  2K                     + K
                                   h H )p                      αH +(1−αH )p
                                                                              i
                                           I−K ∗
k (max (x − S, 0)) starting at S ∈ Z − αH +(1−αH )p + K , Z − (I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ . For S < Z −
                                                       ∗

(I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ , we have k = 1 (call option), and for S = Z − (I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ , we have k ∈ (0, 1) .

   Proof: We start with the following Lemma:
                                  ³                    ³                                   ´´
                                                                        I−K ∗
Lemma 6. wI (Z − (I − K ∗ )) = min Z − (I − K ∗ ) , wI Z −           αH +(1−αH )p   + K∗        .
                                ³                             ´
                                             I−K ∗
Proof. First, note that given wA Z −      αH +(1−αH )p   + K ∗ , the highest we can set wA (Z − (I − K ∗ ))
                                                                                       I−K ∗
is the expression in the lemma from monotonicity and the fact that Z −              αH +(1−αH )p    + K∗ >
Z − (I − K ∗ ) in feasible contracts. Suppose wA (Z − (I − K ∗ )) is lower than this upper bound.
Then, we can increase it without changing the break even constraint and the maximand, since
the outcome Z − (I − K ∗ ) does not happen in equilibrium. This relaxes the IC constraint and so
improves the contract.                                        ³                      ´
                                                                      I−K ∗         ∗ .
   This proves that the first piece is debt with face value wI Z − αH +(1−α     + K
                                                   ³                     ´ H )p
                                   ∗      ∗                 I−K ∗      ∗
   Next, suppose wI (Z − (I − K ) + K ) > wI Z − αH +(1−αH )p + K . Then, the proposition
states that
                     w (2 (Z − (I − K ∗ ))) = wI (Z − (I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ ) + Z − I

which is the highest possible value for wI (2 (Z − (I − K ∗ ))) given wI (Z − (I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ ) . Sup-
pose this is not the case. Then, we can lower wI (Z − (I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ ) and increase wI (2 (Z − (I − K ∗ )))
to keep the break even constraint and the maximand constant without violating monotonicity. If

      wGP (Z − (I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ ) > pwGP (2 (Z − (I − K ∗ ))) + 2p (1 − p) wGP (Z − (I − K ∗ ))

this does not change the IC constraint, but if

      wGP (Z − (I − K ∗ ) + K ∗ ) < pwGP (2 (Z − (I − K ∗ ))) + 2p (1 − p) wGP (Z − (I − K ∗ ))

the IC constraint is relaxed and so this improves the contract. End Proof.

7.8. Proof of Proposition 7:

Proof : First, it is necessary that

                                                 I −K
                                  Z +K −                      > 2K
                                             αH + (1 − αH ) p




                                                   46
or else the left hand side of the IC condition 5.5 is zero from monotonicity. Second, it is necessary
that
                                           I −K
                             Z +K −                     > Z − (I − K)
                                       αH + (1 − αH ) p
since otherwise            µ                            ¶
                                     I −K
                     wGP    Z−                    +K        ≤ wGP (Z − (I − K))
                                 αH + (1 − αH ) p
This would violate the IC condition 5.5, since in that case the right hand side of the IC condition
becomes

        E(α) [pwGP (2 (Z − (I − K))) + (1 − p) wGP (Z − (I − K))] + (1 − E(α)) p ∗
        max (wGP (Z − (I − K) + K) , pwGP (2 (Z − (I − K))) + 2 (1 − p) wGP (Z − (I − K)))



           ≥ (E(α) + (1 − E(α)) p) [pwGP (2 (Z − (I − K))) + (1 − p) wGP (Z − (I − K))]
                                       µ                           ¶
                                                   I −K
           ≥ (E(α) + (1 − E(α)) p) wGP Z −                     +K
                                              αH + (1 − αH ) p

   Since
                            E(α) + (1 − E(α)) p > q (αH + (1 − αH ) p)

this is larger than the left hand side of the IC condition.
   The two necessary conditions above can be rewritten as

                                         I −K
                                                      <Z −K
                                     αH + (1 − αH ) p

and
                                            I −K
                                                         <I
                                        αH + (1 − αH ) p
Note that both these are easier to satisfy for higher K, and by setting K maximal at K ∗ from
Proposition 5, the conditions become

                        αL + (1 − αL ) p
                                         Z < Z − (I − (αL + (1 − αL ) p) Z)
                        αH + (1 − αH ) p

and
                                       αL + (1 − αL ) p
                                                        Z<I
                                       αH + (1 − αH ) p
These conditions together give the last expression in the proposition.
   The first part from the proposition is proved as follows. The right hand side of the IC condition




                                                  47
5.5 is given by

       E(α) (pwGP (2 (Z − (I − K))) + (1 − p) wGP (Z − (I − K))) + (1 − E(α)) p ∗
       ∗ max (wGP (Z − (I − K) + K) , pwGP (2 (Z − (I − K))) + 2 (1 − p) wGP (Z − (I − K)))



              ≥ E(α)pwGP (2 (Z − (I − K))) + (1 − E(α)) pwGP (Z − (I − K) + K)
                     µ                          ¶
                                I −K
              ≥ pwGP Z −                   +K
                          αH + (1 − αH ) p

where the last step follows from monotonicity. Therefore, the IC condition can only be satisfied if

                                       q (αH + (1 − αH ) p) ≥ p

   Thus, this is a necessary condition for the equilibrium to be implementable. To show that
it together with the other conditions are suﬃcient, suppose they are satisfied. Then, for ε small
enough, it is always possible to set

                                             wGP (Z − (I − K)) = 0
                                          wGP (2 (Z − (I − K))) = ε
                                   µ                         ¶
                                              I −K
                             wGP    Z−                    +K    = ε
                                         αH + (1 − αH ) p
                                         wGP (Z − (I − K) + K) = ε

For this contract, the IC condition reduces to

                                       q (αH + (1 − αH ) p) ≥ p

For ε small enough, investors always break even as long as social surplus is created. End Proof.




                                                 48
   References

   Ballve, Alberto and Josh Lerner (2001) “The Exxel Group: March 2001,” Harvard Business
School Case 9-202-053.
   Cho, In-Koo, and David M. Kreps (1987), “Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 102, 179-222
   Diamond, Douglas (1984), “Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring,” Review of
Economic Studies.
   Fenn, George, Nellie Liang, and Steven Prowse, “The Private Equity Industry: An Overview,”
(Financial Markets, Institutions and Instruments Series, Volume 6, Number 4), Boston, Blackwell
Publishers, 1997.
   Gompers, Paul, and Josh Lerner (1996), “The use of covenants: An empirical analysis of venture
partnership agreements,” Journal of Law and Economics 39.
   Gompers, Paul, and Josh Lerner (1999a), “An analysis of compensation in the U.S. venture
capital partnership,” Journal of Financial Economics 51(1), 3-44.
   Gompers, Paul, and Josh Lerner (1999b), “The Venture Capital Cycle,” MIT Press: Cambridge.
   Gompers, Paul, and Josh Lerner (2000), “Money Chasing Deals?: The Impact of Fund Inflows
on the Valuation of Private Equity Investments,” Journal of Financial Economics 55: 281-325.
   Hoye, Alex, and Josh Lerner (1995), “The Exxel Group: October 1995,” Harvard Business
School Case 297-068.
   Inderst, Roman, and Felix C. Muennich (2004) “The Benefits of Shallow Pockets,” working
paper, London School of Economics.
   Innes, Robert (1990) “Limited liability and incentive contracting with ex-ante action choices,”
Journal of Economic Theory 52: 45-67.
   Jensen, Michael (1988), “Takeovers: Their Causes and Consequences,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 2, No. 1, 21-48.
   Jones, Charles, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf (2003), “The price of diversifiable risk in venture
capital and private equity,” working paper, Columbia University.
   Kandel, Eugene, Dima Leshchinskii, and Harry Yuklea (2006), “VC funds: Aging brings my-
opia,” working paper, Hebrew University.
   Kaplan, Steven (1989) “Management Buyouts: Evidence on Taxes as a Source of Value,” Journal
of Finance, 44, 611-632.
   Kaplan, Steven, and Antoinette Schoar (2004), “Private Equity Performance: Returns, Persis-
tence and Capital Flows,” Journal of Finance, 60, 1791-1824.
   Kaplan, Steven, and Jeremy Stein (1993) “The Evolution of Buyout Pricing and Financial
Structure in the 1980s,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, 313-358.




                                               49
   Laux, Christian (2001), “Limited liability and incentive contracting with multiple projects,”
Rand Journal of Economics 32(3).
   Lerner, Joshua (1995), “Venture Capitalists and the oversight of private firms,” Journal of
Finance, 50, 301-18.
   Lerner, Joshua, and Antoinette Schoar (2003), “The illiquidity puzzle: Theory and evidence
from private equity,” Journal of Financial Economics 72(1), 3-40.
   Lerner, Joshua, Antoinette Schoar, and Wan Wong (2005) “Smart Institutions, Foolish Choices?
The Limited Partner Performance Puzzle,” NBER Working Paper 11136.
   Ljungquist, Alexander, and Matthew Richardson (2003) “The Investment Behavior of Private
Equity Fund Managers,” Working Paper, NYU.
   Metrick, Andrew, and Ayako Yasuda (2006), “Economics of private equity funds,” Working
Paper, Wharton School.
   Myers, Stewart, and Nicholas Majluf (1984) “Corporate financing and investment decisions
when firms have information that investors do not have,” Journal of Financial Economics, 13,
187-221.
   Nachman, David, and Thomas Noe (1994) “Optimal design of securities under asymmetric
information,” Review of Financial Studies, 7, 1-44.
   Sahlman, William (1990), “The Structure and Governance of Venture Capital Organizations,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 27, 473-521.
   Schell, James (2006), Private Equity Funds. Business Structure and Operations (Rel. 12). Law
Journal Press, New York.
   Stein, Jeremy (1997), “Internal Capital Markets and the Competition for Corporate Resources,”
Journal of Finance, 52, no.1, March 1997, pp.111-133.
   Stein, Jeremy (2005), “Why Are Most Funds Open-End? Competition and the Limits of Arbi-
trage,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 247-272..




                                                50
