                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        STICKY PRICES AND MONETARY POLICY:
                      EVIDENCE FROM DISAGGREGATED U.S. DATA

                                           Jean Boivin
                                          Marc Giannoni
                                           Ilian Mihov

                                       Working Paper 12824
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12824


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2007




We thank Piotr Eliasz, Giorgio Primiceri, Robert Rich, and Mark Watson for valuable discussions,
Jordi Gali, participants to the NBER Monetary Economics Summer Institute, the NY Area Monetary
Policy Workshop, and the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy at the Federal Reserve
Board for comments. We also thank Rashid Ansari, Guilherme Martins, Mehmet Pasaogullari and
Mauro Roca for excellent research assistance. Boivin and Giannoni are grateful to the National Science
Foundation for financial support (SES-0518770). The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Jean Boivin, Marc Giannoni, and Ilian Mihov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Sticky Prices and Monetary Policy: Evidence from Disaggregated U.S. Data
Jean Boivin, Marc Giannoni, and Ilian Mihov
NBER Working Paper No. 12824
January 2007
JEL No. C3,D2,E31,E4,E5

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper disentangles fluctuations in disaggregated prices due to macroeconomic and sectoral conditions
using a factor-augmented vector autoregression estimated on a large data set. On the basis of this estimation,
we establish eight facts: (1) Macroeconomic shocks explain only about 15% of sectoral inflation fluctuations;
(2) The persistence of sectoral inflation is driven by macroeconomic factors; (3) While disaggregated
prices respond quickly to sector-specific shocks, their responses to aggregate shocks are small on impact
and larger thereafter; (4) Most prices respond with a significant delay to identified monetary policy
shocks, and show little evidence of a "price puzzle," contrary to existing studies based on traditional
VARs; (5) Categories in which consumer prices fall the most following a monetary policy shock tend
to be those in which quantities consumed fall the least; (6) The observed dispersion in the reaction
of producer prices is relatively well explained by the degree of market power; (7) Prices in sectors
with volatile idiosyncratic shocks react rapidly to aggregate monetary policy shocks; (8) The sector-specific
components of prices and quantities move in opposite directions.

Jean Boivin                                           Ilian Mihov
HEC Montréal                                          INSEAD
3000, chemin de la Côte-Sainte-Catherine              Boulevard de Constance
Montréal (Québec)                                     77300 Fontainebleau
Canada H3T 2A7                                        France
and NBER                                              ilian.mihov@insead.edu
jean.boivin@hec.ca

Marc Giannoni
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 824
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
mg2190@columbia.edu
1        Introduction

In this paper, we document the eﬀects of macroeconomic fluctuations on disaggregated prices.

Whether prices are generally flexible or sticky has been for a long time the subject of considerable
controversy in macroeconomics. A proper assessment of the speed of price adjustment is crucial to

understand the sources of business cycle fluctuations, as well as the eﬀects of monetary policy on
the economy.
        Numerous studies focusing on specific wholesale or retail items have found evidence of prices
maintained fixed for several months, in the U.S.1 Surveys of firms also suggest that a large frac-
tion of prices remain constant for many months (Blinder, Canetti, Lebow, and Rudd, 1998). In
addition, studies involving vector autoregressions (VAR) usually provide evidence of stickiness of

the aggregate price level. For instance, under a wide range of identifying assumptions, follow-
ing an unexpected monetary policy tightening, aggregate price indices are commonly found to
remain unchanged for about a year and a half, and start declining thereafter (see, e.g., Christiano,
Eichenbaum and Evans, 1999). Largely motivated by this evidence, many macroeconomic mod-
els including models used for policy analysis rest on the assumption that prices are sticky. Such

models, sometimes augmented with mechanisms to increase the persistence in inflation, have been
argued to replicate many features of aggregate data (e.g., Rotemberg and Woodford, 1997; Chris-
tiano, Eichenbaum and Evans, 2005; Smets and Wouters 2004), and in particular the delayed and
persistent eﬀects of monetary policy shocks on prices.
        However, recent evidence on disaggregated prices series has cast doubts on the validity of existing

models with price rigidities. For instance, Bils and Klenow (2004) find that disaggregated consumer
prices are much more volatile than conventionally assumed in studies based on aggregate data.
In fact, looking at 350 categories of consumer goods and services that cover about 70% of U.S.
consumer expenditure, Bils and Klenow (2004) estimate that the median time between price changes
    1
   See for instance Carlton (1986), Cecchetti (1986), Kashyap (1995), Levy, Bergen, Dutta and Venable (1997),
MacDonald and Aaronson (2001), and Kackmeister (2001).




                                                       1
is 4.3 months.2 The duration between price changes varies however considerably across sectors.3
Bils and Klenow (2004) argue that sectoral inflation rates are much more volatile and short-lived

than implied by simple sticky-price models. Klenow and Kryvtsov (2005) document that when
prices change, they change by more than 13% on average, or by 8.5% when adjusting for temporary

sales. Golosov and Lucas (2003), in turn, calibrate a menu-cost model with both aggregate and
idiosyncratic shocks to match these facts, and find that monetary policy shocks have large and
rapid eﬀects on aggregate prices but only very little eﬀect on economic activity.

       The evidence about relatively flexible individual prices thus contrasts sharply with the evidence
obtained from aggregate price indices. While simple sticky-price models designed to explain aggre-
gate price behavior appear to explain poorly the behavior of more disaggregated price series, models
with relatively flexible sectoral prices do not seem to explain the empirical evidence obtained from
aggregate series.
       How then, can the facts just laid out be reconciled? One possibility is that studies based on
aggregate series mistakenly assume that prices are sticky in the face of macroeconomic fluctuations,
when in fact prices adjust more frequently to changes in economic conditions. In such a case, sectoral
prices would be expected to respond on average rapidly to macroeconomic disturbances such as
monetary policy shocks. And they would be expected to respond more rapidly in sectors that
adjust prices more frequently. Another possibility is that prices respond diﬀerently to sectoral and
macroeconomic shocks. In that case, individual prices may respond rapidly and strongly to shocks
specific to the particular price categories, but may adjust more slowly to aggregate macroeconomic

factors.
       In addition, while aggregate inflation is often argued to be persistent over long samples,4 dis-
aggregated series appear much more transient. Several authors have argued that the apparent

persistence of aggregate inflation may reflect an aggregation bias or a structural break in the
   2
     The median duration remains below 5 months when they account for temporary sales. More recently, however,
Nakamura and Steinsson (2006), analyzing CPI microdata, argue that the median duration is between 8 and 11
months when they exclude sales and price changes due to product substitutions. The upper bound is similar to the
median duration found in Euro area data (see, e.g., Dhyne et al., 2005, and several other studies which are part of
the Eurosystem Inflation Persistence Network).
   3
     It ranges from less than a month (for gasoline prices) to more than 80 months (coin-operated apparel laundry
and dry-cleaning).
   4
     See, e.g., Fuhrer and Moore (1995), Galí and Gertler (1999), Cogley and Sargent (2001, 2005), Sims (2001), Stock
(2001), Pivetta and Reis (2003), Levin and Piger (2003), Clark (2003).



                                                         2
mean inflation during the sample.5 Yet, as another possible explanation, the diﬀerences in infla-
tion persistence at the aggregate and disaggregate level may also be due to diﬀerent responses to
macroeconomic and sector-specific shocks.
       One limitation of the existing evidence such as that of Bils and Klenow (2004), Klenow and

Kryvtsov (2005) is that while they provide a careful description of individual prices movements,
they do not distinguish between sector-specific and aggregate sources of fluctuations. It thus not
possible to infer from these studies whether sectoral prices respond rapidly or slowly, strongly or
moderately to macroeconomic shocks. Such distinctions would however provide crucial insights
on the determination of prices, hence guidance for the development of appropriate macroeconomic
models.

       In this paper, we disentangle the fluctuations in disaggregated U.S. consumer and producer
prices which are due to aggregate macroeconomic factors from those due to sectoral conditions. We
do so by estimating a factor-augmented vector autoregression (FAVAR) that relates a large panel of
economic indicators and individual price series to a relatively small number of estimated common
factors. This framework allows us to assess the relative importance of macroeconomic and sectoral
disturbances in determining disaggregate price fluctuations, and to decompose the persistence in
inflation in terms of macroeconomic and sector-specific factors. Using this, we can analyze the
typical response of disaggregate prices to macroeconomic shocks and to sector-specific shocks.
       In addition, we estimate the eﬀects of U.S. monetary policy on disaggregated prices after iden-
tifying monetary policy shocks using the information from the entire data set. We study the

magnitude of the price responses to monetary policy shocks, and whether monetary policy has
delayed eﬀects on prices. While extensive research has attempted to characterize the eﬀects of
monetary policy on macroeconomic indicators, little research has analyzed its eﬀects on disaggre-

gated prices. Two exceptions are Bils, Klenow and Kryvtsov (2003), and Balke and Wynne (2003).
These authors estimate the responses of individual prices to a monetary policy shock by append-
ing individual price series to a separately-estimated VAR. However, their estimated price responses
   5
     Pesaran and Smith (1995) and Imbs, Mumtaz, Ravn and Rey (2005) argue that heterogeneity – across categories
– in the persistence of individual series may result in a large estimated persistence of the aggregate even if individual
series display on average little persistence. Cogley and Sargent (2001, 2005), Levin and Piger (2003) and Clark (2003)
find that inflation persistence drops when they allow for changes in mean inflation over time.




                                                           3
display a considerable “price puzzle”, i.e., a price increase following an unexpected monetary policy
tightening, which stands in sharp contrast to predictions of conventional models. As argued in Sims
(1992) and Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz (2005), such evidence of a price puzzle may be indicative
of VAR misspecification due, e.g., to the lack of information considered in the VAR estimation. In

the context of our data-rich FAVAR, this risk of misspecification is considerably reduced, as we
use all of the available information in the estimation. Consistency of our estimates is furthermore
guaranteed by the fact that we estimate within the same framework the parameters describing
the dynamics of the common factors and the parameters that relate the individual price series to
common factors.
   After documenting the responses of prices to a monetary policy shock, we attempt to provide

an explanation for the cross-sectional dispersion of price responses. To this end, we collect data on
industry characteristics that are related to various theories of price stickiness. In general, models
that allow for imperfect competition and variable speed of price adjustment predict that firms in
very competitive industries will react quickly to changes in the economic environment (see Barro,
1972). The standard workhorse monetary model with Calvo pricing assumes a fixed degree of price
stickiness as measured by the probability of re-optimizing prices, so that industry characteristics do
not aﬀect this probability. Extensions of this model allow diﬀerences in probabilities of re-optimizing
prices across sectors (see, e.g., Aoki, 2001; Benigno, 2003; Woodford, 2003, Chap. 3; Carvalho,
2006), but these models still do not explain why diﬀerences in the speed of price adjustments might
emerge as part of the optimizing behavior of firms. Nevertheless, in these New Keynesian models,

one industry characteristic – the degree of competition – aﬀects directly the degree of strategic
complementarity (or “real rigidity” as in Ball and Romer, 1990) in price setting, and therefore the
trajectory of price adjustment.

   Our main findings can be summarized as follows:
   First, most of the fluctuations in sectoral inflation rates are due to sector-specific factors. On
average, only about 15% of inflation fluctuations are due to macroeconomic factors (17% for per-

sonal consumption expenditure prices and 13% for producer prices). Thus, the relative flexibility
of sectoral prices found by Bils and Klenow (2004) is to a large extent due to sector-specific dis-

turbances. Consistent with the evidence on disaggregated price series, we also find considerable


                                                  4
disparities in the magnitude of price changes and in the persistence of inflation across price cat-
egories, both for consumer and producer prices. These disparities are due to a large extent to
diﬀerences in the volatility of sector-specific components, and only little to diﬀerent responses to
macroeconomic factors.

   Second, sectoral inflation fluctuations are persistent, but this persistence is driven primarily by
common macroeconomic components and not by sector-specific disturbances. While sector-specific
shocks may cause large fluctuations in the individual inflation rates, these fluctuations are short-
lived on average. In contrast, aggregate macroeconomic shocks tend to have more persistent eﬀects
on a wide range of sectoral inflation rates.
   Third, prices and quantities respond diﬀerently to macroeconomic shocks and to sector-specific

shocks. While sector-specific shocks induce an immediate and permanent change in sectoral prices
and quantities, macroeconomic shocks have a small impact on prices and quantities but they gen-
erate larger eﬀects thereafter.
   Fourth, most prices respond with a significant delay to identified monetary policy shocks, and
show little evidence of a “price puzzle,” contrary to existing studies based on monetary policy
shocks identified from small-scale VARs. This suggests that exploiting a large information set in
the estimation provides more accurate estimates of the eﬀects of monetary policy.
   The picture that emerges then, is one in which many prices fluctuate considerably in response
to sector-specific shocks, but they respond only sluggishly to aggregate macroeconomic shocks such
as monetary policy shocks. This diﬀerence in responses to various shocks can explain why, at the

disaggregated level, individual prices are found to be adjusted relatively frequently, while estimates
of the degree of price rigidity are much higher when based on aggregate data. This explains why
models that assume considerable price stickiness have often been successful at replicating the eﬀects

of monetary policy shocks.
   Looking across price categories, we find that the observed dispersion in the reaction of producer
prices is relatively well explained by the degree of market power, that prices in sectors with volatile

idiosyncratic shocks react rapidly to aggregate monetary policy shocks, and that PCE categories in
which prices fall the most following a monetary policy shock tend to be those in which quantities

consumed fall the least. Finally, we find that the idiosyncratic components of prices and quantities


                                                  5
move mostly in opposite directions suggesting that idiosyncratic shocks are supply-type shocks.
    Our results are robust to changes in the sample. In particular we show that our main results
are qualitatively similar for the period after 1984.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the econometric framework,

by discussing the formulation and estimation of the FAVAR. In Section 3, we discuss various data
sets used in our estimation. Section 4 presents empirical results about the sources of fluctuations
in disaggregated prices. It includes a description of the price responses to sector-specific shocks
and to macroeconomic fluctuations. Section 5 investigates the eﬀects of monetary policy shocks
and relates the responses of producer prices in various sectors to industry characteristics. Section
6 reports some robustness results for the post-1984 sample. Section 7 concludes.



2    Econometric Framework: FAVAR

The empirical framework that we consider is based on the factor-augmented vector autoregression
model (FAVAR) described in Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz (2005) (BBE). One of its key features
is to provide estimates of macroeconomic factors that aﬀect the data of interest, by systemati-
cally and consistently exploiting all information from a large set of economic indicators. In our
application, we estimate the empirical model by exploiting information from a large number of
macroeconomic indicators, as well as from disaggregated data. This framework is particularly well
suited to decompose the fluctuations of each series into a common and a series-specific component.
It also allows us to characterize the response of all data series to macroeconomic disturbances, such
as monetary policy shocks. As BBE argue, this framework should lead to a better identification

of the policy shock than standard VARs, because it explicitly recognizes the large information set
that the Federal Reserve and financial market participants exploit in practice, and also because
it does not require to take a stand on the appropriate measures of prices and real activity which
can simply be treated as latent common components. A natural by-product of the estimation is
to obtain impulse response functions for any variables included in the data set. In particular, this
allows us to document the eﬀect of monetary policy on disaggregated prices.
    We only provide here a general description of our implementation of the empirical framework



                                                  6
and refer the interested reader to BBE for additional details. We assume that the economy is
aﬀected by a vector Ct of common components to all variables entering the data set. Since we will

be interested in characterizing the eﬀects of monetary policy, this vector of common components
includes a measure of the stance of monetary policy. As in most related VAR applications, we

assume that the Federal funds rate, Rt , is the policy instrument. It will be allowed to have
pervasive eﬀect throughout the economy and will thus be considered as a common component of
all variables entering the data set. The rest of the common dynamics are captured by a K × 1

vector of unobserved factors Ft , where K is relatively small. These unobserved factors may reflect
general economic conditions such as “economic activity,” the “general level of prices,” the level of
“productivity,” which are not easily captured by a few time series, but rather by a wide range of

economic variables. We assume that the joint dynamics of Ft and Rt are given by


                                       Ct = Φ(L)Ct−1 + vt                                        (1)


where                                           ⎡     ⎤
                                               ⎢ Ft ⎥
                                          Ct = ⎣    ⎦,
                                                 Rt

and Φ(L) is a conformable lag polynomial of finite order d, which may contain a priori restrictions,

as in standard structural VARs. The error term vt is i.i.d. with mean zero and covariance matrix
Q.
     The system (1) is a VAR in Ct . The additional diﬃculty, with respect to standard VARs,
however, is that the factors Ft are unobservable. We assume that the factors summarize the
information contained in a large number of economic variables. We denote by Xt this N × 1 vector

of “informational” variables, where N is assumed to be “large,” i.e., N > K + 1. We assume
furthermore that the large set of observable “informational” series Xt is related to the common
factors according to
                                          Xt = ΛCt + et                                          (2)

where Λ is an N × (K + 1) matrix of factor loadings, and the N × 1 vector et contains (mean-zero)
sector-specific components that are uncorrelated with the common components Ct . These sector-

                                                 7
specific components are allowed to be serially correlated and weakly correlated across indicators.
Equation (2) reflects the fact that the elements of Ct , which in general are correlated, represent

pervasive forces that drive the common dynamics of Xt . Conditional on the observed Federal funds
rate Rt , the variables in Xt are thus noisy measures of the underlying unobserved factors Ft . Note

that it is in principle not restrictive to assume that Xt depends only on the current values of the
factors, as Ft can always capture arbitrary lags of some fundamental factors.6
        To estimate the system (1) — (2), we follow the two-step principal component approach described

in BBE. In the first step, the space spanned by the common components, Ct , is estimated using
the first K + 1 principal components of Xt . While the estimation does not exploit the fact that Rt
is observed, Stock and Watson (2002) show that the principal components consistently recover the
space spanned by both Ft and Rt , when N is large and the number of principal components used
is at least as large as the true number of factors. In the second step, a structural VAR is estimated

on these common components, after imposing that Rt is one of the common components.
        This procedure has the advantages of being computationally simple and easy to implement. As
discussed by Stock and Watson (2002), it also imposes few distributional assumptions and allows for
some degree of cross-correlation in the idiosyncratic error term et . Boivin and Ng (2005) document
the good forecasting performance of this estimation approach compared to some alternatives.7



3        Data

The data set used in the estimation of our FAVAR is a balanced panel of 653 monthly series, for
the period running from 1976:1 to 2005:6. All data have been transformed to induce stationarity.

The details for this data set, as well as the transformation applied to each particular series, are
in Appendices A — D. The data set includes 111 updated macroeconomic indicators used by BBE,
and listed in Appendix A, which involve several measures of industrial production, various price
indices, interest rates, employment as well as other key macroeconomic and financial variables.
    6
     This is why Stock and Watson (1999) refer to (2) as a dynamic factor model.
    7
     Note that this two-step approach implies the presence of “generated regressors” in the second step. According to
the results of Bai (2003), the uncertainty in the factor estimates should be negligible when N is large relative to T .
Still, the confidence intervals on the impulse response functions reported below are based on a bootstrap procedure
that accounts for the uncertainty in the factor estimation.




                                                          8
These indicators have been found to collectively contain useful information about the state of the
economy for the appropriate identification of monetary policy. We expanded the data set of BBE
in two directions.
     First, we appended disaggregated data published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis on per-

sonal consumption expenditure (PCE). Specifically, we collected 335 series on PCE prices and an
equal number of series on real consumption. Among these series, 35 price series and 35 real con-
sumption series were removed because of missing observations. In order to capture data for all
expenditures reported, we removed the other series in the same categories and retained the series
at the immediately higher level of aggregation. However, we removed from our data set aggregate
price and real consumption series (except for overall aggregates), so as to count only once each

category in the disaggregated data. We thus ended up with 190 disaggregated PCE price series
and the 190 corresponding consumption series. At the level of disaggregation considered, we have
for instance data on new domestic autos, bicycles, shoes, cereals, fresh fruit, taxicabs, and so on.
In addition, we also included 4 price indices and 4 consumption aggregates (overall PCE, durable
goods, nondurable goods, and services). Further details on these series are provided in Appendix
B.
     Second, in order to obtain a more detailed picture of the characteristics of price responses, we
also collected over 600 series for producer prices at the 6-digit level of NAICS codes (corresponding
to 4-digit SIC codes). Because of changes in definitions and data coverage, we managed to obtain
only 154 series for a longer period starting in January 1976 and ending in June 2005. Appendix C

provides a brief description of these series.
     Besides the series just described, which we used to estimate the FAVAR, we also collected data
on industry characteristics, which could help us validate or reject assumptions underlying models of

price determination. The C4 ratio, provided by the Bureau of the Census, reports the percentage of
total sales attributable to the four largest firms in the industry. As another measure of competition,
we use also data on average gross profit rates from the Annual Survey of Manufacturing. This data

is available on an annual basis from 1997 to 2001. The cross-sectional industry data is described
in Appendix D.




                                                  9
4     Fluctuations in Disaggregated Prices: Macroeconomic Factors

      and Sector-Specific Shocks

We estimated the system (1) — (2) for the period 1976:1- 2005:6, using the data just described, and
assuming 5 latent factors in the vector Ft . We experimented with more factors, but none of our

conclusions were aﬀected. We used 13 lags in estimating (1). The estimated system allows us to
analyze the sources of fluctuations in sectoral inflation rates. Note that for all of the price series
considered, (2) implies that

                                           Xit = λ0i Ct + eit ,                                     (3)

where Xit contains the monthly log change in the respective price series. This formulation allows
us to disentangle the fluctuations in sectoral inflation rates due to the macroeconomic factors –

represented here by the common components Ct which have a diﬀuse eﬀect on all data series –
from those due to sector specific conditions represented by the term eit . It also allows us to study to
what extent the persistence in sectoral inflation rates is due to macroeconomic or sectoral shocks.

Note that since Ct is a vector which may contain elements with very diﬀerent dynamics and the
vectors of loadings λi may diﬀer across sectors, each sector-specific inflation rate may reveal diﬀerent
dynamics in response to macroeconomic disturbances. Recall also, that the sector-specific terms

eit are allowed to be serially correlated and weakly correlated across sectors.


4.1     Sources of fluctuations and persistence

In this subsection we discuss some summary statistics about the volatility and the persistence of
both aggregate and disaggregated monthly inflation series. The next subsection proceeds with a

discussion of the eﬀects of sector-specific and macroeconomic shocks.


4.1.1    Inflation volatility

As is indicated in the first column of Table 1, the standard deviation of aggregate inflation amounts

to 0.24% for the overall PCE series, and ranges between 0.24% and 0.42% for the inflation rates of
durable goods, nondurable goods and services. Most of the volatility in aggregate inflation is due



                                                   10
to fluctuations in common macroeconomic factors. In fact, the R2 statistic, which measures the
fraction of the variance in inflation explained by the common component λ0i Ct lies above 0.5 for all

of the aggregate measures.
       The picture is however quite diﬀerent for more disaggregated inflation series. As the lower panel

of Table 1 shows, disaggregated inflation series are on average much more volatile than aggregate
series. On average (across sectors), the standard deviation of monthly inflation is 1.15% for all
price series considered (0.97% for PCE inflation and 1.36% for PPI inflation).8 As the columns
two to four reveal, most of the inflation volatility is however due to sector-specific disturbances. In
fact while the mean volatility of the common component to inflation lies at 0.33%, the volatility
of the sector specific component is more than three times as large. The results are roughly similar
for PCE and PPI inflation rates. As a result, the R2 statistic amounts to 0.15 on average (0.17 for
PCE and 0.13 for PPI).

       Table 1 also reveals a considerable amount of heterogeneity across sectors in the volatility
of disaggregated inflation series. Whereas some series such as inflation of tenant-occupied rent
fluctuate even less than the inflation rate of the aggregate index, other series like the consumption
category “insurance premium for user-operated transportation” or the production category “other
oilseed processing” have monthly standard deviations close to 10%. This heterogeneity is due
to a large extent to diﬀerences in the volatility of sector-specific conditions, and much less so to
diﬀerences in the response to macroeconomic fluctuations. As the sector-specific components tend
to cancel each other out, inflation in the aggregate price indices ends up being less volatile than
most sector-specific inflation rates.
       One interesting fact revealed by Figure 1 is that the volatility of the common and the sector-
specific components to inflation are strongly positively correlated across sectors. As shown in Tables

2a-2c the correlation between the volatility of idiosyncratic shocks (Sd(ei)) and the volatility of the
common component (Sd(com)) is high both for PCE deflators (0.69) and for PPI data (0.78).9
   8
     The average volatility of disaggregated PCE inflation series, weighted with expenditure shares, is somewhat lower
than the unweighted average, but the overall picture remains the same for the volatility as well as for other statistics
described below.
   9
     From a statistical point of view, there is no reason to expect that the portion of inflation volatility explained by
the regression (common component) and the portion of inflation volatility explained by the error terms should be
correlated across industries (or samples). Therefore, Figure 1 presents an interesting result that requires structural
interpretation.



                                                           11
Note that the inflation variance explained by the macroeconomic factors depends on the loadings
represented by the matrix Λ. One interpretation is that these loadings reflect the price setting
behavior of firms in various industries. Under this interpretation, Figure 1 reveals that firms
in industries with volatile idiosyncratic shocks do also respond strongly to macroeconomic shocks.

This is the case if frequent price adjustments necessitated by idiosyncratic volatility are also used as
an opportunity to adjust to changes in the macroeconomic environment. That would be consistent,
for instance, with a sticky price model a la Calvo with heterogeneity in the frequency of price
adjustment across sectors as in Carvalho (2006).10


4.1.2      Inflation persistence

One characteristic of aggregate inflation often discussed is its persistence. To assess the degree of
persistence, we fit for each inflation series Xit and each of its components, λ0i Ct and eit an AR(p)
process, of the form
                                               wt = ρ (L) wt−1 + εt

where the lag-length p is selected on the basis of BIC, and we measure the degree of persistence by
the sum of the coeﬃcients on all lags, ρ (1) . Not surprisingly, as we report in Table 1, fluctuations
in aggregate inflation are persistent with a measure ρ (1) of 0.9 for the PCE inflation rate, and
ranging between 0.44 and 0.91 for the three main components of PCE inflation. This measured
persistence likely suﬀers from an upward bias. In fact, as argued in Pesaran and Smith (1995)
and Imbs, Mumtaz, Ravn, and Rey (2005), the estimated persistence is likely biased upward when

the components of the aggregate index display heterogenous dynamics, and the persistence of the
individual series and their variance are positively correlated. Another possible source of bias has
to do with a possible change in mean inflation during the sample.
       As Clark (2003) noted, the sectoral inflation series display much less persistence than the aggre-
gated series over the long sample. Similarly, Altissimo, Mojon and Zaﬀaroni (2004) who estimated
  10
    An alternative interpretation might be that industries with significant inherent volatility are riskier so that the
degree of asymmetric information between firms and lenders is more acute (since it is more diﬃcult for lenders to
determine the state of the world). In this case, more idiosyncratic volatility should make firms more vulnerable
to changes in monetary policy, which is known to aﬀect the wedge between internal and external financing (e.g.
Bernanke and Gertler, 1995).




                                                          12
a factor model on disaggregated CPI inflation series in Europe also found that inflation rates of
individual categories are on average more volatile and less persistent than the aggregate inflation
rate, and display widespread heterogeneity across categories. In our data set, the persistence is
0.29 on average over all sectors (0.30 for PCE inflation and 0.28 for PPI inflation). The inflation

persistence varies importantly across sectors. While it is negative for some producer and consumer
prices, it gets above 0.9 for the “health insurance” category of “worker’s compensation” and for
“rental value of farm dwellings.” Interestingly, while the inflation persistence is in some cases due to
series-specific factors, such as in the categories just mentioned, the inflation persistence is for most
series due to fluctuations in common macroeconomic factors. In fact, while the average persistence
of the common components reaches 0.91, the individual components display on average almost no

persistence. There is however considerable heterogeneity in the persistence of the sector-specific
component across sectors.


4.1.3   Persistence and volatility

Bils and Klenow (2004) emphasize that, for a particular process for marginal costs, the Calvo model
predicts that a higher degree of price stickiness reduces the impact of exogenous shocks on current
inflation, but that it increases the persistence inflation. Thus everything else equal, in sectors with
high price stickiness, the inflation rate should display a relatively low volatility and a relatively
high persistence. Bils and Klenow (2004) argue that models such as the Calvo model are rejected
by the data as they predict a strong negative correlation across sectors between the frequency of
price adjustment and the persistence in sectoral inflation, while this correlation is positive in their
data covering 123 consumer goods over the period 1995-2000, and only mildly negative in their

longer data set.
   While we do not have estimates of the frequency of price adjustment, as in Bils and Klenow
(2004), we can nevertheless compare the correlations of inflation volatility and inflation persistence
across sectors in our data set. We find a weakly negative correlation (-0.08) between volatility and
persistence in the sector-specific component of inflation, as Table 2 indicates. Once we look at the

common component of inflation, however, the persistence and the volatility of inflation are much
more negatively correlated (-0.46). This explains in part why the Calvo model is more successful


                                                  13
in describing the volatility and persistence of inflation fluctuations generated by macroeconomic
disturbances, than those generated by sector-specific shocks.


4.2       Eﬀects of macroeconomic shocks and sector-specific shocks

Prices may change for all sorts of reasons, including changes in costs, in productivity, or changes
in demand for goods. While Bils and Klenow (2004) and Klenow and Kryvtsov (2005) provide
very valuable evidence that most prices are changed relatively frequently, and on average by large

amounts, their study does not identify the source of these changes. It is therefore not clear from
these studies whether prices which tend to change frequently and by large amounts – e.g., due to

large and frequent changes in sector specific conditions – also change readily to macroeconomic
shocks. Clarifying this issue is particularly relevant to understand the eﬀects of monetary policy.
If fact, if prices were adjusting rapidly to monetary shocks, monetary policy would have little and

only short-lived eﬀects on economic activity, as in the model of Golosov and Lucas (2003). Our
paper thus complements Bils and Klenow’s (2004) study by documenting how prices respond to
sector-specific shocks and macroeconomic disturbances.
       The left panels of Figure 2 report the response of each of the sectoral (log) price level to
an adverse shock to its own sector-specific component. It is the response to a drop in eit by one

standard deviation. These prices respond sharply and very promptly to sector-specific disturbances,
and tend to reach their new equilibrium level shortly after the shock. Inflation rates show thus
no persistence in response to the sector-specific shock. For PCE categories, we report in Figure 3

the responses of the corresponding quantities to an adverse sector-specific shock in consumption.
Similarly to prices, quantities fall once-and-for-all to such a shock. They don’t seem to revert to
the initial value.

       To understand better the shocks that underlie sector-specific disturbances, we report in Figure 4
the correlation between the sector-specific component of PCE prices and the corresponding sector-
specific component of PCE quantities. Figure 4 reports the histogram of the correlations over all
sectors. As is clear from the figure, all correlations except for one are negative.11 This suggests that
sector-specific shocks are overwhelmingly supply-type disturbances. This finding is consistent with
  11
       The positive correlation refers to the category “insurance premiums for user-operated transportation.”


                                                           14
Franco and Philippon (2004) which by looking at a large panel of firms find that permanent shocks
to productivity, largely uncorrelated across firms, explain a large fraction of the firms’ dynamics.
   While sector-specific shocks tend to shift prices and quantities permanently to a new level, the
responses to macroeconomic disturbances are very diﬀerent. The middle panels of Figure 2 show the

responses of each sectoral price to an innovation (of minus one standard deviation) to its common
component λ0i Ct . We do the same for the PCE quantities in Figure 3. Prices and quantities fall
by a relatively moderate amount in the first couple of months after the shock, but then continue
to fall over the subsequent months. This reveals important sluggishness in the responses of prices
to macroeconomic disturbances, and persistence in inflation rates. This contrasts sharply with the
responses to sector-specific shocks.
   Of course, since we don’t identify any structural macroeconomic shock in this exercise, we are
describing the response to a combination of macroeconomic shocks. These figures do not allow
us to exclude the possibility that there exist macroeconomic disturbances which cause a rapid and
permanent change in prices. To address this shortcoming, we identify in the next section a particular
macroeconomic shock, i.e., a monetary policy shock. To get a sense of the kind of macroeconomic

shocks we are considering here, we note that they do have a permanent eﬀect on both prices and
quantities, and that for PCE categories the correlation between the common component of prices
and of the corresponding quantities are widely distributed over the -1 to +1 interval (Figure 4).

This suggests that the disturbances that are common to our large data set involve both supply-
and demand-type shocks.
   Overall the results of this section suggest that there is a much higher volatility of sectoral
inflation rates than of aggregate inflation rates, and that changes in sector-specific conditions are the
most important determinants of sectoral inflation rates. Fluctuations in the common components,

however, are responsible for a significant fraction of the volatility of sectoral inflation rates, and
generate most of the fluctuations in aggregate inflation. In addition, sectoral prices respond very
diﬀerently to sector-specific shocks and to macroeconomic shocks. While sector-specific shocks

may cause large fluctuations in sectoral inflation, these fluctuations are typically short lived so that
prices tend to move immediately to their new permanent level. Aggregate macroeconomic shocks

instead tend to have more persistent and sluggish eﬀects on a wide range of sectoral inflation rates.


                                                   15
5         Eﬀects of Monetary Policy Shocks

We now turn to the discussion of the eﬀects of monetary policy shocks on disaggregated prices. One

advantage of studying their responses to monetary shocks is that this can be done with a minimum
amount of identifying restrictions in the FAVAR. To investigate the eﬀects of other macroeconomic

shocks would require arguably more controversial identifying assumptions. Since Bernanke and
Blinder (1992) and Sims (1992), it is common to use VARs to trace out the eﬀects of monetary
policy innovations on macroeconomic variables. VARs are particularly convenient for this as they
merely require the identification of monetary policy shocks, leaving the rest of the macroeconomic
model unrestricted. To maintain enough degrees of freedom, estimated VARs are typically low-
dimensional, involving in general no more than six to eight variables.12 The small size of traditional
VARs has however been criticized. In fact estimated monetary policy innovations are likely to be
biased in small-sized VARs to the extent that central banks and the private sector make decisions on
the basis of information not considered in these VARs. A common illustration of this problem is the
“price-puzzle”, i.e., the finding that the price level tends to increase slightly after a contractionary
money policy shock, which contradicts most standard theories (see Sims, 1992). Another problem
with small-sized VARs is that they don’t allow us to understand the eﬀects of monetary policy
shocks on a large number of variables of interest.
         Fortunately, as argued in BBE, the FAVAR described above allows us to address both of these
shortcomings of traditional VAR. BBE provide a characterization of the eﬀects of monetary policy
on about twenty macroeconomic variables using estimated factors. In this paper, we focus on the
eﬀects of monetary policy on our large panel of prices.


5.1        Identification of monetary policy shocks

To identify the monetary policy shock, we follow the strategy described in BBE. The assump-
tion is that none of the latent common components of the economy responds within a month to
unanticipated changes in monetary policy. This is the FAVAR extension of the standard recur-
sive identification of monetary policy shock in standard VARs. To implement it in a FAVAR, we
    12
    Leeper, Sims and Zha (1996), using Bayesian priors consider slightly larger VARs containing up to about 20
variables.



                                                     16
need to account for the added diﬃculty that the principal components are not associated with any
particular economic concepts. However, when the number of data series N is large, the principal
components estimated from the entire data set, Ĉ(Ft , Rt ), have the property that they should con-
sistently recover K + 1 independent, but arbitrary, linear combinations of the latent factors Ft and

the observed common factor, i.e., the Federal funds rate Rt . Since Rt is not explicitly imposed as
a common component in the first step, any of the linear combinations underlying Ĉ(Ft , Rt ) could
involve the Fed’s policy instrument, Rt . It would thus not be valid to simply estimate a VAR

in Ĉ(Ft , Rt ) and Rt , and identify the policy shock recursively. Instead, the direct dependence of
Ĉ(Ft , Rt ) on Rt must first be removed, which is achieved by exploiting a subset of the variables
– prices and real-activity measures, but not financial variables – that are assumed not to re-

spond within the month to changes in monetary policy. We refer readers to BBE for details on the
implementation of the identification.


5.2      Responses to monetary policy shocks

We proceed with a description of the response of our data series to a monetary policy shocks, i.e.,
an unexpected increase (of one standard deviation) of the Federal funds rate. Figure 5a shows the
response of the Federal funds rate, the index of industrial production – as an aggregate measure
of economic activity –, and an aggregate price index (PCE deflator). The solid line shows the
responses generated by our FAVAR and the dashed lines show the responses obtained from a
standard VAR that include these three variables only.13 Figure 5b shows similar impulse responses
except that the VAR is estimated using the consumer price index (CPI) instead of the PCE deflator.
      One important feature of this figure is that the responses of the price index and industrial
production are very diﬀerent for the FAVAR and the VAR. The VAR displays a price puzzle and
a large eﬀect of monetary policy on industrial production after four years, which is inconsistent
with long-run money neutrality. The price puzzle is especially important for the VAR using the
CPI data, in Figure 5b. Instead the FAVAR displays a more conventional response of industrial
production, and essentially no response of the price index for the first few months following a
monetary policy shock. As discussed in BBE, since the FAVAR nests the VAR specification, this
 13
      The VAR includes 13 lags as is the case for the estimated equation (1) in the FAVAR.


                                                         17
suggests that the FAVAR is able to exploit the relevant information from the data set, that Sims
(1992) argued may be missing from small-sized VARs. Note that if the additional series added to
the data set were irrelevant, they should not bias the estimated response, but they should rather
result in less precise estimates. As a result, the fact that the responses of the price index and the

industrial production are diﬀerent for both specifications suggests that the FAVAR is exploiting
relevant information, especially for the CPI data, in Figure 5b.
   We now turn to the responses of more disaggregated price series to the monetary policy shock.
The FAVAR is perfectly suited for such an exercise as it allows us to compute directly the responses
of all of the variables in the data set. The right panels of Figure 2 contain the disaggregated PCE
and PPI price responses to the same identified monetary policy shock. While we observe some

heterogeneity in the responses, a striking feature is that most indices respond very little for several
months following the shock, and start falling only later. In addition, only very few sectors display
an important price puzzle. Recall that in order to identify the monetary policy shock, we assume
that individual prices do not respond within the same month to changes in the Federal funds rate.
However nothing in the estimated FAVAR constrains the response of price series in all months
following the monetary policy shock.
   The right panels of Figure 2 also plot the unweighted average response (thick solid line) and
the response of the overall price index (thick dashed line). It is interesting to note that the average
price responses to a monetary shock and the response of the aggregate price indices are very
similar. This suggests that the weights used in aggregate price indices do not play an important

role in characterizing the response in the overall price indices. The figure makes it clear that most
of the disaggregated prices move little in the 6 months following the monetary shock, and start
decreasing thereafter. As reported in Table 3, the cumulative decline in prices is only 0.09% over

the first 6 months, but reaches 0.43% when cumulated over the first 12 months. The drop in prices
is more pronounced for producer prices with a cumulated decline of 0.78% over the first year than
for consumer prices (cumulated decline of 0.15%). Among consumer prices, the prices of durable

goods start falling more rapidly than nondurables and services, a fact noted by Erceg and Levin
(2002) and Barsky, House and Kimball (2003), and attributed to the greater interest-rate sensitivity

of durable goods. These price indices do not reveal a price puzzle.


                                                  18
   Overall, when they start falling following the monetary shock, prices tend to decline fairly
steadily for a couple of years. This results in relatively persistent sectoral inflation movements. As
reported in Table 3, the autocorrelation coeﬃcients of inflation conditional on a monetary shock
are all very high.

   The right panel of Figure 3 represents the impulse responses of the PCE quantities to the same
monetary policy shock. While on average the real consumption responses tend to fall subsequent
to the monetary shock, before reverting back to the initial level, there is considerable variation
across sectors. As for the price responses, the average real consumption responses displays some
persistence. Interestingly, sectors in which prices fall the most following a monetary shock tend
to be sectors in which quantities fall the least, as indicated in Figure 6. This figure displays

the scatter plot across PCE categories of the cumulated responses of prices and quantities for six
months following the monetary shock, and the regression line reveals a significant and negative
slope. Similar pictures are obtained for longer horizons.
   To the extent that one is interested in characterizing the behavior of the economy in response to
monetary policy actions, our results provide empirical support for features such as price rigidities
and inflation persistence often embedded in monetary models. Our findings, however, contrast
sharply with those of Bils, Klenow, and Kryvtsov (2003) and Balke and Wynne (2003) which call
for a rejection of conventional sticky-price models. These authors found the opposite conclusion
mainly because they estimate an important price puzzle.
   Bils, Klenow, and Kryvtsov (2003) estimate responses of 123 components of the CPI to a Federal

funds innovation, where the latter innovations are extracted from a 7-variable monthly VAR. As
the VAR is estimated independently from the disaggregated price data, the responses obtained
constitute only rough estimates of the price responses. Based on frequencies of price adjustments

reported in Bils and Klenow (2004), they consider two categories of price responses – the flexible
price and sticky price categories – and they report the responses of the prices in both categories
as well as their ratio. They argue that the movements in relative prices are inconsistent with a

popular sticky-price model. Following an expansionary monetary policy shock, their estimated
relative price (of flexible prices relative to sticky prices) declines initially and then increases, while

in the model, the relative price increases temporarily before reverting back to zero. However, the


                                                   19
main reason for their finding of an unconventional relative price response in the data is related to
the fact that their estimate of flexible-price responses display a price puzzle: the flexible prices fall
initially in response a monetary policy expansion, and increase only later. In contrast, sticky prices
do not show significant dynamics in the first 20 months.

   Balke and Wynne (2003), instead, focus on components of the producer price index. After
estimating a small-sized VAR and the response of components of the PPI to an identified monetary
policy shock, they also find a substantial price puzzle in individual series, and thus conclude similarly
to Bils, Klenow and Kryvtsov (2003) that the implied estimated evolution of relative prices in
inconsistent with that predicted by sticky price models.
   These studies make two key assumptions about the behavior of the macro-economy: i) that the

macroeconomic dynamics can be properly uncovered from a small set of macroeconomic indicators,
and ii) that macroeconomic dynamics can be modeled separately from the disaggregated prices.
Based on the results of BBE, and as argued above, the first assumption does not seem to be
empirically valid and could be responsible for finding a price puzzle. The second assumption implies
that disaggregated prices only have an eﬀect on the macroeconomy through an observed aggregate
index. The FAVAR framework that we consider in this paper relaxes these two assumptions as it
allows us to incorporate more information in the estimation of the macroeconomic dynamics, and
to model the disaggregated dynamics in a more flexible fashion. Interestingly, in contrast to these
studies, we don’t find any evidence of price puzzle in our estimated FAVAR. This implies that the
ratio of flexible to sticky prices behaves as predicted by standard monetary models (including sticky

price models) with flexible prices falling after a contractionary monetary policy shock.


5.3     Cross-sectional variation in price responses

Having estimated impulse responses of sectoral prices to monetary policy shocks, we now attempt
to explain diﬀerences in prices responses with sectoral characteristics.


5.3.1    Cumulated impulse responses and volatility of sectoral shocks

One first set of interesting correlations pertains to the cumulative sum of the impulse responses to a
monetary shocks over the first 6 months (sum6 ) and over the first 12 months (sum12 ). Two striking


                                                   20
results are the strongly negative correlations of the cumulative sums (in the last two columns of
Table 2) with the volatility (Sd(ei)) and persistence of idiosyncratic shocks (rho(ei)). To interpret
these correlations, we should point out that the sums of impulse responses are calculated for a
contractionary monetary policy and therefore more negative numbers imply more price flexibility,

i.e. faster price adjustment.
   As illustrated further in Figure 7, in sectors with small enough sectoral shocks there is almost
no price response to monetary shocks over the first 6 months. However the larger the sector-
specific volatility the higher the price responses to monetary policy shocks. This result confirms
the interpretation of Figure 1, that industries with high inherent volatility adjust also faster to
macroeconomic disturbances. Similar pictures are found for when we consider longer horizons.

Such a finding appears consistent with the prediction of the state-dependent model of Gertler and
Leahy (2006). In this model, firms are aﬀected by idiosyncratic shocks and face a cost of adjusting
prices. The model predicts that the more firms are aﬀected by idiosyncratic shocks, the more they
adjust prices conditional on a monetary policy shock. Alternatively, by referring to the costs of
processing information, Reis (2006) presents a model of inattentive producers in which a higher
volatility of shocks requires more frequent price updating.
   In addition, we note that from Tables 2a-2c that the persistence of the idiosyncratic shocks is
again negatively related to the responses of prices to monetary policy shocks. One possible inter-
pretation is that in industries where we observe more persistence of the idiosyncratic component,
firms adjust immediately to any shock because both common and idiosyncratic components are

persistent. Those firms that experience rather transient idiosyncratic shocks wait to see if the cur-
rent shock is persistent (macroeconomic) or not (idiosyncratic) and adjust only with a delay. Of
course, these are raw correlations and it is not clear whether any of these relationships will remain

significant after controlling for example for the degree of competition in the industry. Accordingly,
we turn now to regression analysis.


5.3.2   Responses of producer prices and industry characteristics

For the producer price series we have collected data on industry characteristics by NAICS codes.
We can match now the responses of prices to these characteristics. Our goal is to provide evidence


                                                 21
on the main explanatory factors for the dispersion in price responses observed in the right panels
of Figure 2. To address this question we start with the following specification of the cross-industry
price responses:
                      IRF CUi,h = α + β 1 compi + β 2 Sd(e)i + β 3 rho(e)i +   i                 (4)

where IRF CUi,h is the cumulative deviation of the price level in industry i after a monetary policy
shock, h periods after the shock. We present results for the deviation of prices 6 and 12 months
after the shock. compi denotes the degree of competition. We also use two variables from the
factor analysis: Sd(e)i is a measure of the volatility of the idiosyncratic component and rho(e)i

is the persistence of this component. To check robustness we will also add other controls and
deterministic components like dummy variables.
   We start in Table 6 by using as a dependent variable the cumulative sum of price responses over

the first six months. Column (1) reports that profit rates are strongly and positively correlated
with price responses. Since our price variable is on average negative and higher flexibility implies
more negative cumulative deviation, the result implies that more competitive industries (lower
profit rates) have higher price flexibility. The mean profit rate is about 25% and a movement from
the mean to a profit rate of 35% implies 0.15 percentage points smaller cumulated price change

6 months following a policy shock. This is consistent with standard sticky price models (see e.g.,
Woodford, 2003), as well as with theories based on rational inattention (Reis, 2006). In column (5),
we include three dummy variables to control for potentially diﬀerent average price dynamics. We use
three broad categories — food and textiles (NAICS codes starting with 31; dummy is coded as d1 );
paper, wood, chemicals (codes with 32; dummy is denoted by d2 ); and metallurgy, electronics and

machinery (codes with 33; dummy is denoted by d3 ). In all three cases the intercepts are negative
signifying the absence on average of a price puzzle. Notably the extra flexibility of the model
improves the fit, but does not alter the coeﬃcient on profit rates. In column (6), by including an

interaction term we test whether the relationship between market power and price flexibility diﬀers
across major industry categories, but we find little evidence of changes across major categories.
   This positive relationship between price stickiness and competition within each sector contrasts

with Bils and Klenow’s finding (2004) that their preferred measure of market power – the C4 ratio



                                                 22
– becomes insignificant once they control for prices of raw material goods. As in Bils and Klenow,
we also find that the C4 ratio is not a robust predictor of price dynamics. We use the inverse of the
ratio as a measure of elasticity of demand, and we report in column (2) that the inverse of the C4
ratio is not significantly related to price dynamics. However, our results based on mean profit rates

imply that for producer prices, market power is robustly related to price dynamics in response to
monetary shocks.
    Columns (3) and (4) confirm the correlation from the correlation matrix — both idiosyncratic
volatility and persistence are negatively related to price impulse responses. This implies that firms
in industries with persistent and volatile idiosyncratic shocks adjust rapidly to changes in the
macroeconomic environment. Interestingly, the result survives once we include as controls profit

rates (column (7)) and the three dummy variables defined above (not shown in this table).
    As a robustness check, we turn now to the results based on the cumulative response over the first
12 months. The results reported in Table 5 confirm the importance of market power as measured
by profit rates and also confirm the importance of the volatility of the idiosyncratic shocks (Sd (ei))
and its persistence measure (rho (e)i ). As before, the C4 is insignificant. Finally, in Table 6 we

report regressions results for the price impulse responses from the 7th to the 12th month after
the shock, and find again similar results. In column (8) we include also the sum of the impulse
responses in the initial 6 months. The coeﬃcient is highly significant and positive indicating that
a larger portion of the price adjustment occurs in this second 6-month period.
    To sum up, our sectoral analysis indicates that as predicted by models based on monopolistic

competition, prices adjust more sluggishly in industries in which market power is higher. In addition
we uncovered two other important determinants of price responses: idiosyncratic volatility and the
persistence of industry-specific shocks.



6    Robustness Results

All of the results reported above are based on a sample that starts in 1976:1 and ends in 2005:6.

Recent research has however provided evidence of widespread instability in many macroeconomic




                                                  23
series14 , of changes in monetary policy behavior15 over our sample, and of an important reduction
in output volatility since around 1984. To ensure that our results are not aﬀected by such events,
we reproduce our main results for the sample 1984:1 — 2005:6.
         Table 7 reproduces Table 1 for the post-1984 sample. While the persistence in inflation is lower in

that sample – with the decline in persistence due to a lower persistence in the common component
– all of the qualitative results discussed in Section 4 remain valid. Most notably, it remains true
that most of the volatility in sectoral inflation is explained by sector-specific disturbances. In fact,
only about 10% of inflation fluctuations is attributable to macroeconomic factors. Even though the
persistence in disaggregate inflation is lower in the post-1984 sample than in our full sample, that
persistence remains due to macroeconomic factors.

         Figure 8 reproduce the responses of disaggregated prices to sector-specific shocks, to macro-
economic shocks, and to monetary policy shocks. Once again, while there are some changes, the
responses are qualitatively similar to the ones reported for the full sample in Figure 2. Importantly,
the price responses to idiosyncratic shocks are very diﬀerent from those to macroeconomic shocks,
and disaggregated prices continue to respond with a significant delay to monetary policy shocks.



7         Conclusion

In this paper, we disentangle the fluctuations in disaggregated U.S. consumer and producer prices
which are due to aggregate macroeconomic shocks from those due to shocks to individual price series.
We do so by estimating a factor-augmented VAR that relates a large panel of economic indicators
and of individual price series to a relatively small number of estimated common factors. After

identifying monetary policy shocks using all of the information available, we estimate consistently
the eﬀects of U.S. monetary policy on disaggregated prices. This is important not only to get a
better understanding of the nature of the fluctuations in disaggregated prices, and of how prices

react to macroeconomic shocks, but also to assess the impact of monetary policy on prices in various
sectors.
    14
    Stock and Watson (1996), Boivin (1999), Stock and Watson (2002) have provided evidence of instability in VARs.
    15
    Bernanke and Mihov (1998), Clarida, Galí and Gertler (2000), Cogley and Sargent (2001, 2005), Boivin (1999,
2006), Boivin and Giannoni (2002, 2006).




                                                       24
We obtain several empirical results that can be summarized as follows:


1. At the level of disaggregation considered, most of the sectoral prices fluctuations appear to
   be due to sector-specific factors, and only about 15% of individual sectoral price fluctuations,
   on average, are due to aggregate macroeconomic factors.

2. Sectoral inflation fluctuations are relatively persistent, but this persistence is essentially due

   to the very high degree of persistence in the components driven by common or macroeconomic
   shocks, and not to sector-specific disturbances.

3. Sectoral prices respond very diﬀerently to sector-specific shocks and to macroeconomic shocks:
   while sector-specific shocks may cause large fluctuations in sectoral inflation, these fluctua-
   tions are typically short lived so that prices tend to move immediately to their new permanent
   level; aggregate macroeconomic shocks instead tend to have more persistent and sluggish ef-
   fects on a wide range of sectoral inflation rates.

4. Most disaggregated prices respond with a significant delay to identified monetary policy
   shocks, and show little evidence of a “price puzzle,” contrary to existing studies based on
   traditional VARs. The absence of a strong price puzzle suggests that by exploiting a large
   information set in the estimation of a FAVAR, we may obtain more accurate estimates of the

   eﬀects of monetary policy.

5. PCE categories in which prices fall the most following a monetary policy shock tend to be

   those in which quantities consumed fall the least.

6. The observed dispersion in the reaction of producer prices to monetary policy shocks is
   relatively well explained by the degree of market power.

7. Prices react more rapidly to monetary policy shocks in sectors with volatile idiosyncratic and
   persistent idiosyncratic shocks.

8. The correlations between the idiosyncratic components of prices and quantities tend to be
   negative, suggesting that sector-specific shocks are mostly supply-type shocks.



                                               25
       This collection of stylized facts on the response of disaggregated U.S. prices to various shocks
presents challenges to current models of price determination. An evaluation of various models on
the basis of these stylized facts is beyond the scope of this paper. Nevertheless, it is worth pointing
out that our finding number 3 – namely that sectoral prices respond diﬀerently to macroeconomic

and sector-specific shocks – may explain why sticky-price models such as the Calvo model have
been so popular in characterizing the eﬀects of monetary policy actions on aggregate variables,
while they have been sharply criticized at the same time by authors focused on disaggregate price
series.
       Clearly, is would be desirable to have models that can fully account for the responses of ag-
gregate and disaggregated prices to both macroeconomic and sector-specific disturbances. Some

recent papers are very promising in this respect. Carvalho (2006) generalizes the Calvo model to
allow for heterogeneity in price stickiness across sectors. He finds that in the presence of strategic
complementarities, firms which adjust prices infrequently have a disproportionately large eﬀect on
the decisions of other firms, and thus on the aggregate price level. Even if most sectors have rel-
atively flexible prices, and thus respond quickly to sector-specific disturbances, they may respond
sluggishly to nominal shocks. Gertler and Leahy (2006) propose a state-dependent pricing model
that involves volatile prices due to idiosyncratic shocks, but that predicts sluggish price responses
to a monetary shock, as reported here, due to real rigidities.16 The model also predicts that a high

volatility of idiosyncratic shocks should be associated with more volatile prices and a more volatile
response to monetary shocks, as we find in the data. In yet another direction, recent models on
rational inattention such as those proposed by Reis (2006) and Maćkowiak and Wiederholt (2006)
are also able to generate diﬀerent responses of sectoral prices to sector-specific shocks and aggregate
shocks. The model of Reis (2006), for instance predicts that (i) stickiness is higher in industries
with low price elasticity of demand; (ii) costs of processing information are positively related with
inattentiveness; (iii) volatility of shocks requires more frequent updating.
       Assessing the empirical success of each of these theories along the many dimensions documented
  16
    In contrast, the state-dependent model of Golosov and Lucas (2003) which has idiosyncratic productivity shocks
but which abstracts from strategic complementarities generates rapid and strong price responses following a monetary
policy shock. Midrigan (2006), however, extends the model of Golosov and Lucas (2003) to a multi-product setting
and calibrates the distribution of idiosyncratic shocks in a way that mitigates the price responses to monetary shocks.




                                                          26
in this paper is not a trivial task. Even though a strict and literal interpretation of any of these
models may always be rejected on some dimension, a fair assessment requires moving beyond the
strict interpretation and determining whether some enriched version of existing theories can be
successful. This is in our view an important avenue for future research.




                                                27
References

 [1] Altissimo, Filippo, Benoît Mojon, and Paolo Zaﬀaroni (2004), “Fast Micro and Slow Macro:

    Can Aggregation Explain the Persistence of Inflation?” manuscript, European Central Bank.

 [2] Aoki, Kosuke (2001), “Optimal Monetary Policy Responses to Relative Price Changes,” Jour-
    nal of Monetary Economics 48: 55-80.

 [3] Bai, Jushan (2003), “Inferential Theory for Factor Models of Large Dimensions,” Econometrica
    71(1): 135-72.

 [4] Balke, Nathan S., and Mark A. Wynne (2003), “The Relative Price Eﬀects of Monetary
    Shocks,” FRB Dallas, Working Paper no. 0306.

 [5] Ball, Laurence, and David Romer (1990), “Real Rigidities and the Non-Neutrality of Money,”
    Review of Economic Studies 57: 183-203.

 [6] Barro, Robert J. (1972), “A Theory of Monopolistic Price Adjustment,” Review of Economic
    Studies 39: 17-26.

 [7] Barsky, Robert, Christopher L. House, and Miles Kimball (2003), “Do Flexible Goods Prices
    Undermine Sticky Price Models?” NBER Working Paper 9832.

 [8] Benigno, Pierpaolo (2003), “Optimal Monetary Policy in a Currency Area,” Journal of Inter-
    national Economics.

 [9] Bernanke, Ben S., and Alan S. Blinder (1992), “The Federal Funds Rate and the Channels of
    Monetary Transmission,” American Economic Review 82(4): 901-921.

[10] Bernanke, Ben S., Jean Boivin and Piotr Eliasz (2005), “Measuring Monetary Policy: A Fac-
    tor Augmented Vector Autoregressive (FAVAR) Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics

    120(1): 387-422.

[11] Bernanke, Ben S. and Mark Gertler (1995), “Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of
    Monetary Policy Transmission,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, 27-48.



                                               28
[12] Bernanke, Ben, and Ilian Mihov (1998). “Measuring Monetary Policy.” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 113, 869—902.

[13] Bils, Mark, and Peter J. Klenow (2004), “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,”
    Journal of Political Economy 112(5): 947-985.

[14] Bils, Mark, Peter J. Klenow, and Oleksiy Kryvtsov (2003), “Sticky Prices and Monetary Policy
    Shocks,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 27(1): 2-9.

[15] Blinder, Alan S., Elie R. D. Canetti, David E. Lebow, and Jeremy B. Rudd (1998), Asking
    About Prices: A New Approach to Understanding Price Stickiness, Russell Sage Foundation,
    New York.

[16] Boivin, Jean (1999). “The Fed’s Conduct of Monetary Policy: Has It Changed and Does It
    Matter?” Ph.D. thesis, Princeton University.

[17] Boivin, Jean (2006). “Has U.S. Monetary Policy Changed? Evidence from Drifting Coeﬃcients
    and Real-Time Data,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Vol. 38, No. 5.

[18] Boivin, Jean and Marc Giannoni (2002) “Assessing Changes in the Monetary Transmission

    Mechanism: A VAR Approach”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review
    8(1): 97-111.

[19] Boivin, Jean and Marc Giannoni (2006) “Has Monetary Policy Become More Eﬀective?” The
    Review of Economics and Statistics 88(3): 445-462.

[20] Boivin, Jean, and Serena Ng (2005), “Understanding and Comparing Factor-Based Forecasts,”
    International Journal of Central Banking 1(3): 117-151.

[21] Carlton, Dennis W. (1986), “The Rigidity of Prices,” American Economic Review 76, 637-658.

[22] Carvalho, Carlos (2006), “Heterogeneity in Price Stickiness and the New Keynesian Phillips
    Curve,” Manuscript, Princeton University.

[23] Cecchetti, Stephen G. (1986), “The Frequency of Price Adjustment: A Study of the Newsstand
    Prices of Magazines,” Journal of Econometrics 31, 255-274.

                                                29
[24] Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans (1999), “Monetary Policy
    Shocks: What Have We Learned and to What End?” in J. Taylor and M. Woodford, eds.,
    Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 1A, Chap. 2. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

[25] Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans (2005), “Nominal Rigidities

    and the Dynamic Eﬀect of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy 113(1):
    1-45.

[26] Clark, Todd E. (2003), “Disaggregate Evidence on the Persistence of Consumer Price Infla-
    tion,” manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

[27] Cogley, Timothy, and Thomas J. Sargent (2001), “Evolving Post-World War II U.S. Inflation
    Dynamics,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 16: 331-373.

[28] Cogley, Timothy, and Thomas J. Sargent (2005), “Drifts and Volatilities: Monetary Policies
    and Outcomes in the Post WWII US,” Review of Economic Dynamics 8: 262—302.

[29] Dhyne, E., L. Álvarez, H. Le Bihan, G. Veronese, D. Dias, J. Hoﬀman, N. Jonker, P. Lün-
    nemann, F. Rumler and J. Vilmunen (2005), “Price Setting in the Euro Area: Some Stylised

    Facts from Individual Consumer Price Data,” European Central Bank Working Paper no. 524.

[30] Erceg, Christopher, and Andrew T. Levin (2002), “Optimal Monetary Policy with Durable
    Consumption Goods,” International Finance Discussion Paper #748, Board of Governors of
    the Federal Reserve System.

[31] Franco, Francesco, and Thomas Philippon (2004), “Firms and Aggregate Dynamics,” Manu-
    script, New York University.

[32] Fuhrer, Jeﬀrey C. and George R. Moore (1995), “Inflation Persistence,” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 110, 127-159.

[33] Galí, Jordi, and Mark Gertler (1999), “Inflation Dynamics: A Structural Econometric Analy-
    sis,” Journal of Monetary Economics 44, 195-222.

[34] Gertler, Mark, and John Leahy (2006), “A Phillips Curve with an SS Foundation,” NBER
    Working Paper 11971.

                                              30
[35] Golosov, Mikhail, and Robert E. Lucas (2003), “Menu Costs and Phillips Curves,” NBER
    Working Paper 10187.

[36] Imbs, Jean, Haroon Mumtaz, Morten O. Ravn, and Helene Rey (2005), “PPP Strikes Back:
    Aggregation and the Real Exchange Rate,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 1-44.

[37] Kackmeister, Alan (2001), “Has Retail Price Behavior Changed Since 1889? Evidence from
    Microdata,” manuscript, University of California, Berkeley.

[38] Kashyap, Anil K. (1995), “Sticky Prices: New Evidence from Retail Catalogs,” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 110, 245-274.

[39] Klenow, Peter J. and Oleksiy Kryvtsov (2005) “State-dependent or Time-dependent Pricing:
    Does It Matter for Recent US Inflation?” NBER WP 11043.

[40] Leeper, Eric, Christopher A. Sims, and Tao Zha (1996), “What Does Monetary Policy Do?”
    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2.

[41] Levin, Andrew T., and Jeremy Piger (2003), “Is Inflation Persistence Intrinsic in Industrial
    Economies?” Working Paper 2002-023B, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

[42] Levy, Daniel, Mark Bergen, Shantanu Dutta, and Robert Venable (1997), “The Magnitude
    of Menu Costs: Direct Evidence from Large U.S. Supermarket Chains,” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 112 (3), 791-823.

[43] MacDonald, James N. and Daniel Aaronson (2001), “How Do Retail Prices React to Minimum
    Wage Increases?” manuscript, U.S. Department of Agriculture.

[44] Maćkowiak, Bartosz, and Mirko Wiederholt (2006), “Optimal Sticky Prices under Rational
    Inattention,” manuscript, Humboldt University, Berlin.

[45] Midrigan, Virgiliu (2006), “Menu Costs, Multi-Product Firms, and Aggregate Fluctuations,”

    manuscript, Ohio State University.

[46] Nakamura, Emi, and Jón Steinsson (2006), “Five Facts About Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu
    Cost Models,” manuscript, Harvard University.

                                               31
[47] Pesaran, M. Hashem, and Ron Smith (1995), “Estimating Long-Run Relationships From Dy-
    namic Heterogenous Panels,” Journal of Econometrics 68: 79-113.

[48] Pivetta, Frederic, and Ricardo Reis (2003), “The Persistence of Inflation in the United States,”

    manuscript, Harvard University.

[49] Reis, Ricardo (2006), “Inattentive Producers,” Review of Economic Studies 73(1): 1-29.

[50] Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford (1997), “An Optimization-Based Econometric
    Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 297-346.

[51] Sims, Christopher A. (1992), “Interpreting the Macroeconomic Time Series Facts: The Eﬀects
    of Monetary Policy,” European Economic Review, 36(5), 975-1000.

[52] Sims, Christopher A. (2001), “Comment on ‘Evolving Post-World War II U.S. Inflation Dy-
    namics,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 16, 373-79.

[53] Smets, Frank, and Raf Wouters (2004), “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
    Bayesian DSGE Approach,” manuscript, April.

[54] Stock, James H. (2001), “Comment on ‘Evolving Post-World War II U.S. Inflation Dynamics,”
    NBER Macroeconomics Annual 16, 379-87.

[55] Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (1996). “Evidence on Structural Instability in Macro-
    economic Time Series Relations.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 14, 11—30.

[56] Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (1999), “Forecasting Inflation,” Journal of Monetary

    Economics 44, 293-335.

[57] Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (2002), “Macroeconomic Forecasting Using Diﬀusion
    Indexes,” Journal of Business Economics and Statistics 20(2), 147-162.

[58] Woodford, Michael (2003), Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
    Princeton, Princeton University Press.




                                                 32
                         Table 1: Volatility and persistence of inflation series


                                    Standard deviation                               Persistence
                                         Common        Sector-                        Common       Sector-
                              Inflation     comp.     specific       R2    Inflation      comp.    specific

Aggregated series
PCE     Total                    0.24        0.21        0.11      0.77        0.90       0.95        0.13
        Durables                 0.33        0.25        0.21      0.60        0.88       0.97        0.08
        Nondurables              0.42        0.30        0.30      0.50        0.44       0.91        0.22
        Services                 0.24        0.19        0.14      0.63        0.91       0.98        0.01

Disaggregated series

All     Average                  1.15        0.33       1.08       0.15        0.29       0.91       -0.03
        Median                   0.75        0.27       0.71       0.12        0.30       0.93       -0.02
        Minimum                  0.23        0.08       0.13       0.01       -2.32       0.39       -1.83
        Maximum                 11.67        1.85      11.59       0.68        0.96       0.99        0.87
        Std                      1.14        0.22       1.13       0.12        0.39       0.06        0.33

PCE     Average                  0.97        0.29       0.92       0.17        0.30       0.92       -0.05
        Average (weighted)       0.88        0.31       0.80       0.27        0.47       0.93        0.04
        Median                   0.65        0.23       0.60       0.12        0.36       0.95       -0.02
        Minimum                  0.23        0.08       0.13       0.01       -2.32       0.39       -1.83
        Maximum                 11.67        1.85      11.59       0.68        0.96       0.99        0.87
        Std                      1.10        0.23       1.09       0.15        0.44       0.07        0.37

PPI     Average                  1.36        0.38        1.29      0.13        0.28       0.90        0.01
        Median                   0.92        0.30        0.87      0.11        0.27       0.91       -0.01
        Minimum                  0.35        0.08        0.29      0.01       -0.76       0.61       -0.93
        Maximum                  7.73        1.15        7.66      0.43        0.91       0.98        0.63
        Std                      1.15        0.21        1.15      0.08        0.31       0.06        0.27


Note:   Weighted average of statistics for disaggregated PCE series is obtained using expenditure shares
        in year 2005 as weights.
                         Table 2a. Cross-sectional correlations of various statistics (all prices)


            Sd(π_it) Sd(com)      Sd(ei)       R2 rho(π_it) rho(com)        rho(ei)      AC1     AC12    sum6     sum12
Sd(π_it)          1      0.76      1.00      -0.42    -0.38     -0.57         -0.07      0.30     0.16    -0.52     -0.49
Sd(com)                     1      0.74      -0.12    -0.11     -0.46          0.12      0.30     0.21    -0.49     -0.64
Sd(ei)                                1      -0.44    -0.40     -0.57         -0.08      0.30     0.15    -0.51     -0.48
R2                                               1     0.65      0.38          0.27     -0.24    -0.10     0.19      0.13
rho(π_it)                                                 1      0.41          0.59     -0.02     0.04     0.00     -0.06
rho(com)                                                            1         -0.02     -0.31    -0.20     0.31      0.32
rho(ei)                                                                           1      0.20     0.13    -0.19     -0.26
AC1                                                                                         1     0.84    -0.44     -0.55
AC12                                                                                                 1    -0.39     -0.52
sum6                                                                                                          1      0.90
sum12                                                                                                                   1

                        Table 2b. Cross-sectional correlations of various statistics (PCE prices)


            Sd(π_it) Sd(com)      Sd(ei)       R2 rho(π_it) rho(com)        rho(ei)      AC1     AC12    sum6     sum12
Sd(π_it)          1      0.73      1.00      -0.37    -0.48     -0.61         -0.23      0.23     0.18    -0.29     -0.36
Sd(com)                     1      0.69      -0.08    -0.23     -0.47         -0.03      0.18     0.16    -0.26     -0.60
Sd(ei)                                1      -0.40    -0.49     -0.61         -0.24      0.23     0.18    -0.29     -0.34
R2                                               1     0.65      0.35          0.33     -0.22    -0.10     0.10      0.03
rho(π_it)                                                 1      0.55          0.63     -0.10    -0.06     0.03     -0.02
rho(com)                                                            1          0.15     -0.26    -0.19     0.27      0.22
rho(ei)                                                                           1      0.06     0.00    -0.10     -0.13
AC1                                                                                         1     0.85    -0.23     -0.34
AC12                                                                                                 1    -0.35     -0.47
sum6                                                                                                          1      0.76
sum12                                                                                                                   1

                            Table 2c. Cross-sectional correlations of various statistics (PPI)


            Sd(π_it) Sd(com)      Sd(ei)       R2 rho(π_it) rho(com)        rho(ei)      AC1     AC12    sum6     sum12
Sd(π_it)          1      0.80      1.00      -0.50    -0.24     -0.48          0.13      0.32     0.00    -0.66     -0.57
Sd(com)                     1      0.78      -0.13     0.11     -0.39          0.35      0.42     0.19    -0.66     -0.72
Sd(ei)                                1      -0.53    -0.26     -0.48          0.12      0.32    -0.01    -0.65     -0.56
R2                                               1     0.68      0.39          0.19     -0.12     0.08     0.26      0.17
rho(π_it)                                                 1      0.13          0.53      0.21     0.30    -0.03     -0.14
rho(com)                                                            1         -0.31     -0.28    -0.08     0.34      0.36
rho(ei)                                                                           1      0.47     0.35    -0.28     -0.40
AC1                                                                                         1     0.78    -0.63     -0.75
AC12                                                                                                 1    -0.41     -0.56
sum6                                                                                                          1      0.93
sum12                                                                                                                   1

Sd(π_it)    Standard deviation of π_it
Sd(com)     Standard deviation of common component of π_it
Sd(ei)      Standard deviation of idio component of π_it
R2          R2 of the common component π_it
rho(π_it)   Persistence of π_it
rho(com)    Persistence of common component of π_it
rho(ei)     Persistence of idio component of π_it
AC1         First-order autocorrelation of π_it conditional on a monetary policy shock
AC12        Twelveth-order autocorrelation of π_it conditional on a monetary policy shock
sum6        Cummulative sum of IRF of p_it over first 6 periods
sum12       Cummulative sum of IRF of p_it over first 12 periods
                      Table 3: Response of price series to a monetary policy shock


                             Autocorrelation of πit conditional on shock          Cumul. price responses
                              1st-order   3rd-order   6th-order 12th-order             6 mths     12 mths

Aggregated series
PCE     Total                     0.97        0.91       0.82        0.63               -0.02       -0.21
        Durables                  0.97        0.90       0.80        0.61               -0.06       -0.21
        Nondurables               0.98        0.93       0.84        0.67               -0.05       -0.54
        Services                  0.96        0.88       0.76        0.54                0.01       -0.02

Disaggregated series

All     Average                   0.97        0.90       0.80        0.58               -0.09       -0.43
        Median                    0.97        0.91       0.81        0.62                0.00       -0.14
        Minimum                   0.93        0.79       0.54        0.18               -1.96       -6.23
        Maximum                   1.00        0.98       0.93        0.78                0.83        1.68
        Std                       0.01        0.04       0.07        0.13                0.35        1.00

PCE     Average                   0.97        0.89       0.78        0.55               -0.01       -0.15
        Average (weighted)        0.97        0.89       0.78        0.55               -0.02       -0.20
        Median                    0.97        0.90       0.79        0.58                0.02       -0.05
        Minimum                   0.93        0.79       0.54        0.19               -0.91       -4.15
        Maximum                   1.00        0.98       0.93        0.78                0.61        1.48
        Std                       0.01        0.04       0.08        0.14                0.20        0.64

PPI     Average                   0.97        0.92       0.82        0.63               -0.19       -0.78
        Median                    0.97        0.92       0.83        0.65               -0.05       -0.41
        Minimum                   0.94        0.82       0.62        0.18               -1.96       -6.23
        Maximum                   0.99        0.97       0.91        0.77                0.83        1.68
        Std                       0.01        0.03       0.06        0.11                0.46        1.23


Note:   Weighted average of statistics for disaggregated PCE series is obtained using expenditure shares
        in year 2005 as weights.
     Table 4: Cross-sectional dispersion in price responses for first 6 months after the shock

                       (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)            (7)


Constant             -0.569        -0.156        0.142       -0.195                                   -0.151
                    (0.106)**     (0.072)*     (0.039)**    (0.036)**                                (0.132)
Gross Profit          1.540                                               1.598                        1.013
                    (0.355)**                                           (0.368)**                   (0.449)*
Invc4                               -0.683
                                   (2.034)
Sd(e)                                           -25.932                                              -22.549
                                               (4.157)**                                            (3.769)**
rho(e)                                                       -0.524                                   -0.243
                                                            (0.129)**                                (0.116)*
d1                                                                       -0.681        -0.643
                                                                        (0.138)**    (0.161)**
d2                                                                       -0.608        -0.677
                                                                        (0.138)**     (0.282)*
d3                                                                       -0.529        -0.554
                                                                        (0.103)**     (0.225)*
d1*profit                                                                               1.454
                                                                                     (0.447)**
d2*profit                                                                               1.857
                                                                                      (0.864)*
d3*profit                                                                               1.699
                                                                                       (0.874)
Observations        149            149           151         151          149            149            149
R-squared           0.13           0.00          0.42        0.09        0.27           0.27           0.50
     Robust standard errors in parentheses. (*) denotes significant at 5%; (**) denotes significant at 1%
 Table 5: Cross-sectional dispersion in price responses for first 12 months after the shock

                     (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)           (7)


Constant           -1.890         -0.629         0.002       -0.774                                 -0.878
                  (0.264)**      (0.181)**      (0.134)     (0.093)**                              (0.319)**
Gross Profit        4.597                                                  4.699                     2.973
                  (0.882)**                                              (0.883)**                 (0.998)**
Invc4                             -3.023
                                 (4.752)
Sd(e)                                          -59.502                                              -47.903
                                              (13.709)**                                          (12.032)**
rho(e)                                                       -1.844                                  -1.105
                                                            (0.323)**                              (0.270)**
d1                                                                        -2.055       -1.846
                                                                         (0.321)**   (0.323)**
d2                                                                        -1.987       -1.812
                                                                         (0.294)**   (0.404)**
d3                                                                        -1.822       -2.357
                                                                         (0.278)**   (0.692)**
d1*profit                                                                               3.909
                                                                                     (0.818)**
d2*profit                                                                               4.045
                                                                                     (1.163)**
d3*profit                                                                               6.876
                                                                                      (2.644)*
Observations       149            149            151           151         149           149           149
R-squared          0.16           0.00           0.31         0.15         0.41          0.42         0.46
     Robust standard errors in parentheses. (*) denotes significant at 5%; (**) denotes significant at 1%
         Table 6: Cross-sectional dispersion in price responses for months 7 to 12 after the shock

                    (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)


Constant          -1.321        -0.472        -0.140        -0.579                                 -0.727       -0.515
                 (0.180)**     (0.117)**      (0.100)      (0.061)**                              (0.201)**   (0.110)**
Gross Profit       3.057                                                 3.101                      1.960        0.541
                 (0.599)**                                             (0.596)**                  (0.604)**    (0.383)
Invc4                            -2.340
                                (2.879)
Sd(e)                                         -33.570                                              -25.355      6.242
                                             (10.107)**                                           (8.914)**    (7.000)
rho(e)                                                      -1.320                                  -0.862      -0.522
                                                           (0.212)**                              (0.180)**   (0.152)**
Sum6                                                                                                             1.401
                                                                                                              (0.175)**
d1                                                                      -1.374      -1.203
                                                                       (0.207)**   (0.185)**
d2                                                                      -1.378      -1.134
                                                                       (0.193)**   (0.225)**
d3                                                                      -1.293      -1.802
                                                                       (0.193)**   (0.472)**
d1*profit                                                                            2.455
                                                                                   (0.428)**
d2*profit                                                                            2.189
                                                                                   (0.649)**
d3*profit                                                                            5.177
                                                                                   (1.787)**
Observations      149            149           151           151         149          149            149        149
R-squared         0.16          0.00           0.23         0.18         0.45         0.47           0.40       0.73
   Robust standard errors in parentheses. (*) denotes significant at 5%; (**) denotes significant at 1%
                Table 7: Volatility and persistence of inflation series (Post-1984)


                                Standard deviation                               Persistence
                                     Common        Sector-                        Common       Sector-
                          Inflation     comp.     specific       R2    Inflation      comp.    specific

Aggregated series
PCE Total                     0.16       0.14        0.08      0.73       0.33        0.71        0.01
    Durables                  0.26       0.16        0.20      0.39       0.78        0.95        0.12
    Nondurables               0.40       0.33        0.21      0.71       0.14        0.59        0.30
    Services                  0.16       0.08        0.13      0.29       0.58        0.96       -0.16

Disaggregated series

All   Average                 0.97       0.25        0.93      0.10        0.09        0.81      -0.01
      Median                  0.64       0.16        0.62      0.07        0.06        0.85      -0.02
      Minimum                 0.11       0.03        0.09      0.00       -1.95       -0.24      -1.20
      Maximum                 7.31       2.79        7.17      0.76        1.03        0.97       0.81
      Std                     0.98       0.29        0.94      0.10        0.35        0.15       0.30

PCE Average                   0.86       0.23        0.81      0.12        0.06        0.82      -0.05
    Average (weighted)        0.75       0.27        0.68      0.18        0.21        0.84       0.00
    Median                    0.57       0.15        0.55      0.07        0.02        0.88      -0.05
    Minimum                   0.11       0.04        0.09      0.01       -1.95       -0.18      -1.20
    Maximum                   7.31       2.79        7.17      0.76        0.92        0.97       0.81
    Std                       0.93       0.32        0.89      0.13        0.38        0.16       0.32

PPI   Average                 1.11       0.26        1.07      0.07        0.13        0.81       0.04
      Median                  0.75       0.17        0.72      0.06        0.09        0.84       0.03
      Minimum                 0.24       0.03        0.23      0.00       -0.89       -0.24      -0.92
      Maximum                 6.33       1.45        6.27      0.33        1.03        0.96       0.70
      Std                     1.01       0.24        0.99      0.06        0.30        0.14       0.27
                                                              Figure 1: Volatility of common and sector-specific components

                                               14




                                               12
Standard deviation of idio components (e_it)




                                               10

                                                                                                     St.dev.(ei) = -0.14 + 3.70 * St.dev.(lambda_i*C)
                                                                                                     R2 = 0.54
                                               8




                                               6




                                               4




                                               2




                                               0
                                                    0   0.2   0.4       0.6         0.8          1            1.2           1.4           1.6           1.8   2
                                                                       Standard deviation of common components (lambda_i'*C)
          PCE: Sector-specific              PCE: Common component                       PCE: Monetary shock
  0                                     0                                     0.5


                                                                                0
 -5                                    -5

                                                                             -0.5

-10                                   -10
                                                                               -1


-15                                   -15                                    -1.5
      0     12     24     36     48         0      12    24    36       48          0     12    24     36     48


          PPI: Sector-specific                  PPI: Common component                   PPI: Monetary shock
  0                                     0                                     0.5


 -2

                                       -5                                       0
 -4


 -6
                                      -10                                    -0.5

 -8


-10                                   -15                                      -1
      0     12     24     36     48         0      12    24    36       48          0     12    24     36     48
                         Figure 2. Sectoral price responses to various shocks

    Notes: Estimated impulse responses of (log) sectoral prices to a sector-specific shock
(left panels), to a shock to the common component (middle panels), and to an identified
monetary policy shock (right panels). Fat lines represent unweighted average responses. Fat
dashed lines represent the response of the aggregate PCE and PPI (finished) price indices
to a monetary policy shock.
          Sector-specific                    Common component                   Monetary shock
  0                                  0                                1.5



 -5


                                    -5                                  1
-10



-15

                                   -10                                0.5
-20



-25
                                   -15                                  0

-30



-35
                                   -20                               -0.5


-40



-45                                -25                                 -1
      0   12      24    36    48         0    12    24    36    48          0   12    24    36   48
               Figure 3: Responses of disaggregated consumption to various shocks

    Notes: Estimated impulse responses of (log) sectoral PCE quantities to a sector-specific
shock (left panel), to a shock to the common component (middle panel), and to an identified
monetary policy shock (right panel). Fat lines represent unweighted average responses. The
fat dashed line represents the response of the aggregate PCE quantity to a monetary policy
shock.
                                     Correlations of sector-specific components of PCE prices and quantities
                     50


                     40
 Number of sectors




                     30


                     20


                     10


                      0
                      -1      -0.8     -0.6       -0.4      -0.2        0         0.2        0.4       0.6     0.8   1
                                                                   Correlations

                                        Correlations of common components of PCE prices and quantities
                     25


                     20
 Number of sectors




                     15


                     10


                      5


                      0
                      -1      -0.8     -0.6       -0.4      -0.2        0         0.2        0.4       0.6     0.8   1
                                                                   Correlations

                           Figure 4: Correlations between components of PCE prices and quantities

    Note: Each panel represents a histogram of correlations all PCE categories. The upper
(lower) panel plots correlations between the sector-specific (common) component of PCE
prices and quantities in any given sector.
             Federal Funds Rate                              Industrial Production
  0.1                                             0.2

 0.08                                             0.1

 0.06                                               0

 0.04                                            -0.1

 0.02                                            -0.2

    0                                            -0.3

-0.02                                            -0.4

-0.04                                            -0.5
        0    12       24       36       48              0     12          24         36    48




            Price level (log): PCE
  0.1

    0                                                       Baseline FAVAR (5 factors)

 -0.1                                                       VAR [Indus. prod., PCE, FFR]

 -0.2
                                                            VAR & 1 factor
 -0.3

 -0.4

 -0.5

 -0.6
        0    12       24       36       48

   Figure 5a: Estimated impulse responses to an identified monetary policy shock (PCE)
             Federal Funds Rate                             Industrial Production
  0.1                                             0.1

 0.08
                                                    0
 0.06

                                                 -0.1
 0.04

 0.02
                                                 -0.2

    0
                                                 -0.3
-0.02

-0.04                                            -0.4
        0    12       24        36      48              0    12         24          36     48




            Price Level (log): CPI
  0.2
                                                            Baseline FAVAR (5 factors)
  0.1
                                                            VAR [Indus. prod., CPI, FFR]
    0
                                                            VAR & 1 factor
 -0.1

 -0.2

 -0.3

 -0.4

 -0.5

 -0.6
        0    12       24        36      48

   Figure 5b: Estimated impulse responses to an identified monetary policy shock (CPI)
                                                                               Figure 6: Impulse responses of PCE prices and quantities to monetary shock

                                                                                                                          1.5



                                                                                                                            1
Responses of PCE quantities cumulated for first 6 months




                                                                                                                          0.5



                                                                                                                            0
                                                           -1.00       -0.80          -0.60       -0.40        -0.20         0.00         0.20       0.40   0.60   0.80


                                                                                                                         -0.5


                                                                   IRFCUQ6 = -0.257 - 0.593 * IRFCUP6
                                                                             (0.033) (0.167)                               -1
                                                                   R2 = 0.06


                                                                                                                         -1.5



                                                                                                                           -2



                                                                                                                         -2.5
                                                                                              Responses of PCE prices cumulated for first 6 months
                                                            Figure 7: Impulse responses to monetary shock and volatility of sector-specific components

                                                   1


                                                                                                                                                            PPI
                                                 0.5                                                                                                        PCE
Impulse responses cumulated for first 6 months




                                                   0
                                                        0               2                4                   6                    8                    10         12


                                                 -0.5




                                                  -1




                                                 -1.5



                                                                                                                     IRFCU6 = 0.082 - 0.16 * St.dev.(ei)
                                                  -2                                                                          (0.023) (0.014)
                                                                                                                     R2 = 0.26


                                                 -2.5
                                                                                        Standard deviation of idio components (e_it)
          PCE: Sector-specific              PCE: Common component                     PCE: Monetary shock
  0                                     0                                     2


                                                                              1

 -5                                    -5
                                                                              0


                                                                             -1
-10                                   -10

                                                                             -2


-15                                   -15                                    -3
      0     12     24     36     48         0      12    24    36       48        0     12    24     36     48


          PPI: Sector-specific                  PPI: Common component                 PPI: Monetary shock
  0                                     0                                     2


 -2                                                                           1

                                       -5
 -4                                                                           0


 -6                                                                          -1
                                      -10

 -8                                                                          -2


-10                                   -15                                    -3
      0     12     24     36     48         0      12    24    36       48        0     12    24     36     48
             Figure 8. Sectoral price responses to various shocks in post-1984 sample

    Notes: Estimated impulse responses of (log) sectoral prices to a sector-specific shock
(left panels), to a shock to the common component (middle panels), and to an identified
monetary policy shock (right panels). Fat lines represent unweighted average responses. Fat
dashed lines represent the response of the aggregate PCE and PPI (finished) price indices
to a monetary policy shock.
APPENDIX A – Main Data Set
Format is as in Stock and Watson (2002) paper: series number; series mnemonic; data span;
transformation code and series description as appears in the database. The transformation
codes are: 1 – no transformation; 2 – first difference; 4 – logarithm; 5 – first difference of
logarithm. Second differencing of logarithms was not used. Our main data set contains 230
monthly series with no missing observations. Series were directly taken from DRI/McGraw Hill
Basic Economics Database.
      OUT ----------- Real Output and Income
  1   IPS11              1976:1 - 2005:6    5      Industrial Production Index - Products, Total
  2   IPS299             1976:1 - 2005:6    5      Industrial Production Index - Final Products
  3   IPS12              1976:1 - 2005:6    5      Industrial Production Index - Consumer Goods
  4   IPS13              1976:1 - 2005:6    5      Industrial Production Index - Durable Consumer Goods
  5   IPS18              1976:1 - 2005:6    5      Industrial Production Index - Nondurable Consumer Goods
  6   IPS25              1976:1 - 2005:6    5      Industrial Production Index - Business Equipment
  7   IPS32              1976:1 - 2005:6    5      Industrial Production Index - Materials
  8   IPS34              1976:1 - 2005:6    5      Industrial Production Index - Durable Goods Materials
  9   IPS38              1976:1 - 2005:6    5      Industrial Production Index - Nondurable Goods Materials
 10   IPS43              1976:1 - 2005:6    5      Industrial Production Index - Manufacturing (SIC)
 11   IPS67e             1976:1 - 2005:6    5      Industrial Production Index - Mining NAICS=21
 12   IPS68e             1976:1 - 2005:6    5      Industrial Production Index - Electric and Gas Utilities
 13   IPS10              1976:1 - 2005:6    5      Industrial Production Index - Total Index
 14   PMI                1976:1 - 2005:6    5      Purchasing Managers' Index (SA)
 15   PMP                1976:1 - 2005:6    5      NAPM Production Index (Percent)
 16   PYQ                1976:1 - 2005:6    5      Personal Income (Chained) (Bil 2000$, SAAR)
 17   MYXPQ              1976:1 - 2005:6    5      Personal Income Less Transfer Payments (Chained) (Bil 2000$,SAAR)
 18   IPS307             1976:1 - 2005:6    5      Industrial Production Index - Residential Utilities
 19   IPS316             1976:1 - 2005:6    5      Industrial Production Index - Basic Metals

      EMP ------------- Employment and Hours
 20   LHEL               1976:1 - 2005:6   5       Index of Help-Wanted Advertising In Newspapers (1967=100;SA)
 21   LHELX              1976:1 - 2005:6   4       Employment: Ratio; Help-Wanted Ads: No. Unemployed Clf
 22   LHEM               1976:1 - 2005:6   5       Civilian Labor Force: Employed, Total (Thous., SA)
 23   LHNAG              1976:1 - 2005:6   5       Civilian Labor Force: Employed, Nonagric. Industries (Thous., SA)
 24   LHUR               1976:1 - 2005:6   1       Unemployment Rate: All Workers, 16 Years & Over (%, SA)
 25   LHU680             1976:1 - 2005:6   1       Unemploy. by Duration: Average(Mean) Duration in Weeks (SA)
 26   LHU5               1976:1 - 2005:6   1       Unemploy. by Duration: Persons Unempl.Less Than 5 Wks (Thous., SA)
 27   LHU14              1976:1 - 2005:6   1       Unemploy. by Duration: Persons Unempl.5 To 14 Wks (Thous., SA)
 28   LHU15              1976:1 - 2005:6   1       Unemploy. by Duration: Persons Unempl.15 Wks + (Thous., SA)
 29   LHU26              1976:1 - 2005:6   1       Unemploy. by Duration: Persons Unempl.15 To 26 Wks (Thous., SA)
 30   BLS_LPNAG          1976:1 - 2005:6   5       Total Nonfarm Employment (SA) - CES0000000001
 31   BLS_LP             1976:1 - 2005:6   5       Total Private Employment (SA) - CES0500000001
 32   BLS_LPGD           1976:1 - 2005:6   5       Goods-Producing Employment (SA) - CES0600000001
 33   BLS_LPMI           1976:1 - 2005:6   5       Natural Resources and Mining Employment (SA) - CES1000000001
 34   BLS_LPCC           1976:1 - 2005:6   5       Construction Employment (SA) - CES2000000001
 35   BLS_LPEM           1976:1 - 2005:6   5       Manufacturing Employment (SA) - CES3000000001
 36   BLS_LPED           1976:1 - 2005:6   5       Durable Goods Manufacturing Employment (SA) - CES3100000001
 37   BLS_LPEN           1976:1 - 2005:6   5       Nondurable Goods Manufacturing Employment (SA) - CES3200000001
 38   BLS_Ser.-EMP       1976:1 - 2005:6   5       Service-Providing Employment (SA) - CES0700000001
 39   BLS_Tra.EMP        1976:1 - 2005:6   5       Trade, Transportation, and Utilities Employment (SA) - CES4000000001
 40   BLS_Ret.- EMP      1976:1 - 2005:6   5       Retail Trade Employment (SA) - CES4200000001
 41   BLS_Whol. EMP      1976:1 - 2005:6   5       Wholesale Trade Employment (SA) - CES4142000001
 42   BLS_Fin.-EMP       1976:1 - 2005:6   5       Financial Activities Employment (SA) - CES5500000001
 43   BLS_P-Ser.EMP      1976:1 - 2005:6   5       Private Service-Providing Employment (SA) - CES0800000001
 44   BLS_LPGOV          1976:1 - 2005:6   5       Government Employment (SA) - CES9000000001
 45   BLS_LPHRM          1976:1 - 2005:6   1       Manufacturing Average Weekly Hours of Production Workers (SA) - CES3000000005
 46   BLS_LPMOSA         1976:1 - 2005:6   1       Manufacturing Average Weekly Overtime of Production Workers (SA) - CES3000000007
 47   PMEMP              1976:1 - 2005:6           NAPM Employment Index (Percent)

      HSS --------------   Housing Starts and Sales
 48   HSFR                 1976:1 - 2005:6     4    Housing Starts: Nonfarm (1947-58); Total Farm&Nonfarm(1959-); (Thous. U., SA)
 49   HSNE                 1976:1 - 2005:6     4    Housing Starts: Northeast (Thous. U., SA)
 50   HSMW                 1976:1 - 2005:6     4    Housing Starts: Midwest (Thous. U., SA)
 51   HSSOU                1976:1 - 2005:6     4    Housing Starts: South (Thous. U., SA)
 52   HSWST                1976:1 - 2005:6     4    Housing Starts: West (Thous. U., SA)
 53   HSBR                 1976:1 - 2005:6     4    Housing Authorized: Total New Private Housing Units (Thous., SAAR)
 54   HMOB                 1976:1 - 2005:6     4    Mobile Homes: Manufacturers' Shipments (Thous. U., SAAR)

      INV ---------------- Real Inventories and Inventory-Sales Ratios
 55   PMNV                1976:1 - 2005:6      1   NAPM Inventories Index (Percent)

      ORD--------------- Orders and Unfilled Orders
 56   PMNO               1976:1 - 2005:6      1   NAPM New Orders Index (Percent)
57    PMDEL                 1976:1 - 2005:6   1   NAPM Vendor Deliveries Index (Percent)
58    MOCMQ                 1976:1 - 2005:6   5   New Orders (Net) - Consumer Goods & Materials, 1996 Dollars (BCI)
59    MSONDQ                1976:1 - 2005:6   5   New Orders, Nondefense Capital Goods, In 1996 Dollars (BCI)

      SPR ---------------   Stock PriCES
60    FSPCOM                1976:1 - 2005:6   5   S&P's Common Stock Price Index: Composite (1941-43=10)
61    FSPIN                 1976:1 - 2005:6   5   S&P's Common Stock Price Index: Industrials (1941-43=10)
62    FSDXP                 1976:1 - 2005:6   1   S&P's Composite Common Stock: Dividend Yield (% Per Annum)
63    FSPXE                 1976:1 - 2005:6   1   S&P's Composite Common Stock: Price-Earnings Ratio (%, NSA)
64    FSDJ                  1976:1 - 2005:6       Common Stock Prices: Dow Jones Industrial Average

      EXR ---------------- Exchange Rates
65    EXRSW               1976:1 - 2005:6     5   Foreign   Exchange   Rate:   Switzerland (Swiss Franc Per U.S.$)
66    EXRJAN              1976:1 - 2005:6     5   Foreign   Exchange   Rate:   Japan (Yen Per U.S.$)
67    EXRUK               1976:1 - 2005:6     5   Foreign   Exchange   Rate:   United Kingdom (Cents Per Pound)
68    EXRCAN              1976:1 - 2005:6     5   Foreign   Exchange   Rate:   Canada (Canadian $ Per U.S.$)

      INT ---------------- Interest Rates
69    FYFF                1976:1 - 2005:6     1   Interest Rate: Federal Funds (Effective) (% Per Annum, NSA)
70    FYGM3               1976:1 - 2005:6     1   Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Bills,Sec Mkt,3-Mo.(% Per Ann, NSA)
71    FYGM6               1976:1 - 2005:6     1   Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Bills,Sec Mkt,6-Mo.(% Per Ann, NSA)
72    FYGT1               1976:1 - 2005:6     1   Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Const Maturities,1-Yr.(% Per Ann, NSA)
73    FYGT5               1976:1 - 2005:6     1   Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Const Maturities,5-Yr.(% Per Ann, NSA)
74    FYGT10              1976:1 - 2005:6     1   Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Const Maturities,10-Yr.(% Per Ann, NSA)
75    FYAAAC              1976:1 - 2005:6     1   Bond Yield: Moody's AAA Corporate (% Per Annum)
76    FYBAAC              1976:1 - 2005:6     1   Bond Yield: Moody's BAA Corporate (% Per Annum)
77    SFYGM3              1976:1 - 2005:6     1   Spread FYGM3 - FYFF
78    SFYGM6              1976:1 - 2005:6     1   Spread FYGM6 - FYFF
79    SFYGT1              1976:1 - 2005:6     1   Spread FYGT1 - FYFF
80    SFYGT5              1976:1 - 2005:6     1   Spread FYGT5 - FYFF
81    SFYGT10             1976:1 - 2005:6     1   Spread FYGT10 - FYFF
82    SFYAAAC             1976:1 - 2005:6     1   Spread FYAAAC - FYFF
83    SFYBAAC             1976:1 - 2005:6     1   Spread FYBAAC - FYFF

      MON ---------------- Money and Credit   Quantity Aggregates
84    FM1                1976:1 - 2005:6       5  Money Stock: M1(Curr,Trav.Cks,Dem Dep,Other Ck'able Dep) (Bil$, SA)
85    FM2                1976:1 - 2005:6       5  Money Stock:M2(M1+O'nite Rps,Euro$,G/P&B/D Mmmfs&SAv&Sm Time Dep (Bil$, SA)
86    FM3                1976:1 - 2005:6       5  Money Stock: M3(M2+Lg Time Dep,Term Rp's&Inst nnly Mmmfs) (Bil$, SA)
87    FM2DQ              1976:1 - 2005:6       5  Money Supply - M2 In 1996 Dollars (BCI)
88    FMFBA              1976:1 - 2005:6       5  Monetary Base, Adj for Reserve Requirement Changes (Mil$, SA)
89    FMRRA              1976:1 - 2005:6       5  Depository Inst Reserves: Total,Adj For Reserve Req Chgs (Mil$, SA)
90    FMRNBA             1976:1 - 2005:6       5  Depository Inst Reserves: Nonborrowed,Adj Res Req Chgs (Mil$, SA)
91    FCLBMC             1976:1 - 2005:6       1  Wkly Rp Lg Com'l Banks: Net Change Com'l & Indus Loans (Bil$, SAAR)
92    CCINRV             1976:1 - 2005:6       5  Consumer Credit Outstanding - Nonrevolving(G19)
93    IMFCLNQ            1976:1 - 2005:6          Commercial & Industrial Loans Oustanding In 1996 Dollars

      PRI ---------------   Price Indexes
 94   PMCP                  1976:1 - 2005:6   1   NAPM Commodity Prices Index (Percent)
 95   PWFSA                 1976:1 - 2005:6   5   Producer Price Index: Finished Goods (82=100,SA)
 96   PWFCSA                1976:1 - 2005:6   5   Producer Price Index: Finished Consumer Goods (82=100,SA)
 97   PWIMSA                1976:1 - 2005:6   5   Producer Price Index: Intermed Mat.Supplies & Components (82=100,SA)
 98   PWCMSA                1976:1 - 2005:6   5   Producer Price Index: Crude Materials (82=100,SA)
 99   PUNEW                 1976:1 - 2005:6   5   CPI-U: All Items (82-84=100,SA)
100   PU83                  1976:1 - 2005:6   5   CPI-U: Apparel & Upkeep (82-84=100,SA)
101   PU84                  1976:1 - 2005:6   5   CPI-U: Transportation (82-84=100,SA)
102   PU85                  1976:1 - 2005:6   5   CPI-U: Medical Care (82-84=100,SA)
103   PUC                   1976:1 - 2005:6   5   CPI-U: Commodities (82-84=100,SA)
104   PUCD                  1976:1 - 2005:6   5   CPI-U: Durables (82-84=100,SA)
105   PUXF                  1976:1 - 2005:6   5   CPI-U: All Items Less Food (82-84=100,SA)
106   PUXHS                 1976:1 - 2005:6   5   CPI-U: All Items Less Shelter (82-84=100,SA)
107   PUXM                  1976:1 - 2005:6   5   CPI-U: All Items Less Medical Care (82-84=100,SA)
108   PSCCOM                1976:1 - 2005:6   5   Spot Market Price Index: BLS & CRB: All Commodities (1967=100)

      AHE ------------- Average Hourly Earnings
109   BLS_LEHCC          1976:1 - 2005:6     5     Construction Average Hourly Earnings of Production Workers (SA) - CES2000000006
110   BLS_LEHM           1976:1 - 2005:6     5     Manufacturing Average Hourly Earnings of Production Workers (SA) - CES3000000006

      OTH ------------- Miscellaneous
111   HHSNTN             1976:1 - 2005:6      1   U. of Michigan Index of Consumer Expectations (Bcd-83)
APPENDIX B - Personal Consumption Expenditures
(price indexes and nominal expenditure)

Format is as above: series number; series; data span; transformation code and series
description as appears in the database. The transformation for all data was first difference of
logarithms, which is coded as 5. This data set contains 194 monthly price series on Personal
Consumption Expenditures with no missing observations, and 194 monthly real consumption
series on Personal Consumption Expenditures. We describe here the 194 price series. The 194
corresponding real consumption series were ordered and transformed in a similar fashion.
Series were downloaded from the underlying tables of the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
   1   P1NDCG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   New domestic autos
   2   P1NFCG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   New foreign autos
   3   P1NETG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Net transactions in used autos
   4   P1MARG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Net purchases of used autos: Used auto margin
   5   P1REEG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Net purchases of used autos: Employee reimbursement
   6   P1TRUG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Trucks, new and net used
   7   P1REVG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Recreational vehicles
   8   P1TATG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Tires and tubes
   9   P1PAAG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Accessories and parts
  10   P1FNRG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Furniture, including mattresses and bedsprings
  11   P1MHAG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Major household appliances
  12   P1SEAG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Small electric appliances
  13   P1CHNG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   China, glassware, tableware, and utensils
  14   P1RADG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Video and audio goods, including musical instruments, and computer goods
  15   P1FLRG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Floor coverings
  16   P1CLFG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Clocks, lamps, and furnishings
  17   P1TEXG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Blinds, rods, and other
  18   P1WTRG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Writing equipment
  19   P1HDWG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Tools, hardware, and supplies
  20   P1LWNG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Outdoor equipment and supplies
  21   P1OPTG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Ophthalmic products and orthopedic appliances
  22   P1GUNG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Guns
  23   P1SPTG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Sporting equipment
  24   P1CAMG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Photographic equipment
  25   P1BCYG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Bicycles
  26   P1MCYG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Motorcycles
  27   P1BOAG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Pleasure boats
  28   P1AIRG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Pleasure aircraft
  29   P1JRYG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Jewelry and watches
  30   P1BKSG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Books and maps
  31   P1GRAG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Cereals
  32   P1BAKG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Bakery products
  33   P1BEEG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Beef and veal
  34   P1PORG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Pork
  35   P1MEAG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Other meats
  36   P1POUG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Poultry
  37   P1FISG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Fish and seafood
  38   P1GGSG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Eggs
  39   P1MILG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Fresh milk and cream
  40   P1DAIG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Processed dairy products
  41   P1FRUG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Fresh fruits
  42   P1VEGG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Fresh vegetables
  43   P1PFVG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Processed fruits and vegetables
  44   P1JNBG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Juices and nonalcoholic drinks
  45   P1CTMG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Coffee, tea and beverage materials
  46   P1FATG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Fats and oils
  47   P1SWEG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Sugar and sweets
  48   P1OFDG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Other foods
  49   P1PEFG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Pet food
  50   P1MLTG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Beer and ale, at home
  51   P1WING3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Wine and brandy, at home
  52   P1LIQG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Distilled spirits, at home
  53   P1ESLG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Elementary and secondary school lunch
  54   P1HSLG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Higher education school lunch
  55   P1OPMG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Other purchased meals
  56   P1APMG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Alcohol in purchased meals
  57   P1CFDG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Food supplied to employees: civilians
  58   P1MFDG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Food supplied to employees: military
  59   P1FFDG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Food produced and consumed on farms
  60   P1SHUG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Shoes
 61   P1WGCG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Clothing for females
 62   P1WICG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Clothing for infants
 63   P1WSGG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Sewing goods for females
 64   P1WUGG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Luggage for females
 65   P1MBCG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Clothing for males
 66   P1MSGG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Sewing goods for males
 67   P1MUGG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Luggage for males
 68   P1MICG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Standard clothing issued to military personnel (n.d.)
 69   P1GASG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Gasoline and other motor fuel
 70   P1LUBG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Lubricants
 71   P1OILG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Fuel oil
 72   P1LPGG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Liquefied petroleum gas and other fuel
 73   P1TOBG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Tobacco products
 74   P1SOAG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Soap
 75   P1CSMG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Cosmetics and perfumes
 76   P1OPHG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Other personal hygiene goods
 77   P1SDHG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Semidurable house furnishings
 78   P1CLEG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Cleaning preparations
 79   P1LIGG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Lighting supplies
 80   P1PAPG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Paper products
 81   P1RXDG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Prescription drugs
 82   P1NRXG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Nonprescription drugs
 83   P1MDSG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Medical supplies
 84   P1GYNG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Gynecological goods
 85   P1DOLG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Toys, dolls, and games
 86   P1AMMG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Sport supplies, including ammunition
 87   P1FLMG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Film and photo supplies
 88   P1STSG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Stationery and school supplies
 89   P1GREG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Greeting cards
 90   P1ARTG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Expenditures abroad by U.S. residents: Government expenditures abroad
 91   P1ARSG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Expenditures abroad by U.S. residents: Other private services
 92   P1REMG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Less: Personal remittances in kind to nonresidents
 93   P1MGZG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Magazines and sheet music
 94   P1NWPG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Newspapers
 95   P1FLOG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Flowers, seeds, and potted plants
 96   P1OMHG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Owner occupied mobile homes
 97   P1OSTG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Owner occupied stationary homes
 98   P1TMHG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Tenant occupied mobile homes
 99   P1TSPG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Tenant occupied stationary homes
100   P1TLDG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Tenant landlord durables
101   P1FARG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Rental value of farm dwellings
102   P1HOTG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Hotels and motels
103   P1HFRG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Clubs and fraternity housing
104   P1HHEG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Higher education housing
105   P1HESG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Elem and second education housing
106   P1TGRG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Tenant group room and board
107   P1TGLG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Tenant group employee lodging
108   P1ELCG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Electricity
109   P1NGSG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Gas
110   P1WSMG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Water and sewerage maintenance
111   P1REFG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Refuse collection
112   P1LOCG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Local and cellular telephone
113   P1INCG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Intrastate toll calls
114   P1ITCG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Interstate toll calls
115   P1DMCG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Domestic service, cash
116   P1DMIG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Domestic service, in kind
117   P1MSEG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Moving and storage
118   P1FIPG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Household insurance premiums
119   P1FIBG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Less: Household insurance benefits paid
120   P1RCLG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Rug and furniture cleaning
121   P1EREG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Electrical repair
122   P1FREG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Reupholstery and furniture repair
123   P1PSTG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Postage
124   P1MHOG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Household operation services, n.e.c.
125   P1ARPG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Motor vehicle repair
126   P1RLOG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Motor vehicle rental, leasing, and other
127   P1TOLG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Bridge, tunnel, ferry, and road tolls
128   P1AING3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Insurance premiums for user-operated transportation
129   P1IMTG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Local transportation: Mass transit systems
130   P1TAXG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Taxicab
131   P1IRRG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Railway
132   P1IBUG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Bus
133   P1IAIG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Airline
134   P1TROG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Other
135   P1PHYG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Physicians
136   P1DENG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Dentists
137   P1OPSG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Other professional services
138   P1NPHG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Hospitals: Nonprofit
139   P1FPHG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Hospitals: Proprietary
140   P1GVHG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Hospitals: Government
141   P1NRSG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Nursing homes
142   P1MING3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Health insurance: Medical care and hospitalization
143   P1IING3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Health insurance: Income loss
144   P1PWCG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Health insurance: Workers' compensation
145   P1MOVG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Admissions to motion picture theaters
146   P1LEGG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Admissions to theaters and opera, and entertainments of nonprofit instit. (except athletics)
147   P1SPEG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Admissions to spectator sports
148   P1RTVG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Radio and television repair
149   P1CLUG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Clubs and fraternal organizations
150   P1SIGG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Sightseeing
151   P1FLYG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Private flying
152   P1BILG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Bowling and billiards
153   P1CASG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Casino gambling
154   P1OPAG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Other commercial participant amusements
155   P1PARG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Pari-mutuel net receipts
156   P1REOG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Other recreation
157   P1SCLG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Shoe repair
158   P1DRYG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Drycleaning
159   P1LGRG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Laundry and garment repair
160   P1BEAG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Beauty shops, including combination
161   P1BARG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Barber shops
162   P1WCRG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Watch, clock, and jewelry repair
163   P1CRPG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Miscellaneous personal services
164   P1BROG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Brokerage charges and investment counseling
165   P1BNKG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Bank service charges, trust services, and safe deposit box rental
166   P1IMCG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Commercial banks
167   P1IMNG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Other financial institutions
168   P1LIFG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Expense of handling life insurance and pension plans
169   P1GALG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Legal services
170   P1FUNG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Funeral and burial expenses
171   P1UNSG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Labor union expenses
172   P1ASSG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Profession association expenses
173   P1GENG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Employment agency fees
174   P1AMOG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Money orders
175   P1CLAG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Classified ads
176   P1ACCG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Tax return preparation services
177   P1THEG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Personal business services, n.e.c.
178   P1PEDG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Private higher education
179   P1GEDG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Public higher education
180   P1ESCG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Elementary and secondary schools
181   P1NSCG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Nursery schools
182   P1VEDG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Commercial and vocational schools
183   P1REDG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Foundations and nonprofit research
184   P1POLG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Political organizations
185   P1MUSG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Museums and libraries
186   P1FOUG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Foundations to religion and welfare
187   P1WELG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Social welfare
188   P1RELG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Religion
189   P1FTRG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Foreign travel by U.S. residents (110)
190   P1EXFG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Less: Expenditures in the United States by nonresidents (112)
191   P1TDGG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Durable goods
192   P1TNDG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Nondurable goods
193   P1TSSG3   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Services
194   PPCE      1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Personal Consumption Expenditures (all items)
APPENDIX C – Producer Price Indices

Format is as in Stock and Watson (2002) paper: series number; series mnemonic (NAICS
code); data span; transformation code and series description as appears in the database. The
transformation for all data was first difference of logarithms, which is coded as 5. This data set
contains 154 monthly series with no missing observations. All series are downloaded from the
website of BLS.
1     311119    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Other animal food manufacturing
2     311119p   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Other animal food manufacturing (primary products)
3     311211    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Flour Milling
4     311212    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Rice milling
5     311213    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Malt mfg
6     311223a   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Other oilseed processing (cottonseed cake and meal and other byproducts)
7     311225p   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Fats and oils refining and blending (primary products)
8     311311    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Sugarcane mills
9     311313    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Beet sugar manufacturing
10    311412    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Frozen specialty food manufacturing
11    311520    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Ice cream and frozen dessert mfg
12    311920    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Coffee and tea manufacturing
13    312140    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Distilleries
14    32211-    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Pulp mills
15    32213-    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Paperboard mills
16    325620p   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Toilet preparation mfg (primary products)
17    325920    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Explosives manufacturing
18    32731-    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Cement mfg
19    327320    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Ready mixed concrete mfg and dist
20    327410    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Lime
21    327420    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Gypsum building products manufacturing
22    327910    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Abrasive product manufacturing
23    331210    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Iron steel pipe & tube mfg from purch steel
24    333210    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Sawmill & woodworking machinery mfg
25    334310    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Audio & video equipment mfg
26    335110    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Electric lamp bulb & part mfg
27    336370    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Motor vehicle metal stamping
28    337910    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Mattress mfg
29    311421    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Fruit and vegetable canning
30    311423    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Dried and dehydrated food manufacturing
31    311513    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Cheese manufacturing
32    311611    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Animal except poultry slaughtering
33    311612    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Meat processed from carcasses
34    311613    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Rendering and meat byproduct processing
35    311711    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Seafood canning
36    311712    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Fresh & frozen seafood processing
37    311813p   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Frozen cakes pies & other pastries mfg (Primary products)
38    3118233   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Dry pasta manufacturing (macaroni spaghetti vermicelli and noodles)
39    312111p   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Soft drinks manufacturing (primary products)
40    312221    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Cigarettes
41    3122291   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Other tobacco product mfg (cigars)
42    313111    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Yarn spinning mills
                                          Broadwoven fabric finishing mills
43    3133111   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   (finished cotton broadwoven fabrics not finished in weaving mills)
44    315111    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Sheer hosiery mills
45    315191    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Outerwear knitting mills
46    315223    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Men's boy's cut & sew shirt excl work mfg
47    315224    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Men's boy's cut & sew trouser slack jean mfg
48    315993    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Men's and boys' neckwear mfg
49    316211    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Rubber and plastic footwear manufacturing
50    316213    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Men's footwear excl athletic mfg
51    316214    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Women's footwear excl athletic mfg
52    316992    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Women's handbag & purse mfg
53    321212    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Softwood veneer or plywood mfg
54    3212191   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Reconstituted wood product mfg (particleboard produced at this location)
                                          Other millwork including flooring
55    3219181   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   (wood moldings except prefinished moldings made from purchased moldings)
56    321991    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Manufactured homes mobile homes mfg
57    3221211   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Paper except newsprint mills (clay coated printing and converting paper)
58    322214    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Fiber can tube drum & other products mfg
59    324121    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Asphalt paving mixture & block mfg
60    324122    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Asphalt shingle & coating materials mfg
61    324191p   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Petroleum lubricating oils and greases (primary products)
62    325181    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Alkalies and chlorine
63    3251881   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   All other basic inorganic chemical manufacturing (sulfuric acid gross new and fortified)
64    3251921   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Cyclic crude and intermediate manufacturing (cyclic coal tar intermediates)
65    325212    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Synthetic rubber manufacturing
66    325222    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Manufactured noncellulosic fibers
67    325314    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Fertilizer mixing only manufacturing
68    3254111   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Medicinal & botanical mfg (synthetic organic medicinal chemicals in bulk)
69    3261131   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Unsupported plastics film sheet excluding packaging manufacturing
70    326192    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Resilient floor covering manufacturing
71    326211    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Tire manufacturing except retreading
72    327111    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Vitreous plumbing fixtures access ftg mfg
73    327121    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Brick and structural clay tile
74    327122    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Ceramic wall and floor tile
75    327124    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Clay refractories
76    327125    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Nonclay refractory manufacturing
77    327211    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Flat glass manufacturing
78    327213    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Glass container manufacturing
79    327331    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Concrete block and brick manufacturing
80    3279931   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Mineral wool manufacturing
81    331111    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Iron and steel mills
82    331112    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Electrometallurgical ferroalloy product mfg
83    331221    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Rolled steel shape manufacturing
84    331312    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Primary aluminum production
85    331315    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Aluminum sheet plate & foil mfg
86    331316    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Aluminum extruded products
87    331421    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Copper rolling drawing & extruding
                                          Other nonferrous metal roll draw extruding
88    3314913   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   (titanium and titanium base alloy mill shapes excluding wire)
89    3314923   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Other nonferrous secondary smelt refine alloying (secondary lead)
90    331511    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Iron foundries
91    3322121   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Hand and edge tools except machine tools and handsaws (mechanics' hand service tools)
92    332213    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Saw blade & handsaw mfg
                                          Prefabricated metal building and component manufacturing (prefabricated
93    3323111   1976:1 - 2005:6       5   metal building systems excluding farm service bldgs & residential buildings)
94    332321    1976:1 - 2005:6       5   Metal window and door manufacturing
95    332431    1976:1 - 2005:6       5   Metal can mfg
                                          Other metal container manufacturing
96    324393    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   (steel shipping barrels & drums excl beer barrels more than 12 gallon capacity)
97    332611    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Spring heavy gauge mfg
98    3326122   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Spring light gauge mfg (precision mechanical springs)
99    3327224   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Bolt nut screw rivet & washer mfg (externally threaded metal fasteners except aircraft)
100   332913    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Plumbing fixture fitting & trim mfg
101   332991    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Ball and roller bearings
102   332992    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Small arms ammunition mfg
103   332996    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Fabricated pipe & pipe fitting mfg
104   332998    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Enameled iron & metal sanitary ware mfg
105   333111    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Farm machinery & equipment mfg
106   333131    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Mining machinery & equipment mfg
107   333132    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Oil and gas field machinery and equipment mfg
108   333292    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Textile machinery
109   333293    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Printing machinery & equipment mfg
110   3332941   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Food products machinery mfg (dairy and milk products plant machinery)
111   3332981   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   All other industrial machinery mfg (chemical manufacturing machinery equip. and parts)
                                          Automatic vending machine mfg
112   3333111   1976:1 - 2005:6       5   (automatic merchandising machines coin operated excluding parts)
113   333512    1976:1 - 2005:6       5   Machine tool metal cutting types mfg
114   333513    1976:1 - 2005:6       5   Machine tool metal forming types mfg
                                          Cutting tool & machine tool accessory mfg
115   3335151   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   (small cutting tools for machine tools and metalworking machinery)
116   333612    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Speed changer industrial high speed drive & gear mfg
117   333618    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Other engine equipment mfg
118   3339111   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Pump & pumping equipment mfg (indus. pumps except hydraulic fluid power pumps)
119   333922    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Conveyor & conveying equipment mfg
                                          Overhead crane hoist & monorail system mfg
120   3339233   1976:1 - 2005:6       5   (overhead traveling cranes and monorail systems)
                                          Industrial truck tractor trailer stacker machinery mfg
121   3339241   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   (industrial trucks and tractors motorized and hand powered)
122   333992    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Welding & soldering equipment mfg (welding & soldering equipment mfg)
123   333997    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Scale & balance except laboratory mfg
124   334411    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Electron tube mfg
125   334414    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Electronic capacitor mfg
126   334415    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Electronic resistor mfg
127   334417    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Electronic connector mfg
                                          Electricity measuring testing instrument mfg
128   3345153   1976:1 - 2005:6       5   (test equipment for testing electrical radio & communication circuits & motors)
129   334517p   1976:1 - 2005:6       5   Irradiation apparatus manufacturing (primary products)
                                          Residential electric lighting fixture mfg
130   3351211   1976:1 - 2005:6       5   (residential electric lighting fixtures except portable & parts)
131   335122    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Commercial electric lighting fixture mfg
132   335129    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Other lighting equipment mfg
133   335212    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Household vacuum cleaner mfg
134   335221    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Household cooking appliance mfg
135   335311    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Power distribution specialty transformer mfg
136   335312    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Motor & generator mfg
137   335314p   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Relay & industrial control mfg (primary products)
138   335911    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Storage battery mfg
                                          Other communication and energy wire mfg
139   3359291   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   (power wire and cable made in plants that draw wire)
140   335932    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Noncurrent carrying wiring device mfg
141   335991p   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Carbon & graphite product mfg (primary products)
142   336321p   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Vehicular lighting equipment mfg (primary products)
143   337121    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Upholstered household furniture mfg
144   337122    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Wood household furniture except upholstered
145   337124    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Metal household furniture
146   337211    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Wood office furniture mfg
147   3372141   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Nonwood office furniture (office seating including upholstered nonwood)
                                          Jewelry except costume mfg
148   3399111   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   (jewelry made of solid platinum metals and solid karat gold)
149   3399123   1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Silverware & hollowware mfg ( Flatware and carving sets made wholly of metal)
150   339931    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Doll & stuffed toy mfg
151   339932    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Game toy & children's vehicle mfg
152   339944    1976:1   -   2005:6   5   Carbon paper & inked ribbon mfg
                                          Fastener button needle & pin mfg
153   3399931   1976:1 - 2005:6       5   (Buttons and parts except for precious or semiprecious metals and stones)
154   3399945   1976:1 - 2005:6       5   Broom brush & mop mfg (other brushes)




APPENDIX D – Cross-Sectional Industry Characteristics

For the cross-sectional regressions we use the following data sources:

C4 - Concentration ratio. Represents the percentage of sales made by the largest 4 firms in the
industry. Source. Bureau of the Census 1997.

Profit rates – average gross profit rates for 1997-2001 based on tax accounting.
Source: 2001 Annual Survey of Manufacturers.
