NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MANDATED HEALTH INSURANCE BENEFITS AND THE UTILIZATION AND
OUTCOMES OF INFERTILITY TREATMENTS
M. Kate Bundorf
Melinda Henne
Laurence Baker
Working Paper 12820
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12820

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2007

We thank the Iris M. Litt Fund from the Institute for Research on Women and Gender at Stanford
University for financial support. We thank Marianne Bitler as well as participants at various conferences
and seminars for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by M. Kate Bundorf, Melinda Henne, and Laurence Baker. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Mandated Health Insurance Benefits and the Utilization and Outcomes of Infertility Treatments
M. Kate Bundorf, Melinda Henne, and Laurence Baker
NBER Working Paper No. 12820
January 2007, Revised April 2008
JEL No. I1
ABSTRACT
During the last two decades, the treatment of infertility has improved dramatically. These treatments,
however, are expensive and rarely covered by insurance, leading many states to adopt regulations
mandating that health insurers cover them. In this paper, we explore the effects of benefit mandates
on the utilization and outcomes of infertility treatments. We find that use of infertility treatments is
significantly greater in states adopting comprehensive versions of these mandates. While greater utilization
had little impact on the number of deliveries, mandated coverage was associated with a relatively large
increase in the probability of a multiple birth. For relatively low fertility patients who responded to
the expanded insurance coverage, treatment was often unsuccessful and did not result in a live birth.
For relatively high fertility patients, in contrast, treatment often led to a multiple, rather than a singleton,
birth. We also find evidence that the beneficial effects on the intensive treatment margin that have
been proposed in other studies are relatively small. We conclude that, while benefit mandates potentially
solve a problem of adverse selection in this market, these benefits must be weighed against the costs
of the significant moral hazard in utilization they induce.

M. Kate Bundorf
Health Research and Policy
Stanford University
HRP T108
Stanford, CA 94305-5405
and NBER
bundorf@stanford.edu
Melinda Henne
Walter Reed Army Medical Center
mhenne@stanford.edu

Laurence Baker
Department of Health Research & Policy
HRP Redwood Bldg, Rm T110
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5405
and NBER
laurence.baker@stanford.edu

I. Introduction
Mandating that employers provide certain benefits to their workers can be an
attractive way for governments to achieve policy goals. In the case of health insurance,
mandates exist primarily as regulations requiring insurers to cover specified services in
the policies they sell. Because most people with health insurance obtain it through an
employer, mandating that private insurers cover particular benefits compels employers
who offer health insurance to purchase coverage for those services.1 Over time, state
governments and, on occasion, the Federal government have adopted mandates covering
a wide range of services (Laugesen, Paul et al. 2006).
The most compelling economic argument for health insurance benefit mandates is
that they mitigate problems of adverse selection for particular types of services (McGuire
and Montgomery 1982; Summers 1989). When asymmetric information exists between
insurers and consumers, a situation frequently encountered in health care, competitive
insurance markets may fail to provide optimal levels of coverage (Rothschild and Stiglitz
1976). Mandated provision can remedy this. Against the potential welfare gains of
benefit mandates, however, weigh the possible negative welfare effects. In the case of
health insurance, mandates may exacerbate moral hazard, leading to inefficiently high
consumption of the mandated service (Gruber 1992).
Existing empirical literature provides mixed evidence on the efficiency
implications of health insurance benefit mandates. For maternity benefits, state and
federal mandates appear to have addressed a market failure due to adverse selection
without generating significant moral hazard (Gruber 1994). The mandates dramatically

1

The well known exception is that the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA)
exempts employers who self-insure from this type of regulation.

1

expanded insurance coverage, with employers passing on the costs of the mandated
benefit to the workers most likely to benefit from expanded coverage. The wage offset,
in turn, had no impact on the labor supply of affected workers, indicating that their value
of the incremental coverage exceeded the cost.
Other studies provide a less positive picture of the efficiency implications of
benefit mandates, consistent with the view that mandate passage may represent the
preferences of particular interest groups (e.g. Stigler 1971) rather than the attempts of
regulators to increase social welfare. Some studies have found that benefit mandates
negatively affect both insurance and labor markets (Jensen and Gabel 1992; Sloan and
Conover 1998; Jensen and Morrisey 1999), suggesting that they generate moral hazard
that offsets any welfare gains. A third group of studies, however, reports that mandates
of even high cost benefits have not had negative effects on either health insurance or
labor markets. These studies suggest that employers often provide mandated benefits
even in the absence of a mandate (Gruber 1992; Kaestner and Simon 2002). In this case,
mandates neither alleviate adverse selection nor create moral hazard.
In this paper, we investigate the impact of mandates requiring health insurers to
provide coverage for infertility treatments. Over the last three decades, new technologies
have transformed the treatment of infertility. Among the most significant advances has
been the development of assisted reproductive therapies (ART) in which a physician
surgically removes an egg from a woman, combines the egg with sperm in a laboratory,
and returns the developing embryo to a woman’s body.2 In vitro fertilization (IVF), in

2

The development of drugs that stimulate ovulation in women was also an important advance in the
treatment of infertility. Patients often use these drugs in ART cycles as well as on their own or with
intrauterine (or artificial) insemination.

2

which the embryo is returned to the woman’s uterus, is the most common type of ART.3
The use of infertility treatments, particularly ART, increased rapidly during the last two
decades. The first delivery using ART in the U.S. occurred in 1981. By 2004, 411
clinics performed 127,977 cycles leading to 36,760 births of 49,458 infants (CDC 2006).
An important concern in the treatment of infertility is its association with high
rates of multiple births. In IVF, patients and physicians decide how many embryos to
return to the uterus. While transferring more embryos increases the likelihood of a
pregnancy, it also increases the likelihood of a multiple birth (Thurin, Hausken et al.
2004). More than 90% of patients transfer more than one embryo in given cycle, and
approximately one-third of ART deliveries are multiple births compared to about 3% of
all births (CDC 2005; Martin, Hamilton et al. 2005). The use of ovulation-inducing
drugs, even in the absence of ART, generates similar concerns. Approximately one-third
of the dramatic increase in multiple birth rates during the last three decades was due to
increased use of reproductive technologies (CDC 2000).
Infertility treatment offers an intriguing case of the potential the trade-off between
solving a problem of adverse selection and creating a problem of moral hazard as a
consequence of a benefit mandate. Adverse selection is likely to be a problem in this
market. Treatment, particularly ART, is expensive. A single cycle of IVF costs
approximately $10,000 (Neumann and Johannesson 1994; Collins 2001). Because many
cycles do not result in a live birth, the average cost per delivery is over $50,000 (Collins
2001). The uncertain incidence of infertility and the high cost of treatment make it a

3

Other types of ART include gamete intrafallopian transfer (GIFT) and zygote intrafallopian transfer
(ZIFT), in which either unfertilized eggs and sperm (gametes) or fertilized eggs (zygotes) are placed in the
fallopian tubes. While GIFT and ZIFT were used in the early 1990s, they represented less than 1% of ART
cycles in 2003 (CDC 2005).

3

significant financial risk, and experimental evidence suggests that people highly value
insurance against this risk (Neumann and Johannesson 1994). However, people are likely
to have private information about both their fertility and their desire for children that is
highly predictive of their utilization. Because health insurance enrollment decisions are
generally made annually, individuals are able to use this information when purchasing
insurance, potentially leading to adverse selection.
The fact that infertility is rarely covered by insurance is consistent with, although
not direct evidence of, adverse selection in this market. Although data on insurance
coverage of infertility treatments are limited, a 1997 Mercer Consulting employer survey
found that 65% of employers did not cover any infertility services and, of those that
covered some, less than half provided coverage for the most expensive treatments like
IVF. If the absence of insurance coverage for infertility treatments signals the existence
of adverse selection in this market, a benefit mandate may be a useful regulatory solution.
In practice, a number of states enacted mandates requiring insurers to cover infertility
treatments during the late 1980s and early 1990s, and Louisiana, New Jersey, and New
York passed legislation as recently as 2001.
In our analysis, we focus on the moral hazard effects of mandated coverage for
infertility treatments. Our key contribution is that we demonstrate that, not only did
expanding insurance coverage increase utilization of ART, but that the coverage
expansions had heterogeneous effects on the population of women of child-bearing age.
We demonstrate that, in theory, both relatively low and relatively high fertility patients
may respond to a reduction in the price of infertility treatments. The effects on outcomes,
however, are likely to differ between these groups. For relatively low fertility couples,

4

greater utilization is likely to lead to unsuccessful cycles. For relatively high fertility
couples, in contrast, greater utilization of fertility treatments may lead to higher rates of
multiple births without a corresponding increase in birth rates. Using mother’s age as a
proxy for fertility, we provide empirical evidence consistent with these types of effects.
Our focus on the heterogeneous treatment effects both differentiates our study
from other research on the effects of these mandates and provides important insights into
the interpretation of the findings of existing studies. Hamilton and McManus (2005)
examine the impact of benefit mandates as well as competition among fertility clinics on
utilization of ART and multiple birth risk. While they conclude that mandates reduce
multiple birth risk by changing the financial incentives influencing embryo transfer
decisions, our results provide evidence of an alternative mechanism for their findings –
that the reduction in multiple birth rates associated with expanded coverage reflects
changes in the composition of the treated population. While Bitler and Schmidt (2007)
document higher rates of utilization of reproductive therapies in states with insurance
mandates, particularly among older, highly-educated women, they do not link increased
utilization to outcomes, which is necessary for evaluating the welfare implications of
greater utilization.
Bitler (2006), who examines differences in health outcomes among twins in states
with and without mandates, documents that mandates lead to higher rates of twinning and
that twins born in mandated states have slightly worse health outcomes, suggesting a
negative effect of either ART treatment or patient selection into ART on infant health.
Our results provide evidence on how patient selection is likely to affect the interpretation
of results based on this identification strategy. In particular, we propose that the marginal

5

patient in an analysis of the effects of expanded insurance coverage on rates of twinning
is likely to represent a relatively fertile patient (among ART births), suggesting that any
negative effects of patient selection into ART on health outcomes could be larger among
the broader population.
Schmidt (2007) documents higher rates of first births among women 35 and older
in states adopting infertility mandates. As an analysis of the moral hazard associated
with this type of benefit mandate, however, this study has significant limitations. We
demonstrate that, because infertility treatments are often used for couples experiencing
secondary infertility, restricting the analysis to first births misses important effects of
utilization on outcomes, particularly among older women. More importantly, because the
study does not examine rates of multiple births, it does not capture a key dimension of the
heterogeneity of the treatment effect – whether insurance coverage leads some women to
have a multiple rather than a singleton birth. Using a separate data source, we also
analyze outcomes among those treated to determine whether mandates result in
incremental utilization that does not ultimately result in a birth and, thus, would not be
captured by the population birth data.
Finally, while not the focus of our study, our results provide some indirect
evidence on whether benefit mandates cause women to delay child birth by reducing the
price of infertility treatment (Buckles 2006).
While each of these studies examines an important aspect of extending insurance
coverage for the treatment of infertility, none provides evidence on how the mandates
affect the composition of the treated population. Yet, we demonstrate that understanding
these heterogeneous treatment effects is essential for evaluating the welfare effects of

6

expanded coverage. In our discussion, we reconcile our findings with those of the
existing literature and identify their implications for research and policy.

II.

Theoretical Effects of Insurance Coverage for Infertility Treatment

Effect of Insurance Coverage on Utilization along the Extensive Margin
By reducing the price of treatment, insurance coverage may increase demand for
infertility services, resulting in greater utilization among those for whom the expected
benefits of treatment are lower. Patients responding to the lower price may include both
relatively low and relatively high fertility patients. Figure 1 plots a hypothetical
relationship between a couple’s fertility and birth probabilities with and without
treatment. Treatment has the largest effect on the probability of a birth for couples in the
middle of the fertility distribution. Lower fertility patients are unlikely to have a birth
without treatment and treatment generates a relatively small increase in that probability.
Although the treatment effect is also relatively small for high fertility patients, they are
likely to have a birth even in the absence of treatment.
In Figure 1, L and H represent the fertility thresholds for patients seeking
treatment in the absence of insurance coverage. The expected benefits of treatment
exceed the expected costs only for couples with fertility greater than L and less than H.
A reduction in the out-of-pocket price of treatment shifts these thresholds from L to L’ (a
shift toward relatively low fertility patients) and from H to H’ (a shift toward relatively
high fertility patients).4 In both cases, the lower price results in utilization by patients
with lower expected benefits, and utilization increases birth rates within each group.

4

This result is formalized in a theoretical model developed by Hamilton and McManus (2005).

7

While the effect of insurance coverage on the probability of a birth is similar for
the marginal low and high fertility patient, the effect on the probability of a multiple birth
differs dramatically. In Figure 1, we plot the relationship between the probability of a
multiple birth and fertility, with and without treatment, assuming that treatment has a
constant, positive effect on the probability of a multiple birth, conditional on a birth.
Under this assumption, holding embryo transfer practices constant, the probability of a
multiple birth increases with fertility due primarily to its relationship with the probability
of any birth. Figure 1 demonstrates, however, that a portion of both high and low fertility
patients undergoing infertility treatment in response to more generous insurance coverage
would have given birth even in the absence of treatment. Because multiple birth rates are
high among those treated with ART, for this subset of women, treatment had no effect on
whether they gave birth, but a large effect on their likelihood of a multiple birth.
A key distinction between low and high fertility patients in this effect is the
number of patients for whom it applies. Because many high fertility patients would have
given birth in the absence of treatment, insurance coverage may generate a relatively
large increase in the number of multiple births relative to the increase in the number of
births. Among low fertility couples, in contrast, relatively few would have given birth in
the absence of treatment. As a result, the magnitude of the effect of treatment on the
number of multiple births is likely to be smaller. Thus, a potentially important form of
moral hazard in response to insurance coverage for the treatment of infertility is an
increase in multiple birth rates without a corresponding increase in birth rates among
relatively high fertility patients.

8

Table 1 provides a hypothetical numerical example to demonstrate this effect.
High and low fertility patients differ in their probability of a birth without treatment (0.8
versus 0.2). We assume that treatment has the same effect on the probability of a birth (a
10 percentage point increase) for both high and low fertility patients, and that, for both
groups, infertility treatment increases the probability of a multiple birth conditional on a
birth from 0.03 to 0.30. The implication is that treatment has a larger (in absolute value)
incremental effect on the probability of a multiple birth for high (0.246) than low (0.084)
fertility patients. In addition, the ratio of the incremental probability of a multiple birth to
the incremental probability of a birth is much higher for high than low fertility patients.
For low fertility patients, each incremental birth is associated with 0.8 incremental
multiple births. For high fertility patients, in contrast, each incremental birth is
associated with 2.46 incremental multiple births.
The assumptions underlying this stylized model are generally consistent with
fertility rates and infertility treatment. Rates of multiple births among those conceiving
with ART are high - approximately 30% of ART deliveries are multiple deliveries,
compared to approximately 3% of births in the population as a whole. In our empirical
work, we use female age as a proxy for fertility. While female fertility declines
significantly with age (Menken, Trussell et al. 1986), the proportion of births that are
multiples varies relatively little with age, either with or without treatment. Prior to the
widespread use of infertility treatments, differences by age in rates of twin and triplet
births were relatively small. In 1980, rates of multiple births per 1,000 births were 20.5,
23.5, 25.3, and 23.0 for women aged 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, and 40-44, respectively
(Martin and Park 1999). In the case of ART, both birth rates and multiple birth rates

9

conditional on a birth decline with age, particularly after age 35 (CDC 2005). These facts
suggest that age is likely to be a good proxy for fertility in this context.

Effects Insurance Coverage on Utilization along the Intensive Margin
Patients seeking treatment for infertility face a variety of treatment alternatives,
and generous insurance coverage may cause them to progress more rapidly from
inexpensive to more expensive treatment options. For example, artificial insemination
(AI) is thought to be more cost-effective than IVF, which has a higher success rate but
also a much higher cost, so that it would typically be optimal for patients to progress to
IVF only after AI has failed (Van Voorhis, Sotovall et al. 1997). Because patients with
generous insurance coverage are protected from the out-of-pocket costs of IVF, they may
progress to IVF more quickly.
Other research, however, suggests insurance coverage of ART may lead to more
efficient utilization of ART by influencing treatment patterns in ways that ultimately lead
to lower rates of multiple births (Jain, Harlow et al. 2002). Because multiple births are
associated with low birth weight and other comorbidities for babies as well as greater risk
of complications for mothers, many consider them a negative outcome of infertility
treatment (Adashi, Barri et al. 2003).5 Infants born as part of a multiple rather than a
singleton birth are more likely to have low or very low birth weight (Schieve, S.F. et al.
2002), and low birth weight is highly correlated with infant mortality as well as a variety
5

Although the evidence of complications associated with the use of ART, conditional on the number of
births, is less conclusive, some studies point to the existence of negative effects on infant health.
Population-based studies have found that infants conceived using reproductive technologies have worse
health outcomes relative to those conceived naturally (Schieve et. al. 2002; Bitler 2006), and reviews of the
medical literature conclude that the possibility that infants conceived using ART have an increased risk of
birth defects relative to those conceived naturally cannot be ruled out (Hansen et. al 2005; Kurinzuk et. al.
2006).

10

of longer-term poor health outcomes (Hack, Klein et al. 1995; CDC 2002). Medical care
costs are also higher for multiple than for singleton births. A study conducted during the
late 1980s and early 1990s found that the average per baby cost for a singleton delivery
was $9,845 compared to $18,974 and $36,588 for twin and triplet deliveries, respectively
(Callahan, J.E. et al. 1994).6
Due to the high per cycle cost of IVF, patients paying out-of-pocket face strong
financial pressure to minimize the number of cycles. Thus, they are willing to increase
their chances of success at the increased risk of a multiple birth by transferring more
embryos in a given cycle. Patients with comprehensive health insurance covering
multiple rounds may be more conservative in their decisions regarding embryo transfer
since their out of pocket costs will be much lower for an additional cycle if the first is
unsuccessful.7
A potential mechanism for these positive efficiency effects is that insurance
coverage of ART corrects a distortion in utilization created by differential coverage of
complementary services. Patients usually do not bear the high incremental medical care
costs associated with the multiple births because they are generally covered by insurance.
Thus, when they make embryo transfer decisions, they have no incentive to consider the
incremental medical care costs associated with multiple births. Insurance coverage of
ART essentially corrects this distortion by subsidizing the cost of additional cycles of

6

Almond, Chay and Lee (2005), however, propose that these studies, which are largely cross-sectional
analyses, overstate the magnitude of both the negative health consequences and medical care costs of low
birth weight.
7
In fact, some clinical evidence is consistent with this view, finding that fewer embryos are transferred per
cycle and that the percentages of cycles resulting in live births and multiple births are lower in states with
mandates for comprehensive health insurance coverage of ART than in those without (Reynolds, 2001;
Jain, 2002). However, it is not clear that these studies have adjusted well for the underlying characteristics
of treated patients.

11

ART. Alternatively, Hamilton and McManus (2005) propose that this effect can be
attributed to intertemporal income effects that result in patients pursuing ART earlier due
to the availability of greater wealth in subsequent periods, conditional on treatment in the
earlier period. Insurance essentially generates moral hazard by creating incentives for
couples to pursue treatment earlier.

Effects of Insurance Coverage on the Timing of Childbearing
Insurance coverage of the treatment of infertility may also cause women to delay
childbirth (Buckles 2006). Women pursuing a career face a trade-off with respect to the
timing of births. While delaying child birth may lead to greater lifetime earnings,
because female fecundity declines with age, it increases the risk of infertility. By
enabling women to bear children at older ages, effective infertility treatment reduces this
risk. Insurance coverage, in turn, reduces the medical care costs of expected future use of
infertility treatment, creating stronger incentives for women to delay.

III.

Data Sources
We analyze separately data from two sources in order to examine the effects of

the mandates. Using population birth data, we examine birth rates, independent of
treatment. By not restricting our analyses to the treated population, we are able to test
whether the incremental utilization associated with mandates indeed leads to incremental
births or multiple births, essentially accounting for births that would likely have taken
place in the absence of more generous insurance coverage. Then, using clinic registry
data, we examine utilization and outcomes among those treated with ART. These data

12

allow us to assess the relationship between state mandate status and utilization of ART as
well as outcomes among those treated.
The source of population-level data on birth rates for the year 1981 to 1999 is the
National Vital Statistics System of the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS 19811999). These data are abstracted from birth certificates filed each year in vital statistics
offices of each state. While the data include 100% of birth certificates for most states for
the years of our study, for a small number of states during the earlier years, the data
include only a 50% sample of birth certificates, and we adjust the total numbers
accordingly. From these data, we calculated the total number of births, singleton births,
multiple births (any order), and triplet or higher order births in each state in each year by
5-year age categories (25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, and 45-49). We restrict our analyses
to women age 25-49 because women in this age group represent the vast majority of ART
cycles (CDC 2005). We transform the birth data to represent deliveries, rather than
births, because a delivery is the appropriate unit of analysis for most of our models.
Because the use of infertility treatments is associated with high rates of multiple births,
analyses that examine the number of infants born, as opposed to the number of women
giving birth, may overstate the effects of the mandates on fertility rates. We divide the
number of births which were either twin or higher order by the relevant number of infants
in order to estimate the number of deliveries for a given age group-state-year cell.8
We examine utilization and outcomes among those treated using registry data
from the Society for Assisted Reproductive Technologies (SART). In 1989, SART, an

8

Prior to 1989, quadruplets and quintuplets were characterized as triplet or higher order births. For these
years, we estimated the distribution of triplet, quadruplet, and quintuplet births based on the average of the
national age-specific distribution for 1989 and 1990. Because the numbers of quadruplet and quintuplet
births are very small, we believe this estimate is unlikely to significantly bias our results.

13

affiliate of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine (ASRM), began a voluntary
reporting system to collect clinic-level information about the utilization and outcome of
ART services. The Fertility Clinic Success Rate and Certification Act of 1992 federally
mandated participation in the system for clinics providing ART. The results are compiled
annually by the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), and the first national report under
this law was based on data collected for utilization in 1995. We obtained hard copies of
the 1989-1994 published reports from SART. The clinic-level data from subsequent
years are publicly available on the CDC website. We use SART data from 1991 to 2001.
We exclude the earlier years in order to restrict our analyses to the post-adoption period
since the vast majority of states adopted mandates prior to 1989.
The reports include the number of various types of ART cycles performed (in
vitro fertilization (IVF), gamete intrafallopian transfer (GIFT), zygote intrafallopian
transfer (ZIFT), transfer of cryopreserved embryos, and combinations of the above
procedures) and the number of births and multiple births for each procedure. Clinics do
not report utilization of non-ART therapies such as artificial insemination or the use of
ovulation inducing drugs without ART. We identified the state of each clinic based on its
ZIP code and calculated the numbers of cycles, live deliveries, and multiple live
deliveries for each state in each year. From this information, we calculated rates of
cycles per 1,000 women age 25-44, live deliveries per cycle, and multiple deliveries per
live delivery.9 While the reports include information on cycles and outcomes by age, the
age groupings vary over time. Thus, prior to 1995, we are only able to analyze utilization
9

The SART reports include the number of multiple deliveries (twins and higher) for all cycles from 19901994 and only for cycles involving fresh embryos from non-donor eggs for later years. As a result, we
analyze only multiple deliveries resulting from fresh cycles for all years. In addition, in 1991 and 1992, the
number of reported cycles is based on the number of retrievals as opposed to the number of cycles initiated.
This will cause us to under-estimate the number of cycles in these years.

14

and outcomes aggregated across age groups. From 1995 to 2001, we analyze separately
women under 35 and 35 and over, although we limit our analyses to cycles using fresh
eggs due to a change in the reporting of cycles using donor or frozen eggs in 1999.

Insurance Mandates
We obtained information on which states had adopted insurance mandates from
RESOLVE (www.resolve.org), a consumer organization for people experiencing
infertility. We then verified and expanded on this information by reviewing the actual
legislation for each mandate. Twelve states passed legislation mandating insurance
coverage of ART between 1985 and 1999 (Table 2).10 The conditions of the mandates,
however, vary significantly across states based on the types of plans affected, the number
and types of treatments covered, the cost-sharing associated with treatment, and the
population to which the mandate applies. Of course, firms that self-insure are exempt
from mandates in all states.
We classified the laws into three categories based on their likely effectiveness in
changing treatment patterns. We first differentiate between mandates that require
insurance companies only to offer coverage for treatment and those that require insurance
companies to cover infertility treatment. It is not clear why mandating that insurers offer
a policy but not mandating that consumers purchase the coverage would affect rates of
coverage of the mandated benefit. Insurers could have offered this type of policy at the
chosen premium in the absences of a mandate. While this treatment is consistent with
most of the existing literature on benefit mandates that does not even consider offer-only

10

Louisiana and New Jersey each adopted a mandate and New York updated its mandate in 2001.

15

mandates (e.g. Gruber 1992), we explicitly test the effects of this type of mandate by
analyzing them separately.
Among mandates that require insurers to cover infertility treatment, we
distinguish between those that require generous coverage of IVF from those that do not.
We defined a “comprehensive” mandate (three states) as a requirement that insurance
companies, including health maintenance organizations (HMOs), provide coverage for
the cost of diagnosis and treatment of infertility, including ART of at least four cycles,
with few exclusions on the population covered by the mandate. A “limited” mandate
(seven states) refers to mandating that insurers cover fewer than 4 cycles of IVF. For the
most part, these mandates require insurers to cover either a single cycle or exclude IVF
from the mandated coverage. An exception is the state of Maryland. Although
Maryland’s mandate required coverage of up to 3 cycles when it was adopted in 1985,
coverage was limited to those with a 5-year history of infertility.11 This restriction on the
covered population, combined with fewer covered cycles, potentially makes the mandate
less generous than those we define as comprehensive. However, it is unclear how strictly
the restriction based on pre-existing infertility was enforced. In addition, the mandated
three cycles of IVF is more generous that the coverage required in other states adopting
limited mandates. Due to this ambiguity, we test the sensitivity of our results to
reclassifying Maryland’s mandate as comprehensive. The states adopting mandates, the
year of adoption, and their classification are listed in Table 2. We also note the specific
restrictions on coverage that differentiate comprehensive from limited mandates.

11

In 1994, the mandate was extended to couples with a 2-year history of infertility as well as those with
particular diagnoses with no waiting period.

16

A natural concern for our analysis is whether mandate passage was exogeneous
with respect to demand for infertility treatment. Existing papers in this literature provide
strong evidence that this is not the case. Hamilton and McManus (2005) find little
difference between states adopting and those not adopting mandates with IVF-specific
coverage regulations in demographic characteristics potentially reflecting demand for
treatment, including female labor force participation rates, female educational attainment,
average family size, and median household income. Instead, they find substantive
differences between the types of states in their regulatory environments as proxied by the
extent to which they tend to mandate other types of services as well as the voting
behavior of their citizens. From this, they conclude that mandate adoption appears to
reflect governing tastes rather than preferences for children or other life-style factors.
Finally, they demonstrate that neither clinic size nor the number of clinics in a market
varied by future state mandate status prior to the implementation of most mandates.
Bitler (2006) demonstrates that trends in neither rates of twin births nor twin outcomes
during the period prior to the adoption of mandates (1981-1984) differed by state
mandate status. These findings indicate that mandate adoption is unlikely to reflect statespecific trends in demand for infertility treatment.

Control variables
We obtained data on the number of women in each state by age from 1981-2001,
which are the basis of our per capita calculations, from the U.S. Census Bureau. Data on
time-varying characteristics of states, which we use as control variables in the empirical
models, are from a variety of sources. The estimate of per capita income is from the

17

regional economic accounts produced by the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. We
obtained annual state-level unemployment rates from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
From the Current Population Survey, we calculated state-year level female labor force
participation rates, rates of education among women of child-bearing age, the distribution
of the population based on family income relative to poverty, and rates of minorities and
Hispanics. Finally, using the County Business Patterns data produced by the U.S. Census
Bureau, we calculate the proportion of workers in each state employed in small firms
(<100 workers) in each year.

IV.

Insurance Mandates and Population Delivery Rates
In Figures 2-4, we present trends in rates of deliveries, multiple deliveries

(including twin and higher order births), and triplet or higher order deliveries per women
25-49 by whether the state ever adopted each type of mandate. The vertical lines indicate
the earliest and latest years in which mandates of any type were adopted.
Although the baseline levels differ, there are not obvious differences in the trends
for the total number of deliveries by state mandate status (Figure 2).12 There are,
however, more noticeable differences in trends in the rates of multiple births (Figure 3).
In the post-mandate period, rates of multiple deliveries for women 25-49 increased more
rapidly in states that adopted comprehensive mandates than in states that did not adopt
mandates or that adopted offer-only or limited mandates. These trends are even more
pronounced for triplet and higher order deliveries (Figure 4). The case of triplet and
higher order births is notable because both the levels and trends in triplet or higher order

12

The peak in birth rates in 1991 is well documented in the literature and is driven primarily by birth rates
for women 25 to 29.

18

deliveries were similar by state mandate status prior to the adoption of the mandates, but
clearly diverged in the post-mandate period.
We identify the effects of mandates by examining changes in delivery rates in
states adopting laws before and after their implementation compared to changes in states
that did not adopt mandates. The following model provides the basic framework for our
difference-in-difference estimates:

y i ,t = α + M i.t − 2 λ + X i ,t β + S i γ + Yt δ + ε i ,t .

(1)

The data are aggregated to the state (i)-year (t) level. Y represents a measure of
the delivery rate among women of a particular 5-year age group, ranging from 25-49.
We estimate all models separately by age group because we expect the effects of the
mandates to differ by age group. This specification also allows the effects of state
characteristics and time trends to vary across age groups and avoids grouping populations
with very different baseline fertility rates. M is a series of indicators representing
whether the state had adopted a comprehensive, limited, or offer-only mandate in place
two years prior to the indicated year. We lag the mandate indicators by two years for two
reasons. First, the lag between successful treatment and a birth is approximately nine
months, indicating that the effect should be lagged by at least one year. In addition, in
preliminary analyses, we found that the mandates appear to affect birth rates with an
additional year lag, potentially reflecting either lags in technology diffusion or the use of
multiple cycles prior to achieving a live birth. We include state (S) and year (Y) fixed
effects as well as a set of time-varying state characteristics (X) described above. Table 3
includes definitions and summary statistics for the independent variables.

19

We estimate the model for each age group using two types of dependent variables.
We first examine deliveries per capita to test the relationship between mandates and
fertility rates. We also examine rates of multiple deliveries (twin or higher order) and
triplet or higher order deliveries per 1,000 deliveries to test whether mandates are
associated with a shift in the distribution of deliveries toward multiples. We estimate
linear models using least squares, weighting by the size of the female population in each
age group in a given state and year. We allow for clustering by state when calculating the
standard errors in order to obtain estimates that are unbiased by within-state serial
correlation in the error terms (Bertrand, Duflo et al. 2004).
The differences-in-differences estimates indicate that comprehensive mandates
were associated with a decrease in delivery rates for women 25-29 and an increase in
delivery rates for women 35-39 (Table 4 – Panel A for each age group). The decrease of
3.192 deliveries per 1,000 women represents a 3% decline for women 25-29 and the
increase of 1.208 deliveries per 1,000 women represents a 4% increase for women 35-39.
While the negative effect for younger women is consistent with a delay in child birth in
response to more generous insurance coverage of infertility, we also find a similar
negative effect in states adopting offer-only mandates, which are, in theory, less likely to
effect insurance coverage and treatment patterns. For women 30-34 and 40-44, the
estimates of the effects of comprehensive mandates are positive, but not statistically
significant at conventional levels. For each group, the estimate represents a 1% increase
in delivery rates, and the estimate borders on statistical significance for women 30-34
(p=0.14) We find no evidence that limited mandates affected delivery rates for any age
group, and offer-only mandates are associated with delivery rates only for women 25-29.

20

For twin or higher order deliveries, the implementation of a comprehensive
mandate led to a statistically significant increase in the proportion of deliveries that were
multiples among women 30-34 and 35-39 (Table 4 – Panel B), and, for each of these age
groups, the point estimate of the number of incremental multiple deliveries represents a
10% increase in multiple delivery rates. For women 40-44 and 45-49, the estimates are
relatively large, representing a 16% and 17% increase, respectively, but imprecise. We
find no evidence that either limited or offer-only mandates increased rates of twin or
higher-order deliveries among women of any age.
The results for triplet or higher order multiple deliveries are similar to those for
twin or higher order deliveries, although we find that, in addition to women 30-34 and
35-39, comprehensive mandates increased rates of triplet or higher order deliveries
among the youngest age group we study – women 25-29. In general, the point estimates
from these models represent a large percentage increase due to the relatively low rate of
triplet or higher order deliveries in the population as a whole. For example, a
comprehensive mandate led to 0.304 incremental triplet or higher order deliveries per
1,000 deliveries among women 30-34, representing a 54% increase. Once again, these
results provide no evidence that either limited or offer-only mandates were associated
with higher rates of multiple deliveries.
Our results for the effects of mandates on fertility rates differ somewhat from
those of Schmidt (2007) who estimates that mandates increased first birth rates by 5%
among women 35 and older but did not affect first births rates among younger women.
One important methodological difference is that we do not restrict the measure of fertility

21

to first births.13 In 2002, 43% of women who had one or more visits for medical help to
get pregnant had already given birth at least once.14 Because infertility treatments are
often used for couples experiencing secondary infertility, restricting the analysis to first
births may miss important effects of utilization on outcomes, particularly among older
women. In Table 5, we present the results of re-estimating our delivery rate models,
restricting the dependent variable to first deliveries. While we continue to find little
evidence that either limited or offer-only mandates had an effect on delivery rates, the
results for comprehensive mandates differ somewhat from those presented in Table 4. In
particular, we find the strongest evidence of an increase in first birth rates among women
30-34. For these women, the estimate of an incremental 1.303 deliveries per 1,000
women represents a 7% increase in the first birth rate. While the estimates for older
women are large in percentage terms (8% and 9% for women 35-39 and 40-44,
respectively), they are imprecisely estimated. Comparing the results from Tables 4 and 5,
we conclude that the effects of comprehensive mandates on delivery rates were not
restricted to first deliveries and that they were larger for first deliveries for women 30-34
and for subsequent deliveries for women 35-39.
We also test the sensitivity of the results to re-classifying Maryland as having
adopted a comprehensive, rather than a limited, mandate in 1985 (results are presented in
Appendix Table 1). Because few states adopted comprehensive versions of the laws and
Maryland’s mandate was more comprehensive than most regulations that we classified as

13

Other differences include specifying the types of mandates into mutually exclusive groups, measuring
fertility based on the number of women giving birth, rather than the number of infants born, a potentially
important adjustment given the high rates of multiple births associated with infertility treatments, not log
transforming the dependent variables, and not including state-specific quadratic time trends.
14
Author’s calculations using data from the National Survey of Family Growth published by the CDC
(2005).

22

limited (although less comprehensive than those we classified as comprehensive), this
potentially represents an important test of the robustness of our results. The results are
not particularly sensitive to this reclassification. Although the magnitudes of most of the
estimates of the effects of comprehensive mandates are slightly smaller (with the
exception of the effect of the comprehensive mandate on delivery rates for women 3034), they remain statistically significant. In addition, we continue to find no evidence
that limited mandates affected either fertility or multiple birth rates.
In summary, we find that the effects of mandates on both fertility and multiple
delivery rates were concentrated among states adopting the most comprehensive versions
of the laws. For states adopting comprehensive laws, mandates had the largest
percentage effect on delivery rates for women 35-39 – a 4% increase for these women.
For slightly younger (30-34) and older (40-44) women, the estimates indicate that
mandates increased delivery rates by approximately 1%, although these estimates are not
statistically significant at conventional levels. For multiple deliveries, in contrast, we
find strong evidence that mandates increased the proportion of deliveries that were
multiples for women 30-34 and 35-39. In the case of triplet or higher order deliveries,
these effects extended to women 25-29.

V. Insurance Mandates and the Utilization and Outcomes of ART
In this section, we examine the relationship between state mandate status and
utilization and outcomes of ART. These analyses supplement those from the birth data in
three ways. First, a relationship between state mandate status and utilization of ART
provides important evidence of the mechanism underlying the effects we observe in the

23

population birth data. Second, we directly test the relationship between state mandate
status and changes in treatment patterns along the intensive margin by examining embryo
transfer decisions. Finally, we examine the relationship between state mandate status and
the outcomes of ART patients.
ART utilization increased dramatically from 1991-2001. The number of cycles
per 1,000 women of reproductive age (25-44) more than doubled from 0.79 to 1.83.15
During the same time period, births per cycle increased from 0.17 to 0.25 and multiples
per birth increased from 0.31 to 0.38. Cycles per capita, however, increased much more
quickly in states that adopted comprehensive mandates than in states either without
mandates or with other types of mandates (Figure 5). Consistent with findings from the
medical literature, deliveries per cycle (Figure 6) and multiples per ART delivery were
lower in states with comprehensive mandates than in other states (Figure 7).
We examine these trends using multivariate models. Because the registry data do
not span the period prior to the implementation of mandates, we are unable to control for
characteristics of states that are fixed over time using state fixed effects. Thus, these
results are necessarily more tentative than those using the birth data. The analyses are
based on the following basic model:
y i ,t = α + M i λ + Yt δ + X i ,t β + ε i ,t

(3)

Once again, we aggregate the data to the state(i)-year(t) level, and the dependent
variables include cycles per 1,000 women, live deliveries per cycle, and multiple
deliveries per live delivery. M is a set of dummy variables indicating whether the state
had a comprehensive, limited, or offer-only mandate in place. In some models, we
15

We restrict the denominator to women 25-44 in this analysis because women 45-49 represent relatively
few ART cycles. While we were able to analyze this group separately using the birth data, we are unable to
do so using the SART data.

24

include dummy variables indicating the year (Y) to control for trends in treatments and
outcomes that were common across states over time. Because utilization demonstrated a
strong linear time trend, we also estimate models in which we instead include a linear
time trend and the interaction of the trend with state mandate status. This allows us to
differentiate between a one-time shift in the level of outcome variables and a change in
the rate of growth associated with the implementation of the mandate. X includes timevarying state-level characteristics that potentially affect treatments or outcomes. Table 6
includes summary statistics for the independent variables in these models.
We estimate one set of models, pooling data for patients of all ages covering the
period 1991-2001 as well as separate models by age group (under 35 and 35 and over) for
the subset of the years for which we have consistent age breakdowns for the dependent
variables (1995-2001). We estimate the models using least squares, weighting by the
corresponding denominator in the dependent variable. We estimate the standard errors
allowing for within-state correlation in the error terms.
Comprehensive mandates were associated with an increase in the rate of growth,
rather than a one-time shift, in utilization of ART relative to states not adopting
mandates. Although the point estimate of the effect of a comprehensive mandate is large
in the model with only the main effects of the mandates (Table 7 – Column 1), it is not
statistically significant. However, when we interact a linear time trend with the mandate
indicators, we find that the cycles per capita rose more quickly in states with
comprehensive mandates than in states without mandates (Table 7 – Column 2). We find
no evidence that either limited or offer-only mandates were associated with greater
utilization of ART. When we re-estimate the model and restrict the sample to 1995-2001,

25

we obtain a similar result, although the effect of the comprehensive mandate is only
weakly statistically significant (p=0.107), likely due to the smaller sample size (Table 7 –
Column 3). When estimating the model separately for women under 35 years and 35 and
over, we find little evidence of differences in the effect of the comprehensive mandate on
utilization for the two groups (Table 7 – Columns 5 and 6). Although the point estimate
is not statistically significant at conventional levels for the older group, the magnitude of
the effect is similar to that for the younger group. The estimates indicate that utilization
of ART in states with comprehensive mandates is nearly double that of states without
mandates.
Consistent with research from the medical literature, we find that rates of
deliveries per cycle and multiples per delivery were lower in states that adopted
comprehensive mandates than in states without mandates. The magnitudes of the effects
are similar for women under 35 (Table 8 - Columns 1 and 2) and 35 and over (Table 8 Columns 6 and 7), and the effects are large – representing an approximately 25%
reduction in births per cycle and an eight percent reduction in multiples per birth.
Although fewer embryos are transferred per cycles in states with comprehensive
mandates for patients in both age groups, these effects are not statistically significant
(Table 8 - Columns 3 and 8). More importantly, we also find no evidence that
differences in embryo transfer rates explain the lower rates of deliveries and multiple
deliveries in state with comprehensive mandates. When we control for the average
number of embryos transferred (Table 8 – Columns 4, 5, 9 and 10), the point estimates of
the effects of a comprehensive mandate on rates of deliveries per cycle and multiples
deliveries per delivery are nearly identical to those from the models without the control.

26

While existing literature has attributed the relationship between mandates and lower rates
of births per cycle and multiples per birth to the ability of insurance to reduce incentives
to transfer more embryos in a given cycle (Jain, Harlow et al. 2002), our results imply
that the relationship may have more to do with the composition of the treated population,
which has typically been poorly controlled in previous work.
While we find no evidence of an association between ART outcomes and state
mandate status for states adopting limited mandates, we do find similar effects for states
adopting offer-only mandates to those for states adopting comprehensive mandates.
However, in the analysis of utilization, we found no evidence that utilization was greater
in states with offer-only mandates, suggesting that these effects represent differences in
the populations seeking treatment between the two types of states.

VI.

Discussion
We find that mandates requiring insurers to provide comprehensive coverage of

infertility treatments affect the utilization and outcomes of these services. These effects,
however, are concentrated within states adopting the most comprehensive versions of the
laws – those that place fewer exclusions on the population to which the mandate applies
and that require coverage of 3 or more cycles of IVF as well as less expensive treatments.
We do not find evidence that more limited mandates affect either ART treatment patterns
or population-level delivery or multiple delivery rates for women of any age.
The effects of comprehensive mandates on population delivery rates are largest in
percentage terms for women 35-39. For this age group, comprehensive mandates
resulted in an additional 1.208 deliveries per 1,000 women, a 4% increase. For women

27

30-34, our estimates indicate that comprehensive mandates increased delivery rates by
1% (p=0.14) and that this increase was concentrated among first births. We do not find
evidence that comprehensive mandates increased delivery rates among women of other
ages, although for women 40-44, both the magnitude and standard error of the estimate
are large.
The estimates from the models of population delivery rates are consistent with
those from the SART data. In particular, by multiplying the point estimates of the effects
of comprehensive mandates on delivery rates for women 30-34, 35-39, and 40-44 (Table
4) by the number of women in each age group in comprehensive mandate states, we
calculate that comprehensive mandates resulted in 1,867 incremental deliveries annually.
From the SART data, we multiply the estimate of incremental annual utilization in states
with comprehensive mandates (1.536 cycles per capita) by the number of women 25-44
in these states to estimate the number of incremental cycles – 4,824. Dividing the two,
we obtain a ratio of incremental deliveries to incremental cycles of 0.39, close to the
1996 rate of births per ART cycle of 0.23. This calculation, however, assumes that all
incremental births associated with the comprehensive mandate are due to ART. If they
are driven in part by increased utilization of other reproductive therapies such as
ovulation-inducing drugs or artificial insemination, which seems likely, the estimated rate
of incremental deliveries per ART cycle would be lower.
While our results do not differ entirely from those of Schmidt (2007), who studies
the effects of the mandates on rates of first birth among women of different ages using
national natality data, they do provide a different picture of the effects of mandates on
fertility rates. First, while Schmidt finds that mandates increased first birth rates by 5%

28

among women 35 and older but did not affect first births rates among younger women,
our analysis indicates that the largest effects were among women 35-39. The percentage
increases were smaller for both younger and older women. In addition, our results
indicate that limiting the analysis to first births may fail to capture important effects of on
delivery rates. In particular, we find that mandates had a larger effect on second or
higher parity deliveries than on first deliveries for women 35-39. This difference is
potentially important when interpreting our findings because it is more consistent with an
increase in the overall number of births than with a shift in the timing of births due to the
implementation of a mandate. Finally, Schmidt’s analysis provides no evidence on the
corresponding effects on rates of multiple births among women of any age.
Do younger women delay childbirth in response to mandated insurance coverage?
While we find that delivery rates for women 25-29 declined after the adoption of
comprehensive mandate in our main model, this result is sensitive to the classification of
the Maryland law as comprehensive. In addition, we find a similar effect for offer-only
mandates, but not for limited mandates. Thus, we view our findings on this issue as
inconclusive because they are sensitive to model specification, although we note that
other research using different methods and datasets has documented this type of effect
(Buckles 2006).
We also find that comprehensive mandates had relatively large effects on rates of
multiple deliveries for women 25 to 39. For women 30-34 and 35-39, comprehensive
mandates are associated with a 10% increase in rates of multiple births. The magnitudes
of the effects of comprehensive mandates on rates of triplet or higher order deliveries
range from a 29% increase for women 25-29 to a 54% increase for women 35-39.

29

While our results are not inconsistent with those of Bitler (2006) who documents
an increase in the proportion of births that are twins among women 30 and over, they
provide a more complete picture of the effects of mandates on rates of multiple births. In
particular, by not limiting our analysis to twin births, we find that comprehensive
mandates increased rates of triplet and higher order births as well, and that this increase
was not limited to women 30 and over, but extended to younger women aged 25-29.
Because triplet and higher order births are both more costly and more risky than twin
births, this effect has potentially important public health implications.
Do comprehensive mandates increase the risk of multiple births among the
relatively high fertility group - women who would have been likely to give birth even in
the absence of treatment? We find evidence of this type of effect among women 25-29
and possibly among women 30-34. Among the youngest women (25-29), we find no
evidence that infertility mandates increased the number of deliveries although they did
increase the rate of multiple deliveries. Because comprehensive mandates resulted in an
increase in both deliveries and multiple deliveries among women 30 to 34 and 35 to 39,
whether they had this type of effect depends on the ratio of incremental multiple
deliveries to incremental deliveries induced by the mandate. We examine this in Table 9
by re-estimating the model of multiple deliveries based on multiple deliveries per capita
rather than per delivery and calculating the ratio of incremental multiple deliveries to
incremental deliveries associated with a comprehensive mandate. This type of effect
would result in the ratio of incremental multiple deliveries to incremental deliveries in the
population exceeding the ratio of multiple births among those treated with ART.

30

For women 35-39, we find that proportion of incremental deliveries associated
with a comprehensive mandate that were multiples was 0.11 with a 95% confidence
interval from 0.06 to 0.18. This is somewhat lower than 30%, the approximate average
rate of multiple births among those conceiving with ART, providing little evidence that
the mandate led disproportionately to incremental utilization among those who would
have given birth in the absence of treatment. For women 30-34, in contrast, the ratio of
the estimates is 0.18 with a 95% confidence interval from -0.412 to 1.589. Although the
imprecision of the estimates makes it possible that the true ratio is either higher or lower
than 0.3, the potential for higher values suggests that it is possible that many women in
this age group conceiving with ART may have delivered a baby in the absence of
treatment.
Did comprehensive mandates increase utilization among women for whom
treatment was not successful? The SART data provides evidence of this type of an effect.
We find that utilization of ART was higher in states adopting comprehensive mandates
for women both under 35 and 35 and over, and rates of deliveries per cycle and multiples
per delivery were lower for both age groups. This is consistent with an increase in
utilization among poor prognosis patients. These patients were less likely to conceive in
a given cycle and may have produced fewer viable embryos to transfer, resulting in a
fewer multiples per delivery.
The effects of mandates on the composition of the population using ART as well
as other infertility treatments may have important implications for evaluating the effects
of infertility treatment on infant health. In particular, we demonstrate that the marginal
patient induced to use infertility treatment in response to a mandate is likely to differ

31

from the average patient using these treatments. For example, Bitler (2006) finds that
twins born in mandate states have slightly worse health outcomes than those born in nonmandate states, indicating the existence of negative effects of either selection of patients
into treatment or the use of infertility treatments on infant health. While our analysis
indicates that the women undergoing treatment for infertility in response to a benefit
mandate may represent those from either the lower or higher end of the fertility
distribution relative to those receiving treatment in the absence of a mandate, the
relatively high fertility patients are those most likely to have a multiple birth. Thus, the
relatively small effects observed by Bilter may be representative of the most fertile
portion of the distribution of patients receiving treatment. Based on this reasoning, the
negative effects on infant health among the treated population in the absence of a
mandate could be larger.
While the results from our analyses of utilization are necessarily more tentative
due to the absence of data from the pre-mandate period, we do find evidence that
utilization of ART grew more rapidly after the adoption of mandates for both younger
and older women of reproductive age. Consistent with other research, we find that births
per cycle, multiples per birth, and the number of embryos transferred per cycle are lower
in states with comprehensive insurance mandates than in states without mandates. While
other studies have attributed these relationships to less aggressive embryo transfer
decisions caused by more generous insurance coverage, our results point to an alternative
explanation – that, on net, comprehensive insurance coverage extended treatment to a
relatively low fertility population for whom treatment was often not successful. While
we cannot rule out the possibility that in states with comprehensive mandates, patients

32

transferred fewer embryos per cycle – the estimate is negative, but imprecisely estimated
- the lower rates of deliveries per cycle and multiples per delivery in mandated states is
not explained by embryo transfer rates. Thus, we conclude that these relationships are
more likely to have been driven by a worse case mix in states adopting comprehensive
mandates than more conservative embryo transfer decisions due to expanded insurance
coverage.
An important limitation of our study is that the data on utilization and outcomes
of ART do not span the period prior to the adoption of most insurance mandates. In
addition, we are unable to assess the effects of mandates on treatments other than ART
such as AI or ovulation-inducing drugs. In the case of the models using the population
birth data, the effects we observe may be driven by increased utilization of any type of
infertility treatment, not just ART. In addition, the mandates may have affected
utilization of these other treatment in ways we do not observe. While the existence of
endogeneity in the passage of the laws represents is also possible, other researchers have
documented that the states passing laws were very similar to those not passing laws in the
time period proceeding the adoption of the laws (Hamilton and McManus 2005; Bitler
2006), somewhat alleviating this concern.

VII. Conclusion
In summary, we find that the adoption of mandates that insurers cover the
treatment of infertility significantly increased the utilization of these treatments. For
many patients, the outcome was favorable in the sense that the incremental utilization
resulted in a birth which likely would not have taken place in the absence of a mandate.

33

For others, however, the welfare implications are less clear. While both relatively high
and low fertility patients responded to the price reduction created by the mandate, the
consequences of greater utilization of these technologies differed between the two
groups. For some high fertility patients seeking treatment in response to the availability
of more generous insurance coverage, utilization led to a multiple rather than a singleton
delivery. This shift in the birth distribution toward multiples is important because
multiple births are not only high cost, but are also high risk for both mothers and infants,
primarily due to complications associated with low birth weight. For low fertility
women, in contrast, the adverse consequences of greater utilization were primarily in the
form of unsuccessful outcomes. For many of these couples, treatment was costly and did
not ultimately lead to a live birth.
These findings indicate that, even if infertility mandates increase welfare by
reducing adverse selection in the coverage of infertility treatments, these benefits must be
weighed against the significant moral hazard that they induce. However, they also point
to an alternative explanation for the absence of insurance coverage for infertility
treatment. Perhaps the moral hazard associated with generous insurance coverage itself
reduces the extent to which insurers cover these services. While our analyses cannot
differentiate between these two explanations, their implications for policy differ. If the
market for insurance coverage for infertility treatment is limited due to adverse selection,
a benefit mandate intended to solve this problem would need to be accompanied by
mechanisms to minimize the resulting moral hazard. These types of mechanisms may
include restrictions on the population covered by the mandate and controls on utilization
through either supply side mechanisms or demand side cost-sharing. If the market for

34

coverage is limited primarily by the extent of moral hazard generated by more generous
insurance coverage, in contrast, a benefit mandate will not solve this problem. A more
effective solution would be the development of more sophisticated mechanisms to target
utilization to those for whom treatment the expected benefits of treatment exceed the
expected costs.

35

References:
Adashi, E. Y., P. N. Barri, et al. (2003). "Infertility Therapy-Associated Multiple
Pregnancies (Births): an Ongoing Epidemic." Reproductive BioMedicine Online
7(5): 151-542.
Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, et al. (2004). "How Much Should We Trust Differences-inDifferences Estimates?" Quarterly Journal of Economics February: 249-275.
Bitler, M. and L. Schmidt (2006). "Health Disparities and Infertility: Impacts of StateLevel Insurance Mandates." Fertility and Sterility 85: 858-865.
Bitler, M. and L. Schmidt (2007). Who do Health Insurance Mandates Affect? The Case
of Infertility Treatment: 28.
Bitler, M. P. (2006). Effects of Increased Access to Infertility Treatment on Infant and
Child Health Outcomes: Evidence from Health Insurance Mandates.
Buckles, K. (2006). Stopping the Biological Clock: Infertility Treatments and the
Career-Family Tradeoff: 60.
Callahan, T. L., H. J.E., et al. (1994). "The economic impact of multiple-gestation
preganancies and the contribution of assisted reproduction techniques to their
incidence." New England Journal of Medicine 331(4): 244-249.
CDC (2000). "Contribution of Assisted Reproductive Technology and OvulationInducing Drugs to Triplet and Higher-Order Multiple Births--United States, 19801997." MMWR 49(24): 535-8.
CDC (2002). "Infant Mortality and Low Birth Weight among Black and White Infants -United States, 1980-2002." Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 51(27): 589-592.
CDC (2005). Assisted Reproductive Technology Success Rates: National Summary and
Fertility Clinic Reports, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention: 1-84.
CDC (2006). 2004 Assisted Reproductive Technology Success Rates: National
Summary and Fertility Clinic Reports. Atlanta, GA, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention.
Collins, J. (2001). "Cost-effectiveness of in vitro fertilization." Semin Reprod Med 19(3):
279-89.
Gruber, J. (1992). "State-mandated benefits and employer-provided health insurance."
Journal of Public Economics 55: 499-464.
Gruber, J. (1994). "The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits." American Economic
Review 84(3): 622-641.
Hack, M., N. K. Klein, et al. (1995). "Long-Term Developmental Outcomes of Low Birth
Weight Infants." The Future of Children 5(1).
Hamilton, B. H. and B. McManus (2005). Infertility Treatment Markets: The Effects of
Competition and Policy: 42.
Hansen, M., C. Bower, et al. (2004). "Assisted reproductive technologies and the risk of
birth defects - a systematic review." Human Reproduction 20(2): 328-338.
Jain, T., B. L. Harlow, et al. (2002). "Insurance Coverage and Outcomes of in Vitro
Fertilization." The New England Journal of Medicine 347(9): 661-666.
Jensen, G. A. and J. R. Gabel (1992). "State Mandated Benefits and the Small Firm's
Decision to Offer Insurance." Journal of Regulatory Economics 4(4): 379-404.

36

Jensen, G. A. and M. A. Morrisey (1999). "Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance and
Mandated Benefit Laws." The Milbank Quarterly 77(4): 425-459.
Kaestner, R. and K. Simon (2002). "Labor Market Consequences of State Health
Insurance Regulation." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 56(1): 136-159.
Kurinczuk, J. J., M. Hansen, et al. (2004). "The risk of birth defects in children born after
assisted reproductive technologies." Current Opinion in Obstetrics and
Gynecology 16: 201-209.
Laugesen, M. J., R. R. Paul, et al. (2006). "A Compariative Analysis of Mandated Benefit
Laws, 1949-2002." Health Services Research 41(3): 1082-1103.
Martin, J., B. Hamilton, et al. (2005). Births: Final data for 2003. Hyattsville, MD,
National Center for Health Statistics.
Martin, J. A. and M. M. Park (1999). "Trends in Twin and Triplet Births: 1980-97."
National Vital Statistics Reports 47(24): 1-16.
McGuire, T. G. and J. T. Montgomery (1982). "Mandated Mental Health Benefits in
Private Health Insurance." Journal Of Health Politics, Policy, and Law 7(2): 380399.
Menken, J., J. Trussell, et al. (1986). "Age and infertility." Science 233: 1389-94.
NCHS. (1981-1999). "Data File Documentations, Natality, 1981-1999 (machine readable
data file and documentation, CD-ROM Series)."
Neumann, P. J. and M. Johannesson (1994). "The Willingness to Pay for In Vitro
Fertilization: A Pilot Study using Contigent Valuation." Medical Care 32: 686 99.
Reynolds, M. A., L. A. Schieve, et al. (2001). "Risk of multiple birth associated with in
vitro fertilization using donor eggs." American Journal of Epidemiology 154(11):
1043-1050.
Rothschild, M. and J. Stiglitz (1976). "Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets:
An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information." Quarterly Journal of
Economics 90: 629-49.
Schieve, L. A., M. S.F., et al. (2002). "Low and very low birth weight in infants
conceived with use of assisted reproductive technology." New England Journal of
Medicine 346(10): 731-737.
Schmidt, L. (2007). "Effects of infertility insurance mandates on fertility." Journal of
Health Economics 26: 421-446.
Sloan, F. A. and C. J. Conover (1998). "Effects of State Reforms on Health Insurance
Coverage of Adults." Inquiry 35(3): 280-293.
Stigler, G. (1971). "The Theory of Economic Regulation." The Bell Journal of
Economics and Management Science 2(1): 3-21.
Summers, L. H. (1989). "Some Simple Economics of Mandated Benefits." American
Economic Review 79(2): 177-183.
Thurin, A., J. Hausken, et al. (2004). "Elective Single-Embryo Transfer versus DoubleEmbryo Transfer in in Vitro Fertilization." New England Journal of Medicine
351: 2392-402.
Van Voorhis, B. J., D. W. Sotovall, et al. (1997). "Cost-effectiveness of infertility
treatments: a cohort study." Fertility and Sterility 67(6): 830-836.

37

Figure 1: The Effect of Treatment on Birth and Multiple Birth Rates by Patient
Fertility

1
Pr(Birth) with treatment

Pr(Birth) without treatment

Probability

Pr(Multiple Birth) with treatment

Pr(Multiple Birth) without treatment

Fmin
L’ L

Fertility

Fmax
H H’

38

Figure 2: Deliveries per 1,000 Women 25-49 by State Mandate Status

40

Deliveries per 1000 Women
50
60

70

Deliveries Women 25-49 by State Mandate Status

1980

1985

1990
year
No Mandate
Limited

1995

2000

Offer
Comprehensive

Figure 3: Multiple Deliveries per 1,000 Women 25-49 by State Mandate Status

Multiple Deliveries per 1000 Women
.4
.6
.8
1
1.2

Multiple Deliveries Women 25-49 by State Mandate Status

1980

1985

1990
year
No Mandate
Limited

1995

2000

Offer
Comprehensive

39

Figure 4: Triplet + Deliveries per 1,000 Women 25-49 by State Mandate Status

Triplet + Deliveries per 1000 Women
0
.02
.04
.06
.08

Triplet + Deliveries Women 25-49 by State Mandate Status

1980

1985

1990
year
No Mandate
Limited

1995

2000

Offer
Comprehensive

Figure 5: ART Cycles per 1000 Women 25-44 by State Mandate Status

Cycles per 1000 women 25-44
1
2
3
4
5

ART Cycles per 1000 women 25-44 by State Mandate

1990

1995
year
No Mandate
Limited

2000
Offer
Comprehensive

40

Figure 6: ART Deliveries per Cycle by State Mandate Status

.15

Births/Cycle
.2
.25

.3

ART Births per Cycle by State Mandate

1990

1995
year
No Mandate
Limited

2000
Offer
Comprehensive

Figure 7: Multiples Deliveries per ART Delivery by State Mandate Status

.25

Multiple Birth/Birth
.3
.35

.4

Multiple Births per ART Birth by State Mandate

1990

1995
year
No Mandate
Limited

2000
Offer
Comprehensive

41

Table 1: Hypothetical Example of the Effects of Treatment on Birth and Multiple Birth Rates for Low and High Fertility
Patients

No Treatment

Pr(Multiple Pr(Multiple
Fertility Pr(Birth) Birth|Birth)
Birth)
Low
0.200
0.030
0.006
High
0.800
0.030
0.024

Treatment

Pr(Multiple Pr(Multiple
Pr(Birth) Birth|Birth)
Birth)
0.300
0.300
0.090
0.900
0.300
0.270

Incremental Effect
Incremental
Births
/Incremental
Multiple
Pr(Multiple
Pr(Birth)
Birth)
Births
0.100
0.084
0.84
0.100
0.246
2.46

42

Table 2: Summary of the Timing and Type of Infertility Mandates Adopted by States
State
Arkansas
California
Connecticut
Hawaii
Illinois

Year of Adoption
1987
1989
1989
1987
1991

Type
Limited
Offer-only
Offer-only
Limited
Comprehensive

Maryland

1985

Limited1

Massachusetts
Montana
New York
Ohio
Rhode Island
Texas
West Virginia

1987
1987
1990
1991
1989
1987
1977

Comprehensive
Limited
Limited
Limited
Comprehensive
Offer-only
Limited

Restrictions
Insurers may limit the benefit to $15,000; applies to non-HMOs only

Insurers must cover only one cycle of IVF
Insurers must cover up to 4 complete oocyte retrievals for a first birth
and up to 2 complete oocyte retrievals for a second birth.
Limited to 3 IVF attempts per live birth and $100,000 maximum
lifetime benefit. When the law was adopted, coverage was limited to
patients with a 5-year history of infertility. In 1994, this requirement
was changed to limit coverage to couples with a 2-year history of
infertility or infertility due to particular causes with no waiting period.
IVF excluded; applies to HMOs only
IVF excluded; applies to non-HMOs only
IVF excluded; applies to HMOs only

IVF excluded; applies to HMOs only

1

For our main results, we classify Maryland’s law as limited due to its limitation to 3 cycles and its requirement of a 5-year history of
infertility. The law, however, is more comprehensive than those classified as limited in our analysis. As a result, we present results
re-estimating the models with Maryland classified as a comprehensive mandate.

43

Table 3: Descriptive Statistics for Control Variables in Models of Population Birth Rates
N=969

Variable
Mean
Offer-only Mandate
0.113
Limited Mandate
0.082
Comprehensive Mandate
0.035
Female Labor Force Participation Rate
0.686
Years of Education Women 20-49: 12-15
0.650
Years of Education Women 20-49: 16-17
0.162
Years of Education Women 20-49: 18+
0.052
Per Capita Income (000s)
24.473
Family Income 2 to <4 times Poverty Level
0.346
Family Income 4+ times Poverty Level
0.317
Unemployment Rate
6.400
Proportion of Workers in Firms with < 100 Workers
0.553
Proportion of Population Minorities (Non-White)
0.164
Proportion of Population Hispanic
0.094
Estimates are weighted by the size of the female population 25-49

Std.
Dev.
Min
Max
0.317 0.000 1.000
0.274 0.000 1.000
0.185 0.000 1.000
0.053 0.465 0.838
0.047 0.411 0.779
0.035 0.069 0.284
0.020 0.006 0.197
3.733 14.222 38.332
0.036 0.213 0.466
0.066 0.123 0.579
2.032 2.200 18.000
0.046 0.431 0.846
0.085 0.008 0.714
0.098 0.004 0.417

44

Table 4 - The Effects of Benefit Mandates on Population Delivery Rates
Panel A
Comprehensive Mandate
Limited Mandate
Offer Only Mandate

25-29
-3.192*
[1.222]
0.317
[2.006]
-2.362*
[0.987]

Deliveries per 1,000 women by age group
30-34
35-39
40-44
0.999
1.208*
0.073
[0.663]
[0.455]
[0.128]
-0.806
-0.074
0.009
[1.467]
[0.649]
[0.128]
0.37
-0.419
-0.116
[0.739]
[0.637]
[0.231]

45-49
-0.019
[0.014]
0.015
[0.016]
-0.003
[0.023]

Mean of dependent variable1
Observations
R-squared

110.69
969
0.91

Panel B

Twin or higher order deliveries per 1,000 deliveries by age group
25-29
30-34
35-39
40-44
45-49
-0.018
1.504**
1.680*
2.512
7.043
[0.181]
[0.359]
[0.738]
[2.053]
[5.770]
-0.038
-0.46
-0.292
-1.276
-1.322
[0.223]
[0.474]
[0.599]
[0.857]
[5.339]
-0.115
-0.548
-0.475
0.831
3.418
[0.198]
[0.478]
[0.448]
[1.156]
[5.130]

Comprehensive Mandate
Limited Mandate
Offer Only Mandate
Mean of dependent variable1
Observations
R-squared
Panel C
Comprehensive Mandate
Limited Mandate
Offer Only Mandate

12.29
969
0.78

74.87
969
0.97

15.2
969
0.82

29.64
969
0.98

17.58
969
0.81

5.517
969
0.98

16.139
969
0.66

0.262
969
0.88

41.664
963
0.27

Triplet or higher order deliveries per 1,000 deliveries by age group
25-29
30-34
35-39
40-44
45-49
0.083**
0.304**
0.292**
0.196
-0.097
[0.029]
[0.059]
[0.066]
[0.151]
[1.022]
0.027
-0.046
0.038
-0.208
-2.066
[0.026]
[0.075]
[0.078]
[0.149]
[1.380]
-0.058*
-0.088
0.057
0.075
-0.911
[0.027]
[0.061]
[0.084]
[0.104]
[1.568]

Mean of dependent variable1
0.291
0.565
0.730
Observations
969
969
969
R-squared
0.58
0.75
0.66
Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by state.
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

0.666
969
0.41

3.267
963
0.27

Note: Models include state and year fixed effects and time varying state level characteristics
including female labor force participation rates, educational attainment, per capita income,
distribution of the population by family income relative to poverty level, the unemployment rate, the
minority rate, Hispanic ethnicity rate, and the proportion of workers employed in small firms.
1
Mean rate over all states and all years

45

Table 5 - The Effects of Benefit Mandates on First Delivery Rates
Dependent Variable: First Deliveries per 1,000 women of indicated age group
25-29
-0.546
[0.435]
-0.909
[0.833]
-0.542
[0.586]

Comprehensive Mandate
Limited Mandate
Offer Only Mandate

30-34
1.303**
[0.339]
-0.797+
[0.468]
0.228
[0.401]

35-39
0.458
[0.342]
-0.175
[0.199]
-0.147
[0.191]

40-44
0.093
[0.108]
-0.04
[0.035]
-0.021
[0.042]

45-49
-0.002
[0.004]
0.002
[0.007]
0.000
[0.010]

1

Mean of dependent variable
40.097
19.641
6.123
1.022
0.043
Observations
969
969
969
969
969
R-squared
0.89
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.81
Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by state.
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Note: Models include state and year fixed effects and time varying state level characteristics
including female labor force participation rates, educational attainment, per capita income,
distribution of the population by family income relative to poverty level, the unemployment
rate, the minority rate, Hispanic ethnicity rate, and the proportion of workers employed in
small firms.
1
Mean rate over all states and all years

46

Table 6: SART Descriptive Statistics
N=561

Variable
Mean
Comprehensive Mandate
0.07
Limited Mandate
0.16
Offer-only Mandate
0.21
Proportion of Women 30-34
0.26
Proportion of Women 30-34
0.26
Proportion of Women 40-44
0.24
Female Labor Force Participation Rate
0.71
Years of Education Women 20-49: 12-15
0.65
Years of Education Women 20-49: 16-17
0.17
Years of Education Women 20-49: 18+
0.06
Per Capita Income (000s)
25.51
Family Income 2 to <4 times Poverty Level
0.34
Family Income 4+ times Poverty Level
0.33
Proportion of Population Hispanic
0.11
Proportion of Population Minorities (Non-White)
0.17
Proportion of Workers in Firms with >= 100
Workers
0.57
Unemployment Rate
6.00
Estimates weighted by the size of the female population 25-44

Std.
Dev.
0.26
0.36
0.41
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.04
0.05
0.03
0.02
3.31
0.03
0.06
0.11
0.08

Min
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.21
0.22
0.20
0.55
0.41
0.08
0.01
16.76
0.23
0.14
0.00
0.01

Max
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.28
0.30
0.31
0.84
0.77
0.28
0.20
37.64
0.46
0.49
0.41
0.70

0.04
1.53

0.39
2.50

0.68
11.40

47

Table 7: Relationship between State Mandate Status and Utilization of ART

Comprehensive Mandate
Limited Mandate
Offer Only Mandate
Linear Year
Comprehensive*Linear Year
Limited*Linear Year
Offer Only*Linear Year

Cycles per 1,000 Women of Indicated Age
1991-2001
1995-2001
25-44
25-44
25-44
<35
1.29
-0.079
1.536
1.571*
[0.822]
[0.555]
[0.935]
[0.691]
-0.127
-0.344
-0.125
-0.033
[0.197]
[0.251]
[0.294]
[0.236]
-0.079
-0.206
-0.091
-0.037
[0.312]
[0.343]
[0.378]
[0.362]
0.080*
[0.037]
0.222**
[0.060]
0.034
[0.033]
0.027
[0.042]
X
X
X
X

>=35
1.545
[1.150]
-0.142
[0.331]
-0.035
[0.379]

Year Fixed Effects
X
Linear Year
Mean of dependent variable1
1.513
1.513
1.8
1.64
1.77
Observations
561
561
357
357
357
R-squared
0.74
0.75
0.77
0.74
0.76
Standard errors adjusted for clustering by state.
+ significant at 10%; * significant
at 5%;
g
q ** significant at
g 1% y
p p
All models include the control variables listed in Table 8 including the age distribution of the female
population of reproductive age, female labor force participation rate, education, per capita income,
distribution of family income based on poverty thresholds, the unemployment rates, the proportion of
workers employed in large firms, proportion hispanic and proportion minority. Standard errors are adjusted
for clustering by state.
1
Mean rate over all states and all years. Age specific rates are lower than the pooled rate due to the inability
to identify donor cycles by age in the later years.

48

Table 8: Relationship between State Mandate Status and Outcomes of ART

(1)

Comprehensive Mandate
Limited Mandate
Offer Only Mandate

Births
per Fresh
Cycle
-0.071**
[0.011]
0.012
[0.012]
-0.039*
[0.015]

Embryo Transfer Rate

Women Under 35
(2)
(3)
(4)

(5)

Multiples Number of
Births
per Birth Embryos
(Fresh Transferred per Fresh
Cycle
Cycles) per Cycle
-0.033**
-0.125
-0.074**
[0.010]
[0.108]
[0.010]
0.009
-0.159+
0.008
[0.007]
[0.080]
[0.012]
-0.025+
-0.047
-0.040**
[0.013]
[0.142]
[0.014]
-0.023*
[0.011]

Multiples
per Birth
(Fresh
Cycles)
-0.031**
[0.009]
0.011
[0.007]
-0.025+
[0.014]
0.017
[0.011]

(6)
Births
per Fresh
Cycle
-0.056**
[0.008]
0.021**
[0.007]
-0.027*
[0.011]

Women 35 and Over
(7)
(8)
(9)
Multiples Number of
per Birth Embryos
(Fresh Transferred
Cycles) per Cycle
-0.027**
-0.107
[0.008]
[0.102]
0.01
0.004
[0.009]
[0.092]
-0.031*
-0.124
[0.012]
[0.175]

Births
per Fresh
Cycle
-0.056**
[0.008]
0.021**
[0.007]
-0.026*
[0.011]
0.002
[0.002]

(10)
Multiples
per Birth
(Fresh
Cycles)
-0.026**
[0.008]
0.01
[0.008]
-0.030*
[0.012]
0.008
[0.005]

Mean of dependent variable1
0.306
0.408
3.191
0.306
0.408
0.195
0.314
3.234
0.195
0.314
Observations
324
322
324
324
322
324
323
324
324
323
R-squared
0.55
0.24
0.78
0.57
0.25
0.57
0.15
0.41
0.57
0.16
Standard errors adjusted for clustering by state.
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Note: All models include controls for the age distribution of the female population of reproductive age, female labor force participation rate,
education, per capita income, distribution of family income based on poverty thresholds, the unemployment rate, the proportion of workers
employed in large firms, proportion hispanic and proportion minority.
1

Mean rate over all states and all years.

49

Table 9: The Ratio of Incremental Multple Deliveries per Incremental Delivery
30-34

35-39

Incremental deliveries per 1000

0.999
(-0.333 , 2.332)

1.208
(0.294 , 2.121)

Incremental multiple deliveries per 10002

0.183
(0.103, 0.264)

0.116
(0.042 , 0.190)

0.184
(-0.412 ,1.589)

0.096
(0.056 , 0.168)

1

3

Incremental multiple deliveries per incremental delivery
1

Point estimates and 95 percent confidence internvals of the effect of a comprehensive
mandate on deliveries per 1,000 women of indicated age. These estimates are identical to
those presented in Table 4.

2

Point estimates and 95 percent confidence intervals of the effect of a comprehensive
mandate on multiple deliveries per 1,000 women of indicated age. These estimates are
derived from models identical to those used to calculate incremental deliveries with the
exception of the change in the dependent variable from deliveries (any order) to multiple
deliveries.

3

Estimates of the ratio of incremental multiple deliveries to incremental deliveries. 95
percent confidence intervals are estimated using the bootstrap method.

50

Appendix Table 1 - The Effects of Benefit Mandates on Population Delivery Rates
(reclassifying Maryland as having a comprehensive mandate)
Panel A
Deliveries per 1,000 women by age group
25-29
30-34
35-39
40-44
Comprehensive Mandate
-1.323
1.013+
1.099*
0.08
[1.715]
[0.599]
[0.461]
[0.112]
Limited Mandate
-0.688
-1.012
-0.126
-0.002
[2.184]
[1.575]
[0.682]
[0.128]
Offer Only Mandate
-2.136*
0.321
-0.46
-0.117
[1.059]
[0.750]
[0.636]
[0.229]
Mean of dependent variable1
110.69
74.87
29.64
5.517
Observations
969
969
969
969
R-squared
0.91
0.97
0.98
0.98
Panel B
Comprehensive Mandate
Limited Mandate
Offer Only Mandate
Mean of dependent variable1
Observations
R-squared
Panel C
Comprehensive Mandate
Limited Mandate
Offer Only Mandate

45-49
-0.023+
[0.012]
0.02
[0.014]
-0.003
[0.023]
0.262
969
0.88

Twin or higher order deliveries per 1,000 deliveries by age group
25-29
30-34
35-39
40-44
45-49
0.032
1.105*
1.381*
1.922
6.381
[0.176]
[0.504]
[0.640]
[1.791]
[5.558]
-0.077
-0.344
-0.228
-1.102
-1.344
[0.239]
[0.470]
[0.609]
[0.807]
[5.215]
-0.112
-0.621
-0.532
0.74
3.223
[0.197]
[0.490]
[0.466]
[1.175]
[5.164]
12.29
969
0.78

15.2
969
0.82

17.58
969
0.81

16.139
969
0.66

41.664
963
0.27

Triplet or higher order deliveries per 1,000 deliveries by age group
25-29
30-34
35-39
40-44
45-49
0.075*
0.249**
0.238**
0.145
-0.586
[0.029]
[0.073]
[0.077]
[0.141]
[1.136]
0.027
-0.037
0.058
-0.198
-1.858
[0.026]
[0.075]
[0.078]
[0.148]
[1.416]
-0.060*
-0.100
0.049
0.066
-0.968
[0.026]
[0.063]
[0.086]
[0.105]
[1.581]

Mean of dependent variable1
0.291
0.565
0.730
Observations
969
969
969
R-squared
0.58
0.75
0.66
Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by state.
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

0.666
969
0.41

3.267
963
0.27

Note: Models include state and year fixed effects and time varying state level characteristics including
female labor force participation rates, educational attainment, per capita income, distribution of the
population by family income relative to poverty level, the unemployment rate, the minority rate,
Hispanic ethnicity rate, and the proportion of workers employed in small firms.
1
Mean rate over all states and all years

51

