NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SELF-PROTECTION AND INSURANCE WITH INTERDEPENDENCIES
Alexander Muermann
Howard Kunreuther
Working Paper 12827
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12827

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2007

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
' 2007 by Alexander Muermann and Howard Kunreuther. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including ' notice, is given to the source.

Self-Protection and Insurance with Interdependencies
Alexander Muermann and Howard Kunreuther
NBER Working Paper No. 12827
January 2007
JEL No. C22,D80,G22,H23
ABSTRACT
We study optimal investment in self-protection of insured individuals when they face interdependencies
in the form of potential contamination from others. If individuals cannot coordinate their actions, then
the positive externality of investing in self-protection implies that, in equilibrium, individuals underinvest
in self-protection. Limiting insurance coverage through deductibles can partially internalize this externality
and thereby improve individual and social welfare.
Alexander Muermann
The Wharton School, 3010 Sh-Dh
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218
muermann@wharton.upenn.edu
Howard Kunreuther
Operations and Information Management
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6366
and NBER
kunreuther@wharton.upenn.edu

1

Introduction

This paper is concerned with the question as to how much insured consumers should invest in
loss reduction measures when they can be contaminated by others due to interdependencies. To
motivate the analysis consider the following problem faced by Ms. A, an owner of an apartment in a
multi-unit building. Ms. A, who is required to purchase insurance as a condition for her mortgage,
needs to determine how much she should invest in protective measures (e.g. a sprinkler system) to
reduce the likelihood of a fire occurring in her apartment knowing that there is some chance that
one of her neighbors unprotected could experience a fire that could spread to her apartment and
cause damage even if she invests in these measures.
More generally, our interest is on examining the equilibrium levels of investment in protective
measures when there are interdependencies between individuals and when insurance rates are riskbased. We show that without coordination between those at risk, individuals will, in equilibrium,
underinvest in protection relative to the socially optimal decision due to the possibility of being
contaminated by others. Restricting the amount of coverage an individual can take by requiring a
deductible on insurance policies can encourage investment in protective measures and often improves
both individual and social welfare.
To our knowledge no-one has investigated optimal behavior by insureds when they have the opportunity to invest in protective measures and face interdependent risks. Ehrlich and Becker (1972)
study the interaction between insurance and self-protection when there are no interdependencies.
Schlesinger and Venezian (1986) focus on the joint production of insurance and self-protection in
various market settings without interdependencies between insureds. The problem of optimal protection when there are interdependencies between agents has been recently studied by Kunreuther
and Heal (2002) and Heal and Kunreuther (2005) when there is no insurance. They developed a
game theoretic model for these interdependent security problems where there are two choices facing
an agent: don’t invest in protection at all or invest in full protection. For the case where there are
negative externalities due to the possibility of contagion from others, they show that there can be

2

two Nash equilibria–either everyone invests in protection or no-one invests. The key point is that
the incentive that any agent has to invest in risk-reduction measures depends on how she expects
the others to behave in this respect. If she thinks that they will not invest in protection, then this
reduces the incentive for her to do so. On the other hand should she believe that others will invest
in risk reducing measures, then it may be best for her to also do so. So there may be an equilibrium
where no-one invests in protection, even though all would be better oﬀ if they had incurred this
cost.
The interdependency problem we are studying raises the question as to the benefits of coordinating individuals’ protective decisions so that one can reduce the externalities due to contamination
and hence improve both individual and social welfare. In this sense it is related to the study by
Shavell (1991) who investigated the optimal decision by individuals to protect their property against
theft, acting alone or collectively, when precautions are observable (e.g. iron bars on a window) or
unobservable (e.g. use of a safe for storing valuables). Ayres and Levitt (1998) have demonstrated
the social benefits of protection when individuals invest in unobservable precautionary measures.
They focus on the Lojack car retrieval system that criminals cannot detect. This generates positive
externalities that lead to a sub-optimal level of private investment.
The paper is organized as follows. We first consider the case of two identical individuals where
there is no possibility of contamination from one individual to another and each individual has
an opportunity to invest in mitigation to reduce its losses with premium reductions reflecting the
reduced level of risk. We label this base case the No Contamination case. We compare this base
case with a situation where there can be contamination between the two parties and where the two
parties coordinate their actions. This case is labeled Contamination – First Best. It will be
compared with a situation where the two parties cannot coordinate their actions and thus each party
makes a decision independent of the other. This case is labeled Contamination – Second Best.
We then turn to a situation where there is a required deductible on each insurance policy and show
that this can improve welfare if the two parties face the possibility of contamination and cannot
coordinate their actions, i.e. the case Contamination – Second Best. The concluding section
3

discusses the policy implications of these findings by highlighting the importance of coordination
between agents either voluntarily or through external involvement such as building codes. We also
suggest directions for future research.

2

Model

There are two identical agents, i and j, who maximize expected utility with respect to an increasing,
concave utility function u (·).1 Each policyholder has initial wealth w0 and is exposed to a loss of
size L with probability p0 . There is a market for self-protection and a market for insurance.
Investing in self-protection reduces the loss probability and investing in insurance transfers wealth
from the no-loss to the loss state. The cost of reducing the loss probability to pi ≤ p0 is given by
a cost function γ (∆p) = γ (p0 − pi ) where γ (0) = 0, γ 0 > 0, and γ 00 > 0. The policyholder can
purchase insurance coverage I for an actuarially fair premium P = P (I). We assume that there is
no moral hazard problem, i.e. the agents’ investment in protection is verifiable and contractible by
the insurer.
Optimal Insurance Coverage. As insurance is actuarially fair, it is optimal for the risk-averse
agent to purchase full insurance, i.e. I ∗ = L, for any level of investment in self-protection. Hence
one can investigate the decision on how much self-protection to purchase under conditions of no
contamination and contamination independently of the insurance decision. Furthermore since individuals are fully protected by insurance they do not face any risk. They will thus determine their
optimal amount of self-protection by maximizing their level of final wealth which, in this case, is
equivalent to maximizing their expected utility of wealth. This equivalence does not hold if insurance coverage is restricted and individuals therefore face risk. The optimal level of self-protection
is then derived under the maximization of expected utility of final wealth (see Section 3).
1

One obtains the same qualitative results when considering n rather than two individuals.

4

2.1

No Contamination

We first review the situation in which one individual cannot be contaminated by the other. As
noted above, the optimal amount of self-protection and therefore the optimal loss probability p∗ is
determined by maximizing the value of final wealth

max W (p) = w0 − γ (p0 − p) − pL.
p

The first and second derivatives with respect to p is W 0 (p) = γ 0 (p0 − p) − L and W 00 (p) =
−γ 00 (p0 − p) < 0. The objective function is thus globally concave which implies that we either
have a corner solution p∗ = p0 if γ 0 (0) ≥ L or otherwise the optimal loss probability p∗ < p0 is
determined by the first order condition
γ 0 (p0 − p∗ ) = L.

(1)

The individual thus equates the marginal cost of the loss reduction, γ 0 (∆p), with the marginal
benefit in premium reduction, L. We now assume that γ 0 (0) < L < γ 0 (p0 ) which implies an inner
solution 0 < p∗ < p0 . Note that if γ 0 (p0 ) < L then p∗ = 0 because the marginal cost of eliminating
the probability of a loss is suﬃciently small relative to the magnitude of the loss itself that it is
worth investing so there is no exposure to this risk. Similarly if γ 0 (0) > L then the marginal cost
of investing in any protection is so high relative to the benefits in reducing the expected loss that
it is optimal not to commit any funds to mitigation.

2.2

Contamination

In this section, we introduce the possibility that one agent can be contaminated by the other agent.
Denote by q (pj ) the likelihood that agent i is contaminated by the other agent, j, as a function
of the other agent’s loss probability pj . Contamination thus introduces an externality between the
two agents in the sense that the decision of one policyholder to invest in protection aﬀects the
5

decision of the other policyholder. We assume that contamination is “perfect” in the sense that if
a loss is incurred by one policyholder it spreads with probability one to the other policyholder, i.e.
q (pi ) = pi and q (pj ) = pj . The loss and final wealth distribution faced by policyholder i is
event

prob

final wealth

loss

pi + (1 − pi ) pj

w0 − γ (p0 − pi ) − P (I) − L + I

no loss

(1 − pi ) (1 − pj )

w0 − γ (p0 − pi ) − P (I)

where the actuarially fair premium is given by P (I) = (pi + (1 − pi ) pj ) I.
As above, given that insurance coverage is actuarially fair, it is optimal for the policyholder to
purchase full insurance, I ∗ = L, independent of the amount invested in self-protection. Under full
coverage, policyholder i’s level of final wealth is given by

Wi = W (pi , pj ) = w0 − γ (p0 − pi ) − (pi + (1 − pi ) pj ) L.
In the following two subsections, we consider the optimal investment in self-protection under the
first-best and second-best scenarios in which policyholders can and cannot, respectively, contract
on the level of investment in protection.
First-Best. If policyholders can contract on the externalities, i.e. they jointly determine and
implement pi and pj , the Coase theorem applies and the optimal solution is given by the socially
optimal level that maximizes the aggregate level of final wealth

Wi + Wj = 2w0 − γ (p0 − pi ) − γ (p0 − pj ) − 2 (pi + (1 − pi ) pj ) L.

6

The first and second derivative of the aggregate level of wealth with respect to pi is given by
∂Wi + Wj
∂pi
2
∂ Wi + Wj
∂p2i

= γ 0 (p0 − pi ) − 2 (1 − pj ) L
= −γ 00 (p0 − pi ) < 0.

The aggregate level of wealth is thus globally concave which implies a unique solution p∗i (pj ) for
each pj . As the maximization problem is symmetric in i and j, let p∗F B denote the optimal solution
which is determined by p∗F B = p∗i (p∗F B ) = p∗j (p∗F B ). If γ 0 (0) ≥ 2 (1 − p0 ) L, then it is optimal not
to invest in protection, i.e. p∗F B = p0 . Note that 2 (1 − p0 ) L represents the expected joint loss
to individuals i and j if neither party invests in protection. In this situation the marginal cost of
investing even a penny in protection is greater than the marginal benefit of the joint reduction in
losses to individuals i and j from incurring this cost. Note that the smaller p0 is, the more likely one
invests in protection for any given value of γ 0 (0) because the marginal benefits to each individual
of the other investing in mitigation is (1 − p0 ) L which increases as p0 decreases. Otherwise, the
optimal solution is determined by the first-order condition
γ 0 (p0 − p∗F B ) = 2 (1 − p∗F B ) L.

(2)

We can interpret this condition by rearranging it into
γ 0 (p0 − p∗F B ) + p∗F B L = L + (1 − p∗F B ) L.

(3)

The left hand side of (3) is the marginal cost of investing in protection which is the sum of the
marginal dollar cost, γ 0 (p0 − p∗F B ), and the marginal increase in the premium, p∗F B L, due to indirectly increasing the likelihood of being contaminated by the other agent. The right hand side
of (3) is the marginal benefit of investing in protection which is decomposed into the marginal
reduction in premium, L, due to the reduced likelihood of a direct loss and the marginal reduction

7

in premium, (1 − p∗F B ) L, due to the reduction in the likelihood of contaminating the other agent.
The latter marginal benefit represents the benefit from internalizing the positive externality.
Second-Best. In this section, we examine the setting in which the two policyholders cannot contract on the level of investment in self-protection and determine the pure-strategy Nash-equilibria.
Policyholder i’s best response function p∗i (pj ) is given by
p∗i (pj ) ∈ arg maxWi (pi , pj ) = w0 − γ (p0 − pi ) − (pi + (1 − pi ) pj ) L.
pi

It therefore satisfies the first-order condition
γ 0 (p0 − p∗i (pj )) − (1 − pj ) L = 0.
Diﬀerentiating with respect to pj yields
00
∗
−p∗0
i (pj ) γ (p0 − pi (pj )) + L = 0

i.e.
p∗0
i (pj ) =

γ 00 (p0

L
> 0.
− p∗i (pj ))

(4)

Policyholder i’s strategy is thus a strategic complement to policyholder j’s strategy which implies
that there are only symmetric pure-strategy Nash-equilibria.
If policyholder j reduces the loss probability to zero, i.e. pj = 0, then there is no contamination
to policyholder i and thus p∗i (0) = p∗ which is implicitly determined by (1). Under the assumption
γ 0 (0) < L < γ 0 (p0 ) we have an inner solution 0 < p∗i (0) = p∗ < p0 . If policyholder j does not
invest in self-protection, i.e. pj = p0 , then policyholder i0 s best response is determined by
γ 0 (p0 − p∗i (p0 )) = (1 − p0 ) L.

8

If γ 0 (0) ≥ (1 − p0 ) L then policyholder i’s best response is also to not invest in self-protection, i.e.
p∗i (p0 ) = p0 . Otherwise, if γ 0 (0) < (1 − p0 ) L then p∗i (p0 ) < p0 .
Since 0 < p∗i (0) = p∗j (0) < p0 and since the best-response functions are increasing, they can
only cross the 45 degree line an odd number of times. We thus conclude that if γ 0 (0) < (1 − p0 ) L
then there exists an odd number of pure-strategy Nash-equilibria, p∗SB = p∗i (p∗SB ) = p∗j (p∗SB ),
which are all inner solutions and determined by the condition
γ 0 (p0 − p∗SB ) = (1 − p∗SB ) L.

(5)

If γ 0 (0) ≥ (1 − p0 ) L, then there also exists an odd number of pure-strategy Nash-equilibria with
the only diﬀerence that the largest equilibrium is at the corner p∗SB = p0 , i.e. there is no investment
in self-protection in this equilibrium.
In both cases, the smallest and the largest equilibrium are stable with respect to a myopic adjustment process and the other equilibria alternate in terms of stability and instability. The stability
∗
00
∗
condition is characterized by p∗0
i (pSB ) < 1 which, by equation (4) is equivalent to γ (p0 − pSB ) > L.

If the best-response functions are concave, then there exists a unique pure strategy Nash-equilibrium
which is stable with respect to a myopic adjustment process. Figure 1 shows a situation in which
there are three Nash-equilibria.

9

pi*(pj)
p0
pSB*
pSB*
pSB*
p*
45°
p* pSB*

pSB*

pSB*

p0

pj*(pi)

Figure 1

To interpret condition (5), we rearrange it into
γ 0 (p0 − p∗SB ) + p∗SB L = L.

(6)

The left hand side of (6) is the same as under the first-best scenario (3) , i.e. the sum of the
marginal dollar cost, γ 0 (p0 − p∗SB ), and the marginal increase in the premium, p∗SB L, due to indirectly increasing the likelihood of being contaminated by the other agent. The right hand side
of (6), however, diﬀers from the first-best scenario (3). The only marginal benefit of investing in
protection is the marginal reduction in premium, L, due to the reduced likelihood of a direct loss.
As policyholders cannot contract on the level of investment in self-protection, it is not possible
for a policyholder to benefit from the positive externality that his investment poses on the other
policyholder as shown in equation (3) for the joint solution.

10

2.3

Comparison

In the following subsection, we compare the level of investment in any Nash equilibrium with both
the one in the first-best scenario and the one if policyholders do not face contamination.
Comparing Second-Best with First-Best. In this section, we compare the optimal level of
investment in self-protection in the first-best with the one in the second-best scenario. Suppose it
is optimal to not invest in self-protection in the first-best world, i.e. γ 0 (0) ≥ 2 (1 − p0 ) L. Then it
is also not optimal to invest in self-protection in the second-best world, as γ 0 (0) ≥ 2 (1 − p0 ) L >
(1 − p0 ) L since an individual does not take into account the positive externalities provided the
others when making an investment decision. Now suppose it is optimal to invest in self-protection
in the first-best world, i.e. γ 0 (0) < 2 (1 − p0 ) L. The optimal solution is then determined by
γ 0 (p0 − p∗F B ) = 2 (1 − p∗F B ) L.
This implies
γ 0 (p0 − p∗F B ) > (1 − p∗F B ) L
and condition (5) yields p∗SB > p∗F B . In any pure-strategy Nash-equilibrium the level of investment
in self-protection is thus lower compared to the first-best scenario. The intuition behind this
result can be derived from comparing the first-order condition (3) in the first-best scenario under
contamination
γ 0 (p0 − p) + pL = L + (1 − p) L
with the first-order condition (5) in the second-best scenario under contamination
γ 0 (p0 − p) + pL = L.

11

We note that in the second-best scenario it is not possible to internalize the marginal benefit
of the policyholder’s eﬀect on the other policyholder, (1 − p) L, and he therefore underinvests in
self-protection compared to the first-best scenario.
Comparing First-Best with No-Contamination. Let us compare the optimal level of investment without contamination with the one in the first-best scenario with contamination. The
first-order condition (1) under no contamination is
γ 0 (p0 − p) = L
and the first-order condition (3) in the first-best scenario under contamination is
γ 0 (p0 − p) + pL = L + (1 − p) L.
By comparing the marginal costs and benefits of the two scenarios, we see that contamination adds
both a marginal cost and a marginal benefit of investing in self-protection. The additional marginal
cost, pL, is due to the indirect increase in the likelihood of being contaminated by the other agent
while the marginal benefit, (1 − p) L, is due to the internalized positive of eﬀect on the other agent.
This implies that investment in self-protection under contamination can be larger or smaller than
under no contamination depending on whether the additional marginal benefit is larger or smaller
than the additional marginal cost.
Under the condition p0 < 1/2–which seems most relevant for insurance events–the additional
marginal benefit is larger than the additional marginal cost of investing in self-protection. It is thus
optimal to invest more in self-protection under the first-best scenario with contamination compared
to the scenario in which agents cannot be contaminated which yields p∗F B < p∗ .
To be more precise, suppose it is optimal to not invest in self-protection if there is no contamination, i.e. γ 0 (0) ≥ L. Then it may still be optimal to invest in self-protection in the first-best world
with contamination since the condition for not investing is γ 0 (0) ≥ 2 (1 − p0 ) L and 2 (1 − p0 ) L > L
12

for all p0 < 1/2. Now suppose that it is optimal to invest in self-protection without contamination.
Then policyholders invest more in self-protection in the first-best world with contamination as the
first-order condition γ 0 (p0 − p∗ ) = L under no contamination implies
γ 0 (p0 − p∗ ) < 2 (1 − p∗ ) L
for all p0 < 1/2 and condition (3) yields p∗F B < p∗ .
Comparing Second-Best with No-Contamination. Let us now compare the optimal level
of investment without contamination with the one in the second-best scenario with contamination.
Suppose it is optimal to not invest in self-protection if there is no contamination, i.e. γ 0 (0) ≥ L.
Then it is also optimal to not invest in self-protection in the second-best world as γ 0 (0) ≥ L
implies γ 0 (0) > (1 − p0 ) L. Now suppose that it is optimal to invest in self-protection without
contamination. Then policyholders invest less in self-protection in the second-best world with
contamination as the first-order condition γ 0 (p0 − p∗ ) = L implies
γ 0 (p0 − p∗ ) > (1 − p∗ ) L
and condition (5) yields p∗SB > p∗ . In any pure-strategy Nash-equilibrium the level of investment
in self-protection is thus lower compared to the scenario in which policyholders do not face possible
contamination. The intuition behind this result can again be derived by comparing the first-order
conditions (6) in the second-best scenario under contamination
γ 0 (p0 − p) + pL = L
with the first-order condition (1) under no contamination is
γ 0 (p0 − p) = L.
13

In the second-best scenario policyholders, by investing in self-protection, face the additional marginal
cost of implicitly increasing the likelihood of being contaminated by the other policyholder, pL.
The marginal cost equates the marginal benefit of investing in self-protection thus at a lower level
of investment.

2.4

Illustrative Example

Suppose that the cost of reducing the probability from p0 to pi is given by the function

γ (p0 − pi ) =

c
(p0 − pi )2 .
2

As γ 0 (0) = 0, it is optimal under all three scenarios to invest in self-protection. We also assume
γ 0 (p0 ) = cp0 > L such that the optimal loss probability is strictly positive. Solving the first-order
conditions (1), (2), and (5) yields the following solutions:
L
,
c
(1 − p0 ) 2L
,
= p0 −
c − 2L
(1 − p0 ) L
.
= p0 −
c−L

p∗ = p0 −
p∗F B
p∗SB

We observe that p∗SB > p∗ and p∗SB > p∗F B . Furthermore, the best response function of individual
i in the second-best scenario is given by
p∗i (pj ) = p0 −

(1 − pj ) L
.
c

Since it is linear in pj the solution p∗SB above is the unique pure-strategy Nash-equilibrium.

14

3

Improving Welfare by Restricting Insurance Coverage

In the section above, we have shown that individuals ineﬃciently underinvest in self-protection if
they cannot coordinate their activities. In this section, we show that restricting insurance coverage,
e.g. by requiring a deductible in the insurance policy, can improve individual and social welfare
in a second best world with contamination. With a deductible, each individual has to bear part
of their own loss and is likely to have more of an incentive to invest in self-protection than if he
had full insurance coverage. The additional investment in self-protection creates an extra marginal
benefit, (1 − p) L, through the positive externality that exists between individuals. In the following
Proposition, we specify conditions under which this benefit outweighs the cost of bearing part of the
loss and implies that partial insurance is optimal. It is important, however, that the deductible is
enforced by some regulatory entity. In an unregulated environment, an insurer always will deviate
by oﬀering full coverage to attract all customers.2
Proposition 1 Suppose that the stability condition γ 00 (p0 − p∗SB ) > L holds where p∗SB is the loss
probability in a Nash-equilibrium under full insurance coverage, implicitly defined by (5). Then the
optimally enforced deductible is strictly positive if and only if
³
´
(1 − p∗SB )2 L > 1 − (1 − p∗SB )2 γ 00 (p0 − p∗SB ) .

(7)

Proof. See Appendix.
Imposing a strictly positive deductible and thereby forcing agents to invest more in self-protection
can only be welfare-improving if the marginal benefit of internalizing the externality, i.e. (1 − p) L,
is relatively large. This is exactly reflected in the necessary and suﬃcient condition (7). If p∗SB is
relatively small, the marginal benefit of internalizing the externality, (1 − p∗SB ) L, is relatively large
and (7) is satisfied.
2

Since individuals face risk under restricted insurance coverage, the proof requires the maximization of expected
utility of final wealth.

15

This result should be contrasted with the case of terrorism insurance considered by Lakdawalla
and Zanjani (2005) where protection by one target leads the terrorist to attack a less protected
target. Protection thus creates a negative externality and an ineﬃcient overinvestment in selfprotection. A governmental subsidy of terrorism insurance can improve social welfare by discouraging investment in protection. In our case, there is a positive externality associated with investment
in protection. Social welfare is now improved by limiting insurance through a deductible, thereby
encouraging investment in protection.
Remark 2 In the proof of Proposition 1, we show that small, but strictly positive deductibles induce
p
agents to invest more in self-protection if and only if p∗SB < 1 − 1/2. Note that this condition

is implied by the necessary and suﬃcient condition (7), i.e. enforcing a strictly positive deductible
can only be optimal if it induces agents to invest more in self-protection than they would under full
insurance coverage.
Put diﬀerently, if the probability of a loss under full insurance coverage is relatively large,
p
i.e. p∗SB > 1 − 1/2, limiting insurance by enforcing a deductible discourages the investment in

protection. This is related to the finding of Ehrlich and Becker (1972) who show that the absence
of market insurance can discourage the investment in self-protection if the probability of a loss is
relatively large.

3.1

Illustrative Example

We continue our previous illustrative example in Section 2.4 with γ 00 (p0 − pi ) = c. Then
p∗SB = p0 −

(1 − p0 ) L
c−L

16

with cp0 > L which implies γ 00 (p0 − pi ) = c > L. The necessary and suﬃcient condition (7) for the
optimal enforced deductible to be strictly positive is

p0 < 1 −

4

s

(c − L)2
.
c (c + L)

Implications for Policy

The bundling of protection and insurance has a long history dating back to the factory mutuals
founded in the early 19th century in New England (Bainbridge, 1952). These mutual companies
oﬀered factories an opportunity to pay a small premium in exchange for protection against potentially large losses from fire while at the same time requiring inspections of the factory both prior
to issuing a policy and after one was in force. Poor risks had their policies canceled; premium reductions were given to factories that instituted loss prevention measures. For example, the Boston
Manufacturers worked with lantern manufacturers to encourage them to develop safer designs and
then advised all policyholders that they had to purchase lanterns from those companies whose
products met their specifications. In many cases, insurance would only be provided to companies
that adopted specific loss prevention methods. For example one company, the Spinners Mutual,
only insured risks where automatic sprinkler systems were installed. The Manufacturers Mutual
in Providence, Rhode Island developed specifications for fire hoses and advised mills to buy only
from companies that met these standards.
Private insurers today should consider requiring protective measures as a condition for insurance
with respect to standard homeowners coverage to reduce the negative externalities due to contagion.
However, all insurers would have to find it in their financial interest to follow this strategy because of
the contractual arrangements with respect to claims payments. Any insurer who provides protection
to individual i is responsible for losses incurred by this policyholder no matter who caused the
damage.3 One reason for this arrangement between insurer and insured is the diﬃculty in assigning
3

With respect to fire damage, a classic case is H.R. Moch Co., Inc. v Rensselaer Water Co. 247N.Y.160, 159 N.E.
896 which ruled that “A wrongdoer who by negligence sets fire to a building is liable in damages to the owner where

17

causality for a particular event. Without protection requirements by other insurers, a competitive
insurer will have to charge premiums that reflect the actions of policyholders who are independently
deciding how much to invest in protection given that they have some chance of being contaminated
by others.
One way of coordinating protective decisions of individuals is through a monopolistic insurer
who can require the adoption of such measures or provide premium incentives for those at risk to
adopt them to internalize the externalities due to interdependencies . A competitive insurer may
not be able to do this as easily if others in the industry do not take similar actions. von UngernSternberg (1996) provides an empirical study of the pricing and performance of insurance markets in
Switzerland and compares the performance of competitive insurers in seven cantons of the country
with local state monopolies in the 19 other cantons. The study finds that for very similar products
the monopolies charge premiums that are 70 percent lower than for the competitive insurance, they
spend substantially more on fire prevention and have much lower damage rates.
Some type of coordinative mechanism may also improve both individual and social welfare without having to rely on the power of the monopolist insurer. One option is for a well-enforced standard
or regulation, such as a building code, that requires individuals and firms to adopt cost-eﬀective
protective mechanisms when they would not do so voluntarily. One could also turn to the private
sector to coordinate decisions through an industry association that stipulates that any member has
to follow certain rules and regulations. For example, an apartment owners association could require
that all residents in the building adopt certain fire protective measures such as installing a smoke
alarm and/or a sprinkler system. The association could then arrange to purchase insurance for all
units in the building where the premiums would reflect the required protection that would reduce
the chances of a fire occurring.

the fire has its origin, but not to other owners who are injured when it spreads”. We are indebted to Victor Goldberg
who provided us with this case.

18

5

References

Ayres, Ian and Steven D. Levitt (1998). “Measuring Positive Externalities From Unobservable
Victim Precaution: An Empirical Analysis Of Lojack,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1),
43-77.
Bainbridge, John (1952). Biography of an Idea: The Story of Mutual Fire and Casualty Insurance,
Doubleday & Company Inc., Garden City, NY.
Ehrlich, Isaac and Gary S. Becker (1972). “Market Insurance, Self-Insurance, and Self-Protection,”
Journal of Political Economy, 80(4), 623-648.
Heal, Geoﬀrey and Kunreuther Howard (2005). “You Can Only Die Once,” in H.W. Richardson,
P. Gordon and J.E. Moore II, eds., The Economic Impacts of Terrorist Attacks, Edward Elgar,
Cheltenham, UK.
Kunreuther, Howard and Geoﬀrey Heal (2002). “Interdependent Security,” Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty, Special Issue on Terrorist Risks, 26(2-3), 231-249.
Lakdawalla, Darius and George Zanjani (2005). “Insurance, Self-Protection, and the Economics of
Terrorism,” Journal of Public Economics, 89(9-10), 1891-1905.
Schlesinger, Harris and Emilio Venezian (1986). “Insurance Markets with Loss-Prevention Activity:
Profits, Market Structure, and Consumer Welfare”, RAND Journal of Economics, 17(2), 227-238.
Shavell, Steven (1991). “Individual Precautions to Prevent Theft: Private versus Socially Optimal
Behavior,” International Review of Law and Economics 11(2), 123-132.
von Ungern-Sternberg, Thomas (1996). “The Limits of Competition: Housing Insurance in Switzerland,” European Economic Review, 40(3-5), 1111-1121.

19

6

Appendix: Proof of Proposition 1

The economic environment is as above in the second-best scenario in which individuals cannot contract on
their investment in self-protection. The only diﬀerence is that the insurance policy includes a deductible D,
i.e., the insurer pays L − D in case of a loss. The loss and final wealth distribution faced by policyholder i is
event
loss
no loss

prob
pi + (1 − pi ) pj
(1 − pi ) (1 − pj )

final wealth
w0 − γ (p0 − pi ) − P (D) − D
w0 − γ (p0 − pi ) − P (D)

where the actuarially fair premium is given by P (D) = (pi + (1 − pi ) pj ) (L − D). Policyholder 1’s expected
utility of final wealth is given by
EUi (pi , pj , D) = (1 − pi ) (1 − pj ) u (w0 − γ (p0 − pi ) − P (D))
+ (pi + (1 − pi ) pj ) u (w0 − γ (p0 − pi ) − P (D) − D) .
Policyholder i’s best response function p∗i (pj , D) is given by
p∗i (pj , D) ∈ arg maxEUi (pi , pj ) .
pi

Let p∗SB (D) denote the symmetric Nash-equilibrium, i.e. p∗SB (D) = p∗i (p∗SB (D) , D) = p∗i (p∗SB (D) , D),
which satisfies the first-order condition
(1 − p∗SB (D)) (u (w0 − γ (p0 − p∗SB (D)) − P (D) − D) − u (w0 − γ (p0 − p∗SB (D)) − P (D)))
2

+ (1 − p∗SB (D)) (γ 0 (p0 − p∗SB (D)) − (1 − p∗SB (D)) (L − D)) u0 (w0 − γ (p0 − p∗SB (D)) − P (D))
+p∗SB (D) (2 − p∗SB (D)) (γ 0 (p0 − p∗SB (D)) − (1 − p∗SB (D)) (L − D)) u0 (w0 − γ (p0 − p∗SB (D)) − P (D) − D)
= 0.
(8)
At D = 0 we get the condition
γ 0 (p0 − p∗SB (0)) − (1 − p∗SB (0)) L = 0,

(9)

where p∗SB (0) = p∗SB . For a given deductible D, the level of expected utility is thus given by
2

EUi (p∗SB (D) , p∗SB (D) , D) = (1 − p∗SB (D)) u (w0 − γ (p0 − p∗SB (D)) − P (D))
+ (2 − p∗SB (D)) p∗SB (D) u (w0 − γ (p0 − p∗SB (D)) − P (D) − D) . (10)
Diﬀerentiating expected utility with respect to the deductible level and evaluating at D = 0 implies
∂EUi (p∗SB (D) , p∗SB (D) , D)
∗
0
∗
|D=0 = −p∗0
SB (0) (1 − pSB (0)) Lu (w0 − γ (p0 − pSB (0)) − P (0)) .
∂D

(11)

To determine the sign of the first derivative we implicitly diﬀerentiate the first-order condition (8) with
respect to D and evaluate it at D = 0. We derive
00
∗
p∗0
SB (0) (L − γ (p0 − pSB (0))) = 0.

The stability condition γ 00 (p0 − p∗SB (0)) > L then implies p∗0
SB (0) = 0 and thus

20

∂EUi (p∗SB (D) , p∗SB (D) , D)
|D=0 = 0.
∂D
Next, we determine the sign of the second derivative of expected utility evaluated at D = 0. It is given by
∂ 2 EUi (p∗SB (D) , p∗SB (D) , D)
|D=0
∂D2
∗
0
∗
= −p∗00
SB (0) (1 − pSB (0)) Lu (w0 − γ (p0 − pSB (0)) − P (0))

+ (1 − p∗SB (0))2 p∗SB (0) (2 − p∗SB (0)) u00 (w0 − γ (p0 − p∗SB (0)) − P (0)) .

(12)

Implicitly diﬀerentiating the first-order condition (8) twice with respect to D and evaluating at D = 0 yields

i.e.

00
∗
0
∗
p∗00
SB (0) (L − γ (p0 − pSB (0))) u (w0 − γ (p0 − pSB (0)) − P (0))
³
´
2
= (1 − p∗SB (0)) 1 − 2 (1 − p∗SB (0)) u00 (w0 − γ (p0 − p∗SB (0)) − P (0)) ,

p∗00
SB (0) =

³
´
(1 − p∗SB (0)) 1 − 2 (1 − p∗SB (0))2 u00 (w0 − γ (p0 − p∗SB (0)) − P (0))
(L − γ 00 (p0 − p∗SB (0))) u0 (w0 − γ (p0 − p∗SB (0)) − P (0))

.

(13)

p
If p∗SB (0) < 1 − 1/2 then p∗00
SB (0) < 0 and small deductible levels thus increase the investment in selfprotection. Note that this condition is implied by the necessary and suﬃcient condition (7). Substitution of
(13) into the second derivative of expected utility (12) implies
∂ 2 EUi (p∗SB (D) , p∗SB (D) , D)
|D=0
∂D2
´ 
³

1 − 2 (1 − p∗SB (0))2 L
2
 (1 − p∗SB (0))2 u00 (w0 − γ (p0 − p∗SB (0)) − P (0)) .
= 1 − (1 − p∗SB (0)) −
(L − γ 00 (p0 − p∗SB (0)))

(14)

∂ 2 EU (p∗ (D),p∗ (D),D)

i
SB
SB
|D=0 > 0. Equation (14) implies
A strictly positive deductible is optimal if and only if
∂D2
the condition
³
´
(1 − p∗SB (0))2 L > 1 − (1 − p∗SB (0))2 γ 00 (p0 − p∗SB (0)) .

21

