                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE DEMOGRAPHIC TRANSITION AND THE SEXUAL DIVISION OF LABOR

                                         Bruno L. S. Falcao
                                         Rodrigo R. Soares

                                        Working Paper 12838
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12838


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2007




This paper benefited from comments from Roger Betancourt, Suzanne Bianchi, Matthias Doepke,
William N. Evans, Pedro Cavalcanti Ferreira, David Meltzer, Samuel Pessoa, Seth Sanders, and seminar
participants at CEDEPLAR-UFMG, Ibmec-Rio, Simon Fraser University, Stockholm School of Economics,
University College London, University of California-Santa Barbara, University of California-Santa
Cruz, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor, Yale University, the Stanford IIS Conference on "Health,
Demographics, and Economic Development," the IZA/EUI Workshop on "Demographic Change and
Secular Transitions in Labor Markets," the 2005 Meeting of the Brazilian Econometric Society, and
the 2006 Meeting of the Society for Economic Dynamics. Soares gratefully acknowledges financial
support from the National Institutes of Health (NICHD grant #HD050520-01). The usual disclaimer
applies. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Bruno L. S. Falcao and Rodrigo R. Soares. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Demographic Transition and the Sexual Division of Labor
Bruno L. S. Falcao and Rodrigo R. Soares
NBER Working Paper No. 12838
January 2007
JEL No. J11,J13,J24,J31,J82

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper presents a theory where increases in female labor force participation and reductions in the
gender wage-gap are generated as part of a single process of demographic transition, characterized
by reductions in mortality and fertility. The paper suggests a link between changes in mortality and
transformations in the role of women in society that has not been identified before in the literature.
Mortality reductions affect the incentives of individuals to invest in human capital and to have children.
Particularly, gains in adult longevity reduce fertility, increase investments in market human capital,
increase female labor force participation, and reduce the wage differential between men and women.
Child mortality reductions, though reducing fertility, do not generate this same pattern of changes.
The model reconciles the increase in female labor market participation with the timing of age-specific
mortality reductions observed during the demographic transition. It generates changes in fertility, labor
market attachment, and the gender wage-gap as part of a single process of social transformation, triggered
by reductions in mortality.

Bruno L. S. Falcao
Department of Economics
Yale University
New Haven CT 06520-8264
bruno.falcao@yale.edu

Rodrigo R. Soares
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
soares@econ.umd.edu
1     Introduction
This paper presents a theory where increases in female labor supply and reductions in the gender
wage-gap arise as by-products of the classical process of demographic transition, characterized by
increases in life expectancy and reductions in fertility. In the theory, gains in adult longevity raise
the returns to human capital and reduce fertility, reducing the demand for household production.
As women are initially specialized in the household sector, these changes lead to increases in
the fraction of the productive lifetime that women allocate to the market, and through changes
in human capital accumulation, to reductions in the wage diﬀerential between men and women.
Reductions in child mortality, though reducing fertility, do not generate this same pattern of
changes. Since reductions in child mortality increase the return to investments in children, and
therefore the return to time spent at home, their overall impact on female labor force participation
is smaller than that of reductions in adult mortality. The diﬀerent impact of adult and child
mortalities in our model reconciles economic theory with the timing of changes in age-specific
mortality and female labor force participation during the process of demographic transition. Our
theory highlights a link between mortality and the changing role of women in society that has
never before been identified in the literature. At the same time, this link generates a pattern of
social transformation that is remarkably consistent with the timing of events during the historical
experiences of demographic transition.
    There have been profound changes in the labor supply of women in the last decades, both in
developed and developing countries. In the United States, female participation in the paid labor
force changed drastically in the course of the 20th century. In 1880, only 17% of all American
women at working ages participated in the labor market. By 2000, this number had risen to more
than 60%. At the same time, individuals and families were changing in other important ways.
Figure 1 shows the evolution of life expectancy, fertility and female labor force participation in the
United States between 1880 and 2000. Throughout the 20th century, life expectancy at birth rose
by 30 years, from 47 to 77. The total fertility rate dropped from above 4 to 2.1.1 These changes
in life expectancy and fertility reflect trends that were observed at least since the beginning of
the 19th century, when the total fertility rate was above 7 points and life expectancy at birth was
below 40 years.


   1 The temporary increase in fertility in the post-war period is the well-known “baby-boom” phenomenon. Our

focus here is on the long term trend of fertility decline, which was only temporarily interrupted by the increased
fertility rate of the 1950’s and 1960’s.




                                                        1
                                                    Figure 1: United States - Life Expectancy, Fertility and
                                                              Female Labor Force Participation
                                               80                                                                    5

                                               70                                                                    4.5
               Life Exp (years) and FLFP (%)
                                                                                                                     4
                                               60
                                                                                                                     3.5
                                               50




                                                                                                                           TFR
                                                                                                                     3
                                               40
                                                                                                                     2.5
                                               30
                                                                                                                     2

                                               20                                                                    1.5

                                               10                                                                    1
                                                    1880     1900      1920 year 1940    1960     1980        2000
                                                                      Life Exp      FLFP      TFR
               Note: Total fertility rate prior to 1920 is for the black and white populations only.
               Source: Costa (2000), National Center for Health Statistics (2003), and US Census Bureau (1975).




                                                     Figure 2: Great Britain - Life Expectancy, Fertility and
                                                               Female Labor Force Particpation
                                               80                                                                    5.5
                                               75                                                                    5
               Life Exp (years) and FLFP (%)




                                               70                                                                    4.5
                                               65
                                                                                                                     4
                                               60
                                                                                                                     3.5
                                               55                                                                          TFR
                                                                                                                     3
                                               50
                                                                                                                     2.5
                                               45
                                               40                                                                    2

                                               35                                                                    1.5
                                               30                                                                    1
                                                    1851   1871     1891     1911      1931   1951   1971   1991
                                                                                    year
                                                                           Life Exp        FLFP      TFR
               Source: Wrigley et al (1997), Keyfitz and Fieger (1968), Costa (2000), World Bank (2004) and Human
               Mortality Database (2006).




   Over this same period, similar trends were observed in other developed countries (the case of
Great Britain is illustrated in Figure 2). These reductions in mortality and fertility were part
of the process of demographic transition, which spread through most of the world in the post-
war period. The empirical pattern characterizing the transition has been widely documented and
discussed in the demographic literature. It is usually understood as being marked by an initial
reduction in child mortality, followed by reductions in adult mortality and fertility (see, e.g., Heer




                                                                                       2
and Smith, 1968, Cassen, 1978, Kirk, 1996, and Mason, 1997).2 Maybe less acknowledged is the
fact that changes in female labor force participation have also reached several of the “latecomers”
of the demographic transition. Though data in these cases are more recent and sparse, it is
already possible to notice the trends. Figure 3, for example, illustrates the demographic changes
experienced by Brazil in the period between 1960 and 2000. In this forty-year interval, Brazil
went through radical demographic changes: life expectancy at birth rose from 55 to 68 years,
while total fertility rate declined from 6 to 2.2. Though data on female labor force participation is
not available before the mid 1970’s, the pattern of the series suggests that modest increases were
being observed before 1975. But it is really only after 1980 that the increase in female labor force
participation gained momentum. In the twenty five years between 1975 and 2000, women’s labor
market participation in Brazil increased from 39% to 58%.


                                                      Figure 3: Brazil - Life Expectancy, Fertility and Female
                                                                    Labor Force Particpation
                                                 70                                                                        7
                 Life Exp (years) and FLFP (%)




                                                 65                                                                        6

                                                 60
                                                                                                                           5
                                                 55




                                                                                                                               TFR
                                                                                                                           4
                                                 50
                                                                                                                           3
                                                 45

                                                 40                                                                        2

                                                 35                                                                        1
                                                      1960   1965   1970   1975       1980    1985   1990    1995   2000
                                                                                      year

                                                                           Life Exp          FLFP      TFR
                 Source: Soares and Izaki (2002) and World Bank (2003)




    This pattern is not particular to Brazil. In the recent experience of the developing world, the
fraction of the labor force composed by women increased in almost every single country where
significant reductions in fertility were observed (see World Bank, 2004). At the same time, the
wage diﬀerential between men and women fell in virtually every documented history of increased
female labor force participation. This was a general pattern, irrespective of cultural tradition or
level of economic development (see Blau and Kahn, 2000). For example, between 1980 and 2000,
the gap between female and male earnings was reduced by 12 percentage points in Great Britain,

   2 There is still some controversy regarding the early experience of the first Western European countries to go

through the demographic transition. Nevertheless, this sequence of events is accepted as an accurate description of
reality in the vast majority of cases.


                                                                                      3
by 14 percentage points in the United States, and by 15 percentage points in Brazil (Blau and
Kahn, 2000 and Simão et al, 2001).
    The implications of the increased attachment of women to the labor market encompass issues
such as the bargaining power of husband and wife within the household, the enhanced indepen-
dence of women in modern society, and the availability of parents to invest in children. On the
one hand, this change has been linked to cultural transformations within society, which led to
a change in the role of women in the household and in the labor market. On the other hand,
economists have linked it to rising wages and falling fertility. Though these closer explanations
are relevant, they do not identify the ultimate determinants of the observed trends. What is the
underlying reason behind society’s change of attitude toward women? Why did fertility decline
and, even with rising labor supply, why did women’s wages increase? And why changes in female
labor force participation seem always to follow reductions in mortality? Up to now, theory has
been unable to identify any causal link consistent with the generality of the phenomenon and with
the timing of events during the historical experiences of demographic transition. Nevertheless, the
evidence suggests that increased female labor force participation follows a quite general pattern,
which therefore cannot be entirely explained by technological or institutional changes that are
particular to each specific country.
    This paper suggests that changes in the role of women in society can be partly understood as
a consequence of the impact of reductions in mortality on household decisions. In this context,
increased female labor force participation and a narrowing gender wage-gap could be seen as
later developments of the same process of demographic transition characterized by increases in life
expectancy and reductions in the size of families. Our model incorporates all these dimensions into
a unified theory of demographic change, which does not resort to exogenous changes in culture,
habits or preferences. Though deep cultural and technological transformations have certainly been
important components of the social changes observed during the last century, the model has the
goal of highlighting one potentially important force that has been entirely ignored in the literature.
Therefore we abstract completely from changes in technologies (not related to health), culture and
social norms, and concentrate our analysis on the impacts of mortality.
    We argue that exogenous reductions in mortality — driven by technological progress in medical
and biological sciences3 — have two fundamental eﬀects: they reduce the return from large families

   3 Our theory has exogenous reductions in mortality as the main driving force behind all other demographic

changes. Though there are several dimensions on which individuals can invest in their own health, our focus here is
on changes in mortality brought about by technological advances or diﬀusion of previously existing technologies. An
extensive literature has pointed to the fact that recent changes in mortality have been largely unrelated to income
and living conditions, and are to a great extent exogenous to individuals and countries. This issue is discussed
in Preston (1975, 1980), Becker et al (2005) and Soares (2005), and will not be explored in further detail here.
Theoretical discussions on endogneous health and empirical evidence on the reverse eﬀect of education on health


                                                        4
and increase the return from investments in human capital. We develop a model where house-
holds composed by two members (female and male) decide on their allocation of time, number
of oﬀspring, and human capital investments in children and adults. Since women are assumed
to be marginally more productive at child raising, the initial allocation is one where females are
at least partially specialized in household production. In this situation, we show that gains in
adult longevity reduce fertility and increase the returns to investments in market-oriented human
capital. As women are initially specialized in raising children, reduced demand for household
production leads to an increase in investments in female human capital and labor supply that is
more than proportional to the gain in longevity, and larger than the increase observed for men.
The diﬀerential change across genders translates into increased labor force participation of women
and narrowing of the gender wage-gap.
    In addition, and contrary to the superficial intuition, the model does not generate increases
in female labor force participation or narrowing of the gender wage-gap as results of reduced
child mortality. Reductions in child mortality do not increase the returns to market attachment
directly, but they do increase the returns to investments in children. In our setup, when women
initially allocate part of their time to household production, the increased return from investments
in children guarantees that female labor force participation and investments in market human
capital do not rise as child mortality is reduced. Therefore, the paper reconciles theory with the
timing of changes in fertility and female labor force participation after the demographic transition.
Fertility reductions are observed soon after the onset of expressive gains in life expectancy — when
reductions in child mortality still play a prominent role, while increases in female labor force
participation appear only later on — as adult mortality gains relative importance.
    This setup shows that there is an economic force linking together mortality, fertility, female
labor force participation, and the gender wage-gap, and suggests that this connection may be
important for understanding the consequences of recent social changes for future generations.
Most notably, increased female labor force participation has raised concerns about the possibility
of negative impacts on the quality children, due to reduced presence of parents in the household.4
 As a by product, the theory proposed here suggests that this question should be analyzed in
light of the more general process of social change of which it is part.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the relevant literature on
the demographic transition and the recent changes in female labor force participation. Section 3
can be found, among others, in Grossman (2000), Scott (2002), Arendt (2005), and Lleras-Muney (2005).
   4 This issue has been the topic of a series of recent presidential addresses to the Population Association of

America (see, for example, Preston, 1984, Bianchi, 2000, and McLanahan, 2004), and is still subject of debate (e.g.
Sayer et al, 2004, Gauthier et al, 2004, and James-Burdumy, 2005).




                                                        5
presents the basic framework of the model. Section 4 discusses the eﬀect of adult longevity gains.
Section 5 analyzes the impact of child mortality reductions. Section 6 discusses the pattern of
historical changes generated by the model and the related evidence. Finally, section 7 concludes
the paper.


2    Related Literature
There are numerous empirical papers on female labor force participation, mainly within the lit-
erature on the determinants of labor supply. For example, the first generation of models took
lifetime wage profiles or fertility decisions as given, and analyzed their impact on labor supply
decisions (see, e.g., Mincer, 1962, Gronau, 1973, or the survey in Heckman, 1978). More recent
papers acknowledge the joint household decision regarding number of children, investments in
human capital and labor supply of women. This literature usually tries to instrument for one
of these dimensions of choice and analyze its impact on the other dimensions (Hotz and Miller,
1988, Rosenzweig and Schultz, 1985, and Angrist and Evans, 1998). From a macro perspectives,
several papers have performed exercises that are also close in spirit to the labor supply literature.
In these cases, authors typically calibrate a general equilibrium model of household decisions re-
garding labor supply and ask how much of the long-term change in labor supply of women can be
explained by changes in wages or returns to productive attributes. Jones et al (2003), for example,
argue that the narrowing wage-gap alone is enough to explain a large part of the recent changes
in female labor force participation. Similarly, Olivetti (2001), Mulligan and Rubinstein (2005),
and Leukhina and Bar (2006) analyze the role of changes in specific features of the distribution of
potential wages in explaining the change in female labor force participation. All these papers take
the potential wage distribution as given, and try to understand the changes in female labor force
participation from that. As argued before, our goal is to go one step further and also understand
what determines the changes in the market wages faced by women.
    Few papers have focused on the more structural determinants of the changing labor market
participation of women and the narrowing of the gender wage-gap. Greenwood et al (2004) suggest
that a major force determining the liberation of women from household chores was the techno-
logical revolution in household production induced by the birth of electricity. The introduction of
electricity in the household — followed by a series of new durable goods — liberated women from
household production and allowed increased labor force participation, without implying a reduc-
tion in the consumption of home produced goods. Goldin and Katz (2002), on the other hand,
suggest that a technological innovation of a diﬀerent nature was the main factor determining the
changes in women’s professional choices. They argue that the introduction of the oral contracep-


                                                 6
tive in 1960 was the driving force behind the changes in women’s career and marriage decisions
in the US.
    Without denying the importance of these factors to the extent and timing of the changes
observed in modern economies, our goal here is to draw attention to an economic force that has
not yet been identified in the literature. This force links together the changing role of women
in society to the previous process of demographic transition. Both these changes were observed
in various parts of the world, under diﬀerent levels of development and at diﬀerent points in
time. The generality of this pattern therefore cannot be entirely attributed to technological or
institutional transformations that are typically country-specific, even though these factors are
certainly important to explain the particularities of each diﬀerent experience.
    In this respect, the theory proposed here is closest in spirit to the work of Galor and Weil (1996).
These authors analyze the process of increased participation of women in the labor market as a
joint consequence of the reduced demand for children induced by economic growth. In their model,
women are assumed to have comparative advantage in mental labor, as opposed to physical labor.
In addition, capital is assumed to be complementary to mental labor, so that growth induced
by capital accumulation tends to increase the relative return to mental labor and, therefore, the
relative wage of women. In a situation where the capital stock is small, and the return to physical
capital relatively high, women specialize in raising children. But capital accumulation increases
the relative wage of women, therefore increasing the opportunity cost of children, reducing fertility,
and raising female labor force participation.5
    We share the same basic goal of Galor and Weil (1996), but key aspects of our theory diﬀer
from theirs, and we also extend the analysis in new directions. First, we focus on the reductions in
mortality that characterize the onset of demographic transition as the only reason behind all the
changes observed thereafter, while Galor and Weil (1996) do not incorporate mortality changes
as part of the transition. Second, the only diﬀerence between men and women in our model
is that women are marginally more productive at raising children (childbearing, breast-feeding,
etc.), while they rely on diﬀerential productivity of men and women in physical and mental labor.
And third, we explore the impact of these changes on the quality of children, while they do not
incorporate investments in children in their model.
    Experiences of demographic transition in the vast majority of cases have been characterized

   5 Lagerlöf (2003) also looks at the long term process of demographic changes together with the changing role of

women in society. But rather than trying to explain increased productivity and labor force participation of women,
he looks at these as the driving forces behind other changes. In his model, gender discrimination arises as a Nash
equilibrium. With the population re-coordinating on a more equal equilibrium, female productivity and labor force
participation rise, driving other changes in society. In this respect, his theory is a cultural one and should be seen
as complementary to the forces discussed here. Though it is certainly important to explain the dynamics of social
change through time, we do not believe that it suggests potential factors that might have triggered the process.


                                                          7
by initial reductions in mortality that are, after some delay, followed by reductions in fertility
(see, e.g., Heer and Smith, 1968, Cassen, 1978, Kirk, 1996, and Mason, 1997). This has taken
place in diﬀerent areas of the world at very diﬀerent development levels, so that to link the
changes exclusively to economic growth and to ignore the major role played by mortality during
the demographic transition does not seem fully satisfactory.
    This paper follows the literature that stresses the interaction between fertility and investments
in human capital as one of the distinguishing features of modern economies, and as the main
determinant of the diﬀerential behavior of population before and after the demographic transition
(as Becker et al, 1990). As O’Hara (1975), Meltzer (1992), Kalemli-Ozcan (2002), Soares (2005),
and Cervellati and Sunde (2006) the paper explores the particular way in which health aﬀects this
interaction in order to shed light on the determinants of the behavior of society in the long run.
The potential role of this mechanism in determining changes in female labor force attachment and
the gender wage-gap has never before been identified in the literature. The evidence discussed
later on suggests that, together with the other forces mentioned in this section, it may be an
integral part of a more complete explanation of the recent changes in the role of women in society.


3     The Model
Consider an economy inhabited by families that live for a deterministic amount of time. Each
family is composed by a male and a female (denoted by subscripts m and f , respectively), who
jointly decide on the allocation of time of each member towards investments in adult human
capital, work, and raising children. As in Galor and Weil (1996), fertility is realized in terms of
couples who grow up to be a household, so that we abstract from questions of matching and the
formation of families. Each member of the family is endowed with a level of basic human capital
determined from the previous generation’s decision (both members receive the same level of basic
human capital). This basic human capital determines the productivity of individuals in acquiring
market human capital and raising children. Market human capital, on its turn, determines the
productivity of each unit of time allocated to labor supply, and goods produced in the market
may be used for consumption or investment in children.
    In such context, where we incorporate the eﬀects of mortality, quality of children cannot be
understood simply as productive human capital. Evolutionary considerations lead to a formulation
where parents derive utility not only from the number of children and human capital of each child,
but also from the child mortality rate and adult longevity faced by the children. In addition,
these considerations imply that parents regard life expectancy and fertility in similar ways. This
formulation requires the recognition that adult longevity can be seen as an additional dimension


                                                  8
of oﬀspring quality, justified by the fact that survival into adulthood aﬀected evolutionary fitness
in earlier hunter-gatherer populations (due to the necessity of providing to oﬀspring until the early
teenage years). It also implies the existence of a biological trade-oﬀ between quantity and quality
of oﬀspring (in the economics literature, see Robson and Kaplan, 2003, Robson, 2004, or Galor
and Moav, 2005; references in the anthropological and biological literature include Lack, 1968,
Smith and Fretwell, 1974, Beauchamp, 1994, and Kaplan and Lancaster, 2003; a summary of the
main arguments is contained in Soares, 2005). In this case, natural selection imposes a trade-
oﬀ between life expectancy and number of oﬀspring (fertility) that, if recognized by preferences,
implies a dominant evolutionary strategy. This is the logic underlying a recent model developed
by Robson (2004), in which preferences that aim at maximizing the product of life expectancy
(quality) and fertility (quantity) arise as evolutionarily dominant in the long run. In his model,
the relation between life expectancy and fertility is relevant for purely biological reasons. But their
interaction in the induced preferences is exactly the same as assumed here: parents’ utility regards
number and life expectancy of oﬀspring in similar ways. This same idea is implicit in traditional
arguments relating child mortality to fertility, where parents are assumed to derive utility from
the number of surviving children. Here we follow Soares (2005) and extend this idea to later ages,
by assuming that parents also care about the adult longevity of their oﬀspring. This is a natural
extension once we consider that parents are concerned not only with the immediate survival of
their children, but also with the continuing survival of their lineage. In this case, families should
care about whether their children would live long enough to have and raise their own oﬀspring,
therefore guaranteeing the long term survival of descendents.
       For these reasons, we adopt a simplified version of the formulation proposed in Soares (2005).
Households derive utility from consumption in each period of life (c(t)σ /σ, over T years of life)
and from children. We assume that parents derive utility from the basic human capital of children
(hα
  c /α), and that this utility is aﬀected by the number of children (n), the child mortality rate

(β), and the lifetime that each child will enjoy as an adult (T ). The discount factor applied to
basic human capital is assumed to be a concave and increasing function ρ(.) of the total expected
lifetime of the children (nT (1 − β)), or the total of “child-years.”6               With this formulation, the
household utility function is given by7

   6 Soares (2005) shows that the main results generated by this functional form are also present under a more

general formulation for the ρ(.) function. Specifically, if the altruism function assumes the general form ρ(n, T, β),
                   ρ (n,T,β)n
and ε(n, T, β) = nρ(n,T,β) denotes its elasticity in relation to n, the condition needed is sign{εn (n, T, β)} =
sign{εT (n, T, β)} = −sign{εβ (n, T, β)}, where the subscripts denote partial derivatives. We adopt the alterna-
tive formulation because it relates directly to the endogenous preferences results from the evolutionary literature
(Robson, 2004). In addition, it is intuitively more appealing and simpler.
   7   We investigate the eﬀect of technologically induced mortality changes, which are perceived as permanent by



                                                          9
                                  ZT
                                                   c (t)σ                    hα
                                       exp (−θt)          dt + ρ (nT (1 − β)) c                                   (1)
                                                      σ                       α
                                   0

where c(t) is consumption at instant t, θ is the subjective discount factor and 0 < α, σ < 1 . The
first term is the utility that parents derive from consumption in each period of life, and the second
term is the utility that they derive from their children.8
    Production of basic human capital for children (hc ) can use either one of two inputs. The first
input (xT ) is produced with time invested by adult members of the household, while the second
input (xy ) is a good purchased with income on the market (at a fixed price p). For simplicity, we
assume that these two inputs are perfect substitutes in the production function of hc :


                                             hc = axT + (1 − a) xy ,                                              (2)

where a is a constant between zero and one.9             The household produced input (xT ) makes use of
the time of parents according to the following production function:


                                             xT = (Bbf + Cbm )hp ,                                                (3)

where hp is the basic human capital of parents and B and C are constants. In this context, the
idea that women are more productive at raising children can be translated into B > C, such
that each unit of time invested in a child by a woman generates more of the input xT than the
same unit invested by a man. This hypothesis is maintained throughout the paper. It is the only
intrinsic diﬀerence between men and women in our model.
    Basic human capital of each parent is also used, together with time invested in adult education,
to produce market (productive) human capital. We adopt a formulation similar to that used by
agents. This is why we do not distinguish between parent’s and children’s adult longevity in this formulation. As
long as the changes are permanent, the long-run eﬀects are the ones discussed here, even if they apply only from the
children’s generation on. In this case, we could understand our exercise as comparing households two generations
apart.
   8 Though we do not make this distinction formally in the model, the relevant dimension of change in T refers

to the length of productive life. So extensions in life during years when individuals are not able to work should not
bring together the eﬀects of changes in adult longevity stressed by our theory. We discuss the empirical relevance
of changes in mortality during productive years later on in the paper.
    9 In reality, when parents purchase investments in children through the market, a large part of these investments

is composed of other people’s time (baby-sitters, teachers, etc.). As long as the changes being analyzed here are
economy-wide, any impact on parents’ productivity and wages should also be reflected on the wages of these service
providers, and therefore should minimize the diﬀerential change on household production vis-à-vis market purchase
of inputs. In order to simplify the framework and to focus on the wedge between household production and market
purchase, we take the price of xy as given. Generally, similar results would hold as long as the price of xy increased
less than proportionally with the productivity and the market wages of parents (or as long as other people’s time
were not the only input used to produce xy ).




                                                         10
Becker (1985) to analyze specialization within the household:

                                                   Hi = Ahp ei .                                           (4)

   This is the human capital that is actually used to produce goods. The market human capital
of each member determines the productivity of each unit of time used as labor. Assuming that
adult individuals start working only after finished raising children and investing in adult human
capital, the lifetime present value of the total amount of market goods produced (or wages earned)
by the household is
                                 ZT                             ZT
                         y=                exp (−rt) Hm dt +           exp (−rt) Hf dt,                    (5)
                              nbm +em                        nbf +ef

where li = T − nbi − ei is the lifetime labor supply of agent i. The distinction between basic
and market human capital highlights the diﬀerent types of human capital acquired at diﬀerent
points in the life cycle. Basic human capital (h) refers to basic skills (language, motor ability,
etc.) and general knowledge accumulated during early stages of life, and while investments deci-
sions are still taken by parents. Market human capital (H) refers to the accumulation of skills
related to a specific occupation or profession, and when investment decisions are already taken
by the individuals themselves. Since the model is unable to capture all the subtleties of human
capital investments, we understand market human capital very broadly as referring to any type of
human capital investment specific to a particular task, including college and graduate education,
professional training, and the investment dimension of on-the-job training and learning-by-doing.
The distinction between these two types of human capital turns out to be key in identifying the
diﬀerent eﬀects of changes in child mortality and adult longevity.
   The total amount of goods produced by the household is allocated between consumption and
raising children. We assume that households have access to perfect capital markets, but that
borrowing from future generations and bequests are not allowed, so that the budget constraint is
                                      ZT
                               y≥          exp (−rt) c (t) dt + exp (−rτ ) npxy ,                          (6)
                                      0

where r is the interest rate, xy is the goods investment in the basic human capital of each child,10
and all the children are assumed to be born in period τ .
   Each adult member of the family also faces a time constraint. Her/his adult lifetime has to be
allocated between investing in market skills (adult human capital), working and, possibly, raising

  1 0 The model could also incorporate a parameter f capturing a fixed goods cost of having children. But since

the economy analyzed here displays long-run growth, this parameter would be asymptotically irrelevant and would
not aﬀect the long-run behavior of the economy.


                                                        11
children. The time constraint of agent i is given by

                                                          T = li + ei + nbi .                                    (7)

    In order to simplify the problem and concentrate the analysis on the intergenerational behavior
of the economy, we abstract from life-cycle considerations and set discount rates and interest rates
to zero. In this context, once we substitute for y in the budget constraint and for hc in the utility
function, the problem of the household can be written in a simpler form as:


                                                                                                        α
                                                                cσ                    [axT + (1 − a) xy ]
                               max                    V     = T    + ρ (n (1 − β) T )                            (8)
                  {c,n,xy ,lm ,lf ,em ,ef ,bm ,bf }              σ                            α
          subject to lm Ahp em + lf Ahp ef                  ≥ T c + pnxy ,

                                                      T     = li + ei + nbi , for i = f, m, and

                                                  xT        = (Bbf + Cbm )hp .

    In this framework, there are two forces working toward specialization. First, since women’s time
is relatively more productive in household activities, simple comparative advantage considerations
would lead to women’s partial specialization in household production. Second, the possibility of
increasing market productivity through human capital investments generates increasing returns to
the total amount of time allocated to market related activities (both investments in adult education
and labor supply together).11               The presence of increasing returns to market related activities
enhances the tendency toward specialization generated by any minor diﬀerence in comparative
advantage and exacerbates ex-post diﬀerences.
    Therefore, there can be no equilibrium where both agents share their time between market ac-
tivities and household production. Comparative advantage and investments in education generate
an incentive toward specialization, and at least one agent will always be completely specialized in
some activity. When agents spend some amount of time investing in children, there can be only
three possible equilibria: (a) m specializes in the market and f works both in the market and in
the household; (b) m works in the market and in the household and f specializes in the household;
or (c) m specializes in the market and f specializes in the household. This has to be the case
because if both agents share their time between market and household activities, the household

  1 1 If t̃ denotes the total amount of time allocated to market related activities by agent i (t̃ = e + l ), the
           i                                                                                        i     i    i
optimal allocation of time between human capital investments and labor supply is ei = li = t̃i /2. Substituting
both back into the production functions, this would imply a total production of Ahp t̃2i /4 for agent i. So there are
increasing returns to the total amount of time t̃i dedicated to market related activities. This is the type of return
to specialization discussed in Becker (1985). In Lagerlöf (2003), it is also true that, though men and women are
intrinsically identical in terms of potential market productivity, they end up with diﬀerent levels of human capital.
But in his case this arises due to anticipated discrimination against women (as a Nash equilibrium), and not due
to returns to specialization and diﬀerences in productivity at raising children, as we have here.


                                                                  12
can always increase its total production by increasing the market time of m (there are increasing
returns to the total amount of time dedicated to the market). In addition, since B > C, if only one
agent works in the household, it must be f . It is also possible that both agents end up spending
all of their time investing in market human capital and working, in which case investments in
children are made using goods purchased on the market.
    In what follows, we concentrate the discussion on the cases where women spend at least part
of their time on the market, and men are completely specialized on market production. Since
women labor force participation has been positive in modern economies for most of the recent
past, this seems to be the relevant equilibrium from an empirical perspective (the other equilibria,
and the eﬀects of mortality on the transition between diﬀerent equilibria, are briefly described
in the Appendix). Early stages of the process of economic development and of the movement
of households out of subsistence agriculture may be better characterized as a movement of men
from household activities to the market. This is a possibility that deserves further thought and
discussion, but we do not deal with it here. Our main focus is on the increased female labor force
participation that characterizes most industrial societies and also many less developed countries
that have already experienced the demographic transition.


4     The Eﬀect of Longevity Gains
From the first order conditions for an optimum (see Appendix), it is easy to show that, when the
woman shares her time between market and non-market activities, the optimal allocation of time
of m and f is characterized by
                                                    T
                                      em     = lm =    , bm = 0,
                                                     2
                                                    T − nbf
                                  and ef     = lf =         .
                                                        2
    Using the first order conditions for n, bf , and xy (see Appendix):
                                           ρ0 nT (1 − β)
                                                         =α                                     (9)
                                                 ρ
This expression determines the response of n to exogenous changes in longevity (T ) and child
mortality (β). Particularly:
                                            dn    n
                                               = − < 0.                                        (10)
                                            dT    T
This is the same relationship found in Soares (2005), and it reflects the interaction between n and
T inside the function ρ.
    Since mother’s time (bf ) and market goods (xy ) are substitutes in the production function
for children’s basic human capital (hc ), only the one with the higher relative return will be used.

                                                 13
Analyzing the first order conditions, one can see that there are two possible choices: one where the
investment in basic human capital is done using the domestic technology (bf > 0 and xy = 0, or
Equilibrium A), and another where this investment is done using goods purchased on the market
(bf = 0 and xy > 0, or Equilibrium B). In other words, in Equilibrium A the woman shares her
time between market and household activities, while in Equilibrium B both man and woman spend
all their time on the market, and investments in children are undertaken with goods purchased on
the market.
   Longevity aﬀects the investment in children’s human capital through two channels. First,
it aﬀects the choice of the technology to be used in this investment (extensive margin). And
second, it aﬀects the total amount of investment undertaken, possibly through both income and
substitution eﬀects (intensive margin).


Equilibrium A
  We first analyze the eﬀect of T on the intensive margin, when women use part of their time to
invest in children. In Equilibrium A, the fraction of time that the woman dedicates to the market
(human capital investments plus labor supply) increases in T . The fraction of time spent in the
household declines, but the net eﬀect on the absolute value of bf (investment in each child) is
ambiguous, since fertility is also reduced (see Appendix). The impact on consumption is positive.
These eﬀects are described by


                                 d (ef /T )     d (lf /T )      dc
                                              =            > 0,    > 0,                            (11)
                                     dT            dT           dT
                                d (nbf /T )              dbf
                            and               < 0, but       ≷ 0.
                                    dT                   dT

   When women spend part of their time in the household, an increase in T increases overall
incentives to invest in market human capital, because the time over which the returns can be
enjoyed is longer. Therefore, the opportunity cost of time (and fertility) increases. In addition,
the gain in longevity itself also reduces the benefits from larger families, and these two forces
together determine a reduction in fertility. The result is that the total amount of time spent on
market related activities increases more than proportionally with the gain in life-span, reducing
the fraction of time allocated to the household. In the end, the fraction of f ’s productive lifetime
allocated to labor supply (lf /T ) — the female labor force participation — rises, and the time invested
in each child may respond positively or negatively, depending on the relative responses of fertility
and the total time allocated to the household.
   Understanding the market wage as the productivity of one unit of time allocated to labor


                                                  14
supply, we can define the wage rate as wi = Hi = Ahp ei = Ahp t̃i /2, where t̃i denotes the total
amount of agent i’s time allocated to the market. Since gains in longevity lead to more than
proportional increases in the time women allocate to the market, while increases in men’s time
are just proportional to T , the gender wage-gap (1 − wf /wm ) is reduced as the process described
in the previous paragraph takes place.
   In relation to the quality of children, the response of investment per child (bf ) to changes in
longevity, though indeterminate, follows a very specific pattern. For lower levels of female labor
force participation (below 40% irrespective of the parameters of the model), increases in longevity
bring both increases in female labor force participation and improvements in the quality of children.
For intermediary values of bf , and conditional on other parameters, investments in children may
decrease as longevity and female labor force participation increase. But for suﬃciently high
levels of female labor force participation, irrespective of the parameters of the model, increases
in longevity are again accompanied by increased quality of children. Therefore, for a given set
of parameters, the relation between female labor force participation and investment per child is
either positive or non-monotonic. When the relation is non-monotonic, it starts as positive for low
levels of female labor force participation, turns into negative for intermediary levels, and becomes
positive again at high levels. Even in these cases, the quality of children increases with longevity
for the vast majority of initial levels of female labor force participation.
   The claims from the previous paragraph are proven in the Appendix, but here we give the
intuition for the results. Three forces relevant to decisions regarding investments in children are
at work when longevity increases. First, the increase in longevity itself relaxes the resources
constraint and increases full lifetime income. Second, the reduction in fertility that accompanies
the gain in longevity reduces the relative price of investments in children. And third, due to
increasing returns to market related activities, longevity increases the opportunity cost of time
used in the household. The first two forces work toward increased investments in children, while
the third works against it. For low levels of female labor force participation, the eﬀect of increasing
returns is relatively weak, so the first two forces dominate. At the other extreme, for high levels
of female labor force participation, consumption is very high and fertility is very small, so the
income eﬀect is strong and it takes relatively little time to increase the quality of children. Also
in this case, the first two forces dominate. The only situation where the third force may dominate
is the intermediary one, where increasing returns kick in strongly and, to take advantage of them,
women shift their time abruptly toward the market. In any case, it is not generally guaranteed
that this third force will be strong enough to overcome the first two and, even when it does, it is
only in a relatively short interval.


                                                  15
Equilibrium B
  In the case of Equilibrium B (market investments in children), the expressions derived before
fully describe the household’s allocation of time and its response to longevity changes. Both
adult members of the household allocate their total lifetime to market related activities, sharing it
equally between investments in human capital and labor supply. Contrary to before, the eﬀect of
longevity gains on the quality of children is unambiguously positive (dxy /dT > 0), but the eﬀects
on consumption are ambiguous (dc/dT ≷ 0). In this case, changes come from the income eﬀect
and from the fact that increases in longevity reduce the returns from large families. Since fertility
is reduced as a result of the latter, the shadow cost of investments in children goes down, so that
parents end up investing more in each child (there are no time costs in this case, and this eﬀect
can be seen as a positive substitution eﬀect toward the quality of children). Whether consumption
increases or not depends on how strong the income and substitution eﬀects are.


Extensive Margin Choice
  The extensive margin choice of the technology used to invest in children is also aﬀected by
longevity. For a large enough T , returns to market human capital are so high that both members
of the household spend their entire time on market related activities, and make their investments
in children through the market. For lower levels of T , this may not be the case, and women may
share their adult lifetime between market activities and raising children. The intuition for this
is clear: for lower T , the returns to market human capital and the cost of time are lower, the
family is poorer, and, therefore, it is cheaper to spend time investing in children instead of buying
this investment through the market. As longevity increases, returns to human capital (and family
income) rise, so that women increase their level of education and the opportunity cost of time.
When this change is large enough, it becomes cheaper for the family to make its investments in
children through the market, and allocate all the available time of its members to investments in
adult education and labor supply.


Long-Run Growth
  Diﬀerences in investments in children in this model translate into long-run diﬀerences in growth
rates, since basic human capital determines the productivity of later investments in market spe-
cific human capital. In steady-state, the growth rate between generations is determined by the
evolution of basic human capital between parents and children.12 Changes in women’s labor force

  1 2 As shown in Soares (2005), a steady-state only exists in this type of economy when α = σ. We implicitly make

this assumption whenever talking about steady-states. To keep notation to a minimum, we are not indexing by
generations, and are distinguishing parent’s and children’s basic human capital by the subscripts p and c. These
are obviously related across generations. If we let i index diﬀerent generations, hp,i+1 ≡ hc,i . So the growth rate


                                                        16
participation may aﬀect the accumulation of basic human capital in diﬀerent ways, depending on
the equilibrium that characterizes the economy. In the case of Equilibrium A, the eﬀect is am-
biguous, but tends to be positive. This comes directly from the fact that longevity has ambiguous
eﬀects on the quality of children, which nevertheless are positive for relatively low and high levels
of female labor force participation. In terms of growth rates,


                                                          hc
                                            1+g         =    = aBbf , and                              (12)
                                                          hp
                                        d (1 + g)            dbf
                                                        = aB     ≷ 0.
                                           dT                dT

    In Equilibrium B, investments in children are purchased through the market. Also, in this situ-
ation, increases in longevity reduce fertility, relax the budget constraint, and increase investments
in children:

                                                            hc           xy
                                         1+g        =           = (1 − a) , and                        (13)
                                                            hp           hp
                                     d (1 + g)              (1 − a) dxy
                                                    =                   > 0.
                                        dT                     hp dT

    It is therefore possible to observe an intermediary period when the growth rate of the economy
is reduced as women increase their attachment to the market. This is due to reduced investments
in children during this transition period. But eventually, the quality of children and the growth
rate start rising again as women intensify their attachment to the market. This tendency is
reinforced after women enter fully into the job market, and investments in children are bought
outside of the household. From this point on, the cost of time becomes irrelevant in determining
the quality of children and the long-run growth of the economy.


5     The Eﬀect of Child Mortality Reductions
The impact of child mortality changes is much simpler in nature than that of adult longevity. The
eﬀects of child mortality on fertility can be seen, as before, from the expression ρ0 n(1−β)T /ρ = α.
This relation implies that reductions in child mortality will be accompanied by reductions in
fertility:
                                                 dn      n
                                                    =         > 0.                                     (14)
                                                 dβ   (1 − β)
    This is the only direct eﬀect of child mortality in the model, and all subsequent changes follow
from how fertility aﬀects other margins of the household decision. In Equilibrium A (woman
of basic human capital from one generation to the next is hc,i /hp,i = hp,i+1 /hp,i = hc,i /hc,i−1 .



                                                             17
sharing her time between market and non-market activities), the household allocation of time
between domestic and market related activities is also aﬀected by the change in fertility. The
reductions in fertility and child mortality imply a reduction in the shadow price of investments in
children (or an increase in the rate of return to these investments). In the presence of increasing
returns to market activities, the marginal cost of market goods in terms of time is decreasing in
total production (or, alternatively, the marginal productivity of goods is increasing in the total
amount of time allocated to the market). This non-linear time cost tends to magnify responses
to price changes. For this reason, the reduction in the shadow price of child quality represented
by the fertility decline is strong enough to increase the total amount of time allocated to children
(see Appendix). This happens here, among other things, because there are increasing returns to
market activities. Otherwise, the reduction in fertility would generate the typical price response of
a normal good, where consumption (bf or hc ) necessarily increases, but total expenditures (nbf )
may not. Since there is a reduction in the total amount of time allocated to the market, female
educational attainment and labor force participation are actually reduced by reductions in child
mortality, and the wage diﬀerential between men and women rises.
   The prediction that female labor force participation is unequivocally reduced by reductions
in child mortality is not general, and depends partly on the specific functional forms adopted
in the model. Nevertheless, it does highlight an economic principle that is quite general and is
particularly strong in our theory. Changes in child mortality are, in nature, similar to changes
in the price of investments in children (due to reduced fertility, together with higher survival
probability of each child). Changes in adult longevity, on the other hand, are similar to changes
in the return to labor market attachment (due to longer productive life and reduced fertility).
Therefore, in the case of gains in adult longevity, mortality and fertility are two forces working
together toward increased labor supply (increased productive life and fewer children). In the
case of reductions in child mortality, mortality and fertility work in opposite directions, since
reduced fertility tends to increase labor supply (fewer children), but reduced child mortality tends
to increase household production (increased return to investments in each child). This essential
distinction should lead to an eﬀect of child mortality, if not opposite, at least modest in magnitude
when compared to the eﬀect of adult longevity, irrespective of the particular functional forms
adopted. Contrary to common belief, the general result suggested by our theory is that female
labor force participation should be closely related to adult longevity, not to child mortality.
   In Equilibrium B (investments in children through the market), the reduction in child mortality
and fertility is reflected on higher investments in children, as the simple response of a normal good
to price changes. But the choice between the two equilibria is also aﬀected by child mortality.


                                                 18
In order to be optimum for the household to allocate part of the woman’s time to the market, it
                          a   B
must be the case that p (1−a) A > ef . Since the reduction in child mortality tends to reduce female

investments in market human capital, reductions in child mortality tend to move the economy away
from Equilibrium B and toward Equilibrium A.
    In both equilibria, increased investments in children lead to higher growth rates and, in the long
run, higher consumption (this may take place at the expense of reductions in present consumption).
But, most important, reductions in child mortality cannot generate increased female labor force
participation nor a narrowing gender wage-gap. In fact, the model generates exactly the opposite
result when women spend part of their time on domestic activities: reductions in child mortality
lead to reduced participation of women in the labor market and to a widening wage diﬀerential
between men and women. This result highlights the key position occupied by adult longevity in
our theory. Specifically, reductions in fertility are not enough to generate the typical change in
women’s labor supply. Increased return to market specific human capital is an additional feature
that is essential in explaining the observed trends.


6     Predictions of the Model and Related Evidence
The theory proposed here generates a close link between adult longevity, female labor force par-
ticipation, and the gender-wage gap. On the other hand, child mortality does not seem to be a
particularly important determinant of female labor force participation, even though its eﬀect on
fertility is important. These predictions are in line with historical evidence, since female attach-
ment to the labor force only increases significantly at later stages of the demographic transition,
when changes in adult longevity gain importance. This could explain the lag between the initial
increase in life expectancy during the onset of the demographic transition and the later increase
in female labor force participation, as Figures 1, 2, and 3 show.
    This point is further illustrated in Figures 4 and 5, where together with life expectancy at
birth and female labor force participation, we present life expectancy at age 20 for the US and
Great Britain (similar numbers are not available as a time series for Brazil). Two points in these
figures deserve attention. First, the timing of changes in female labor force participation seems to
be much more closely related to the timing of changes in life expectancy at age 20 than to that
of changes in life expectancy at birth. Second, both countries experienced very expressive gains
in life expectancy at age 20 in the recent past. Just between 1940 and 2000, the US and Great
Britain gained roughly 10 years in life expectancy at age 20.
    This evidence points to the fact that changes in adult longevity have been an important part of
the recent gains in life expectancy throughout the world. For example, female mortality between


                                                  19
ages 15 and 60 was reduced by 39% between 1960 and 2000 in the case of Brazil, while the analogous
number for countries as diverse as Australia, Austria, Chile, China, Colombia, Germany, India,
Indonesia, Ireland, Korea, Mexico, and Spain was around or above 50% (World Bank, 2004). In
absolute terms, these changes represented reductions in the probability of death between ages 15
and 60 of up to 30 or 50 percentage points for countries such as China, Indonesia and Korea.


                                              Figure 4: United States - Life Expectancies and
                                                    Female Labor Force Participation
                                  80                                                                             70

                                  75                                                                             60

                                  70
                                                                                                                 50
               Life Exp (years)




                                  65




                                                                                                                      FLFP (%)
                                                                                                                 40
                                  60
                                                                                                                 30
                                  55
                                                                                                                 20
                                  50

                                  45                                                                             10

                                  40                                                                             0
                                        1880       1900          1920 year 1940        1960    1980      2000
                                                          Life Exp           Life Exp at 20    FLFP

              Source: Costa (2000), National Center for Health Statistics (2003), and US Census Bureau (1975).




                                       Figure 5: Great Britain - Life Expectancies and Female
                                                     Labor Force Particpation
                                  80                                                                             55

                                  75                                                                             50
                                  70
                                                                                                                 45
               Life Exp (years)




                                  65
                                                                                                                      FLFP (%)




                                                                                                                 40
                                  60
                                                                                                                 35
                                  55
                                                                                                                 30
                                  50

                                  45                                                                             25

                                  40                                                                             20
                                       1851     1871      1891       1911      1931    1951   1971    1991
                                                                            year
                                                          Life Exp           Life Exp at 20    FLFP
              Source: Wrigley et al (1997), Keyfitz and Fieger (1968), Costa (2000), World Bank (2004) and Human
              Mortality Database (2006).




   Also in the cross-country context, as in the historical experience of the US and Great Britain,

                                                                              20
variations in female labor force participation are more closely related to adult longevity than to
child mortality. Table 1 presents a set of cross-country panel regressions of the fraction of the
labor force composed by women on diﬀerent sets of variables. The diﬀerent specifications include
as independent variables various combinations of child mortality (before age 5), adult female and
male mortalities (between ages 15 and 60), income per capita adjusted for terms of trade, average
educational attainment in the population above 15, total fertility rate, and country and time fixed
eﬀects.13    Income per capita is from the Penn World Tables version 6.1, educational attainment
is from the Barro and Lee Dataset, and all the other variables are from the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators. These regressions are not intended to imply any causal relationship, as
this would require an empirical eﬀort that is beyond the scope of this paper. They are seen here
simply as a descriptive tool, intended to reveal the pattern of conditional correlations observed
across countries. The goal of the table is to show that this pattern of simple correlations is quite
diﬀerent from what is commonly thought and, maybe surprisingly, is strikingly consistent with
the theory proposed here.
    Since the measure of labor force participation available is a relative one, we control for adult
male mortality in all regressions. The table shows that higher female mortality is significantly
related to lower female labor force participation in all specifications. At the same time, in the
simplest specification, child mortality does not show a significant correlation with female labor
supply. But when country fixed-eﬀects and/or other controls are added, child mortality starts
having a positive and significant correlation with female labor supply, meaning that reductions
in child mortality are associated with reductions in female labor force participation. Notice that,
as specification (3) shows, this correlation is not due exclusively to the relation between child
mortality and fertility. Though fertility is endogenous to the problem, the correlation between
child mortality and female labor supply remains positive and significant even after fertility and
educational attainment are included in the regression. This should be expected if the driving force
behind these correlations were the change in investments in children, as the model would suggest.
The inclusion of income per capita and country fixed eﬀects also shows that these correlations are
not driven by the association between the diﬀerent variables and economic development, nor by
any country-specific cultural or institutional characteristic.


  1 3 In order to make consistent comparisons, the table keeps the same sample across the diﬀerent specifications.

Qualitative results are the same when the sample is allowed to include all the observations available for each diﬀerent
specification. The main qualitative results are also the same when child mortality before age 1 is used instead of
child mortality before age 5.




                                                          21
                           Table 1: Regressions for the Fraction of the Labor Force
                              Composed by Women, Cross-country, 1960-2000
                                        1          2          3          4          5
                   Child Mort             -0.0051         0.0436          0.0381         0.0339         0.0461
                                            0.0088         0.0068         0.0068          0.0099         0.0072
                                            0.5652         0.0000         0.0000          0.0007         0.0000
                   Female Mort            -0.0486         -0.0358        -0.0285         -0.0265        -0.0206
                                            0.0127         0.0089         0.0089          0.0122         0.0086
                                            0.0002         0.0001         0.0014          0.0304         0.0171
                   Male Mort               0.0745         0.0218          0.0171         0.0629         0.0105
                                            0.0122         0.0094         0.0090          0.0106         0.0085
                                            0.0000         0.0210         0.0570          0.0000         0.2219
                   ln(Income PC)                                          2.2791         -1.7530        1.6727
                                                                          0.7820          0.8044         0.7690
                                                                          0.0038          0.0298         0.0303
                   Fertility                                                             -2.2714        -1.0464
                                                                                          0.4347         0.3106
                                                                                          0.0000         0.0008
                   Education                                                             1.1937         0.5731
                                                                                          0.2464         0.3256
                                                                                          0.0000         0.0793
                   Country f.e.               no            yes             yes             no             yes
                   N Obs                    453             453            453             453            453
                     2
                   R                        0.32            0.92           0.92            0.42           0.93
                   Obs.: Standard errors and p-values below the coefficients. Dependent variable is the
                   fraction of the labor force composed by women (WDI). All regressions include a constant
                   and year fixed-effects. Child Mort is mortality under age 5 (per 1,000 live births, WDI);
                   Female Mort is female mortality between ages 15 and 60 (per 100,000, WDI); Male Mort
                   is male mortality between ages 15 and 60 (per 100,000, WDI); Income PC is income per
                   capita adjusted for terms of trade (PWT 6.1, rgdptt), Fertility is the total fertility rate (WDI);
                   Education is average educational attainment in the population aged 15 and above (Barro
                   & Lee). Data in five-year intervals between 1960 and 2000; 97 countries included in the
                   sample.




   One of the main issues that made it diﬃcult to relate female labor force participation to
the demographic transition was precisely the fact that increased labor supply of women starts
only considerably after significant reductions in mortality and fertility are observed. Our theory
overcomes this problem by showing that reductions in fertility are not enough to generate the
movement of women out of household work. The latter is only guaranteed when reduced fertility
is accompanied by increased return to labor market attachment, which does not happen until
reductions in adult mortality are observed (corresponding to later stages of the demographic
transition).
   This close association between female labor force participation and adult longevity, as opposed
to child mortality, is somewhat at odds with the accepted common knowledge in the profession.
Typically, female labor force participation is seen as closely linked to fertility, which in turn is
thought to depend to a great extent on child mortality. Therefore, one might think, child mortality
should exhibit a negative correlation with female labor force participation. In addition, the simple
fact that development brings together modernization and health improvements might mean that
this same correlation should be reinforced, even if not because of a strictly causal relationship


                                                                  22
between the two variables.
   The evidence discussed here shows that this belief is not supported by the pattern of corre-
lations observed in the data. Be it through time or across countries, female labor supply tends
to be positively associated with adult survival, and, at best, not closely related to child survival.
Even though these are simply descriptive patterns, it is still true that at the same time as they are
diﬀerent from what is commonly believed, they are entirely consistent with our theory. Further
research is needed in order to establish whether these correlations indeed reflect the causal links
suggested by the model.
   As a final note, the model also has implications regarding the relationship between female labor
force participation and the quality of children. In our theory, there can be either a positive or a
non-monotonic relationship between female participation in the labor market and child quality.
For intermediary levels of longevity and income, increases in female labor force participation
may reduce child quality, while the opposite certainly happens for suﬃciently low or high levels of
labor supply. Recent demographic evidence regarding the relationship between these two variables
has not yet reached a consensus. In some circumstances, a non-monotonic relationship between
female labor supply and time spent with children has been found. In others, positive, negative,
and non-significant eﬀects of mother’s labor supply on diﬀerent dimensions of child quality have
also been registered. Gauthier et al (2004), for example, present evidence for the US, UK and
Canada indicating that average time spent on child-care activities was reduced up to the end
of the 1970’s, after when it started rising again. They also show that since 1960 average time
spent on housework by mothers was reduced by more than 30%. Overall, time spent by women
in housework and child-care together was reduced by roughly 1.2 hour a day. Sayer et al (2004)
also find the same non-monotonic trend in terms of time allocated to direct child-care by mothers,
with reductions observed between 1965 and 1975, and increases afterward. In addition, they find
that, even though reductions in fertility have reduced the total amount of time allocated to child-
care, activities involving direct and deeper interaction with children have increased in relative
importance. The literature that tries to estimate the eﬀect of mother’s employment and hours
worked on diﬀerent measures of child quality is reviewed by James-Burdumy (2005). The results
from this literature are also largely mixed, with negative, positive, and quantitatively irrelevant
eﬀects all being common. James-Burdumy (2005) addresses some of the problems common to the
previous papers — absence of control for family specific eﬀects and instruments for mother’s labor
force participation — and finds only modest eﬀects of mother’s labor supply on child performance,
both positive and negative (depending on the test score analyzed and on the age of the child when
the mother worked). So rather than settling the debate, the results from James-Burdumy (2005)


                                                 23
add to the controversy.
    Our theory suggests that the relationship between female labor supply and investments in
children may be non-monotonic, meaning that families under diﬀerent economic circumstances
may display diﬀerent patterns of correlation between mother’s labor supply and the quality of
children. In this respect, contradictory results in studies looking at diﬀerent groups of the pop-
ulation, or weak quantitative results in studies looking at broad groups, might be exactly what
should be expected. Therefore, the theory suggests that family heterogeneity and the possibility
of non-monotonic relationships may be fruitful directions for future empirical research in the area.


7     Concluding Remarks
This paper presents a model where, ultimately, longevity gains are solely responsible for the
increased participation of women in the labor market and the narrowing of the gender wage-gap.
Though the direct link between these two phenomena may seem obscure, the intuition becomes
clear once other dimensions of the demographic transition are brought into the analysis. Increased
longevity increases the returns to investments in market oriented human capital. Higher returns
to investment in human capital increase the cost of time and shift the quantity-quality trade-oﬀ
toward fewer and better educated children. In addition, lower mortality reduces the return to
large families, representing an additional force toward reduced fertility. With higher returns to
human capital and fewer children, women increase their investments in human capital and their
attachment to the market. Since women are initially specialized in the household sector, this
takes place at a rate more than proportional than the one observed for men, so that the gender
wage-gap is reduced.
    At the same time, the model does not generate increases in female labor force participation
or reductions in the gender wage-gap from reductions in child mortality. Though reductions in
child mortality reduce fertility, they also increase the return to investment in children, increasing
therefore the demand for household production. In the case of child mortality, there is an opposing
force that tends to reduce the positive eﬀect that the reduction in fertility could have on labor
supply. Our model shows that, under reasonable assumptions, this force may be strong enough
so that reductions in child mortality will be accompanied by reduced labor supply of women.
Generally, our theory shows that increases in female labor supply and reductions in the gender
wage-gap should be closely related to gains in adult longevity, not to reductions in child mortality.
    The predictions generated by this framework suggest a single process of demographic transition,
triggered by reductions in mortality, that is consistent with several social changes observed in the
course of the last century. Though other technological and cultural changes are certainly important


                                                 24
to help explain the transformation in the role of women in society, we highlight one important
economic force that has been entirely ignored in the previous literature.


A      Appendix
A.1     First Order Conditions

Let Ψ, λf , λm , and Π denote sequentially the multipliers for the constraints in the maximization
of equation 8. Substituting for hc and xT in the objective function, the first order conditions for
c, n, em , lm , bm , ef , lf , bf and xy are given by, respectively:



                                           T cσ−1 = ΨT,
                                               hα
                                  ρ0 T (1 − β) c = Ψpxy + λf bf ,
                                                α
                                          Ahp lm Ψ = λm ,

                                        Ahp em Ψ = λm ,

                                     ρhα−1
                                       c   aChp      < λm n , = if bm > 0

                                         Ahp lf Ψ = λf ,

                                         Ahp ef Ψ = λf ,

                                     ρhα−1
                                       c   aBhp      < λf n , = if bf > 0 and

                                   ρhα−1
                                     c   (1 − a) < Ψpn, = if xy > 0.

A.2     The Choice of the Technology for Investments in Children
                                                                                                        hα
When investments make use of the mother’s time, bf > 0 and we have that ρ0 T (1 − β)                    α
                                                                                                         c
                                                                                                             =
ρhα−1 aBhp                                                                                                   hα
  c
    n      bf . And    when investments make use of income, xy > 0 so that we can write ρ0 T (1 − β)         α
                                                                                                              c
                                                                                                                  =
ρhα−1 (1−a)
  c
    n       xy .

Proposition 1 There is a T ∗ such that, for every T < T ∗ , investments in children are done
domestically (using the mother’s time), and, for every T > T ∗ , investments are done with goods
purchased on the market.

Proof. The rate of return to investments using the domestic technology (marginal productivity
                                                              ρhα−1 aBhp
divided by opportunity cost) is given by RRbf =                 c
                                                                  λf n   .   The rate of return to investments
                                 ρhα−1
                                                 The household will choose to use time whenever RRbf >
                                       (1−a)
using income is RRxy =             c
                                     Ψpn     .
            aBhp       (1−a)                                                                      a   B
RRxy , or    λf    >     Ψp .   Substituting for λf , this inequality can be rewritten as e < p (1−a) A . For
                                             a   B
T suﬃciently low (in particular, for T < p (1−a) A ) RRbf > RRxy and investments in children

are done domestically. In addition, since e increases at least proportionately with T , there is a T


                                                         25
large enough so that e > p (1−a)
                             a
                                 A . In this case, RRbf 6 RRxy and investments in children are
                                 B


done through the market.

A.3     The Equilibrium with Time Investments in Children

When investments in children make use of the domestic technology, it is convenient to rewrite the
problem in terms of the shares of total lifetime (T ) dedicated to each diﬀerent activity. Define
the new variables e∗i = ei /T , li∗ = li /T and di = nbi /T as the shares of total lifetime allocated
to, respectively, investments in adult human capital, labor supply, and domestic activities (raising
children). Incorporating xy = 0, the original problem can be rewritten as

                                                            cσ                hα
                                          max           T      + ρ[(1 − β)T n] c
                                      e∗   ∗
                                       i ,li ,di ,n,c       σ                  α
subject to
                   ¡                           ¢
                       Ahp e∗m lm
                                ∗
                                  + Ahp e∗f lf∗ T 2           ≥ T c,

                                                        1 ≥ e∗i + li∗ + di , with i = m, f,
                                                            T
                                                      hc =      a (Bdf + Cdm ) hp , and
                                                            n
                                           e∗i , li∗ , di ≥ 0.

   Let λ be the multiplier on the first constraint, and λi the multiplier on the second constraint
for agent i. In the equilibrium where men specialize in market activities and women share their
time between market and domestic activities, first order conditions can be written in terms of the
new variables as

                                       c−σ         = λ,
                                        hα                          T
                            ρ0 (1 − β)T c          = ρhα−1
                                                       c               a (Bdf + Cdm ) hp ,
                                        α                           n2
                                   2     ∗
                                λT Ahp lm          = λm ,

                              λT 2 Ahp e∗m         = λm ,
                                  T
                            ρhα−1
                              c      aChp          < λm ,
                                  n
                                λT 2 Ahp lf∗       = λf ,

                                λT 2 Ahp e∗f       = λf , and
                                   T
                            ρhα−1
                              c       aBhp         = λf .
                                   n
   Therefore, e∗m = lm
                     ∗
                       = 1/2, dm = 0, and lf∗ = e∗f . For each individual, the time spent with
investments in adult human capital and labor supply is always the same. Therefore, to save on
notation, we write ti as the proportion of total lifetime allocated to market related activities

                                                               26
(investments in human capital plus labor supply), so that li∗ = e∗i = ti /2 (ti = t̃i /T , where t̃i was
defined before as the total amount of agent i’s time allocated to the market).
   Rewriting the problem after substituting for the budget constraint directly into the utility
function, and considering the equilibrium where tm = 1 , and df , tf ∈ [0, 1]:

                                           µ         ¶σ
                                               Ahp          £       ¤σ                  hα
                           max T 1+σ                         1 + t2f /σ + ρ[(1 − β) T n] c
                        tf ,df ,n               4                                        α
subject to

                                                  1 ≥ tf + df , and
                                                      T
                                                 hc =    aBhp df ,
                                                       n
and to the additional constraint that tf , df ≥ 0. In this form, first order conditions become
                                                                  hα
                                                                   c                 T
                                                 (1 − β)T ρ0               = ρhα−1
                                                                               c        aBhp df ,
                                 µ         ¶σ                     α                  n2
                           1+σ       Ahp        £        ¤σ−1
                       T                         1 + t2f      2tf          = λf , and
                                      4
                                                            T
                                                 ρhα−1
                                                   c          aBhp         = λf .
                                                            n
   The objective function is concave on df and convex on tf , so we cannot, in principle, guarantee
unicity of the internal solution nor trust on the Hessian to verify that a point of maximum is
reached. The issue in question and the optimal solution to the problem can be better understood
with the help of a figure. Define
                                                            µ         ¶σ
                                                   1+σ
                                                        £       ¤σ
                                                                Ahp
                                 f (t) = T               1 + t2f /σ, and
                                                                 4
                                                      ¡T          ¢α
                                                         aBhp df
                                 g (d) = ρ[(1 − β)T n] n             .
                                                           α
   Conditional on being on this equilibrium, and given the choice on the number of children
(n),the optimal allocation of the woman’s time is the solution to the following problem.

                                                   max f (tf ) + g (df )
                                                   tf ,df

subject to tf + df = 1 and with tf , df > 0.
   The optimum is characterized by f 0 (tf ) = g 0 (df ), where these derivatives are given by the left
hand side of the last two first order conditions above. One can show that
                        µ       ¶σ
                           Ahp     £        ¤σ−2 £                        ¤
   f 00 (tf ) = 2T 1+σ              1 + t2f        1 + t2f + 2 (σ − 1) t2f > 0,
                             4
                                       µ            ¶α
                                           T
   g 00 (df ) = (α − 1) ρ[(1 − β)T n]        aBhp      dα−2
                                                          f   < 0, and
                                           n
                        µ       ¶σ
                           Ahp     £        ¤σ−3 h                                              i
   f 000 (tf ) = 2T 1+σ             1 + t2f        6 (σ − 1) tf + 2 (σ − 1)2 t3f + 2σt3f (σ − 1) < 0,
                             4

                                                                 27
where the inequality comes from the fact that tf > t3f . In addition, these functions are charac-
terized by the following properties: g 000 (df ) > 0, lim g 0 (df ) = ∞, lim g 0 (df ) = constant > 0,
                                                            x−→0                        x−→1
lim f 0 (tf ) = 0, and lim f 0 (tf ) = constant > 0. So we can plot the functions f 0 and g 0 against
t−→0                     t−→1
the fraction of time allocated to market and non-market activities (see Figure A.1).
   In the figure, we assume that the two curves intersect. If they did not, the origin would be the
optimal choice. Points II and III are the ones that satisfy the first order conditions.

Proposition 2 Point III is preferrable to point II and, therefore, is the solution to the household
problem.

Proof.     Starting from point II and moving to the right, tf increases while df is reduced. The
gains in terms of utility are given by f 0 , while the losses are given by g 0 . Since f 0 > g 0 in (II, III),
III is preferrable to II.


                     Figure A.1: Characterization of First Order Conditions

                 f’,g’                                 g’




                                                                                   f’
                                                 III




                           II

                    I
                                     increasing tf                                             tf, df
                                                                   increasing df



   Points I and III are not comparable on a strictly graphical basis. More rigorously, their
                                                   Rc
ordering would depend on the value of the integral (f 0 − g 0 ) dt. Point I corresponds to the
                                                               0
equilibrium where there is total specialization within the household (man on the market and
woman in the household). For lower values of T , the integral above is negative, and the optimal
choice is point I. For a higher T , the value of the integral increases and eventually becomes
positive. This is what characterizes the first movement of women into the labor market.
   Generally, the comparative statics of the problem can be analyzed from the impact of changes


                                                       28
in T on the curves f 0 and g 0 . As T increases, f 0 moves vertically at a rate (1 + σ), and g 0 moves
vertically at a rate 2α.14 In order for a steady state to exist in this economy, we must have α = σ
(see Soares, 2005). In this case, f 0 shifts at a faster rate and, therefore, point III moves to the
right, corresponding to a higher tf and a lower df .

A.4       The Quality of Children in the Equilibrium with Time Investments

With the first order conditions and after some tedious algebra, it can be shown that

                              dbf                   D                      b
                                  =³            h                        i´ f ,
                              dT    2D + (1 − σ) (1 − df ) + (1 − df )
                                                                       3    T

                                                          3                    2             2
where D = − (1 − α) (1 − df ) − (1 − α) (1 − df ) + df + df (1 − df ) − 2 (1 − σ) (1 − df ) df and
df = nbf /T. This implies that dbf /dT < 0 if and only if
                                     h                       i
                                                           3
                              (1 − σ) (1 − df ) + (1 − df )
                            −                                  < D < 0.
                                            2

      Expanding the polynomials on D and incorporating the condition for existence of steady-state
(α = σ), this inequality can be rewritten as
                 h                      i
         (1 − σ) (1 − df ) + (1 − df )3
       −                                  < −(1 − σ)2 + (2 − σ)2df − (1 + σ)d2f + σd3f < 0.
                        2

      The eﬀect of the change in longevity on the quality of children, therefore, depends on the
equilibrium fraction of time allocated to the household (df ). In addition, the set of possible values
of df compatible with Equilibrium A being optimum depends on the other parameters of the
model. From the extensive margin choice between the two technologies, the maximum level of
longevity compatible with Equilibrium A is determined implicitly from

                                                 T (1 − df )     a B
                                          ef =               =p      .
                                                      2         1−aA
      Since the left hand side is constant and T (1−df ) increases more than linearly with T , we know
that there is a T high enough so that this expression is satisfied (even though it may be already
with df = 0). This is the level of longevity at which the family stops using time to invest in the
children and starts using market goods. Call this level of longevity and the associated fraction
of time spent in the household T̂ and dˆf , respectively. Notice that the expression above implies
that any value of df between 0 and 1 is always compatible with Equilibrium A being optimum for
some set of parameters. Particularly, changes in p do not aﬀect the intensive margin choice of df

 14   This result uses the fact that, in equilibrium, (1 − β)nT is constant.



                                                          29
in Equilibrium A, but do aﬀect the extensive margin choice between Equilibria A and B. So, for
any given values of the other parameters, there is always a p such that virtually all values of df
(corresponding to changing T ’s) are compatible with the optimality of Equilibrium A.
   In principle, this means that df can really take any value between 0 and 1 for any value of σ,
depending on the set of parameters. So, in order to check when the inequalities above are satisfied,
we have to check whether they hold for all the values of df and σ between 0 and 1. Based on
the inequalities above, the table below shows whether dbf /dT is negative or positive for a grid of
values of df and σ between 0 and 1.
   It is clear from the table that, in terms of this grid, dbf /dT is positive in the vast majority
of cases (or, generally, it is positive in the vast majority of the area defined when df and σ vary
between 0 and 1). Nevertheless, this result does not mean that dbf /dT is positive for all the
empirically relevant cases.
   But is does mean that when female labor force participation starts rising from low levels
(typically well below 40%), child quality increases together with the increased attachment of
women to the labor market. After this process takes place for some time, it is possible that
further increases in female labor force participation are accompanied, in a certain interval, by
reductions in the quality of children. Yet, even in this case, this would be no more than a temporary
phenomenon. Further increases in longevity eventually bring back the positive association between
increased female labor force participation and child quality. This happens either because, as df
is reduced within Equilibrium A, the range of negative values of dbf /dT is surpassed, or because
the household eventually finds it optimum to move from Equilibrium A into Equilibrium B.
   Therefore, the model generates either a positive or a non-monotonic relationship between fe-
male labor force participation and quality of children. In the case of the non-monotonic relation,
increases in female labor force participation are initially accompanied by increases in child quality,
then by reduced investments in children (for intermediary values of female labor force participa-
tion), and then again by increased quality of children. Section 4 discusses the intuition for these
results.




                                                 30
                         Table A.1: Signal of dbf/dT for Different Values of d and σ

                      d\σ 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 0.40 0.45 0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95
                      0.05 +     +   +     +    +   +     +   +    +    +       +   +   +   +    +    +    +    +    +
                      0.10 +     +   +     +    +   +     +   +    +    +       +   +   +   +    +    +    -    +    +
                      0.15 +     +   +     +    +   +     +   +    +    +       +   +   +   +    -    -    +    +    +
                      0.20 +     +   +     +    +   +     +   +    +    +       +   +   -   -    -    +    +    +    +
                      0.25 +     +   +     +    +   +     +   +    +    +       -   -   -   -    +    +    +    +    +
                      0.30 +     +   +     +    +   +     +   +    +        -   -   -   -   +    +    +    +    +    +
                      0.35 +     +   +     +    +   +     -   -    -        -   -   +   +   +    +    +    +    +    +
                      0.40 +     +   +     +    -     -   -   -    -        -   +   +   +   +    +    +    +    +    +
                      0.45 +     -    -    -    -     -   -   -    +    +       +   +   +   +    +    +    +    +    +
                      0.50   -   -    -    -    -   +     +   +    +    +       +   +   +   +    +    +    +    +    +
                      0.55   -   -   +     +    +   +     +   +    +    +       +   +   +   +    +    +    +    +    +
                      0.60 +     +   +     +    +   +     +   +    +    +       +   +   +   +    +    +    +    +    +
                      0.65 +     +   +     +    +   +     +   +    +    +       +   +   +   +    +    +    +    +    +
                      0.70 +     +   +     +    +   +     +   +    +    +       +   +   +   +    +    +    +    +    +
                      0.75 +     +   +     +    +   +     +   +    +    +       +   +   +   +    +    +    +    +    +
                      0.80 +     +   +     +    +   +     +   +    +    +       +   +   +   +    +    +    +    +    +
                      0.85 +     +   +     +    +   +     +   +    +    +       +   +   +   +    +    +    +    +    +
                      0.90 +     +   +     +    +   +     +   +    +    +       +   +   +   +    +    +    +    +    +
                      0.95 +     +   +     +    +   +     +   +    +    +       +   +   +   +    +    +    +    +    +




A.5     The Equilibrium with Market Investments in Children

When investments in children’s basic human capital is done through the market, increases in
longevity reduce the opportunity cost of investments in children, because of a lowered fertility rate
and an expanded budget constraint (higher educational attainment on the part of both members
of the family)
   From the first order conditions in this situation, we can obtain cσ−1 pn = ρhα−1
                                                                                c   (1 − a). Work-
ing with this expression and incorporating the condition for a steady-state (α = σ), we obtain the
following relation between the changes in c, n, and hc .

                                                    dhc   dc dn    1
                                                        =   +           .
                                                    hc    c   n (σ − 1)
In addition, previous results related to educational attainment and fertility hold, so that we have
            T                             dn
ei = li =   2   for i = m, f , and        dT   < 0.
   When T increases, n falls and y increases more then proportionately (y = lm Hm + lf Hf =
Ahp T 2 /2), so either c or xy must increase (from the budget constraint, T c + f n + pxy = y). If c
increases, from the equation above, hc must also increase, so xy grows. If c falls, from the budget
constraint, xy increases, and so does hc . In any case, increases in longevity lead to increases in
investments in children.




                                                                       31
A.6      Child Mortality and the Allocation of Time
Proposition 3 A reduction in the child mortality rate increases the amount of time that the
woman allocates to household activities.

Proof.    A reduction in the child mortality rate reduces the fertility rate (see derivation in the
text). In Figure A.1 from the Appendix, it can be seen that changes in child mortality aﬀect the
function g. The reduction in fertility generated by the child mortality reduction shifts the the
curve g 0 upwards, shifting the optimal point III to the left (increasing the amount of time that
the woman allocates to the household).


References
      Adams, Scott J., 2002, “Educational Attainment and Health: Evidence from a Sample of
      Older Adults,” Education Economics, 10, 97-109.
      Angrist, Joshua D., and Evans, William N., 1998, “Children and their Parents’ Labor Supply:
      Evidence from Exogenous Variation in Family Size,” American Economic Review, 88(3),
      June, 450-77.
      Arendt, Jacob N., 2005, “Does Education Cause Better Health? A Panel Data Analysis
      Using School Reform for Identification,” Economics of Education Review, 24, 149-160.
      Beauchamp, Guy, 1994, “The Functional Analysis of Human Fertility Decisions,” Ethology
      and Sociobiology, 15, 31-53.
      Becker, Gary S., 1985, “Human Capital, Eﬀort, and the Sexual Division of Labor,” Journal
      of Labor Economics, 3, S33-S58.
      Becker, Gary S.; Murphy, Kevin M. and Tamura, Robert, 1990, “Human Capital, Fertility,
      and Economic Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 98(5) (Part 2), Oct., S12-37.
      Becker, Gary S.; Philipson, Tomas J. and Soares, Rodrigo R., 2005, “The Quantity and
      Quality of Life and the Evolution of World Inequality,” American Economic Review, 95(1),
      March, 277-91.
      Bianchi, Suzanne M., 2000, “Maternal Employment and Time with Children: Dramatic
      Change or Surprising Continuity,” Demography, 37(4), November, 401-14.
      Blau, Francine D. and Kahn, Lawrence M., 2000, “Gender Diﬀerences in Pay,” Journal of
      Economic Perspectives, 14(4), Fall, 75-99.
      Cassen, Robert H., 1978, “Current Trends in Population Change and their Causes,” Popu-
      lation and Development Review, 4(2), June, 331-53.
      Cervellati, Matteo and Sunde, Uwe, 2006, “Fertility, Education and Mortality: A Unified
      Theory of the Economic and Demographic Transition,” Unpublished Manuscript, IZA.
      Costa, Dora L., 2000, “From Mill Town to Board Room: The Rise of Women’s Paid Labor,”
      Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14(4), Fall, 101-22.
      Gershuny, Jonathan and Robinson, John P., 1988, “Historical Changes in the Household
      Division of Labor,” Demography, 25(4), November, 537-52.

                                                32
Galor, Oded and Moav, Omer, 2005, “Natural Selection and the Evolution of Life Ex-
pectancy,” Unpublished Manuscript, Brown University.
Galor, Oded and Weil, David N., 1996, “The Gender Gap, Fertility, and Growth,” American
Economic Review, 86(3), Jun., 374-87.
Gauthier, Anne H.; Smeeding, Timothy M. and Furstenberg, Jr., Frank F., 2004, “Are
Parents Investing Less Time in Children? Trends in Selected Industrialized Countries,”
Population and Development Review, 30(4), Dec., 647-71.
Goldin, Claudia and Katz, Lawrence F., 2002, “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives
and Women’s Career and Marriage Decisions,” Journal of Political Economy, 110(4), August,
730-70.
Greenwood, Jeremy; Seshadri, Ananth and Yorukoglu, Mehmet, 2004, “Engines of Libera-
tion,” Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Gronau, Reuben, 1973, “The Eﬀect of Children on the Housewife’s Value of Time,” Journal
of Political Economy, 80, Mar./Apr., S30-S47.
Grossman, Michael, 2000, “The Human Capital Model.” In: Anthony J. Culyer and Joseph
P. Newhouse (editors), Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 1A, Amsterdam, North-
Holland, 347-408.
Heckman, James J., 1978, “A Partial Survey of Recent Research on the Labor Supply
of Women,” American Economic Review, 68(2), Papers and Proceedings of the Ninetieth
Annual Meeting of the AEA, May, 200-07.
Heer, David M., and Smith, Dean O., 1968, “Mortality Level, Desired Family Size, and
Population Increase,” Demography, 5(1), 104-21.
Hotz, V. Joseph and Miller, Robert A., 1988, “An Empirical Analysis of Life-cycle Fertility
and Female Labor Supply,” Econometrica, 56(1), Jan., 91-118.
James-Burdumy, Susanne, 2005, “The Eﬀect of Maternal Labor Force Participation on Child
Development,” Journal of Labor Economics, 23(1), 177-211.
Jones, Larry E.; Manuelli, Rodolfo E. and McGrattan, Ellen R., 2003, “Why are Married
Women Working so Much,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Research Department
Staﬀ Report 317.
Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, 2002, “Does Mortality DEcline Promote Economic Growth?,” Jour-
nal of Economic Growth, 7(4), 411-39.
Kaplan, Hillard S. and Lancaster, Jane B., 2003, “An Evolutionary and Ecological Analysis
of Human Fertility, Mating Patterns, and Parental Investment.” In: Watcher, Kenneth W.
and Bulatao, Rodolfo A. (editors), Oﬀspring — Human Fertility Behavior in a Biodemo-
graphic Perspective, Washington, National Academy Press, 170-223.
Keyfitz, Nathan and Flieger, Wilhelm, 1968, World Population — An Analysis of Vital Data,
Chicago, The University of Chicago Press.
Kirk, Dudley, 1996, “Demographic Transition Theory,” Population Studies, 50(3), Novem-
ber, 361-87.
Lack, David, 1968, Ecological Adaptation for Breeding in Birds, Bristol, Western Printing
Services Ltd.

                                         33
Lagerlöf, Nils-Petter, 2003, “Gender Equality and Long Run Growth,” Journal of Economic
Growth, 8(4), 403-26.
Lleras-Muney, Adriana, 2005, “The Relationship between Education and Adult Mortality in
the United States,” Review of Economic Studies, 72, 189-221.
Leukhina, Oksana M. and Michael Bar, 2006, “Accounting for Labor Force Participation of
Married Women: The Case of the U.S. since 1959,” Unpublished Manuscript, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Mason, Karen O., 1997, “Explaining Fertility Transitions,” Demography, 34(4), November,
443-54.
McLanahan, Sara, 2004, “Diverging Destinies: How Children are Faring under the Second
Demographic Transition,” Demography, 41(4), November, 607-28.
Meltzer, David, 1992, “Mortality Decline, the Demographic Transition, and Economic
Growth,” Ph.D, dissertation, University of Chicago.
Mincer, Jacob, 1962, “Labor Force Participation of Married Women: A Study of Labor Sup-
ply.” In: Harold G. Lewis (ed.), Aspects of Labor Economics, Princeton, Princeton University
Press.
Mulligan, Casey B. and Yona Rubinstein, 2005, “Selection, Investment, and the Women’s
Relative Wages Since 1975,” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Chicago.
National Center for Health Statistics, 2003, National Vital Statistics Reports, 52(3),
(www.cdc.gov /nchs).
O’Hara, Donald, 1975, “Microeconomic Aspects of the Demographic Transition.” Journal of
Political Economy, 83, 1203-1216
Olivetti, Claudia, 2001, “Changes in Women’s Hours of Market Work: The Eﬀect of Chang-
ing Returns to Experience,” Unpublished Manuscript, Brown University.
Preston, Samuel H., 1975, “The Changing Relation between Mortality and Level of Economic
Development,” Population Studies, 29(2), July, 231-48.
Preston, Samuel H., 1980, “Causes and Consequences of Mortality Declines in Less Devel-
oped Countries during the Twentieth Century.” In: Easterlin, Richard S. (editor). Popula-
tion and Economic Change in Developing Countries, Chicago, National Bureau of Economic
Research and The University of Chicago Press, 289-341
Preston, Samuel H., 1984, “Children and the Elderly: Divergent Paths for America’s De-
pendents,” Demography, 21, 435-57.
Robson, Arthur J., 2004, “A ‘Bioeconomic’ View of the Neolithic and Recent Demographic
Transitions,” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Western Ontario.
Robson, Arthur J. and Hillard S. Kaplan, 2003, “The Evolution of Human Life Expectancy
and Intelligence in Hunter-gatherer Economies,” American Economic Review, 93(1), March,
150-69.
Rosenzweig, Mark R. and Schultz, T. Paul, 1985, “The Demand for and Supply of Births,”
American Economic Review, 75(5), December, 992-1015.



                                         34
Sayer, Liana C.; Bianchi, Suzanne M. and Robinson, John P., 2004, “Are Parents Investing
Less in their Children? Trends in Mothers’ and Fathers’ Time with Children,” American
Journal of Sociology, 110(1), July, 1-43.
Simão, Andréa B.; Horta, Cláudia J. and Wajnman, Simone, 2001, “The Eﬀects of La-
bor Force Aging and Female Participation Growth on Income Inequality,” Unpublished
Manuscript, CEDEPLAR.
Smith, Christopher C., and Fretwell, Stephen D., 1974, “The Optimal Balance Between Size
and Number of Oﬀspring,” American Naturalist, July-August, 108(962), 499-506.
Soares, Rodrigo R., 2005, “Mortality Reductions, Educational Attainment, and Fertility
Choice,” American Economic Review, 95(3), June, 580-601.
Soares, Sergei and Izaki, Rejane S., 2002, “A Participação Feminina no Mercado de Tra-
balho,” Instituto de Pesquisa Econômica Aplicada, Texto para Discussão 923.
U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1975, Historical Statistics of the United States, Washington DC.
World Bank, 2004, World Development Indicators, Washington DC.
Wrigley, Edward A.; Davies, R. S.; Oeppen, J. E. and Schofield, Roger S., 1997, English Pop-
ulation History from Family Reconstitution: 1580-1837, Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press.




                                         35
