                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              ESTIMATING INTERDEPENDENCE BETWEEN HEALTH AND
                       EDUCATION IN A DYNAMIC MODEL

                                             Li Gan
                                            Guan Gong

                                    WORKING PAPER 12830
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12830


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2007




This research was partially supported by NICHD grant 1 RO3 HD046892. Comments from Stephen
Trejo and Russ Cooper are appreciated. All remaining errors are ours. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2007 by Li Gan and Guan Gong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Estimating Interdependence Between Health and Education in a Dynamic Model
Li Gan and Guan Gong
NBER Working Paper No. 12830
January 2007
JEL No. C61,I12
                                      ABSTRACT


This paper investigates to what extent and through which channels that health and educational
attainment are interdependent. A dynamic model of schooling, work, health expenditure, and savings
is developed. The structural framework explicitly models two existing hypotheses on the correlation
between health and education. The estimation results strongly support the interdependence between
health and education. In particular, the estimated model indicates that an individual's education,
health expenditure, and previous health status all affect his health status. Moreover, the individual's
health status affects his mortality rate, wage, home production, and academic success. On average,
having been sick before age 21 decreases the individual's education by 1.4 years. Policy experiments
indicate that a health expenditure subsidy would have a larger impact on educational attainment than
a tuition subsidy.


Li Gan
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843-4228
and NBER
gan@econmail.tamu.edu

Guan Gong
Shanghai University
of Finance and Economics
777 Guoding RD, Shanghai
CHINA
ggong@shufe.edu.cn
     1. Introduction
     The highly positive correlation between health and education has been well
documented in numerous literatures.1 This finding is robust even after controlling for
different measures of socio-economic status, such as income and race, and regardless of
whether health levels are measured by mortality rates, self-reported health status, or
physiological indicators of health.
     This paper studies the existing two competing explanations of this correlation.2 The
first explanation argues that education improves health by raising economic conditions in
per capita income so that a higher expenditure in health is possible and/or by increasing
knowledge of health issues (Grossman 1975, Kenkel 1991, Rosenzweig and Schultz
1991). This explanation suggests that more education is the cause of better health. The
second explanation argues the reverse causality, i.e., better health results in more
education; healthier students may be more efficient in studying (Perri 1984, Currie and
Hyson 1999). Better health may also increase the demand for education because of longer
life expectancy (Gan and Gong 2004).
     Clearly, these two explanations may not be mutually exclusive. The purpose of this
paper is to study to what extent and through which channels that health and educational
attainment are interdependent. In this paper, we estimate a dynamic programming model
of joint decisions of young men on schooling, work, health expenditure, and savings. The
structural framework explicitly models the correlations between health and education in
the existing theoretical hypotheses, and thus the structural approach provides us a
possibility to evaluate relative importance of alternative hypotheses. Moreover, the
estimated model is used to evaluate the effects of policies such as financial support in
health expenditure and/or in college education on an individual’s health, education, and
wealth.
     Previous empirical studies on the correlation between health and education are
typically based on the models with a static setting. The static setting creates at least two

1
  See Grossman and Kaestner (1997) for an extensive review.
2
  A third explanation argues the existence of a “third factor” that affects both health and education in
the same direction. For example, Fuchs (1982) states that time discount rates could be an explanation
for the correlation between health and education: patient people would highly value future income and
health -- and thereafter invest more in education and spend more time and money on activities related
to health -- while impatient people would invest less in education and health.


                                                                                                       2
problems. First, since schooling and health are inherently endogenous, finding proper and
reliable instruments for either health or schooling is often difficult. Second, a typical
static model will have difficulty describing individuals who may have distinctive paths
even if they experience similar shocks. For example, a low academic ability creates a
higher risk of reaping the wage benefits of schooling and a higher probability of failing a
grade. When facing a negative health shock, an individual with a lower academic ability
may choose to drop out of school. His path in consumption, health status, and working,
therefore, may differ systematically from those who have high academic abilities but
have similar negative health shocks.
     This paper develops a dynamic model with an uncertain environment. The model
allows for heterogeneity among youth aged 16 in market skills, study skills, and health
status.3 The heterogeneity may be either innate or a result of prior parental and youth
investment behavior. The model contains a number of channels that can account for
interactive effects between health and educational attainment. First, the model allows the
possibility that education may affect the chance of getting sick, as more educated people
are more efficient producers of health.4 In addition, since an individual’s wage depends
on his education, the individual’s education has an indirect effect on his health
expenditure. Therefore, in both cases, more education may lead to better health.
     Second, health is assumed to affect academic performance. The probability for an
individual to pass or fail a grade depends not only on his academic ability but also on his
health. Here, better health improves the productivity of the study and hence increases the
educational attainment. Similarly, the model also assumes that health affects
productivities at work and at home and therefore affects wages at work and output in
home production.
     Third, health is assumed to affect future survival rate. Sickness decreases the survival
rate and thus reduces the effective time discount rate, which may result in less school


3
  The sample selection of respondents above age 16 is based on the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA).
4
  The efficiency effect, discussed in detail by Grossman (1999), can take two forms: productive
efficiency and allocative efficiency. Productive efficiency pertains to a situation in which the more
educated obtain a larger health output from given amounts of endogenous (choice) inputs. Allocative
efficiency pertains to a situation in which schooling increases information about the true effects of the
input on health (Kenkel 2000). Allocative efficiency will improve health to the extent that it leads to
the selection of a better input mix.


                                                                                                        3
attendance since the individual values his current consumption higher at the expense of
his investment in the future. Although a reduction in survival rate and thus a reduction in
effective time discount rate may be viewed as the third factor (Fuchs 1982, also see
footnote #2) that reduces both health and education, the reduction in survival rate is still
caused by health.
    Finally, the individual’s future health status is dependent on his past and current
health statuses. The individual is assumed to be constantly at risk of sickness. Current
health status affects future health because it indicates an individual’s physical and mental
constitution and therefore implies future health. Grossman (1972) suggests health to be a
stock variable. Allowing past and current health statuses to affect future health status
captures an important aspect of health as a stock variable.
    The model is estimated using data from the 1979 youth cohort of the National
Longitudinal Surveys of Youth (NLSY79). For a representative sample of youth
beginning at age 16, the data set provides longitudinal information on school enrollment,
grade transcripts, work status, wages, assets, sickness, and the duration of sickness.
    Estimation of the model strongly supports the interdependence between health and
education because the coefficients that correspond to two hypotheses are all significantly
estimated. In particular, the estimated sickness function indicates that an individual’s
probability of being sick is affected by his education, his health expenditure, and his
previous health status. Moreover, health has a substantial effect on an individual’s
mortality rate, wages, home production, and academic success in school. Indeed, health
plays an extremely important role in determining an individual’s educational attainment.
On average, having been sick before the age of 21 decreases education by 1.4 years.
    Finally, the estimated model is used to perform two policy experiments: a direct
college tuition subsidy and a high school health expenditure subsidy. To assess the
efficiency of the policies, we let these two experiments have the same per capita cost. The
results reveal that a health expenditure subsidy would have a larger impact on educational
attainment than a direct college tuition subsidy. More specifically, a direct health
expenditure subsidy of $2,100 increases education by 24.3% more than a tuition subsidy
of the similar cost. In addition, a direct college tuition subsidy will favor healthy
individuals, especially those healthy and having low academic ability, while a subsidy of



                                                                                               4
high school health expenditure will favor sick individuals, especially those sick and
having high academic ability.
    Since the NLSY does not contain direct observations on health expenditure, the
model has to infer the amounts of health expenditures from the individuals’ trajectories of
asset accumulations and their choice decisions, such as work and school attendance. A
key assumption for identifying the unobserved health expenditures is that only the
individuals whose incomes are above a minimum level have health expenditure. Below
this minimum level, the individual’s primary concern is the consumption of necessary
commodities. The minimum income level is exogenous to the individual, although it is
estimated as a parameter in the structure model. Therefore, it is possible to identify the
health expenditure by comparing the different paths of asset accumulation among
high-income groups who spend on health and low-income groups who do not.
    The estimation of the model applies the recently developed method of generalized
indirect inference (GII) (Gourieroux, Monfort, and Renault, 1993; Keane and Smith,
2003). Typically, dynamic discrete choice models are estimated using maximum
likelihood (ML) or method of moments (MOM). When the number of alternatives is large,
evaluation of choice probability required by ML or MOM is computationally burdensome,
because the choice probability is a high dimensional integral over stochastic factors that
affect the individual’s utility at each alternative. In addition, unobserved initial conditions,
unobserved state variables, and variables with missing data may also create
computational problems. In this paper, many initial conditions and state variables are
unobserved. Asset information for 1979 -1984 and 1991 and transcript records beyond
high school are missing.
    Indirect inference provides a practical simulation-based approach to the estimation of
dynamic discrete (or discrete/continuous) choice models with a large number of
alternatives. This approach builds on the indirect inference, the idea of which is to use a
rather simple descriptive statistical model to summarize the statistical properties of the
observed data and the simulated data from the structural economic model. The method
then chooses the structural parameters so that the coefficients of the descriptive statistical
model in the simulated data match as closely as possible with those in the observed data.
Since indirect inference is based on simulated data, it avoids the need to construct the



                                                                                              5
choice probabilities generated by the model. However, the implementation of indirect
inference in a discrete choice model encounters a serious problem because of the
non-smooth objective function. GII overcomes this obstacle by using a continuous
function with a smoothing parameter of the latent utilities as the dependent variable in the
descriptive statistical model. As the smoothing parameter goes to zero, this function
delivers the discrete choice implied by the latent utilities, and therefore guarantees
consistency of the estimated parameters.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model, its basic structure,
solution method, estimation method, and parameterization. Section 3 describes the data.
Section 4 presents the estimation results and describes the policy applications. Section 5
concludes the paper.


2. Model
    The model corresponds to the decision problem of a young man beginning at age 16.
At each period, he decides to be in one of three states: working, schooling, or staying at
home. In addition, he will decide the amounts of health expenditure and saving. This
section presents the structure of the model with the environment settings, the solution of
the model, and the estimation method.


2.1. Basic structure
2.1.1. Choice set
    The element of an individual’s choice set at each age t consists of a combination of
activity choice d t1 , asset d t2 d11,t , and health expenditure d t3 . The individual chooses

one of three states: working, schooling, or staying at home. The activity choice vector d t1

hence has three dummy variables: d11,t = 1 if the individual chooses to work at period t,

otherwise d11,t = 0 ; d 21,t and d 31,t correspond to going to school or staying at home.
                                                               3
Their values are similarly defined as d11,t . At each age t,   ∑d
                                                               j =1
                                                                      1
                                                                      j ,t   = 1.

    In addition, the individual at each age will choose level of asset. To improve the
tractability of the problem, the continuous asset level is discretized into K fixed number


                                                                                                 6
of discrete levels of saving,         {ΔA , ΔA ,K , ΔA }, where
                                          1     2          K
                                                                               A is the level of asset, and

ΔAt +1 = At +1 − (1 + r )At . The asset choice vector d t2 includes K mutually exclusive
                     K
alternatives, with   ∑d
                     k =1
                            2
                            k ,t   = 1 , i.e., d k2,t = 1 if ΔA k is chosen, otherwise d k2,t = 0 . Thus,

in this setup, the feasible asset may only grow with age t. It is necessary to note that net
borrowing is not ruled out since ΔA may be less than zero.
    Finally, the continuous health expenditure is also divided into the M fixed number of
discrete levels that are not less than zero:         {h , h
                                                       1       2
                                                                   ,K , h M }. Denote 1×M vector d t3 as
                                                                      M
the decision on the level of health expenditure with                  ∑d
                                                                      k =1
                                                                             3
                                                                             m ,t   = 1 , i.e., d m3 ,t = 1 if h m is

chosen, otherwise d m3 ,t = 0 .

    In summary, given the three choice vectors d t1 , d t2 , and d t3 , the number of the
individual’s choice set at each age t is 3×K×M.


2.1.2. Environment settings
    In order to understand how the individual chooses alternatives in response to the
current information set and stochastic shocks, it is useful to first describe the environment
settings.
    Individuals differ in their skill endowments, health statuses, and schoolings. At each
age, individuals make choices among mutually exclusive and exhaustive alternatives on
activity choices of school, work, or home, on net saving, and on health expenditure. The
current health statuses and the current incomes from work and home have stochastic
elements that are known to the individuals prior to the current-period decision but are
unknown prior to the beginning of the current period. Although the individuals do not
know if they will succeed in school before making the decision of whether or not to
attend school, they know the probability of passing or failing the grade. Individuals may
take divergent paths of schoolings, work, home, saving, and health expenditures because
of the cumulative effects of various shocks, and because they have heterogeneous skill
endowments and heterogeneous initial health status.
    Figure 1 illustrates the order in which stochastic shocks happen and the timing of an


                                                                                                                        7
individual’s choices on alternatives. At the beginning of age t, the individual’s health
status (sick or healthy) is known, and the random shocks to wage and home production
are realized. Then the individual chooses alternatives from among a combination of
activity choices, the levels of saving, and the levels of health expenditure. If he is in
school, the individual will receive a shock for the grade, which will impact his passing or
failing the grade. At the end of period t, the agent will get a health shock, which, together
with his prior educational attainment and current health expenditure, will determine his
health at age t+1. The whole pattern at age t is repeated at age t+1.


2.1.3. Dynamic programming
    At each period t, the individual is assumed to maximize the present discounted value
of lifetime utility from age 16 (t =1) to a known terminal age, t = T. The value function is
given by:
                                          ⎡T                        ⎤
                         Vt (Ωt ) = Max E ⎢∑ δ s −t u (c s )Ps|t Ωt ⎥ ,                             (1)
                                          ⎣ s =t                    ⎦
where E is the expectation operator, δ is the subjective time discount factor, and
u (c s ) = c 1s− ρ / (1 − ρ ) is the contemporary utility at age s. Ps|t is the conditional survival

rate at age s based on the information set at age t. The information set Ωt, known at the
beginning of age t, includes age, educational attainment, working experience, health,
accumulated assets, and contemporaneous shocks from wage and home production. The
maximization of the objective function (1) is achieved by choices of the optimal sequence
of feasible control variables      {d   1
                                        s   , d s2 , d s3 }, given current realizations of health and grade
shocks.
    The budget constraint for the individual is given by:
                 ct + ΔAt +1 = wt d 11,t + et d 31,t − ec * I (edu t > 12 ) * d 21,t − ht ,               (2)

where wt is wage, et is home production including compensation for not working, and ht
is the health expenditure. edu is the level of educational attainment. The cost of education,
denoted as ec, is assumed to be zero when edu is less than 12 years (completion of high
school). Note that in this paper, educational attainment and years of schooling are two
different concepts. Years of schooling are the total years that the individual has attended



                                                                                                              8
school, while educational attainment is the effective years of schooling, i.e., the total
years of schooling minus the number of grades that an individual fails.
    Health expenditure, such as spending on appropriate nutrition, vacation, and health
clubs, affects an individual’s survival. To make the model tractable, we do not model the
individual’s choice decision on health insurance and its subsequent effect on an
individual’s behavior.5 As stated above, the identification of health expenditure comes
from a threshold of income. Only after the income is larger than this threshold will the
individual spend on health. More specifically, let NIB be the income boundary, such that
the health expenditure is strictly positive, if rAt + wt d11,t + et d 31,t > NIB , and zero

otherwise.
    Initial conditions at each age include health status, the level of educational attainment
and the years of work experience at the beginning of the age. The level of asset
accumulation up to the age is also part of the initial conditions. Both work experience and
the level of asset at age 16 are assumed to be zero.


2.1.4. Probability of sickness
    Health status in the next decision horizon is uncertain. The latent health status at age
t+1, denoted as H t*+1 , depends on his age, his present health expenditure, ht, his
educational attainment, edut, and his health status at age t. Define:
               H t*+1 = β1 aget +1 + β 2 ht + β 3 edu t +1 + Dt (β 4 + β 5 sl t ) + ε tS+1 ,     (3)

where ε tS+1 is the serially independent standard normal distribution. If the agent is not
sick at age t, i.e., Dt = 0, all his previous sick years will have no impact on his health
status at age t+1. However, if the agent is sick, Dt = 1, the number of continuous sick
years up to age t, denoted as slt, may affect his health status at age t+1.6 The parameter
β3 reflects the idea that more educated people may have better knowledge of health issues
and thereby refrain from activities that are harmful to health. Then:

5
  Insured and uninsured people show many differences in behaviors related to health, including
seatbelt use, diet, and exercise. Moreover, both the supply and demand for insurance depend on health
status, which confounds the causal effect between insurance coverage and health. Indeed, evidence
that access to health insurance causes better health is limited (Newhouse 1993; Levy and Meltzer,
2001).
6
  Equation (9.5) shows how the value of slt is calculated.


                                                                                                    9
                                         sick or Dt+1 = 1 if H t*+1 > 0 ,

                                      not sick or Dt+1 = 0 if H t*+1 ≤ 0 .

      Note H t*+1 in (3) is related to but different from the health capital of Grossman

(1972). To model Grossman’s health capital, H t*+1 would have to depend on H t* . Since

both H t*+1 and H t* are unobserved, such a model would be difficult to estimate. Instead,
we use an observed binary variable Dt and an accumulative stock variable slt to
approximate H t* . Compared with the effect of the most current health status Dt, our
estimation results show that the effect of slt is very small.


2.1.5. Survival rate
      Health, which is measured by the dummy of sickness, Dt, and the duration of prior
sickness, slt, affects the individual’s survival rate. The mortality rate mt is assumed to be:
                          Pt +1 − Pt ⎧mˆ t e α 0 + Dt (α1 +α 2 slt ) ,   if mˆ t e α 0 + Dt (α1 +α 2 slt ) < 1
                 mt ≡ −             =⎨                                                                           ,   (4)
                               Pt    ⎩                        1,         otherwise

where m̂t is the mortality rate of the life table at age t. Parameters α0, α1 and α2 measure
the effect of health status on the individual’s mortality if the individual was sick at the
current age. Both α1 and α2 are expected to be positive. The mortality rate function in (3)
implies that if the agent recovers from a previous period of illness, his current mortality
risk will not be affected by his sickness during the previous period. However, if he is
currently sick, the number of continuous sick years up to the current age will affect his
current mortality risk. The survival rate at t, conditional on being alive at s, can thereby
be written as:
                            ⎧ s −1
                            ⎪ (1 − m j ),
                     Ps|t = ⎨∏
                                                            as s > t
                               j =t
                                                                                                                     (5)
                            ⎪⎩      1,                      as s = t.

      Note here that the identification of the mortality difference between the sick and the
healthy is not from mortality risks at the individual levels. The current sample is too
small to have enough observed deaths to allow reliable estimates.7 Rather, the

7
    From 1979 to 1994, there were only 19 deaths in the sample.


                                                                                                                       10
identification comes from implied behavioral difference that leads to observed difference
in outcomes.


2.1.6. Passing or failing a grade
    When an individual is in school, he may pass or fail a grade. The individual may be a
high study type (denoted as 1) or a low study type (denoted as 2). Whether he passes or
fails a grade is assumed to depend on his study type; the duration of his previous sickness
may also affect his school performance if he is currently sick. Let Φt* be the latent
academic performance variable,
                               2
                      Φt* = ∑ ξ 0 k I (study type = k ) + Dt (ξ1 + ξ 2 sl t ) + ε tG .          (6)
                              k =1


    The serially independent random shock ε tG follows a standard normal distribution.8
Then:
                                                pass if Φt* > 0 ,

                                                fail if Φt* ≤ 0 .
    In (6), the coefficients ζ1 and ζ2 are both expected to be negative since health may
negatively affect the individuals’ education attainment by affecting the quality of
learning.


2.1.7. Wage
    Assume that wage is a logarithm function of educational attainment (or effective
schooling years), edut, work skill type (high or low), work experience, ept, which is
measured by cumulative years worked, age, health, and idiosyncratic shock ε tw :
                      2
            ln wt = ∑ γ 0 k I (skill type = k ) + γ 1edu t + γ 2 ept + γ 3 ept2 + γ 4 aget
                     k =1                                                                      (7)
                     + Dt (γ 5 + γ 6 slt ) + γ 7 I (ept = ept −1 ) + ε tw ,
where the parameter γ7 is the adjustment cost if the individual didn’t work in the previous
period. Skill types enter into the wage function to reflect the effect of different market

8
  The unobserved random variable may include the individual’s level of motivation in study and the
quality of the teacher.


                                                                                                     11
skills on wages. Again, we assume that the duration of his previous sickness may affect
his wages if he is currently sick.


2.1.8. Home production
     The output of home production is unobserved to econometricians, but observed to the
individuals. Any output that the individual produces to lower the household expenditure
and any compensation he may receives when staying at home are included as the output
of home production. To make it simple, the home production function is assumed to only
depend on an individual’s health:
                             et = e + Dt (φ1 + φ 2 sl t ) + ε te ,                                               (8)

where e is constant and φ1 and φ2 are coefficients of health status. The shocks to the
wage equation (7) ε tw and ε te in (8) are serially independent and follow normal

                       ( )                   ( )                       (
distributions. Var ε tw = σ w2 , Var ε te = σ e2 , and Cov ε tw , ε te = σ we
                                                                           2
                                                                              . )

2.1.9. Evolution of the state space variables
     The state space of this dynamic programming model at age t is:
       {                                                     }
Ω t = edu t , ept , At , Dt , sl t , d t1−1 , d t2−1 , d t3−1 , ε tw , ε te . Note that both the grade shock ε tG and

the health shock ε tS are not included in the state space. As described in the environment

settings and in Figure 1, ε tG is only certain to the individual after the choice decision on

school attendance has been made. The health shock ε tS , on the other hand, is known to the
individual prior to the state decisions and its information is reflected in the sickness
dummy, Dt.
     It is important to describe how the elements of the state space evolve. We only
describe the first five elements of the state space. The evolution of the rest elements is
either obvious or independent across years. We start with edut. The individual’s education
level increases by one year at age t+1 if and only if he attends school at age t and he
passes the grade, i.e.,
                     ⎧edu + 1,         attendingschool and passingthe grade
           edut +1 = ⎨ t                                                                                 (9.1)
                     ⎩ edut ,                                    otherwise



                                                                                                                   12
     As noted earlier, the years of education is different from the years of schooling. An
individual’s education is increased by one year if he passes the grade.
     The individual’s working experience ept+1 increases by one year if and only if he
works at age t:
          ept +1 = ept + d 11,t .                                                       (9.2)

     The individual’s asset at t+1 is the sum of his asset at the beginning of age t and his
choice of asset level at age t:
                                    K
          At +1 = (1 + r )At + ∑ ΔA k d k2,t ;                                          (9.3)
                                    k =1

     As illustrated in Figure 1, the sickness dummy at age t+1, Dt+1, takes value at the end
of t+1, after the choice on health expenditure at t and the education at t+1 occur (see
equation (3) and Figure 1).
                  ⎧1, if sick
          Dt +1 = ⎨                                                                    (9.4)
                  ⎩0, if not sick.
     The variable slt measures the duration of the current sickness up to age t (not
including age t). In particular, slt+1 has the following form:
          sl t +1 = Dt (slt + Dt ).                                                    (9.5)
     From equation (9.5), slt+1=0 if Dt = 0. Suppose the individual is sick at age t and age
t-1, but not sick at age t-2, then his slt+1=1.


2.2. Solution method
     The maximization problem is set into a dynamic programming framework. The value
function can be written as the maximum over alternative-specific value functions, each of
which obeys the Bellman equation:
                                                 {       }
                           Vt (Ωt ;Ψ ) = max Vt i (Ωt ;Ψ )
                                           i∈Γ
                                                                                          (10)

where Ψ is the parameter set of the structural model. Γ is the Cartesian product set of
alternatives Ζ = d 1 × d 2 × d 3 , which consists of 3 × K × M elements. The value function
of the ith alternative, Vt i (Ωt ;Ψ ) , is given by:




                                                                                               13
                                                         [
        Vt i (Ωt ;Ψ ) = u i (Ωt ;Ψ ) + δ (1 − mt ) E Vt +1 (Ωt +1 ;Ψ ) Ωt , Ζ it = 1                      ]
                                                                         (                                    )
                                                                                                                                     (11)
                      ≡ u i (Ωt ;Ψ ) + δ (1 − mt ) E max t Ωt +1 ;Ψ Ωt , Ζ it = 1 .                                           t <T

        The terminal value function of the ith alternative is given by:
                                                         [
        VTi (Ωt ;Ψ ) = u i (ΩT ;Ψ ) + δ (1 − mT )E VT*+1 (ΩT +1 ;Ψ ) ΩT , Z Ti = 1 .                              ]       t =T       (12)

        In both (11) and (12), ui(Ωt;Ψ) represents the contemporary utility if the ith
alternative is chosen (i.e. Z ti = 1 ). VT*+1 is the terminal function and will be discussed
later. The Emaxt function in (11) depends whether attending school or not. In particular:
        If schooling is not chosen at age t, i.e, d 21,t = 0 , then:

                          (              )[
          E max t = Prt sick Ωt , Ζ it = 1 E Vt +1 (Ωt +1 ;Ψ ) Ωt , Ζ it = 1, sick                        ]
                     + Pr (healthy Ω , Ζ = 1)E [V                                                                             ]
                                                                                                                                     (13)
                                                             t +1 (Ωt +1 ;Ψ ) Ωt , Ζ t           = 1, healthy .
                                                 i                                   i
                             t               t   t


          If schooling is chosen, i.e. d 21,t = 1 , then:

               (                ) (                )[                                    ]
E max t = Prt pass Ωt , Ζ it = 1 Prt sick Ωt , Ζ it = 1 E Vt +1 (Ωt +1 ;Ψ ) Ωt , Ζ it = 1, pass, sick
          + Pr ( fail Ω , Ζ = 1)Pr (sick Ω , Ζ = 1)E [V (Ω ;Ψ ) Ω , Ζ = 1, fail , sick ]
               t         t
                                 i
                                 t       t           t
                                                         i
                                                         t                   t +1      t +1           t
                                                                                                                  i
                                                                                                                  t

          + Pr ( pass Ω , Ζ = 1)Pr (healthy Ω , Ζ = 1)E [V (Ω ;Ψ ) Ω , Ζ = 1, pass, healthy ]
               t             t
                                     i
                                     t       t               t
                                                                     i
                                                                     t               t +1      t +1                   t
                                                                                                                              i
                                                                                                                              t

          + Pr ( fail Ω , Ζ = 1)Pr (healthy Ω , Ζ = 1)E [V (Ω ;Ψ ) Ω , Ζ = 1, fail , healthy ],
               t         t
                                 i
                                 t       t               t
                                                                 i
                                                                 t                  t +1      t +1                t
                                                                                                                          i
                                                                                                                          t

                                                                                                                                      (14)
     Given the finite horizon, the solution method is conducted through backward
recursion. The difficulty with this procedure is the well-known “curse of dimensionality”
problem. When the dimension of the state space and the choice set are large, the solution
of the model becomes computationally intractable. This is particularly true in the present
structural model, since the choice set d1× d2× d3 at each age contains 405 (3×15×9)
elements.9 As the time horizon increases, the state space increases exponentially. To deal
with this problem, we adopt an approximation method in Keane and Wolpin (1994).
     Specifically, at each age t, we first compute the Emaxt function at a randomly
selected subset of 200 state space points. For each of these state space points, we use the
Monte Carlo integration to simulate the required multivariate integrals to obtain its Emaxt

9
  Fifteen possible values for net asset savings are + (7,500, 5,000, 3,000, 2,000, 1,000, 500) and 0,
10,000 and 15,000). Nine possible values for health expenditure are 0, 250, 500, 750, 1,000, 1,500,
3,000, 5,000, 7,500.


                                                                                                                                            14
value. Next, we estimate a polynomial regression function using these state space points.
The functional form of the polynomial, denoted as E max t , is given by:

E max t = λt01 + λt02 I (study type is high ) + λt03 I (work type is high ) + Dt (λ1t + λt2 sl t )
      + λt3 edu t + λt4 edu t2 + λt5 At + λt6 At2 + λt7 ept + λ8t ept2
      + λt9 edut I (study type is high ) + λ10
                                            t
                                               edu t I (work type is high )                          (15.1)
      + λ11
         t
            At I (study type is high ) + λ12
                                          t
                                             At I (work type is high )
      + λ13
         t
            ept I (study type is high ) + λ14
                                           t
                                              ept I (work type is high ).
    Finally, the Emaxt values at other non-simulated state space points are interpolated
by using the predicted values based on estimated coefficients from the regression in
(15.1). The process is repeated for each age, and the coefficients in (15.1) are
age-dependent.
    Solving the maximum problem requires specifying the terminal condition. The
terminal age, T = 31, is the maximum age of individuals in the sample. We use the
polynomial form of the Emax function in (15.1) at the terminal age T as the terminal
condition. Since a different set of parameters is necessary, we explicitly list the terminal
condition in (15.2):
  VT*+1 = τ 01 + τ 02 I (study type is high ) + τ 03 I (work type is high ) + DT +1 (τ 1 + τ 2 slT +1 )
         + τ 3 eduT +1 + τ 4 eduT2 +1 + τ 5 AT +1 + τ 6 AT2+1 + τ 7 epT +1 + τ 8 epT2 +1
         + τ 9 eduT +1 I (study type is high ) + τ 10 eduT +1 I (work type is high )
         + τ 11 AT +1 I (study type is high ) + τ 12 AT +1 I (work type is high )
         + τ 13 epT +1 I (study type is high ) + τ 14 epT +1 I (work type is high ).
                                                                                                  (15.2)
      The parameters of this terminal function are estimated along with the structural
parameters of the model.


2.3. Estimation method
    For any given set of structural parameters, one can simulate the outcomes of the
model. A typical statistical estimation method obtains a set of parameters that directly
matches the predicted outcomes with the observed outcomes. However, when the number
of possible outcomes is large, it is often numerically very difficult to predict probabilities
of each outcome because of the problem of high-dimensional integration. The approach



                                                                                                              15
of indirect inference (Gourieroux, Monfort, and Renault, 1993) first selects a simple
descriptive statistical model. Instead of directly matching predicted outcomes and
observed outcomes, the approach indirectly matches the coefficient estimates of the
descriptive model from the simulated data with the ones from the observed data. By
doing so, this approach avoids the problem of predicting probabilities of outcomes, since
the simulated outcomes can be directly obtained because random draws are known to
econometricians in each simulation. The application of GII (Keane and Smith, 2003) to
estimate the dynamic programming problem in (10) can be implemented in four stages.
This subsection describes the four-stage estimation method in detail.


2.3.1 Stage 1: Estimate the descriptive statistical model using the observed data.
    The criteria for choosing an appropriate descriptive statistical model are
computational tractability and statistical efficiency which it can provide a good
description of the data. The linear probability models, as suggested by Keane and Smith
(2003), fit the criteria precisely.
    Denote     {yit }iN=1 , t = 1,K, T   as the observed choices and outcomes for individual i
and time t. The observed activity choices include working, attending school, or staying at
home. The outcomes include passing/failing the grade, healthy/sick status, wages, and
assets. Because some variables have missing data, and some state variables are
unobserved, the content of yit may be different across both individuals and ages. The
descriptive statistical model is given by:
                                 y it = xitη t + υ t , υ t ~ iidN (0, ∑ t ) ,                 (16)

where xt is the vector of regressors, and θt = (ηt, Σt) is the set of parameters to be
estimated. The details of selections of dependent variables yit and independent variables
xit by age category are described in the Appendix.
    Denote the likelihood function of the descriptive statistical model as

L( y; z , Θ ) = ∏i =1 ∏t =1 l ( y it ; xit , θ t ) , where z is the observed exogenous initial variables,
                  N     T



including health status, educational attainment, working experience, and assets. The
initial values of both working experience and assets are zero. Let Θ be the parameter set
{θ t }Tt=1 . The first step is to find the set of parameters that maximizes the likelihood


                                                                                                            16
function of the descriptive statistical model:
                              Θˆ = arg max L( y; z, Θ ) .                                   (17)
                                          Θ




2.3.2 Stage 2: Simulate the outcomes from the structural model
     We simulate the choices made for each individual from age 16 to 31. Given the
initial condition z and a set of structural parameters Ψ, the structural model can be used

to generate statistically independent simulated data sets {~
                                                           y itf (Ψ )}i =1 , where f = 1, …, F,
                                                                      N



t = 1, …, T; N is the number of observations in each data set, and F is the total number
of data sets. The vector of ~
                            y and y consist of the same type of elements, such as state
                                 it       it


decisions (school, work, or home, d t1 ), indicators for passing a grade, sickness Dt, wages

wt, and assets At. The data sets ~    {     N
                                               }
                                 y itf (Ψ ) i =1   are generated based on the above described
solution method of the simulation and interpolation for computing Emax. Each of the F
simulated data sets is constructed using the same set of observed exogenous individuals’
initial variable z. The difference of each simulated data set results solely from the
different sequences of error draws, which are held fixed for different values of the
parameter Ψ.


2.3.3 Stage 3: Estimate the descriptive statistical model using the simulated data
     Each of the simulated data sets can then be applied to estimate the descriptive
statistical model of (16). However, it is not computationally practical to simply plug in
the simulated discrete variables into the descriptive statistical model because of the
non-smooth objective function (actually, its surface is a step function).10 Applying the
idea of GII proposed in Keane and Smith (2003), we use a series of functions of latent
utility to substitute the discrete choice variables. More specifically, we use the function



10
   The reason for the difficulty in practice is discussed in detail in Keane and Smith (2003): “small
changes in the structural parameters Ψ will cause the simulated data jump discretely and such a
discrete change caused the parameters of the descriptive model fit to the simulated data to jump
discretely. This jump, in turn causes the metric of distance between the descriptive models estimated
on the observed and simulated data to jump discretely too. The algorithms to deal with the
minimization of a non-smooth function perform very poorly.”


                                                                                                    17
                             ~                     ∑ exp(V (Ω ;Ψ ) / λ )
                                                                  t
                                                                          j
                                                                              t

                             d11,t (Ψ ; λ ) =
                             ~                     j∈Ξ1

                                                   ∑ exp(V (Ω ;Ψ ) / λ )
                                                                      j
                                                                                         (18)
                                                                  t           t
                                                   j∈Γ

                      ~
in place of simulated d11,t , where Ξ1 is a subset of Γ and consists of all the alternatives in

which job participation is chosen, and λ is the smooth parameter. The functions
Vt j (Ω t ;Ψ ) are defined in (11) and (12). Because the latent utilities are smooth functions
                        ~
of the parameter set Ψ, d11,t (Ψ ; λ ) is also a smooth function of Ψ. Moreover, as the
                        ~

                                 ~
smooth parameter λ goes to zero, d11,t (Ψ ; λ ) goes to 1 if an alternative with job
                                 ~

participation has the highest latent utility and to zero otherwise.
    Similarly, we use the function

                       ~                   ∑ exp(V (Ω ;Ψ ) / λ )
                                                          1
                                                              j
                                                                      t

                       d 21,t (Ψ ; λ ) =
                       ~                   j∈Ξ 2

                                           ∑ exp(V (Ω ;Ψ ) / λ )
                                                              j
                                                                                         (19)
                                                          1           t
                                            Γ

                      ~
in place of simulated d 21,t , where subset Ξ 2 consists of all the alternatives in which
                                                                     ~
school attendance is chosen. As the smooth parameter λ goes to zero, d 21,t (Ψ ; λ ) goes to
                                                                     ~

1 if an alternative with school attendance has the highest latent utility and to zero
otherwise.
    Wages are observed if and only if the individuals worked during that period. To make
the simulated wage match the observed wage, we apply the observed wage for those
individuals who worked during that period, and set the wage to zero for those individuals
                                             ~
who did not work during that period. We use d11,t (Ψ ; λ )w
                                                          ~ (Ψ ) in place of the simulated
                                             ~
                                                           it

                          ~
     ~ (Ψ ) . Since both d~ 1 (Ψ ; λ ) and w
wage w                                     ~ (Ψ ) are smooth functions of Ψ,           the
      it                   1,t              it


estimated parameters of the descriptive statistical model using the simulated data are also
smooth functions of Ψ. Moreover, as the smoothing parameter λ goes to 0,
 ~
d11,t (Ψ ; λ )w
              ~ (Ψ ) goes to w
                             ~ (Ψ ) if an alternative with job participation choice has the
 ~
               it             it


highest latent utility and to zero otherwise.
    Furthermore, because the sickness dummy is a discrete variable, it needs to be



                                                                                                18
substituted by a continuous function. We use:
                                      ~
                                      Dt +1 (Ψ ; λ ) =
                                      ~                        (
                                                         exp H t*+1 (Ψ ) / λ    )
                                                                   (
                                                       1 + exp H t*+1 (Ψ ) / λ      )                               (20)

in place of simulated Dt +1 . The latent variable H t*+1 (Ψ ) (20) is defined in equation (3).
                      ~

Thus, as the smooth parameter λ goes to 0, Dt +1 (Ψ , λ ) goes to 1 if H t*+1 > 0
                                           ~
                                                                                                            and to
zero otherwise.
    Finally, according to the same reason for the discrete variable of sickness, we use the
                                  (              )[
continuous function exp Φt* (Ψ ) / λ 1 + exp Φt* (Ψ ) / λ   (              )]       in place of the indicator for

passing a grade, where the latent variable Φt* (Ψ ) is defined in equation (6).

    Denote    {~~y f
                  it   (Ψ ; λ )}i =1 , t = 1, …, T, and f = 1, …, F as the modified simulated data
                              N



smoothed by using the functions of the latent utilities. The descriptive statistical model
then can be estimated using each of the simulated smoothed data to obtain the following
parameters:
                                      ~                        ~f
                                      Θ f (Ψ ; λ ) = arg max L ~
                                      ~
                                                           Θ
                                                                       (
                                                               y (Ψ ; z ); x, Θ .        )                      (21)
                                                   ~             F ~
    Let the average of the estimated parameters be Θ (Ψ ; λ ) = ∑ f =1 Θ f (Ψ ; λ ) / F . As the
                                                   ~                   ~

                                                                             ~
sample size N goes to large and the smooth parameter λ goes to small (zero), Θ (Ψ ; λ )
                                                                             ~

converges to a nonstochastic “binding” function H(Ψ) (Gourieroux, Monfort, and Renault
1993 and Keane and Smith, 2003). The next step of the GII is to get an estimate Ψ̂ of
                                        ~
the structural parameters so as to make Θ (Ψ ; λ ) and Θ̂ as close as possible.
                                        ~



2.3.3 Stage 4: Estimate the set of structural parameters Ψ.
    Estimates of the structural parameter Ψ can be obtained by minimizing a metric
                                                      ~
function that measures the distance between Θ̂ and Θ (Ψ ) . In the present context, we
                                                      ~

adopt the likelihood ratio as the metric function, which is used in Keane and Smith
(2003). In particular,
                                                              ~
                                      Ψˆ = arg max L⎛⎜ y; z , Θ(Ψ ; λ )⎞⎟
                                                              ~
                                                                                                               (22)
                                                Ψ    ⎝                  ⎠



                                                                                                                      19
    The two-step approach proposed by Keane and Smith (2003) is used to estimate the
parameters of the structural model. The idea of the first step is to obtain a consistent
estimate Ψ̂1 of the structural parameters by solving the optimization problem (22). In the
first step, the number of simulated data sets F is set to 1, which substantially reduces the
computation time. In addition, a relatively large value for the smoothing parameter λ is
chosen (λ = 0.05) to ensure the objective function is smooth.
    In the second step, to reduce bias we choose λ to be 0.003 and F to be 100.
According to Proposition 2 in Keane and Smith (2003),

                                                 ( )⎞⎟⎠ Jˆ ⎞⎟⎠                           ( )
                                                ~                −1                     ~
             Ψˆ 2 = Ψˆ 1 − ⎛⎜ Jˆ ′LΘΘ ⎛⎜ y; z , Θ Ψˆ 1                Jˆ ′LΘΘ ⎛⎜ y; z , Θ Ψˆ 1 ⎞⎟
                                                ~                                       ~
                                                                                                    (23)
                            ⎝          ⎝                                       ⎝                ⎠
is a consistent and asymptotically normal estimate of Ψ , where LΘΘ is the Hessian of

the likelihood function associated with the descriptive model, and Ĵ is an estimate of
the Jacobian of the binding function Η Ψ̂ 1 .       ( )

3. Data
    The dataset used in this paper is from the 1979 youth cohort of the National
Longitudinal Surveys of Youth (NLSY79). The NLSY79 contains extensive information
about the individuals’ employment, education, health, income, and assets. An original
12,686 individuals were interviewed each year from 1979 to 1994. After 1994, the
interviews switched to every other year. We use information from 1979 to 1994. That
gives us sixteen years of data to work with.
    The analysis is based on the sample of the white males who were age 16 or younger
as of October 1, 1977. Each individual in the sample is followed from the first year he
reaches age 16 as of October 1 of that year to September 30, 1993. The females are
excluded in this paper, since the fertility choice that young females face calls for a model
that is substantially different from the current model. Black males are also excluded,
since this group may also require a different model from white males (see, for example,
Gan and Gong 2004). Finally, we exclude from our sample those who had any active
military service. Modeling military service is not in the scope of this study.




                                                                                                           20
3.1. Health
     In each survey year, the NLSY79 asked the individuals a standard set of health
questions. The focus of these questions was on the health problems that affected the
respondent’s ability to work. In each year, if the respondents were not currently working,
they were asked if their health would prevent them from working, and the rest of
respondents who were currently working were asked if their health limited the type and
the amount of work they could do. If a health limitation was reported, the NLSY79 then
probed for the month and year the health limitation began.
     We use the answers to these questions to construct the health variables.11 An
individual was classified as being sick (Dt) in a given year if a health limitation was
reported in that year. The construction of the sick duration variable (slt) is based on the
information of when the individual’s reported date that the sickness began. The difficulty
in constructing health variables is that a large portion, around thirty percent, of the
self-reported sick duration in the NLSY79 did not match the preceding self-reported
sickness. For example, some respondents reported that the sickness began at some earlier
point, for instance, two years ago, but no reported health limitation could be found during
the last two years. This could be because that no surveys were conducted for these
respondents at those years, or because that the respondents had not been aware of the
sickness until the health limitations developed into a serious problem that affects their
lives. To solve this problem of inconsistency, we check the subsequent self-reported
answers to health questions, while also searching for references to the specific ailments.
If the respondents kept reporting the same health problems and the same date the health
limitation began, we then use this information to update the prior sickness variables. If
the specific health problem was only reported once but the duration was longer than one
year during the entire time of the survey, we simply classify the respondent as sick only
during that reported year.
     In the constructed health data, 21% of the respondents report at least one illness
during the 16 years of surveys. The average duration is 2.28 years. Figure 2 shows the



11
   More specific details on health ailments were asked in the NLSY79 if the individuals gave
affirmative answers that health limited either the kind or amount of work they could do.


                                                                                               21
percentage of respondents who reported sickness at each age from 16 to 29.12 At the
early age of 16, 4.14% of respondents consider themselves sick. Over the subsequent 15
years, the percentage of the respondents reporting an illness increases steadily, peaking at
the age of 29 with 5.17%.


3.2. Schooling, work, or home
     At each interview date, the NLSY79 asked the respondents about their enrollment
status, the highest grade attended and completed, the dates of leaving school, and the
dates that diplomas and degrees were received. An individual is classified as attending
school during the year if the individual reported enrollment in school at the time of the
survey and did not report dropping out of school during that year in the subsequent
surveys.
     Employment data in the NLSY79 include the beginning and ending dates of all jobs,
hours worked on each job, and salary paid on each job. An individual who does not attend
school is classified as having worked during the year if the individual reported working at
least 1,000 hours, i.e. at least 20 hours per week on average for 50 weeks
     Finally, an individual is classified as being at home during the year if the individual
was neither enrolled in school nor worked during the year. Note that some individuals
would be classified as being at home if they worked during the year but did not work at
least 1,000 hours.
     Table 1 presents the choice distributions by age for the whole sample and for the
sickness subsample. The sickness subsample is cumulative, i.e., at each age t, it consists
of the individuals who have reported sickness at least once up to age t. The initial sample
size is 1,062 at age 16. From age 16 to age 29, the sample size declines slightly as a result
of sample attrition such as deceases. The sample size falls from 1045 to 776 at ages 29
and 30, and from 776 to 463 at ages 30 and 31. This is because some respondents have
not yet reached age 31 during the survey periods. Overall, there are 15,972
person-periods in the whole sample dataset and 2,198 person-periods in the sickness
12
   The figure ends at age 29 instead of 31. The percentages of sickness report at ages 30 and 31 are
4.81% and 5.18%, respectively. A dip at age 30 and the breaking of the increase trend may come from
the shrinking of sample size. During the annual survey from 1979 to 1993, 98.4% of the original
respondents reached age 28; however, only 73% and 43.6% of the respondents reach age 30 and 31
years old, respectively.


                                                                                                  22
subsample.
    As table 1 shows, an individual’s decisions on school attendance, job participation, or
remaining home are highly correlated with the individual’s health. Compared to the
individuals in the whole sample, individuals in the sickness subsample at each age have a
smaller percentage of attending school and a larger percentage of remaining home.
Moreover, although a slightly larger percentage of individuals in the sickness data
worked from age 16 to age 18, a relatively smaller percentage of sick individuals worked
after that. More specifically, 11.56% of the individuals in the sickness subsample
attended school, 42.81% worked, and 45.63% remained at home. The corresponding
percentages for the individuals in the whole sample are 25.34%, 54.46%, and 20.20%.
Furthermore, the relative difference in the percentage of school attendance between the
two data sets increases during the normal schooling ages. For example, at age 16, the
percentage of individuals attending school while having been sick is 81.82% (i.e., 93.6%
of the average 87.38%), but at the normal high school graduation age of 18, that
percentage drops to 38.55% (i.e., 77.2% of the average 49.95%); at the normal college
graduation age of 22, it drops to 11.51% (i.e., 60.01% of the average 19.18%).
Additionally, the propensity to work increases monotonically over the first 11 years of
both data sets, followed by slight fluctuations over the last five years.
    Tables 2 and 3, which respectively show one-year transition rates for the whole
sample and for the sickness subsample, reveal substantial state persistence and substantial
dependence on health status. The row percentages describe the transition percentages
from a state at age t-1 to a state at age t, and the column percentages show percentages of
each state at t-1 given the state at age t. State persistence is revealed in the tables 2 and 3.
A large majority of the individuals who enrolled in school in the last year will enroll
currently; however, over 73% of the whole sample and less than 60% of sickness
subsample will make such a decision. Similarly, the majority of individuals who worked
or remained home last year will work or stay at home this year. However, those in the full
sample have a larger probability to continue working and a smaller probability staying at
home than those in the sickness subsample, showing the importance of health status in
determining activity choices.




                                                                                              23
3.3. Passing or failing grades
The NLSY79 collected the information from the high school transcripts during 1980,
1981, and 1983 for those respondents who were 17 years of age or older, and who were
expected to complete high school in the United States. For each person in the sample, the
transcript data gathered up to 64 courses that include the grade level at which the course
was taken, a code for high school courses, and a grade for each course based on a zero to
4.0 scale, corresponding to grade F to grade A. A course is classified as failure if the
grade is F. An individual is assumed to fail a grade if and only if the individual failed
over a half of the courses taken in that grade. This assumption implies that each course is
equally important for assessing the progress in school.
       Table 4 shows the percentages of failing in high school by grade for the whole
sample and for the sickness subsample. In both samples, the probability of failing a grade
declines as the grade level becomes higher, from 13.9% in grade 9 to 3.63% in grade 12
for the full sample, and from 20.7% in grade 9 to 7.61% in grade 12 for the sickness
subsample. The declining trend in grade failures may reflect the fact that some students
dropped out of school before graduation because of bad grades, health problems, or both.
More importantly, table 4 shows that an individual’s health status significantly incluences
his study outcomes. The possibility of failing a grade for the individuals who had been
sick is more than twice than the average of the whole sample, except for the grade 9 in
which the failing probability is about 1.5 times higher.


3.4. Wage and asset
       The real wages used in this analysis are based on a 1984 price level. The average
wage in the whole sample is $20,752, with a standard deviation of $47,535, while the
average wage in the sickness subsample is $18,731, with a standard deviation of $11,367.
Being sick reduces an individual’s wage by about 10%.
       Beginning in 1985, the NLSY79 launched a much larger wealth section. Up to 20
questions about a variety of asset and debt holdings were asked at each subsequent
interview, except for 1991.13 The asset items used in this analysis include (i) residential
property, (ii) cash savings, stock and bond portfolio, etc., (iii) real estate, assets in the

13
     The wealth questions were eliminated in 1991 because of budgetary restrictions.


                                                                                                24
business, and farm operation, (iv) automobile, (v) mortgage debt, property debt, and other
accumulated debt, (vi) other assets each individually worth more than $500, and (vii)
other debts over $500. Together these variables are used to construct the net worth of the
assets of each respondent. Since the asset data are collected at the household level, an
individual’s asset is half of his household asset if he is currently married and his spouse is
listed on the household enumeration.
     Tables 5 and 6 show the asset distribution by age for the whole sample and the
sickness subsample, respectively. The earliest age with reported assets is 21, because the
asset data were not collected until 1985. Given the small size of the observations and
possible measurement errors, outlier asset levels are deleted from the sample.14 As
shown in the tables, both mean and median net assets in the sickness subsample are
smaller than those in the whole sample, reflecting the substantial influence of sickness on
the accumulation of assets. The prevalent dependence of assets on health is also verified
by the proportions of the negative net assets, which are higher in the sickness subsample
from ages 22 to 31. In addition, tables 5 and 6 indicate that assets increase with age.
Between the ages of 21 and 31, the mean net assets increase by 4.13 for the whole sample
and 2.90 times for the sickness subsample, while the median net assets increase by 3.75
times for the whole sample and 3.63 times for the sickness subsample. Moreover, the
median net assets are, on average, less than half of the mean levels, reflecting the
positively skewed nature of the asset distribution.


3.5. Skill types
     The model in Section 2 introduces skill endowments for studying and for working. In
particular, equation (6) introduces the unobserved study type that affects probability
passing or failing a grade, and equation (7) introduces the unobserved market skill type
that affects wages. The endowment skills at age 16 are assumed to be unobserved to the
econometricians, however, the population proportions of skill types are known.15 Denote

14
   In total, 107 extremely large and small net asset observations are deleted from the whole sample,
while 34 from the sickness subsample.
15
   Keane and Wolpin (1994, 1997) undertake the same assumption. Some literatures use the Armed
Forces Qualifying Test (AFQT) as a measure of IQ or endowment skill (Neal and Johnson, 1996;
Cameron and Heckman, 1998, 1999). This analysis does not adopt AFQT for two reasons. First,
AFQT reflects not only an individual’s innate endowment but also his parents’ and his own


                                                                                                       25
the type portions of high ability for studying and high skill for working as ro1 and ro2,
respectively. An individual’s skill or study types can be simulated by random draws from
the uniform distribution between zero and 1. For example, if an individual’s drawn
number of his study type is less than ro1, the individual is labeled as having high
academic ability; otherwise the individual is labeled as having low academic ability. At
each simulated data f, the individual’s skill types are generated independently from the
random draws.
     The process to simulate the unobserved skill types suggests that both (6) and (7) with
unobserved skills are regime switching models of Hamilton (1989). Consider equation (6)
in which there are two regimes: a high-study-type regime and a low-study-type regime. If
an individual’s latent academic performance Φt* belongs to the high-study-type regime,
the intercept term in the model is ξ01. Otherwise, the intercept term is ξ02. Since the model
assumes that ξ01> ξ02, the two regimes have two distributions that differ in their means.
For any individual, the probability that his Φt* is drawn from the high-study-type regime
is ro1. The identification of regime switching models is well established (Hamilton 1989).


4. Estimation results
4.1. Parameter estimates
    The parameter estimates are reported in table 7. The standard deviations are in
parentheses, and the total number of parameters is 50. These parameters are estimated to
fit the sequential choices of 15,972 person-period observations, out of which 2,198 had
been sick at least once throughout the 16-year period. The choice set at each period
consists of decisions on school attendance, job participation, or staying at home, as well
as decisions on net asset savings and on health expenditure.
     The estimated parameters (α0, α1, and α2) for the mortality rate function (4) show that
a healthy individual’s mortality is 1.5 percentage points lower than that of the life table.
Whether an individual has ever been sick has a very large effect on his mortality rate,
while a longer duration of sickness seems to have little additional effect on his mortality

investments in skills up to the time of the test. But, due to the age distribution of the samples in the
NLSY79, small portion of the individuals took the test prior to age 16. Second, given that each
individual is characterized by two skill types (studying and working), one-dimensional AFQT
obviously could not adequately represent a two-dimensional skill.


                                                                                                           26
rate. The mortality rate for an individual who has experienced sickness only at the current
age 21 times larger than the life-table mortality and the mortality rate rises to 22 times as
large as the life-table mortality if the sickness duration is 3.5 years. As for the survival
rate, being sick at age 16 with zero duration of prior sickness decreases the survival rate
between age 16 and 30 by 2%, from 98.4% to 96.4%.
      The estimated parameters (ξ01, ξ02, ξ1, and ξ2) of passing or failing a grade in (6)
indicate that health and academic skill endowment have a significant effect on an
individual’s academic success. Among the individuals with high academic ability who
account for 86.5% of the population, the probability that a healthy individual passes a
grade is 97.6%. In comparison, a sick individual’s probability of passing a grade is 91.2%
if his duration of prior sickness is zero, or 90.88% if his duration of prior sickness is three
years. On the contrary, of the individuals with low academic ability, the probability of
passing a grade is 75.4% if he is healthy, and 53.3% if he is sick with zero duration. In
terms of determining whether an individual passes a grade, health plays a more important
role for an individual of low academic ability than for an individual of high academic
skill. Specifically, the passing probability of an individual with high academic skill will
decrease by 6.4% as a consequence of sickness, whereas the probability of failure with
low academic skill will decrease by 22.8%.
     The estimates for parameters in wage equation (7) reveal that sickness reduces wages
by 16% (γ5), which is consistent with some estimates in the literature.16 In addition,
individuals with high working skill (approximately 59% of the population) earn about
30% more than low working type individuals if other characteristics are the same
(difference between γ01 and γ02). Furthermore, the estimates regarding the job adjusting
cost, the returns for education and experience are quite reasonable: the absence of work
in the last period decreases wages by 13% (γ7); and an additional year of education
increases wages by 10% (γ1); an additional year of experience increases wages by 10.9%
(γ2) in the first year, and 10.1% in the second year, and 9.3% in the third year of
experiences, etc..
     With respect to the home production function in (8), estimated parameters show that

16
   Empirical estimates on effect of health on wages vary widely, in which Berkovec and Stern (1991)
estimate that poor health status reduce wage by 16.7%. See Currie and Madrian (1999) for an
extensive review.


                                                                                                 27
sickness reduces the home production by $2,716 (φ1), and an additional year of sickness
duration reduces the home production by $368 (φ2). The average home production for a
healthy individual is $9,689 ( e ). In addition, wage shock ε tw and home production

shock ε te are negatively correlated with the correlation coefficient -0.3816.
    Table 8 reports the probabilities of being sick by health expenditures and by health
statuses at ages 16, 25, and 30. As the table shows, both health expenditure and health
status have significant effects on the possibility of sickness. If the health expenditure is
zero, a healthy individual has about a 50% chance of getting sick, while a sick individual
has more than an 87% chance of getting sick. The elasticity of health expenditure with
respect to the probability of sickness also differs between healthy people and sick people.
For example, at age 16, a $500 health expenditure reduces a healthy individual’s
probability of sickness by 81%, from 48% to 9%. However, a $500 health expenditure
only reduces the probability of being sick by 36%, from 49% and 31%. These results
indicate that health expenditures have much larger effects in reducing sick probabilities
for healthy people than for sick people. Table 8 also illustrates the effect of age on the
probability of sickness. As people are older, the effect of health expenditure drops
slightly; for example, at age 30, with a $500 health expenditure, an individual’s
probability of sickness is reduced 78% if healthy and 44% if sick.
    To evaluate the effect of education on health, we calculate the probability of sickness
when education attainments are 8, 12, and 16, which represent the education level of
pre-high school, high school graduate, and four-year college graduate. Table 9 shows that
education has a positive effect on the probability of sickness, especially for sick
individuals, although the effect is much less significant than health expenditure and
health status. Specifically, if there is no health expenditure, the probability of sickness for
a 20-year-old and healthy individual who has 8 years of education is 51%. When his
education is 12 and 16 years, the corresponding probabilities of sickness drop to 48% and
45%, respectively.
   Finally, the coefficient of relative risk aversion is 0.8043 and the preference discount
factor 0.9795, which are consistent with some estimates in the literature (see, for example,
Gan, Gong, Hurd, and McFadden 2004). The estimated cost of education beyond high
school is $4,328 per year, and the net income boundary is -$585, below which the health


                                                                                               28
expenditure is zero.


4.2. Within-sample fit
    With the estimated parameters, the validation of the model can be tested by the
within-sample fit. Based on a simulation of 8,000 individuals, table 10 compares the
predicted and actual values of selected state variables by the whole sample and by the
sickness subsample. As can be seen, the model accurately matches the mean level of
completed schooling years in the whole sample. However, at a more disaggregated level,
the predicted means differ from the observed means. For example, the model overstates
the proportion of those who have completed 12 years of schooling (high school) and
understates the proportion of those who have completed 16 years of schooling (college).
In the sickness subsample, the model predicts a slightly higher mean level of schooling
years and overstates the proportion of those who have completed 12 years of schooling.
    The model fits the proportions of those who choose to work, to go to school, and to
stay at home quite well, except that it overstates the proportion of school attendance in
the sickness subsample and understates the proportion of working in the whole sample. A
further fit comparison of the predicted and actual school attendance, working and home
decisions by age for the whole sample and for the sickness subsample is illustrated in
figures 3a and 3b.
    In terms of the probabilities of failing a grade (table 10), the model correctly predict
that health has a large effect on the probabilities. However, the predicted probabilities
have less variation than observed probabilities across grade levels. With respect to the
asset fit, the model captures the broadly increasing pattern with age. Figures 4a and 4b
display the predicted and actual mean assets by age. It is clear that the model does better
in predicting asset levels for the whole sample than for the sickness subsample.
    As predicted by the model, the mean health expenditure in the sickness data is 5.4%
larger than in the full sample. This is because sick individuals have to spend more on
health to reduce the chance of being sick in succeeding years, while healthy individuals
can spend smaller amounts on health and still maintain a relatively low probability of
sickness. Figure 5 shows the predicted and actual percentages of sick individuals from the
simulated data and from the observed full sample. The percentages of people who are



                                                                                            29
sick in both samples range from 4.1% to 5.2%. The largest and smallest gaps between
predicted and actual sick percentages are 0.29% at age 30 and 0.02% at age 27,
respectively. Moreover, the age pattern of health expenditure and the percentage of zero
health expenditure are portrayed in figure 6. It is shown that the mean health expenditure
increases by age, from $783 at age 16 to $952 at age 31, an average increase of 1.34%
per year. Concurrently, the ratio of zero health expenditure increases from zero in the first
four years (i.e., ages 16 to 19) to 0.94% at age 30. Note that according to the model’s
assumption, as the individual’s net income falls lower than the boundary of -$549, his
health expenditure is zero. The increase in the trend of the percentage of zero health
expenditure implies the dispersion of assets and earnings.


4.3. Initial health status and education effects
    As has been observed, an individual’s initial characteristics have a significant effect
on his future behavior of alternative choices, which will subsequently determine his
health, educational attainment and wealth. It is interesting to investigate how the
education, health and welfare are related to initial levels of completed education and
health status at the age of 16.
    Table 11 reports the simulation results of initial health status effects on selected
variables, conditional upon initial schooling. Approximately 5% of individuals completed
ten years or more schooling by age 16 in the observation sample. As seen in the table,
initial health status is an important determinant of education, survival probability, assets,
health expenditure, and lifetime welfare. Moreover, the effects of initial health limitations
are more substantial for individuals with lower levels of education than for individuals
with higher levels of education. For instance, illness at age 16, on average, decreases the
average level of education at age 30 by 0.35 year for individuals with initial schooling of
nine years or less, whereas it decreases by 0.27 year for individuals with initial schooling
of ten years or more. Moreover, the decrease in the probability of survival at age 30,
resulting from the illness at age 16, is 2.8% for those with low initial education,
compared to 1% for those with higher levels of education. Finally, due to the health
limitation at age 16, the mean present value of lifetime utility decreases 13% for the
individuals with low initial education and 11% for those with high initial education,



                                                                                            30
respectively.
    In order to study the effect of initial education, the simulated sample is divided into
two groups. One group consists of observations who have 10 or more years of education
at age 16, the rest of the observations is in another group. Table 11 reports the results. It
indicates that initial education also has a significant effect on the selected variables. If an
individual has 10 or more years of education at age 16, he would have 1.44 more years of
education when he reaches age 30.
    It is important to notice that we cannot conclude whether the initial condition of
health is more important than that of education because of different measure in education
and in health. Next we consider a policy simulation in which we can compare relative
importance between education and health.


4.4. Policy application
    In this section, we conduct two policy experiments. The first experiment is a direct
college tuition subsidy, and the second is a health expenditure subsidy during high school.
The two experiments will incur the same amount of per capita cost. Therefore, by
comparing the outcomes of the two experiments, we are able to evaluate relative
difference in effectiveness between subsidizing health and subsidizing education. For
each subsidy, we simulate a sample of 8,000 individuals. The results for both policy
simulations are discussed below.


4.4.1. College tuition subsidy
    Table 12 reports the distribution effect of a $2,100 per year college tuition subsidy,
which is about 50% of the estimated cost of college education (estimated ec = $4,328).
Although the subsidy is limited to college students, it will also affect the individuals’
decisions before entering college because they anticipate it before making their decision
to enter college. The simulated sample is divided into two subsamples: those who have
been sick at least once before age 21 (12.2% of the population before the subsidy) and
those who have remained healthy before age 21 (87.8% of the population before the
subsidy). Also, people are classified by their endowment types based on the estimated
parameters of population type ratio: high ability in both school and work (group 1), high



                                                                                                31
ability in school and low ability in work (group 2), low ability in school and high ability
in work (group 3), and low ability in both school and work (group 4). For convenience,
the baseline results without subsidy are listed.
     As expected, the college tuition subsidy increases the levels of state variables,
including educational attainment, years in college, assets, and present value of lifetime
utility. Among the 8,000 simulated individuals, the average highest schooling years
completed increases by 0.42 years, from 13.39 to 13.81 years; and the mean years in
college increase by 0.35 years from 1.85 to 2.20 years. The mean value of assets at age 30
increases 18%, from $19,134 to $22,608. The mean expected present value of lifetime
utility at age 16 increases 10.7%, from 185.6 to 197.4. Finally, the percentage of those
who have ever been sick at least once before age 21 decreases 0.9 percentage points,
from 12.2% to 11.3%.
    As seen, the college tuition subsidy has a smaller effect on a sick person than on a
healthy person. In particular, educational attainment changes little for simulated
individuals who are in groups 3 and 4, and who have experienced at least one bout of
sickness before age 21. Specifically, the private gain of welfare from the subsidy is
smaller for the sick person than for the healthy person. The mean present value of
lifetime utility increases 5.6% for people in the sickness subsample, compared to 11% for
healthy people.
    In this experiment, not all simulated individuals will attend colleges. For those who
ever attend colleges, their average gains are $4,620, while for those who never attend
colleges, their gains are zero from the program. Therefore, the per capita cost of a college
tuition subsidy is $2,247, if shared by all of the individuals. In addition, the gains are very
different across groups and health statuses. Overall, observations in groups 1 and 2
experience greater gains from the program because they have significantly large college
attendance regardless of the subsidy. In addition, healthy people gain more than sick
people.


4.4.2. High school health expenditure subsidy
   Table 13 explores the effect of a $778 per year health expenditure subsidy per year for
high school students. The per capita cost of the program is $2,247, which is the same



                                                                                            32
amount as the per capita college tuition subsidy. This amount is smaller than the cost of
subsidizing everybody at $778 for four years starting at age 16 since some simulated
individuals will choose to work or to stay at home and will not get the health expenditure
subsidy.
   As shown, the average highest year of schooling completed increases by 0.53, which
is 0.11 year more than with the college tuition subsidy. The mean years spent in college
increases by 0.44, a little larger than with the college tuition subsidy. In addition, the
mean assets at age 30 are almost the same as in the case of the college tuition subsidy.
The overall welfare has a tiny increase with respect to the college tuition subsidy
program.
   The gain distribution is much different in this case. Gains of sick and low endowment
people improve substantially. This could be explained by the two reasons. First, health
limitation decreases the possibility of passing a grade, and graduating from high school is
the only path assumed in this paper to attending college. Hence, a college tuition subsidy
is not as attractive to those who anticipate a small probability of passing a grade.
However, a high school health expenditure provides a direct channel for this population
to gain from the subsidy. Second, for those people who would go to college even without
the tuition subsidy, the benefits are greatest because of the level effect of the subsidy. But,
for those who are induced to attend college, the benefits incurred from the marginal effect,
i.e., the marginal indifference between college attendance and other options.


5. Conclusion
   In this paper we structurally estimate a dynamic model on activity choices of
schooling, work, or staying at home, on health expenditure, and on levels of saving over
the life cycle using 16 years of data from the NLSY79. The structural framework
explicitly models two existing theoretical hypotheses on the correlation between health
and education. The model is estimated using the recently developed generalized indirect
inference.
   The model’s estimates support that health and education are interdependent since all
coefficients that correspond to the two alternative hypotheses are statistically significant.
In particular, the estimation results imply that an individual’s education, health



                                                                                             33
expenditure, and prior health status influence his health status. Meanwhile, an unhealthy
individual has a lower probability of passing a grade, a higher mortality rate, and a lower
wage. Indeed, health plays an extremely important role in determining an individual’s
educational attainment. On average, having been sick before the age of 21 decreases the
educational attainment by 1.4 years. Policy experiments based on the model’s estimates
indicate that a health expenditure subsidy conditional on high school attendance would
have a larger impact on educational attainment than a direct college tuition subsidy. In
particular, a direct college tuition subsidy will favor healthy individuals, especially those
who are healthy and have low academic ability, while a high school health expenditure
subsidy will favor sick individuals, especially those who are sick and have high academic
ability.




                                                                                            34
Appendix: Forms of Descriptive Statistical Models
    As discussed in Section 2.3.1, the descriptive statistical model at time t is a linear
model, given in (16). The construction of {yt, xt} in (16) is described below.
    (1) t = 1, i.e., age 16
    The regressors include a constant term, schooling years, indicator of sickness, and
duration of sickness:
                                    x1 = (1, sch1 , D1 , sl1 ) .                      (A.1)
    Note that because of the data limitation in calculating the effective schooling years
edu, we use the observed schooling years sch. The indicator for success in school is
chosen as an independent variable.
    The set of dependent variables consists of the dummies for working and for
schooling, wage, indicators of passing the grade, and the dummy for sickness at t = 2 (age
17). Some of the dependent variables are allowed to be missing. If for some individuals,
one or more variables were missing or unobserved, then the corresponding dependent
variables are accordingly missing from these individuals at this age. For example, if the
transcript data were missing or unobserved for individual i (an unobserved transcript may
occur because he was in middle school or college during the time of survey), then the
dependent variable of the indicator of the passing the grade will not be included for this
individual. The set of the dependent variables for the observed data is:
                    (                                                 )
              y1 = d11,1 , w1 , d 21,1 , pass (if in high school ), D2 .                (A.2)

    The simulated data consists of the same individuals as in observed data, except that
the simulated discrete variables are replaced by the smooth functions discussed in Section
2. That is to say that the number of linear regression equations for simulated data and
observed data is equal.


    (2) 1< t < 6, i.e., from age 17 to 20
    For t = 3, 4, or 5, the regressors include a constant term, schooling years, working
experiences, dummies for work and for school attendance, indicator of sickness, and
duration of sickness:




                                                                                             35
                                (
                         xt = 1, scht , ept , d 11,t , d 21,t , Dt , sl t . )                     (A.3.1)

    The independent variables for t = 2 are different from those for t = 3, 4 or 5, in which
working experience was not included because at this period ep 2 is equal to d11,1

(remember that the initial working experience is set at zero):
                                         (
                                 x 2 = 1, sch2 , d11,1 , d 21,1 , D2 , sl 2 .   )                 (A.3.2)

    The dependent variables are:
                                        (
                                y t = d11,t , wt , d 21,t , pass (if in high school ), Dt .   )     (A.4)

    Similar to the case of t = 1, if some observed variables were missing or unobserved,
the corresponding dependent variables are also missing.


    (3) t = 6, i.e., age 21.
    At this age, some agents start to have asset data and some do not. The set of the
independent variables are the same as in (A.3.1). The set of dependent variables is:
                    (
              y 6 = d11, 6 , w6 , d 21, 6 , pass (if in high school ), D7 , A6 .          )        (A.5)


    (4) 6 < t < 16, i.e., from age 22 to 30
    It is necessary to have two descriptive statistical models because of the asset data.
Both models have the same set of dependent variables:
                                (
                         y t = d11,t , wt , d 21,t , Dt +1 , At . )                               (A.6)

    Note that the indicator for passing the grade is not included in (A.6) because of the
convenient assumption that individuals should have finished their high school by age 22.
Actually, in the sample, only 5 individuals who were over 21 years old were still in high
school.
    The first descriptive statistical model includes all the individuals whose assets at
t − 1 were missing or unobserved. In contrast, the second model includes all the
individuals whose assets at t − 1 were observed. The set of independent variables for the
first model is the same as in (A.3.1), while for the second one it is:
                         xt = (1, scht , ept , d 11,t −1 , d 21,t −1 , Dt , sl t , At −1 ).       (A.7)




                                                                                                       36
    (5) t = 16, i.e., age 32
    The descriptive statistical models are similar to the case of 6 < t < 16, in which the
models are distinguished by whether the assets at period 15 were observed. The set of
independent variables for the first model is:
                                 (
                        x16 = 1, sch16 , ep16 , d11,15 , d 21,15 , D16 , sl16 , )
                  (A.8.1)
and for the second model is:
                          x16 = (1, sch16 , ep16 , d11,15 , d 21,15 , D16 , sl16 , A15 ) .   (A.8.2)

    Because the sample does not contain the information for health at t = 17, the set of
dependent variables is:
                                y16 = (d 11,16 , w16 , d 21,16 , A16 ).                      (A.9)




                                                                                                     37
References
Berkovec, J. and S. Stern. (1991), “Job Exit Behavior of Older Men,” Econometrica 59:
      189-210.
Cameron, Steven, and James J. Heckman (1993), “The Nonequivalence of High School
      Equivalents,” Journal of Labor Economics 11: 1-47.
Cameron, Steven, and James J. Heckman (1998), “The Dynamics of Educational
      Attainment for Blacks, Hispanics, and Whites,” Department of Economics,
      University of Chicago, unpublished paper.
Currie, Janet, and R. Hyson, (1999), “Is the Impact of Health Shocks Cushioned by
        Socioeconomic Status? The Case of Low Birth Weight,” American Economic
        Review 89: 245-250.
Currie, Janet, and Brigitte Madrian, (1999), “Health, Health Insurance and the Labor
        Market.” In Ashenfelter and Card, eds, Handbook of Labor Economics. Vol 3.
        Elsevier Sciences.
Fuchs, V. R. (1982), “Time Preferences and Health: An Exploratory Study,” in V. R.
       Fuchs, ed., Economic Aspects of Health (Chicago: University of Chicago Press
       for the National Bureau of Economic Research): 93-120.
Gan, Li and Guan Gong (2004), “Mortality Risk and Educational Attainment of Black
       and White Men.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper,
       #10381.
Gan, Li, Guan Gong, Michael Hurd, and Daniel McFadden (204), “Subjective Mortality
       Risks and Bequests.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper,
       #10789.
Gourieroux, C., A. Monfort, and E. Renault (1993), “Indirect Inference,” Journal of
       Applied Econometrics 8: S85-S118.
Grossman, Michael (1972), “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for
      Health,” Journal of Political Economy 80: 223-255.
Grossman, Michael (1975), “The Correlation between Health and Schooling,” in N. E.
      Terleckyj, ed., Household Production and Consumption (New Y ork: Columbia
      University Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research): 147-211.
Grossman, Michael (1999), “The Human Capital Model of the Demand for Health,”
      National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper: 7078.
Grossman, Michael, and R. Kaestner (1997), “Effects of Education on Health,” in J. R.
      Berhman and N. Stacey, eds. The Social Benefits of Education (Ann Arbor:
      University of Michigan Press).
Hamilton, James (1989), “A New Approach to the Economic Analysis of Nonstationary
       Time Series and the Business Cycle.” Econometrica 57(2): 357-384.
Keane, Michael P., and K. Wolpin (1994), “The Solution and Estimation of Discrete
       Choice Dynamic Programming Models by Simulation and Interpolation: Monte
       Carlo Evidence,” Review of Economics and Statistics 76: 648-72.


                                                                                        38
Keane, Michael P., and K. Wolpin (1997), “The Career Decisions of Young Men,”
       Journal of Political Economy 105: 473-522.
Keane, Michael P., and Anthony A. Smith (2003), “Generalized Indirect Inference for
       Discrete Choice Models.” Department of Economics, Yale University, working
       paper.
Kenkel, Donald S. (1991), “Health Behavior, Health Knowledge, and Schooling,”
       Journal of Political Economy 99: 287-305.
Kenkel, Donald S. (2000), “Prevention,” in Handbook of Health Economics., volume 1B.
       (North-Holland: Elsevier Science): 1675-1720.
Levy, Helen, and David Meltzer (2001), “What Do We Really Know About Whether
       Health Insurance Affects Health?” University of Chicago Harris School of Public
       Policy, unpublished working paper.
Neal, Derek A., and William R. Johnson (1996), “The Role of Premarket Factors in
       Black-White Wage Differences,” Journal of Political Economy 104: 869-95.
Newhouse, Joseph P. (1993), Free for All? Lessons from the RAND Health Insurance
     Experiment. Cambridge and London: Harvard University Press.
Perri, Timothy J. (1984), “Health Status and Schooling Decisions of Young Men,”
        Economics of Education Review:
Rosenzweig, M. R. and Schultz, T. P. (1991), “Education and Household Production of
      Child Health,” in Proceedings of the American Statistical Association (Social
      Statistics Section) (Washington, DC: American Statistical Association).




                                                                                      39
               Table 1: Percentage of People Choosing School, Work, and Home
                 Sickness     Subsample                              Full Sample
Age    School Work            Home      TOTAL        School    Work         Home         TOTAL
16     81.82   9.09            9.09       100         87.38     6.59         6.03          100
        (36)    (4)             (4)       (44)        (928)     (70)         (64)        (1062)
17     69.87 14.29            15.87       100        78.42     11.02        10.56          100
        (44)    (9)            (10)       (63)        (832)    (117)        (112)        (1061)
18     38.55 28.92            32.53       100        49.95     27.57        22.47          100
        (32)   (24)            (27)       (83)        (529)    (292)        (238)        (1059)
19     31.96 27.84            40.21       100        41.12     33.46        25.43          100
        (31)   (27)            (39)       (97)        (435)    (354)        (269)        (1058)
20     22.32 29.46            48.22       100        31.63     39.68        28.69          100
        (25)   (33)            (54)      (112)        (334)    (419)        (303)        (1056)
21     17.05 34.11            48.84       100        28.53     42.65        28.82          100
        (22)   (44)            (63)      (129)        (301)    (450)        (304)        (1055)
22     11.51 46.04            42.44       100        19.18     60.59        20.23          100
        (16)   (64)            (59)      (139)        (202)    (638)        (213)        (1053)
23     10.53 50.66            38.81       100          15.5    66.54        17.97          100
        (16)   (77)            (59)      (152)        (163)    (700)        (189)        (1052)
24      6.06  52.73           41.21       100          9.64    74.14        16.22          100
        (10)   (87)            (68)      (165)        (101)    (777)        (170)        (1048)
25      3.98  56.82           39.20       100          5.63    78.63        15.74          100
         (7)  (100)            (69)      (176)         (59)    (824)        (165)        (1048)
26      3.30  60.44           36.26       100           4.3    80.88        14.82          100
         (6)  (110)            (66)      (182)         (45)    (846)        (155)        (1046)
27      2.63  58.95           38.42       100          3.25    79.43        17.32          100
         (5)  (112)            (73)      (190)         (34)    (830)        (181)        (1045)
28      1.96  52.45           45.59       100          2.87    73.97        23.16          100
         (4)  (107)            (93)      (204)         (30)    (773)        (242)        (1045)
29      1.86  53.02           45.12       100          2.68    72.15        25.17          100
         (4)  (114)            (97)      (215)         (28)    (754)        (263)        (1045)
30      1.24  52.80           45.96       100          2.19    69.33        28.48          100
         (2)   (85)            (74)      (161)         (17)    (538)        (221)         (776)
31      1.16  51.16           47.68       100          1.94    68.47        29.59          100
         (1)   (44)            (41)       (86)          (9)    (317)        (137)         (463)

TOTAL11.56       42.81         45.63        100       25.34 54.46            20.20        100
     (254)       (941)        (1,003)     (2,198)    (4,047) (8,699)        (3,226)      (15,972)
Note: Number of observations is in parenthesis.
      Sickness subsample at age t consists of individuals who have been sick at least once up to
      and including age t.




                                                                                              40
               Table 2: Transition Matrix between two States
                (Full sample: White Males Aged 16-31*)
                                           Choice (t )
Choice (t - 1)                School       Work          Home
School:
           Row %              73.49        12.98         13.52
      Column %                92.59        9.25          17.61
Work:
           Row %              2.31         86.98         10.7
      Column %                3.71         78.97         17.77
Home:
           Row %              4.26         23.92         71.82
      Column %                3.7          11.78         64.62
* Number of observations: 14,910.




                Table 3: Transition Matrix between Two States
               (Sickness Subsample: White Males Aged 16-31*)
                                           Choice (t )
Choice (t - 1)                School       Work          Home
School:
           Row %              58.7         15.38         25.97
      Column %                83.09        6.25          10.66
Work
           Row %              1.81         82.3          15.89
      Column %                5.95         77.9          16.15
Home
           Row %              3.49         19.25         77.26
      Column %                11.22        16.72         72.05
* Number of observations: 2,154.




                                                                 41
      TABLE 4: Percentage Failing Grades 9, 10, 11, and 12 *
                      White Males Aged 16-31
 Grade                              9         10        11                12
 Full Sample                       13.9      6.08      5.54              3.63
                                  (374)     (954)     (903)             (799)

 Sickness Subsample                     20.69     20.93       19.57     7.61
                                         (35)      (72)        (71)     (67)
 * Number of observations with transcripts report are in parentheses.




                               Table 5: Asset Distribution
                         Full Sample: White Males Aged 21 - 31
                                                                    No. Percent
Age     Median       Mean          Std        Max         Min       Obs. Negative
 21     1,931       4,209         6,404     55,330      -15,296     230    9.8
 22     2,248       5,019         8,262     80,524      -14,753     497    11.2
 23     2,752       5,883         10,581    115,630     -12,703     921    16.4
 24     2,863       6,263         12,507    176,972     -31,618     911    16.7
 25     3,590       8,082         16,071    196,907     -36,624     907    15.3
 26     4,003       9,833         20,235    209,874     -43,152     938    16.6
 27     5,237       12,803        22,458    227,072     -43,722     677    16.7
 28     5,565       14,294        26,456    247,706     -33,388     607    15.0
 29     7,443       15,424        27,621    262,705     -37,028     438    12.9
 30     8,628       18,501        35,369    298,728     -21,211     589    11.6
 31     9,168       21,599        48,360    338,994     -24,756     351    10.7
Note: In 1984 dollars.




                                                                                    42
                            TABLE 6: Asset Distribution
                     Sickness Data: White Males Aged 21 - 31
                                                                     No. Percent
Age     Median       Mean        Std          Max           Min      Obs. Negative
 21     1,333       3,389       6,306        16,927       -8,035      29    6.7
 22     2,058       2,737       4,091        19,434       -7,402      67    20.9
 23     2,566       5,064       8,042        36,585       -8,714     130    17.7
 24     2,654       5,257       10,030       61,999      -13,719     141    17.0
 25     3,000       6,289       9,488        52,133      -10,518     148    17.6
 26     3,545       7,054       12,002       62,358      -11,312     160    20.0
 27     4,886       10,452      17,390       93,206       -6,415     114    18.2
 28     3,481       8,470       14,398       69,612      -12,197     103    18.5
 29     3,703       9,898       15,695       84,883      -12,583      97    17.5
 30     5,036       11,823      18,375       77,389       -9,347     118    16.1
 31     6,169       13,203      23,483       96,098       -8,479      65    12.3
Note: In 1984 dollars.
    Sickness data at age t consists of individuals who reported health limitation
       at least once up to and including age t.




                                                                                     43
                            TABLE 7: Estimates of the Model

Mortality Rate Function:
  constant α0:                                                -0.0143 (0.00026)
  sickness α1:                                                3.0566 (0.8965)
  interaction between sickness and duration α2:               0.0136 (0.0032)
Pass/Fail the Grade:
   high study type ζ01:                                       1.9743 (0.1690)
   low study type ζ02:                                        0.6940 (0.9629)
   sickness ζ1:                                               -0.6245 (0.2533)
   interaction between sickness and duration ζ2:              -0.0047 (0.0226)
Wage Function:
  high working type γ01:                                      1.4967 (0.0649)
  low working type γ02:                                       1.2043 (0.579)
  educational attainment γ1:                                  0.1027 (0.0034)
  experience γ2:                                              0.1085 (0.0094)
  experience squared/100 γ3:                                  -0.4008 (0.0789)
  age γ4:                                                     -0.0069 (0.0036)
  sickness γ5:                                                -0.1624 (0.0473)
  interaction between sickness and duration γ6:               -0.0032 (0.0045)
   no working at last period γ7:                              -0.1324 (0.0201)
Home Production Function:
                                                              9689.1 (6245.3)
constant e :
                                                              -2715.8 (1376.5)
sickness φ1:                                                  -368.4 (148.36)
interaction between sickness and duration φ2:
Sick Probability:
age β1:                                                       0.0085 (0.0038)
health expenditure β2:                                        -2.5694 (0.0489)
educational attainment β3:                                    -0.0187 (0.0069)
sickness β4:                                                  1.2041 (0.3568)
interaction between sickness and duration β5:                 0.1060 (0.0058)
Type Ratio:
                                                              0.8605 (0.1547)
high ability in study ro1
                                                              0.5859 (0.257)
high skill in work ro2




                                                                                  44
                         Table 7 Estimates of the Model (Cont.)

  Terminal Value Function:
  constant τ01:                                                   6.0259 (2.6101)
  high study type τ02:                                            0.1002 (0.0258)
  high work type τ03:                                             0.1011 (0.0326)
  sickness τ1:                                                    -0.547 (0.247)
  interaction between sickness and duration τ2:                   -0.0582 (0.0265)
  educational attainment τ3:                                      5.409 (2.068)
  educational attainment squared /100 τ4:                         2.3054 (0.216)
  asset τ5:                                                       0.1594 (0.0231)
  asset squared / 105 τ6:                                         -0.000181 (0.0025)
  experience τ7:                                                  1.1541 (0.269)
  experience squared /100 τ8:                                     0.1182 (0.146)
  interaction between education and high study type τ9:           0.1664 (0.589)
  interaction between education and high work type τ10:           0.1001 (0.0698)
  interaction between asset and high study type τ11:              0.001018 (0.0263)
  interaction between asset and high work type τ12:               0.000602 (0.0025)
  interaction between experience and high study type τ13:         0.001031 (0.006)
  interaction between experience and high work type τ14:          0.003028 (0.0024)
  Error:
  standard deviation of wage σw:                                  0.5137 (0.0698)
  standard deviation of home production σe:                       8.1867 (3.694)
  correlation σwe:                                                -1.6049 (0.1895)
  Preference Discount Factor δ :                                  0.9795 (0.2793)

  Coefficient of Relative Risk Aversion σ:                        0.8043 (0.3691)

  Education Cost ec:                                              $4328(1569.2)

  Net Income Boundary NIB:                                        -$584.8 (178.25)

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                                                       45
      TABLE 8: Estimated Sick Probabilities in Percentage*
              by Age, Health Expenditure, and Health Status
                                                   Sick
       Health                    0-year       1-year    3-year 5-year
Age Expenditure    Healthy      duration duration duration duration
16       0           47.97       87.56        89.60     92.94  95.38
       $250          24.40       69.52        73.13     79.64   85.1
       $500           9.08       44.77        48.98     57.39  65.48
       $750           2.4        21.95        25.21     32.42  40.36
      $1,000          0.44        7.83         9.50      13.6  18.77
      $1,750            0         0.04         0.06      0.12   0.25

25          0              51.02       89.06   90.92   93.91   96.08
          $250             26.87       72.15   75.59   81.73   86.81
          $500             10.40       47.80   52.03   60.37   68.26
          $750              2.86       24.28   27.71   35.22   43.35
         $1,000             0.55       9.02    10.86   15.34   20.9
         $1,750               0        0.05     0.08    0.16   0.31

30          0              52.71       89.83   91.59   94.41   96.42
          $250             28.29       73.56   76.91   82.84   87.69
          $500             11.19       49.50   53.72     62    69.76
          $750              3.15       25.62   29.15   36.81   45.03
         $1,000             0.62       9.73    11.68   16.37   22.15
         $1,750               0        0.06     0.09    0.18   0.35
* Education attainment is 10 grades.
** In 1984 dollars.




                                                                        46
   TABLE 9: Estimated Education Effect on Sick Probability
                                                Sick
              Health                      0-year     3-year
Grade      Expenditure      Healthy      duration duration
  8              0           50.81        88.96      93.85
               $500          10.31        47.60      60.17
              $1,000         0.54          8.93      15.22

  12               0         47.83         87.49      92.89
                 $500        9.03          44.63      57.26
                $1,000       0.43          7.78       13.53

  16               0         44.86         85.88      91.82
                 $500        7.87          41.69      54.31
                $1,000       0.35          6.75       11.97
* Age is 20.
** In 1984 dollars.




                                                              47
                           TABLE 10: Predicted and Actual State Variables
                                                      Sickness Subsample                   Full Sample
                                                      Predicted     Actual              Predicted      Actual
Years of schooling:
  Mean highest schooling years completed                12.63          12.58              13.39          13.40
  Percent 12 schooling years completed                  83.29          75.68              87.08          83.71
  Percent 16 schooling years completed                  13.52          13.06              17.71          25.80
Mean percentage of employment                           41.86          42.81              48.81          54.46
Mean percentage of school attendance                    20.54          11.56              28.65          25.34
Mean percentage of staying at home                      37.60          45.63              22.54          20.20
Percent grade failing *:
  Grade 9                                               17.32          20.69               5.61          13.90
  Grade 10                                              17.66          20.93               5.85           6.08
  Grade 11                                              16.44          19.57               5.22           5.54
  Grade 12                                              16.17           7.61               4.97           3.63
Mean assets at age **:
 21                                                      2805         3389                3548           4209
 24                                                      4767         5257                5796           6263
 27                                                      9722         10452               12466          12803
 30                                                     13404         11823               19134          18501
Mean health expenditure                                 896.6            --               850.5              --

Note: Predicted values are based on 8,000 cumulated individuals.
The sickness data include all the individuals who have been sick during the 16-year periods.
* In this case, the sickness data consists of cumulative individuals who reported sickness
  by the specified grade.
** In this case, the sickness subsample consists of cumulative individuals who have been sick up to age t.




                                                                                                    48
                    TABLE 11: Initial Health Status Effects by Initial Schooling

                                                           Healthy at Age 16           Sick at Age 16
                                                            Initial Schooling Nine Years or Less
Mean education attainment at age 30                                  13.17                    12.82
Mean percent survival probability at age 30                          97.36                    94.60
Mean asset at age 30                                                17,676                   14,822
Mean health expenditure by age 30                                     834                      892
Expected present value of lifetime utility at age 16                 186.4                    162.5
                                                           Initial Schooling Ten Years or More
Mean education attainment at age 30                                 14.60                   14.33
Percent survival probability at age 30                              98.12                   97.08
Asset at age 30                                                    28,654                  24,586
Mean health expenditure by age 30                                   1030                    1072
Expected present value of lifetime utility at age 16                224.6                   204.1
Note: Based on a simulation of 8,000 persons.




                                                                                               49
                                 TABLE 12: Effect of a $2100 College Tuition Subsidy on Selected State Variables*
                                                           Sick up to and including Age 20**                             Healthy up to and including Age 20
Characteristics                          All           All Groups Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 Group 4                   All Groups Group 1 Group 2 Group 3          Group 4
Average highest schooling
years completed:
  No subsidy                            13.39             12.17      12.35     12.72      10.12     10.24             13.56       13.64       14.03    12.0      12.26
  Subsidy                               13.81             12.55      12.76     13.16      10.16     10.32             13.97       13.92       14.45    12.81     13.15
Mean years in college:
 No subsidy                             1.85              0.73        0.65      1.12      0.05      0.07               2.01       2.19         2.34     0.43     0.61
 Subsidy                                2.20              1.1         1.15      1.44      0.05      0.07               2.34       2.26         2.82     1.32     1.58
Asset at age 30
  No subsidy                           19,134            11,725      12,464    13,237     5,474     4,794             20,163     21,047       21,369   14,099   13,597
  Subsidy                              22,608            13,077      14,026    14,814     5,483     4,830             23,822     24,398       25,873   16,822   16,056
Mean expected present value
of lifetime utility at age 16:
  No subsidy                            185.6             156.5      162.5     154.8      142.9     133.9             189.6       208.6       198.4    182.0     174.2
  Subsidy                               197.4             165.2      171.6     166.2      143.0     134.1             222.9       231.3       223.5    196.1     185.0
Note: * The per capita cost of the subsidy is $2,247.
     ** The percentage of people who were sick at least once before age 20 (including age 20): without subsidy, 12.2%; with subsidy, 11.3%.
     1. Based on a simulation of 8,000 individuals.
     2. Group 1: high ability in school and work; Group 2: high ability in school and low ability in work;
        Group 3: low ability in school and high ability in work; Group 4: low ability in school and low ability in work.
     3. The study and the skill endowments are drawn according to the estimated population ratio of types.




                                                                                                                                                                50
                      TABLE 13: Effect of a $778 Health Expenditure Subsidy for High School Students on Selected State Variables*
                                                             Sick up to and including Age 20**                           Healthy up to and including Age 20
Characteristics                          All            All Groups Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 Group 4                  All Groups Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 Group 4
Average highest schooling
years completed:
  No subsidy                            13.39             12.17       12.35     12.72     10.12      10.24             13.56         13.64   14.03     12.0    12.26
  Subsidy                               13.92             13.20       13.25     13.64     11.76      12.03             13.99         13.89   14.43    13.18    13.31
Mean years in college
 No subsidy                              1.85              0.73        0.65      1.12      0.05      0.07              2.01          2.19     2.34     0.43     0.61
 Subsidy                                 2.29              1.68        1.72      2.13      0.34      0.50              2.35          2.22     2.79     1.61     1.86
Asset at age 30
  No subsidy                           19,134             11,725     12,464     13,237    5,474      4,794            20,163     21,047      21,369   14,099   13,597
  Subsidy                              22,603             16,770     16,312     19,831    8,519     13,564            23,230     23,644      24,621   18,316   17,983
Mean expected present value
of lifetime utility at age 16:
  No subsidy                            195.4             156.5       162.5     154.8     142.9      133.9             200.8         208.6   198.4    182.0    174.2
  Subsidy                               218.5             186.6       192.4     187.8     159.7      164.9             221.7         228.0   220.4    204.7    198.6
Note: * The per capita cost of the subsidy is $2247, same amount as the per capita college tuition subsidy.
     ** The percent sickness up to and including age 20 without subsidy is 12.2%, while the percent sickness with subsidy is 9.7%.
     1. Based on a simulation of 8,000 individuals.
     2. Group 1: high ability in school and work; Group 2: high ability in school and low ability in work;
        Group 3: low ability in school and high ability in work; Group 4: low ability in school and low ability in work.
     3. The skill endowments are drawn according to the population ratio of types.
     4. The illness and duration are drawn from the initial health limitation distribution at age 16.




                                                                                                                                                               51
                    Figure 1: Stochastic Shocks and Decisions



Wage and home                                                     Health status
production shocks   Choices on work,                              (sick/healthy)
                    school, home,            Grade shock
                    saving, and health       given school
                    expenditure              attendance
 Health status
      he
 (sick/healthy)
                                                               Health
                                                  Pass /fail   shock
                                                  the grade
              t                                                         t+1




                                                                                   52
Figure 3a: Predicted and Actual Choice Selections by Age
                     (Full Sample)




                                                           53
Figure 3b: Predicted and Actual Mean Percent Choice Selections by Age
                         (Sickness Subsample)




                                                                        54
Figure 4a: Predicted and Actual Mean Assets by Age
                   (Full Sample)




Figure 4b: Predicted and Actual Mean Assets by Age
               (Sickness Subsample)




                                                     55
Figure 5: Predicted and Actual Sick Percentage




Figure 6: Predicted Mean Health Expenditure
 and Percentage of Zero Health Expenditure




                                                 56
