                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     WHO CHOOSES DEFINED CONTRIBUTION PLANS?

                                          Jeffrey R. Brown
                                         Scott J. Weisbenner

                                        Working Paper 12842
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12842


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2007




This research was supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration through grant #10-P-98363-1-03
to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the SSA Retirement Research Consortium.
The findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the author(s) and do not represent the views
of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER. We are grateful to SSA for this support.
We are also grateful to Dan Slack, Doug Steele, and other staff members at the State Universities
Retirement System for their tireless efforts to provide us with the data for this project and for helpful
conversations about the SURS system. We thank Brigitte Madrian, Olivia Mitchell, and participants
at the 2006 Retirement Research Consortium and the 2006 NBER RRC conference for helpful comments.
 Sarah Jackson provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Jeffrey R. Brown and Scott J. Weisbenner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Who Chooses Defined Contribution Plans?
Jeffrey R. Brown and Scott J. Weisbenner
NBER Working Paper No. 12842
January 2007
JEL No. D14,G11

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper provides new evidence on what types of individuals are most likely to choose a defined
contribution (DC) plan over a defined benefit (DB) plan. Making use of administrative data from
the State Universities Retirement System (SURS) of Illinois, we study the decisions of nearly 50,000
new employees who make a one-time, irrevocable choice between a traditional DB plan, a portable
DB plan, and an entirely self-managed DC plan. Because the SURS-covered earnings of these employees
are not covered under the Social Security system, their choices provides insight into the DB vs. DC
preferences of individuals with regard to a primary source of their retirement income. We find that
a majority of participants fail to make an active decision and are thus defaulted into the traditional
DB plan after 6 months. We also find that those individuals who are most likely to be financially sophisticated
are most likely to choose the self-managed DC plan, despite the fact that, given plan parameters, the
DC plan is inferior to the portable DB plan under reasonable assumptions about future financial market
returns. We discuss both rational and behavioral reasons that might explain this finding.

Jeffrey R. Brown
Department of Finance
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
340 Wohlers Hall, MC-706
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820-9080
and NBER
brownjr@uiuc.edu

Scott J. Weisbenner
Department of Finance
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
304C David Kinley Hall
1407 W. Gregory Drive
Urbana, IL 61801
and NBER
weisbenn@uiuc.edu
1. Introduction

       In recent years, numerous proposals have been forwarded to fully or partially replace the
defined benefits provided by the U.S. Social Security system with personal retirement accounts.
A key feature of many personal account proposals, including those of the President’s
Commission to Strengthen Social Security and the plan forwarded by President Bush in 2005, is
that participation in personal accounts would be voluntary. Individuals would be given the
opportunity to choose whether to redirect some of their existing payroll taxes away from the
current system and into personal retirement accounts (PRAs). In exchange for the ability to
participate in the personal accounts program, and individual would give up the right to some
portion of the traditional OASDI benefit, a feature that is commonly referred to as a “benefit
offset.” An interesting and difficult question is who would choose to participate in such a plan
were it to be offered.
       Understanding participation is of more than academic interest. Participants in personal
accounts would face a different risk and return profile of retirement benefits than would non-
participants, and thus understanding who is most likely to participate might influence one’s view
of the individual welfare implications of reform. At an aggregate level, participation rates are a
critical assumption in understanding the fiscal implications of Social Security reform proposals
that involve a redirection of existing payroll tax revenue away from the Trust Funds and into
personal accounts. For a given reform, high participation rates would increase the size of the
transition cost that must be financed in the early years of a reform and, correspondingly, would
result in larger reductions in pay-as-you-go expenditures in future years. When scoring reform
proposals, the Social Security Office of the Chief Actuary typically handles this uncertainty by
showing the financial implications of reform under several alternative assumptions, such as
100%, 67%, 50% and 0%. The uncertainty about participation rates is apparent from the
comparison of the Administration and CBO estimates of participation for the President’s plan.
In its analysis of the President’s FY 2007 budget, the CBO estimated that approximately one-
third of workers would sign up for the accounts under the President’s plan, whereas the OMB
projected a two-thirds participation rate (CBO, 2006).
       As important as participation rates are, there is very little useful guidance in the literature
on how to estimate them. Unfortunately, the very large literature on 401(k) participation rates is
of only limited use because the alternative to participating is entirely different in a 401(k) than in


                                                                                                     1
most Social Security reform proposals. If one chooses not to participate in the 401(k), the
alternative is to take the compensation in the form of taxable wages. In such a case, the main
trade-off is between current and future consumption. In contrast, in Social Security plans with a
benefit offset, the individual would face a trade-off between two alternative methods of financing
future consumption. For example, according to President Bush’s 2005 proposal, for every dollar
that an individual redirected into a personal account, she would have been required to give up a
traditional benefit amount equal to the annuitized value of that one dollar contribution
accumulated at a 3 percent real rate of interest. Thus, if an individual were to receive an average
real rate of return on the personal account balances in excess of 3 percent then their retirement
income would be higher due to having participated in the account. In contrast, if the individual’s
average real return fell below 3 percent, participation in the account would reduce retirement
income. Thus, the decision of whether or not to participate in a Social Security PRA program
has less to do with one’s views about the relative value of consumption today versus in the future
(which is the key decision in a 401(k) plan), and more to do with an individual’s beliefs about
expected financial market returns, mortality risk, financial and political risk, the value of choice,
the value of inheritability, and so forth.
           A better way to learn about potential participation rates in a PRA plan would be to
analyze situations in which an individual worker has an explicit choice between a DB and a DC
plan, holding job characteristics fixed. In most cases, however, individuals can only choose their
pension type by choosing their employer and it is quite clear that a firm’s pension plan is but one
element in a whole vector of characteristics that vary across jobs and firms. Thus, one can never
be sure that the decision to work for an employer that offers a 401(k) instead of an employer that
offers a DB plan reflects characteristics of the pension as opposed to numerous other differences
across the employers. Alternatively, one could attempt to determine the worker characteristics
that correlate with valuing DC over DB by looking at firm’s that switch pension type. Such plan
conversions, however, may be driven more by firm level concerns, such as the costs of plan
administration, than by employee preferences per se. Even if the cross-sectional variation in
which firms choose to convert to a DC plan is correlated with employee preferences, it only tells
us that some subset of employees valued this shift, not that all employees at the firm valued such
a shift.




                                                                                                    2
        Finally, in an ideal world, one would wish to examine the DB vs. DC choice in the
absence of the confounding effects of the Social Security program itself. In most private sector
plans, even if individuals were given a DB vs. DC choice, it would be for income that is above
that which they expect to receive from Social Security in the first place. While there have been
several studies that have been able to examine an explicit DB vs. DC choice, including among
employees at a large non-profit firm (Yang 2005), among corrections officers in Michigan
(Papke, 2004) and among faculty in the North Carolina university system (Clark, Ghent and
McDermed, 2005), employees in all three cases were also covered by the existing Social Security
system. Given that the value of annuitization, for example, is a declining function of the fraction
of wealth already annuitized, this may make individuals more likely to choose a DC if it is on top
of the DB already provided by Social Security.
        In this paper, we make use of a unique data set of employees in the State Universities
Retirement System (SURS) of Illinois. This sample has four key features that make it a
particularly valuable environment for studying the DB vs. DC plan choice. First, these
employees are given an explicit choice between a DB and a DC plan, holding all job
characteristics fixed.1 Specifically, in their first six months of employment, employees are asked
to make a one-time, lifetime, irrevocable choice among three retirement plans: (i) a traditional
formula-based DB plan; (ii) a “portable DB plan,” which is slightly less generous than the
ordinary DB if one retires from the system, but more generous if they take an early lump-sum
distribution; and (iii) the “Self-Managed Plan” or SMP, which is a 100 percent self-directed DC
plan. Individuals who fail to make an active choice within the first 6 months of employment are
automatically defaulted into the traditional DB plan.
        Second, because Illinois is one of several states that opted out of the Social Security
system,2 wages of individuals earned from SURS covered employment are not covered by Social
Security, meaning that no OASDI payroll taxes are withheld and no OASDI benefits accrue
based on these earnings. Thus, unless an individual has substantial employment earnings outside



1
  As reported in Clark, Ghent and McDermed 2006, the choice between a DB and a DC plan is a common feature of
pension plans at public (but not private) universities.
2
  According to the GAO (2003), “historically, Social Security did not require coverage of government employees
because they had their own retirement systems, and there was concern over the question of the federal government’s
right to impose a tax on state governments.” Other states whose employees do not participate in Social Security
include California, Colorado, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Ohio and Texas.


                                                                                                                 3
of the SURS system, it will be SURS and not Social Security that will provide the primary
source of income in retirement.
       Third, the combined employer/employee retirement contributions to the SURS system
are, at minimum, 14.6 percent of annual salary, which is larger than the payroll tax paid by those
in the Social Security system. Therefore, the SURS system looms large as part of a participant’s
lifetime financial plan.
       Fourth, the SURS data includes a diverse group of employees, including campus
administrators, faculty members, clerical staff, individuals in the employ of university police and
fire services, and others. Prior studies of the DB vs. DC choice using state university employees
(e.g., Clark et al 2005, Clark & Pitts 1999) were limited to faculty members only, and thus it is
more difficult to generalize the results to populations that are less highly educated. Our sample
allows us the opportunity to more carefully examine how the DB vs. DC decision might vary
across broad education and occupation groups.
       Using administrative data on the full universe of SURS covered employees since the plan
choice was first made available starting in 1998/99, we analyze what types of employees are
most likely to choose the DC plan over the portable or traditional DB plan. We have two major
findings. First, despite the projections by SURS at the start of the program that a majority of
new employees would actively select the SMP or portable plan, in fact the majority of new
employees never make any active pension choice, and thus are defaulted in to the traditional
plan. After the initial publicity surrounding the introduction of plan choice started to fade, the
proportion of new employees not making a choice, and hence defaulting into the traditional plan,
increased from 43 percent in 1999 to roughly three-fifths over the period 2001-2004. Second,
we find that approximately 15 percent of new employees choose the Self-Managed Plan, despite
the fact that the SMP is likely an inferior choice due to plan parameters that make it less
generous than the Portable plan under reasonable assumptions. Interestingly, we find that
individuals are more likely than average to choose the SMP if they are more highly educated (as
proxied by being an academic employee as opposed to staff, as well as being at a University as
opposed to a community college), have higher earnings, are married, and work at an institution
where a higher fraction of other employees also chose the SMP. We attribute much of the
selection of the SMP to framing effects in how the plan choices are communicated to new




                                                                                                     4
employees, but we discuss alternative explanations as well, including beliefs about political risk
facing the DB and portable DB systems.
       This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 outlines the basic structure of the SURS
system, including more details about each of the plan options and how the choices are made.
Section 3 discusses the administrative data in more detail, including its strengths and limitations.
In section 4, we outline our empirical methods and present some simple tabulations of plan
choice. Section 5 reports more formal results. Section 6 concludes and sets forth several
directions for subsequent research.


2. SURS Choices
2.1 Background on SURS and Allowance of Choice
       As the name implies, the State Universities Retirement System of Illinois is the
retirement program for all employees of the Illinois state university and community college
system. Established in 1941, SURS “serves over 70 employers in Illinois, including state
universities, community colleges, and state agencies. It employs more than 100 people in offices
in Champaign and Chicago and provides benefit services to over 180,000 members throughout
the world.” (SURS website, 6/19/06). “SURS covers all faculty and support staff of Illinois
higher public education including universities, colleges, Class I community colleges, scientific
surveys, and other related agencies.” (SURS Traditional Defined Benefit Package, pg. 1). There
is a large range in the size of the employers, with several state agencies (e.g., the State Water
Survey) having only a few new employees during our sample period while the University of
Illinois at Chicago and the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign together comprise about
one out of every four new employees over this period.
       As noted above, the employees include university, college or campus administrators,
faculty members, administrative and clerical staff, individuals in the employ of university police,
and others. In general, an individual will participate as long as their position requires them to
work “continuously for at least one academic term or 4 months, whichever is less, and …
employment is not temporary, intermittent, or irregular … SURS participation ends on the date
you retire or terminate employment with a SURS-covered employer.” Eligibility does not extend
to students regularly attending classes at a SURS-covered employer who are employed on a part-




                                                                                                     5
time or temporary basis for that employer, to J-1 or F-1 visa holders who have not yet established
residency or to current annuitants from SURS.
        Social Security taxes are not withheld from SURS earnings, and SURS participants are
not eligible for Social Security coverage based on their employment with a SURS covered
employer.3 SURS withholds 8 percent of salary as an employee contribution to SURS. The
State/employer contribution varies by plan, and will be described in more detail below.
        Prior to 1998, all employees in the SURS system were covered by the traditional defined
benefit (DB) system. In the mid-1990s, however, pressure began building on the State
Legislature to offer a DC option to state employees. In 1997, the Illinois Legislature passed a
law allowing participating employers to offer individuals a choice of three plans. The addition of
a DC option was viewed as having three key benefits. First, it was believed that a DC plan
would be more attractive to potential new employees. The SURS executive director at the time
was quoted as saying “The legislation passed because universities were saying they needed it to
attract people from other states.”4 Second, the creation of the SMP option was viewed as a cost-
reduction measure by the state, due to the fact that the state’s contributions to the SMP are lower
than the contributions required to fully fund benefits under the traditional DB option.5 Finally,
the shift was also promoted as a way to impose fiscal discipline on the State Legislature. State
Senator Peter Fitzgerald, a leading advocate of the switch, argued that the DC plan would force
lawmakers to put the money up-front so that employees could invest it, rather than offering
promises of future benefits that the Legislature had a history of under-funding.6
        The next three sub-sections summarize the key features of each of the three pension
options.


2.2 Traditional Benefit Package




3
  Participants hired after March 1986 are subject to withholding for Medicare.
4
  “University Workers Get Greater choice in Retirement Planning.” The State Journal Register. Natalie Boehme.
March 12, 1999, page 39.
5
  Section 15-158.3 of the SURS governing statute requires an actuarial assessment of “the extent to which employee
optional retirement plan participation has reduced the State’s required contributions to the System … in relation to
what the State’s contributions to the System would have been … if the self-managed plan had not been
implemented.”
6
  “Fitzgerald Floats Trial Balloon to Change State Pension System to a 401(k) Plan.” Don Thomson. Daily Herald.
January 14, 1997.


                                                                                                                   6
           This SURS defined benefit (DB) retirement plan is the only one that was in place prior to
1998. As of the writing of this paper, the Traditional plan remains the default option for
individuals who do not make an active plan designation within 6 months of their hire date (or
specifically, the date that is received by SURS as the individual’s certification of employment.)
Employees contribute 8 percent of pay, which is the same contribution rate as in the other two
options. Of this 8 percent, SURS reports that 6.5 percent is designated to fund the normal
retirement benefit, 0.5 percent is designated to fund automatic annual increases in retirement
benefits, and 1 percent is designated to fund survivor benefits, although it is not clear how
closely these reported designations match actuarial costs. Because all SURS-covered workers
are employees of the State of Illinois, the employer contribution to SURS is a general State
obligation. For participants in the Traditional plan, SURS documents state “the State’s share for
a retirement annuity averages about 9.1 percent of the total earnings of all SURS participants in a
Defined Benefit Plan” (pg 2). This 9.1 percent figure is an over-simplification, and most likely
represents a lower bound on the average cost to the State. Indeed, for fiscal year 2007, the
employer normal cost for the various benefits and expenses associated with the DB plan (which
includes both the Traditional and the Portable plan) are approximately 10.8 percent of payroll.7
             Benefits from the traditional plan are paid as life annuities. An individual is eligible to
receive benefits at age 55 with at least 8 years of service, age 62 with 5 years of service, or at any
age with 30 years of service (if employment terminated after 8/2/02). An individual must start
receiving a retirement annuity no later than April 1st of the year following the year they reach age
70½ if they are not participating in SURS or another Illinois state system.
           For most employees there are two formulas for calculating the retirement annuity.8 For
each individual, the benefit will be calculated each way, and the worker receives the larger of the
calculated amounts.
           The two formulas are:
           (a) The General Formula: For those retiring at age 60 after July 1997, the formula is:
                Benefit = 2.2% x Years of Service x Final Average Earnings
                For non-disabled individuals with less than 30 years of service, there is an early
                retirement actuarial reduction of 0.5% for each month under age 60. For retirement


7
    Based on personal communication with SURS, August 7, 2006.
8
    A third option, known as the minimum annuity formula, is so rarely used that it is largely obsolete.


                                                                                                           7
           after August 2, 2002, retirement at any age – without reduction – is permitted if a
           member has 30 or more years of service.
       (b) Money Purchase formula: For most individuals, the money purchase formula is equal
           to 6.5% of the employee’s salary (6.5% of the 8% contribution is for the retirement
           benefit, excluding survivor and inflation adjustments) plus a 140% match by the State
           of Illinois plus interest accumulated at a rate set by the SURS Board all divided by a
           unisex annuity factor.
    Both these approaches to calculating the benefit have numerous additional complexities that
we do not expand on here in the interest of space. For example, there are special rules governing
a supplemental minimum annuity guarantee, reversionary annuities to provide a spouse or
dependent with higher income than the usual survivor benefits, and an additional formula that
applies only to police officers and firefighters.
    For all employees, the benefit is calculated under both methods (with one extra in the case of
police and fire), and the individual receives the higher of these benefit amounts. In recent years,
the majority of retirees have received the highest level of benefits under the money purchase
formula. The only additional restriction is that, regardless of method, benefits in retirement
cannot exceed 80 percent of final average pay (and some individuals have lower maximum
pensions based on their termination date.) Benefits are automatically increased by 3 percent
every January 1. There are also generous survivor benefits both before and after retirement. In
particular, the benefit that comes out of these calculations is automatically paid as a joint and
50% contingent survivor annuity. If a single individual retires under the Traditional plan, then in
addition to receiving the calculated monthly benefit, he is entitled to a refund of 1/8 of his
contributions plus interest.
    The service credit is a key parameter in the calculation of one’s benefits. In any academic
year (from September 1 through August 31), an individual may earn no more than 1 year of
service credit, and it is possible to earn fractional years of credit. A complex set of rules
determines how service credits are affected by disability leave, sick leave, unused sick leave,
prior service with other employers, military service, and other similar situations. A second key
parameter is an individual’s final average earnings (or “final rate of earnings.” This is basically
the four consecutive academic years of service in which the individual’s earnings were the




                                                                                                      8
highest. There are limitations on the rate at which earnings are permitted to grow year-over-year
as part of this calculation.
    While the traditional benefit packages is quite generous relative to most private sector plans,
it is important to bear in mind that the SURS package must substitute for Social Security as well
as a private pension. Indeed, the 2.2 percent formula multiplier is, if anything, a bit less
generous than that in other public pension plans whose employees are not covered by Social
Security. A recent study of public pensions (Ford 2005) indicates an average formula multiplier
of 2.27 percent among such states (versus 1.95 percent average among public pension plans in
states that are covered by Social Security). Of course, over the 2001-2005 period, approximately
two-thirds of SURS retirees received benefits via the money purchase option, which means this
benefit was higher than that calculated under the traditional formula.
    In short, the Traditional Benefit package is a fairly generous pension plan for those who
retire from the system. The major downside of this plan, however, is that it is not very generous
for those who leave the system early and take a refund. Regardless of length of service,
participants in the Traditional Benefit package who take a refund from the system upon
terminating employment will receive their own contributions (equal to 8 percent of salary) plus a
4.5% interest rate. No employer/State contributions are refunded, even after the individual is
vested. Many individuals who leave the system early would be better off leaving their
contributions in the SURS system and claiming a benefit based on the money purchase formula.
    In contrast to private sector DB plans, the SURS benefits are not insured by the PBGC, and
it is worth noting that the State of Illinois has massively under-funded its share of the pension
obligations. As of March 31, 2006, the State Universities Retirement System investment
portfolio (which covers both the Traditional and the Portable plan options) was valued at nearly
$14.5 billion, but faced liabilities of over $21 billion, for a funding ratio of only 68%. In
actuality, the funding problem is worse than these official statistics indicated because the
liabilities are discounted using a high discount rate that reflects the expected return on plan assets
rather than using a riskless rate of interest that would be appropriate given the constitutional
guarantee of benefits to participants (discussed below). The degree of official under-funding is
widely reported in the Illinois press, as well as in the regular participant newsletters sent out by
SURS, and thus most participants are likely aware that there is political risk to their future
benefits.



                                                                                                       9
     This political risk is, however, substantially mitigated by the fact that Article XIII, Section 5
of the Illinois Constitution states that “membership in any pension or retirement system of the
State … shall be an enforceable contractual relationship, the benefits of which shall not be
diminished or impaired.” This “impairment clause,” as it has come to be known, means that the
Legislature cannot reduce the generosity of the SURS benefit without a constitutional
amendment. Nonetheless, uncertainty about the ability of the State to make good on its future
funding obligations may lead some individuals to prefer the Self-Managed Plan. Indeed, as of
July 1, 2005, the power to set the interest rate used in calculating benefits under the money
purchase formula has been transferred from the SURS Board to the State Comptroller. In
addition, the money purchase option was eliminated for employees starting after July 1, 2005.
Such actions likely reinforce the belief that future benefits from SURS are not free from political
risk.


2.3 Portable Benefit Package
     The portable benefit package is a modified version of the Traditional package. The first key
differences is that if the person leaves the system early and takes a refund of their contributions,
they have historically received a rate of interest that is substantially higher than the 4.5%
provided by the Traditional plan. Indeed, this Effective Interest Rate (which, until 6/30/05 was
the same rate used to calculate retirement benefits under the Money Purchase option) has
averaged over 8% for the past 20 years.9 If an individual has at least 5 years of service, and is
thus vested, he/she also receives a full dollar-for-dollar match from the State. In short, any
individual who departs SURS service and takes a refund rather than leaving the money in the
SURS system, the portable plan is far more generous than the traditional plan.
     The second key difference is that the benefits from the portable plan are not as generous as
the traditional plan if the individual retires from the system. In particular, for participants in the
traditional plan, the monthly benefit amount is paid as a joint and survivor annuity. Single
individuals under the traditional plan can take 1/8 of their contributions plus interest as a lump-
sum at retirement in lieu of the survivor benefits. In contrast, under the portable plan, the



9
 Since 7/1/05, the State Comptroller sets the ERI for the Money Purchase option when calculating retirement
benefit. The SURS Board continues to set the ERI for refund calculations. Since 7/1/06, these rates have diverged.


                                                                                                                10
retirement benefit is a paid as a single life annuity, and married individuals must accept an
actuarial reduction to convert it to a joint and survivor annuity.
     There are other differences as well. For example, whereas participants in the Traditional
plan are required to annuitize their assets, Portable plan participants do have the option to take a
lump-sum at retirement. Doing so, however, comes at the high cost of losing eligibility for
retiree health benefits.


2.4 Self-Managed Plan (SMP)
     The SMP is an entirely participant-directed defined contribution plan that invests a total of
14.6% of salary (8% employee and at least 6.6% employer10) into retirement accounts.
Participants are able to choose from a variety of mutual funds and annuity contracts from TIAA-
CREF and Fidelity. Upon full vesting after 5 years of service, the individual is entitled to a
100% refund of both employer and employee contributions plus any investment gains or losses.
Upon retirement, the individual is able to choose from a wide range of annuities (e.g., joint and
survivor with 50%, 75% or 100% survivor benefits, and the option of 10, 15, and 20 year period
certain guarantees) or a lump-sum. As with the Portable plan, however, retirees must annuitize
their full account balance in order to be eligible for retiree health benefits from the State of
Illinois.
     All of the educational information provided by SURS, including the instructional videos, the
program guides and online information, guides new SURS participants through the plan choice
by focusing on the distinction between DB and DC plans. A reasonable inference from this
material, even by financially sophisticated employees, is that the Traditional Benefit Package is
the best choice for individuals who expect to retire from SURS covered employment, while the
SMP option is a good choice for highly mobile employees (such as new, untenured faculty
members) who value choice and are comfortable making their own investment decisions. The
Portable plan is largely presented as a modified version of the DB. Indeed, much of the material
is structured so as to guide individuals down the DB vs. DC path first, and then discuss the
Portable vs. Traditional distinction only after one has gone down the DB path. Thus, many



10
  The 6.6% rate has been the rate applied since the program’s inception. Technically, this rate could rise slightly if
SURS decides that the cost of providing disability benefits to SMP participants is less than 1%. It cannot rise
beyond 7.6%, and indeed is unlikely rise to anywhere near this level due to the cost of paying disability benefits.


                                                                                                                    11
employees may be left with the general impression that the Portable plan lies somewhere
between the Traditional and the SMP on nearly all dimensions.
       A more careful examination, however, suggests that the SMP may be an inferior choice,
relative to the Portable plan, for most employees, regardless of their expected employment
longevity with a SURS employer. To understand its inferiority, it is useful to consider the
benefits from these two options for individuals at different points in their careers.
       First, consider an employee who leaves SURS employment and takes a lump-sum refund
from the system. If they leave service prior to vesting (i.e., individuals with less than 5 years of
service), the differences are small. In both cases, individuals receive their own 8% contributions.
In the portable plan, the individual receives the SURS rate of interest, while in the SMP, they
receive actual investment returns. After vesting, however, the differences are much larger.
Under the portable plan, the individual also receives a full 8% match from the State, while in the
SMP, the individual only receives 6.6%. Thus, for the SMP to be an optimal choice based solely
on relative returns (i.e., ignoring political risk), the individual must expect to earn investment
returns that are sufficient to exceed the rate of interest credited by SURS to the portable plan
(which has averaged 8-9% nominal for the past 20 years) plus enough extra return to make-up
the 1.4% of salary shortfall in the State contribution rate. Assuming an 8% return for the
portable plan, SMP participants must expect annual rates of return of 8.5% even with a 30-year
time horizon (those with a 5 year time horizon must achieve an 11.2% average return).11 Note
that nominal returns of this level are substantially greater than what one should expect from a
diversified stock/bond portfolio using historical U.S. data, let alone what one should expect if the
equity premium going forward is lower than its historical realized value.
       Second, consider an employee who retires from SURS. In this case, the employee receives
the higher of the two methods of benefit calculation discussed above. Just focusing on the
money purchase option, the individual must, as in the case of a refund, beat the 8-9% effective
interest rate plus make-up for the contribution shortfall. Furthermore, even if the Effective
Interest Rate were to decline in the future, the General Formula provides a benefit floor equal to
2.2% of final average salary for each year of service. In short, for long service employees, the
SMP is an inferior choice to the Traditional or the Portable plans.



11
     These calculations assume a 3% annual increase in salary, and a fixed investment return from the SMP.


                                                                                                             12
    Thus, unlike the theoretical comparison between DB and DC provided by Bodie, Marcus
and Merton (1988) in which there is a constraint that the two plan types have equal costs to the
employer, in the case of SURS the required employer contributions to the SMP plan are
significantly lower than that of the two DB options. Given this, and the resulting disadvantage of
the SMP to the Portable plan at all time horizons, it may be surprising that anyone chooses it.
However, many of the differences just described, such as the difference in the match and the
magnitude of the Effective Interest Rate, are not easily discernable from the material provided by
SURS. Further, as previously mentioned, the framing of the pension plan choice as first a
decision between DB and DC, as opposed to a direct comparison of all three options
simultaneously, may also help explain participation in the SMP. The SURS manual explicitly
cites as a disadvantage of a DB plan that “members with short service, or those who expect to
leave their job soon, will not earn a large benefit” while a key advantage of a DC plan is that
“members can transfer balances to other defined contribution plans should they change
employers” (SURS, The Power of Choice, p. 5). However, while the Portable plan is classified
as a DB-type plan, members with short service are treated essentially the same under the SMP
and Portable plan options, with the accumulated balances of both allowed to be transferred to
another plan if the worker changes employers (including employer contributions if vesting has
occurred).
    In addition to a simple lack of understanding of key plan parameters, there are other reasons
that individuals may prefer the SMP option, despite its apparent financial disadvantages. These
include concerns about political risk in the Traditional and Portable plans, arising from the fact
that the State of Illinois has consistently under-funded the plans. While there is a State
constitutional guarantee against the impairment of benefits for current state pension plan
participants, the substantial under-funding of the plans may lead some participants to question
the long-term ability of the State to make good on its pension promises. In contrast, the State
contributions to the SMP are made immediately. Individuals may also have overly-optimistic
beliefs about future equity market returns that lead them to believe that their SMP investments
can outperform the SURS rate of interest. Individuals may also simply place a high value on the
ability to choose their investment portfolio. While we are not able to distinguish among these
various reasons in the current administrative data, we are planning to address these issues in
follow-on work using a survey of SURS participants.



                                                                                                     13
     Finally, another difference between the SMP and the other two plans (Portable and
Traditional), is that employer contributions commence after the employee formally selects the
SMP option and not when employment starts. In the Portable and Traditional plans, the
participant receives credit back to the date of employment for both benefit calculation and refund
purposes.12 Thus, a four-month lag between the start of employment and selecting a retirement
plan will result in the worker losing four months of employer contributions in the SMP plan, but
will result in no loss of employer contributions in the other two plans. This provides a financial
incentive to make a quick decision if one is considering the SMP.


3. Data
         The State Universities Retirement System of Illinois has provided us with a rich data
containing administrative records for the entire population of workers who have started working
for a SURS covered employer subsequent to that employer’s offering of plan choice. SURS
provided us with data on both a) employees who had already been covered by SURS at the point
in time at which their employer first began offering choice and b) new employees who have
joined the system since choice was first offered. We are confident that the new employee data is
complete, i.e., that we observe individuals who were given a choice, even if they subsequently
left the system, became disabled or died. With the pre-existing employee data, however, we are
not confident that we have a complete set of records of individuals who subsequently left the
system. Therefore, we will focus our analysis on the “new employee” sample, where there are
no concerns about sample selection. Fortunately, this is also the more interesting population to
examine because their choice is not “contaminated” by the fact that they had significant prior
service under the Traditional plan. For pre-existing employees who switched to the SMP at the
time the new plans were initially adopted, they had to forfeit all prior employer contributions,
which should have strongly tilted the decision against the SMP (although interestingly, a non-
trivial number of individuals made this choice).
          As such, our analysis focuses on those individuals that began service with a SURS
covered employer in 1999 or after. While most employers adopted the new choices at some
point during the 1998 calendar year, we only know the year in which an employee began service

12
  In this sense, it is as if the employer made contributions retroactively to the first day of employment. In reality,
the State contributions are made on an aggregate, not individual, basis and are generally not made at the level that
would be required for the plan to remain fully funded.


                                                                                                                         14
with a SURS covered employer, and not the month, we are unable to determine which employees
joining the system in 1998 joined the employer after adoption of the new plan options. By
focusing on the 1999 or after sample, we are confident that we are examining the “post-choice”
cohorts.
         The universe of individuals beginning employment in 1999 or after (through 2004)
consists of approximately 63,000 observations. However, SURS was unable to provide complete
earnings records for the entire sample, and thus the sample size drops to just over 45,000 when
we condition on observing earnings.13
         In Table 1, we report the fraction of the population that makes each plan choice in each
year of our 1999-2004 sample. Over the entire sample period, we see that slightly under half the
sample (44%) made an active pension selection, while the majority (56%) were defaulted into
the Traditional Benefits Package. The fact that the default option draws such a large number of
individuals could reflect either the power of the default itself, as one would expect given the
evidence in this area (e.g., Madrian and Shea, 2001, and Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick,
2001), or it could simply reflect that a large number of individuals concluded that the Traditional
plan was the best choice and therefore just allowed SURS to default them into it. Another 10%
of participants made an active choice into the Traditional plan, bringing the total number of
participants in the Traditional Plan to nearly two-thirds of the sample. Approximately 15% of
the sample chose the SMP while just under 19% chose the Portable package.
         A striking feature of the data is that the fraction of individuals accepting the default
option has grown steadily over time, from 43% in 1999 to around 58% in 2001, where it has
remained relative stable since. This time series pattern perhaps reflects the flurry of local press
attention paid during the introduction of plan choice, which quickly subsided.
         The fraction choosing the SMP also shows substantial changes over time. Specifically, in
both 1999 and 2000, 22% of the sample chose the SMP. These years came after a period of


13
   Our measure of earnings is the reported earnings in the second year of employment. While we would have liked
to use the respondent’s first year of earnings, we were given actual rather than annualized earnings during the first
year. Thus, for many individuals who worked only part of the year, we observe only a fraction of their annual
salary. We are unable to annualize the data because SURS did not provide us with the month that a person started
employment. In addition to dropping observations that are missing earnings, we have experimented with several
other approaches (including a dummy variable for missing along with its interaction with earnings, imputing each
missing value with a predicted value, etc.) and found that our coefficient estimates were not terribly sensitive, which
is not surprising given that the reason earnings is missing is not systematically correlated with plan choice. This is
often called an “ignorable case” of missing data in the econometrics literature.


                                                                                                                    15
extremely high equity market returns, which peaked in early 2000. In 2001, the fraction
choosing the SMP fell to only 13.8%, and declined further to 11.5% in 2002. In contrast, while
the SMP has seen a sharp decline in enrollment from 2000-2004, enrollment in the Portable plan
has remained relatively stable in the 18-19% range over the same period.
         In Table 2, we report summary statistics for a number of key variables. We first report
classifications by occupation (academic, staff, or police) interacted whether the individual works
for a university, community college, or some other employer type. The single largest group,
comprising just under one-third of the sample, are academic employees at state universities.
Staff members at universities and academics at community colleges each contribute another 22-
23% of the sample, while community college staff comprise 15% of the sample. Police account
for less then 1% of the sample. Approximately 8% of the sample is employed by a state agency
other than a university or community college.
         Interestingly, only two-thirds of the participants in our sample are considered “active”
SURS participants, meaning that they are still employed by a SURS covered employer and thus
making contributions. Most of the rest left SURS employment, while a trivial fraction of the
sample had died or retired. Individuals who leave SURS service after 5 years are considered
vested, and thus eligible to receive State contributions along with their own if they choose the
Portable of the SMP plan, and thus we will control for this in our analysis.
         A majority of new employees (57%) are women, and 59% of our sample is married.14
The average age in the sample is just over 41 years. Approximately 14% of the sample has
“reciprocal service” from another State administered pension plan, such as the State Teacher’s
Retirement System: this is an important control since these individuals may have a financial
incentive to stay with the Traditional plan due to rules that coordinate benefits across various
public plans in the State of Illinois.
         Average earnings in the sample are only $24,100 per year, but this figure includes part-
time employees (which are over one-quarter of our sample). If we condition the sample on being
considered a full-time employee, the average earnings are roughly $43,000 for an academic,
$35,000 for a police officer, and $28,000 for staff. In addition to these covariates, we also know



14
  For administrative reasons, marital status was missing for some of the individuals who accepted the default
option. For these individuals, we imputed their marital status using a Probit analysis on those individuals who took
the default option and whose marital status was known.


                                                                                                                  16
information about the individual’s three-digit zip code and their campus, which we will use in
some of our specifications below.
       While our data is quite rich in many respects, it has the usual limitation of administrative
data in that we do not know many potentially relevant demographic characteristics, such as
health status, or non-SURS financial resources such as wealth, spousal earnings, or non-SURS
earnings.


4. Unconditional Tabulations and Empirical Methods
       When an individual joins a SURS covered employer, there are four possible outcomes
with respect to their pension choice. These are:
       a. The individual chose the Self-Managed Plan
       b. The individual chose the Portable Benefits Package
       c. The individual actively chose the Traditional Benefits Package
       d. The individual made no active choice and was thus defaulted into the Traditional
            Benefits Package
       Table 3 displays the retirement plan choices made across various groups based on
occupation, plan status, and demographics. These unconditional tabulations suggest that
academics at universities are more than twice as likely to enroll in the SMP (the DC plan) and
are significantly less likely to actively select or be defaulted in to the Traditional (DB) plan than
are other employees. Those employees that left their job before vesting (i.e., in less than five
years) are more apt to have made no pension choice and thus be defaulted into the traditional
plan ex ante than are employees who ended up staying with their employer or stayed long
enough to be vested. This could reflect that, for this group of short-tenured workers, the pension
choice is not viewed as being of much importance (i.e., differences in plan benefits are much
more striking after vesting).
       To more formally analyze these plan choices and their determinants, we follow two
complementary approaches. First, we analyze a series of linear probability models to provide
simple to interpret point estimates (marginal effects from Probit models are similar). We define
the dependent variable yi in six different ways: (i) chose SMP, (ii) chose Portable, (iii) chose or
defaulted into Traditional, (iv) made any “active” choice (vs. defaulting), (v) actively chose
traditional, conditional on being in traditional, and (vi) chose traditional, conditional on making



                                                                                                   17
an active choice. These will be explained in more detail below. We include a full set of control
variables.
        A second approach is to use a multinomial logit model, in recognition of the fact that the
individual is choosing from among four distinct outcomes that do not have a natural ordering. In
the multinomial logit model, we estimate a set of coefficients β1(smp), β2(port), β3(trad), and β4(default)
corresponding to each outcome category, such that the probability of an individual choosing
SMP is:
                                      1
                               e Xβ
Pr ( y = 1) =       1         2           3   4
                e Xβ + e Xβ + e Xβ + e Xβ
        To identify a multinomial model, it is standard to select one set of coefficients equal to
zero, so that the remaining set of coefficients measures the change relative to the base group. In
our specifications, we will use as our base group those individuals who failed to make an active
choice and thus defaulted into the Traditional plan (y=4), and thus set β4(default) =0.
        Thus, the relative probability of choosing the SMP to defaulting into the Traditional plan
is:
          Pr ( y = 1)         1( smp )
                       = e Xβ
          Pr ( y = 4 )
        Thus, the way to interpret the coefficients is that the exponentiated value of a coefficient
is the relative risk ratio for a one unit change in the corresponding variable, where the risk is
being measured is the “risk” of choosing SMP relative to taking the default option. The elements
of X are the same as in the linear probability models. In our tables, we will report the relative
risk ratios for ease of interpretation.


5. Results on Plan Choice
5.1 Who Chooses the SMP, Portable, and Traditional?
        Table 4 reports results from six linear probability models. We begin in columns 1, 2, and
3 with an analysis of who chooses the SMP, Portable, and Traditional (whether by active choice
or default) plans, respectively. Since an individual will ultimately be in one of these three plans,
and being in one plan means not being in the other two, the coefficients across the three columns
will add up to zero (within rounding). Consistent with the simple tabulations presented in Table
3, the results clearly indicate strong differences by occupation (which, in this setting, is a good


                                                                                                          18
proxy for educational attainment and perhaps financial sophistication). When one accounts for
all of the interaction terms, we find that, relative to an academic at a university, staff members at
a university are 9.7 percentage points less likely to choose the SMP, academics at a community
college are 3.6 percentage points less likely to choose the SMP, and staff members at a
community college are 6.9 percentage points less likely to choose the SMP. These effects are
quite large given the baseline SMP participation rate of only 15%. Relative to other occupation
groups, academics at universities are much less likely to be enrolled in the Traditional plan. This
is very much consistent with many academics’ uncertainty surrounding their long-term future at
a university (i.e., the tenure decision) when these retirement plan decisions are made (recall the
Traditional plan is particularly attractive for employees likely to have a long stay with their
employer). For example, staff members at a university are 13 percentage points more likely to
be enrolled in the Traditional Plan than are academics (with the difference much more muted
when one focuses on staff and academics at community colleges). Part of the community college
effect might also be driven by the fact that many community colleges in Illinois are heavily
unionized, and the faculty unions tend to be “pro-DB.”
       Benefits for police officers under the portable and traditional plans are more generous
than those for other employees due to the existence of a fourth option for calculating benefits that
applies only to police and fire employees. Consistent with this, police officers at a University are
23.1 percentage points less like to participate in the SMP, while police officers at a community
college are 10.2 percentage points less likely to do so.
       There is evidence that there is a correlation between the ex post employment duration and
the ex ante retirement plan choices. For example, those individuals that ended up leaving the
firm before vesting were more likely to enroll in the Traditional plan (the default option). For a
worker that leaves SURS before vesting, the choice of retirement plan has little economic
consequence. However, workers that ex post left the SURS system, but with sufficient tenure to
obtain vesting, were much less likely to have chosen the Traditional Plan. Recall that workers
who leave their SURS employer after vesting and opt for a refund of their retirement plan
balance receive both employee and employer contributions under the SMP or Portable plans, but
relinquish employer contributions under the Traditional plan. Thus, assuming some foresight in
employment duration, the coefficients on the “left with vesting” and “left without vesting”
variables are sensible given the pension plan rules in place.



                                                                                                   19
           Higher income workers are more likely to enroll in the SMP or Portable plans, at the
expense of enrollment in the Traditional plan—a $10,000 increase in earnings corresponds to a
nearly 3 percentage point increase in the probability of choosing the SMP, a 0.7 percentage point
increase in the probability of choosing Portable, and a 3.6 percentage point decline in enrollment
in the Traditional plan. To the extent that income may proxy for greater financial sophistication
(similar to being an academic at a university), greater financial sophistication is associated with a
higher likelihood of selecting the DC plan. Females are more likely to pick the Portable plan
than males and married individuals are more likely to pick the SMP than single. Both younger
and older individuals seem less likely to select the SMP and are instead more apt to enroll in the
Traditional plan (but perhaps for different reasons given that the Traditional is also the default
option).15 As expected, individuals with prior service in another system with reciprocity are
more likely to be enrolled in the Traditional plan.
           We also observe how the plan choice varies over time, holding fixed other characteristics.
The time series trends presented in Table 4 are very similar to the unconditional trends
documented in Table 1. We find that SMP participation rates in 2001 – 2004 are significantly
lower than the rates in 1999-2000. These effects are quite large: holding all other covariates
fixed, an individual joining the plan in 2003 was 11 percentage points less likely to choose the
SMP than was an individual who joined SURS in 1999. This is consistent with the possibility
that SMP participation rates are influenced by equity market performance in prior years. There
is very little time trend in take up of the Portable plan from 1999-2004, all of the decrease in
SMP selection is attributable to an increase in enrollment in the Traditional plan (mainly through
default).
           Finally, “Percent on campus” indicates what fraction of the campus population chose the
same option as the individual. This is defined by taking the total number of employees on that
campus at the time the individual began employment who chose the SMP option, for example,
and dividing it by the total number of campus employees (excluding individual i). We find a
strong positive relation for all the pension plan decisions, indicating the possibility of either peer
effects (e.g., an individual is more likely to choose the SMP if others on the campus also did so),
“human resources” effects (e.g., the H.R. officer gives common advice to all new employees on



15
     The omitted age group in the regression is 35-39.


                                                                                                     20
that campus), or more generally sorting of individuals across campuses based on unobserved
characteristics (to the econometrician) that are correlated with pension plan choice.
         In unreported results, we further explore peer effects. In the spirit of Duflo and Saez
(2002, 2003), we also include the percent of academics making a particular choice and the
percent of staff making a choice. We then interact these two campus-wide measures with
whether the individual is an academic or staff. This enables us to test whether academics are
more influenced by the decisions of fellow academics as opposed to staff, and vice versa. We
find, across all of the pension choices, that the choice of a given academic is highly correlated
with that of other academics on campus, but is uncorrelated with that of staff on campus, with
the reverse also holding.
         To summarize, we find that the SMP (DC plan) is most likely to be chosen by individuals
who are highly educated (e.g., university academics) and have higher incomes, while the
Traditional plan (DB plan) is most likely to be chosen by less educated individuals with lower
incomes. In essence, the SMP is disproportionately chosen by the very group that one would
likely expect to be the most financially sophisticated. It is ironic, that, as explained in section 2
above, a close examination of this plan suggests that it may be inferior to the Portable plan in
most states of the world. While we plan to do more research on this subject, our initial
hypothesis is that most participants are making a more general “DB vs. DC” decision, and that
the SMP may indeed be rationally preferable to the Traditional plan for most of these employees.
The failure to choose the Portable plan instead, however, may be due to the difficulty of
understanding the relative advantages of the Portable plan, particular given the manner in which
this complex information is provided to new participants. Other possibilities include that
individuals are over confident in their ability to earn high returns through the SMP or that
individuals are concerned about political risk in the Portable or DB system.16
5.2 Active vs. Passive Choice
         The results in column 3 combine individuals who actively chose the Traditional plan and
those who were defaulted into it. This distinction is worth further consideration, as these may
represent two very different populations. In column 4, we use as our dependent variable whether
the individual simply made any active choice (including SMP, portable, or traditional) as


16
  Indeed the recent decision by the Legislature to shift decision making authority over the setting of the ERI in the
future is one manifestation of political risk.


                                                                                                                    21
opposed to passively accepting the default. The complement of this dependent variable is
defaulting into the Traditional option (and thus the coefficients from a “default” regression will
simply be the negative of those displayed in column 4). Consistent with earlier results, we find
that more educated individuals (academics, university employees), and those with higher
earnings are more likely to make an active plan choice, as are women, and married individuals.
As noted earlier, the overall fraction of active decision-making declined substantially over the
period, falling by 15 percentage points between 1999 and 2003.
        In columns 5 and 6, we examine individuals who made an active choice to go with the
Traditional plan, even though an active choice was not necessary to achieve the Traditional plan
outcome. In column 5, we limit the sample to those in the Traditional plan, and are thus
analyzing active vs. passive Traditional plan participants. We can clearly reject that these two
groups are the same. Conditional on ending up in the Traditional plan, it is actually community
college employees and staff members who are most likely to have actively made this choice.
Higher earners, women and married individuals are also more likely to have made this active
choice, while younger people are more likely to have ended up in the Traditional plan by default.
In sum, the population of defaulters is “different” both from the general population of those that
made an active pension choice as well as hose that actively selected the same plan as the default
option (i.e., the Traditional plan).
        In column 6 we explore how those who actively chose the Traditional plan differ from
other individuals who made active choices (dropping those who defaulted). The patterns are
largely as expected based on earlier results.
5.3 Campus/Employer Fixed Effects
        As stated earlier, the framing of the pension plan choice as a discussion of DB vs. DC, as
opposed to simultaneously comparing all three plans (SMP, Portable, and Traditional) may
obfuscate the benefits of the Portable plan (particularly relative to the SMP). Of all the more
than 60 campuses/employers covered by the State Universities Retirement System (SURS), one
would expect/hope that the employees of SURS itself, the organization that makes and
administers the pension plan rules, would be best informed of the pros and cons of all three
retirement plans. Focusing on employers with at least 25 new hires over the period 1999-2004
(there are a handful of employers with just a couple new hires), we find that only 19% of the
sample chooses the portable option. In contrast, we find that 49% of new employees working



                                                                                                   22
directly for SURS chose the Portable plan. Not only is this the largest fraction of any employer,
but it vastly exceeds the 27% of new employees choosing the Portable plan at the next highest
employer. Only 5% of SURS employees select the SMP, the 4th lowest among all employers,
compared to 15% for the whole sample. Also, 90% of SURS employees make an active choice
(i.e., only 10% default into a choice), which is again the highest proportion by far across the
employers covered by SURS. This evidence is consistent with our hypothesis that the SMP,
once its details are understood, is inferior to the Portable plan. It also suggests, more generally,
that there may be important employer effects influencing plan choice.
           More formally, in specifications not reported, we have further included employer
indicator variables in our regression specifications. While we are no longer able to identify some
of our campus-wide variables in these specifications (such as community college and its
interactions, or the % choosing the same option) because of a very little time series variation in
these variables, we do find that the campus variables are jointly significant, with a p-value of
0.000, even in a regression that already controls for 3-digit zip codes. This clearly suggests that
there are strong campus effects, although it does not allow us to definitively distinguish whether
it is driven by peer effects, human resource effects, or sorting effects.17
5.4 Multinomial Logit Results
           A limitation of the OLS specification is that they limit us to examining one choice at a
time. In reality, individuals can choose from the entire menu of actions upon joining a SURS
covered employer. Specifically, there are four distinct actions an individual can take, as noted
earlier. In Table 5, we introduce a multinomial logit specification to examine this choice. By
treating the default option as our base category, we report the relative risk ratio of our key co-
variates for each of the other three possible outcomes. In interpreting the coefficients, recall that
what matters is whether the risk ratio is greater than or less than 1.0. For example, the relative
risk ratio of 0.744 for community college in column 1 means that an employee of a community
college is only 74.4% as likely to choose the SMP over the Traditional plan than is an employee
of a University. Note that unlike the earlier table, all of the columns in Table 4 are from the
same regression. Column 1 reports the risk ratio for the SMP vs. the default option, column 2 for
Portable vs. the default option, and column 3 for actively choosing the Traditional plan vs.
accepting the default option.

17
     All of the patterns in coefficients in Table 4 also hold in the employer-fixed-effect regression.


                                                                                                         23
       The direction and significance of most of the effects are consistent with what we found
using the series of linear probability models. Specifically, relative to university employees, those
that work for a community college are less likely to choose the SMP or Portable plan, and more
likely to actively choose the Traditional plan. Employees at other employer types are less likely
to make any active choice, meaning that they are much more likely to accept the default.
Relative to academic employees, staff are also less likely to choose the SMP or Portable options,
and more likely to actively choose the Traditional plan. Police officers, particularly those at
universities, are substantially less likely to take the SMP or Portable option.
       Individuals who subsequently leave employment for any reason (disability, retirement,
death, or leaving prior to vesting) are significantly less likely to have been SMP participants.
Those who left SURS employment with vested benefits were much more likely to have chosen
the Portable plan.
       Higher earners and those with full-time status are less likely to default and more likely to
choose each of the active plans, with the earnings effect strongest for the SMP. In general,
women are more likely to make an active choice, as are married individuals. Individuals under
the age of 30 are far less likely to make any active choice, while those at over 50 are less likely
to choose the SMP, but more likely to actively choose the Traditional plan.
       To put all these findings together, it is useful to consider a few stylized individuals and
what our results suggest about their choices:
        -        Young, single, male low earners with less job attachment to the SURS employer
                 (both in terms of % time worked in terms of whether they subsequently leave)
                 are extremely likely to accept the default option.
        -        High earning, well-educated, married professors in their 30’s with the strongest
                 attachment to their employer are disproportionately likely to choose the SMP
                 plan, and to a slightly lesser extent, the Portable plan.
        -        Older, part-time, married, female, community college staff members with above
                 average earnings are disproportionately likely to actively choose the Traditional
                 plan.


6. Conclusions and Future Directions




                                                                                                     24
       This paper has provided novel evidence about what types of workers are most likely to
choose defined contribution plans. We find that, even in an environment where choosing the
pure DC plan may not be the best financial decision, individuals are more likely to choose the
DC option if they are high earners, well-educated, married, in their 30’s, with strong attachment
to their employer. These finding suggest that these “educated, high earning, young
professionals” have a strong preference for DC plans, even when the financial terms are
unfavorable. For example, among the 650 individuals in our sample who are full-time, age 30-
39, academics at a university, married, have earnings in excess of $50,000, and are still active
employees as of spring 2006, 52% of them chose the self-managed plan (versus 15% in the
sample as a whole). This is despite the fact that an individual would need to earn a nominal rate
of return of 5.5% - 11.2% per year (which is, at current inflation rates, substantially higher than
the 3% real rate in President Bush’s Social Security proposal) in order for the SMP to be
preferred to the Portable plan. Using Robert Shiller’s (2005) methodology, we estimate that
even using what most would consider rather high historical equity returns in the market, no
cohort of individuals between 1871 and 2004 would be able to achieve these returns by
following a life-cycle portfolio strategy over their full working lives.
       This analysis raises fascinating questions as to why individuals who, by most observables,
appear to be highly capable individuals make what appear to be sub-optimal choices. We
speculate that there are at least five reasons why they may do so. First, participants may simply
have difficulty processing the complex information that they are provided when making this
choice, due either to time constraints or some form of bounded rationality. Second, the
information provided by SURS may not be optimally designed to facilitate meaningful
comparisons between the self-managed plan and the portable benefits package. This might lead
some employees to mistakenly believe that the self-managed plan is the most generous plan for
individuals who leave SURS employment early in their career. Third, individuals may
understand the rules, but may simply suffer from overconfidence in their investment abilities
and/or have unrealistically high expectations about future risk-adjusted equity market returns.
Fourth, individuals may have either rational or irrational beliefs about the degree of political risk
in the traditional or portable benefit plans, arising due to the chronic under-funding problem
facing the SURS system. Fifth, individuals may simply place a very high value on choice for its




                                                                                                   25
own sake. In future research, we intend to explore these alternative hypotheses using a survey of
current SURS participants.




                                                                                              26
References

Bodie, Zvi,, Alan J. Marcus, and Robert C. Merton, 1988, “Defined Benefit versus Defined Contribution
Pension Plans: What are the Real Trade-offs?” In Pensions in the U.S. Economy, edited by Zvi Bodie,
John Shoven, and David Wise, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press: 139 – 162.

Choi, James, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2001, For better or for worse:
Default effects and 401(K) savings behavior, NBER Working paper 8651, December.

Clark, Robert L., Linda S. Ghent, and Ann A. McDermed, “Pension Plan Choice Among University
Faculty,” Southern Economic Journal. 2006.

Clark, Robert L. and M. Melinda Pitts, “Faculty Choice of a Pension Plan: Defined Benefit vs. Defined
Contribution.” Industrial Relations. 38: 18-45.

Congressional Budget Office, “An Analysis of the President’s Budgetary Proposals for Fiscal Year
2007,” March, 2006.

Duflo, Esther, and Emmanuel Saez, “Participation and Investment Decisions in a Retirement Plan: The
Influence of Colleagues’ Choices,” Journal of Public Economics, LXXXV (2002), 121-48.

Duflo, Esther, and Emmanuel Saez, “The Role of Information and Social Interactions in Retirement Plan
Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVIII (2003),
815-42.

Ford, William, 2005. “2004 Comparative Study of Major Public Employee Retirement Systems.”
Wisconsin Legislative Council, December 2005.

Madrian, Brigitte, and Dennis Shea, 2001, The power of suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) participation and
savings behavior, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1149-1525.

Papke, Leslie, 2004, “Pension Plan Choice in the Public Sector: The Case of Michigan State Employees,”
National Tax Journal, Vol. 57(2), Part 1: 329-339.

Shiller, Robert J., 2005, “The Life Cycle personal Accounts Proposal for Social Security: An Evaluation,”
Yale ICF Working paper No. 05-06.

U.S. Government Accounting Office, 2003, “Social Security: Issues Relating to Noncoverage of Public
Employees,” Statement of Barbara D. Bovbjerg before the Subcommittee on Social Security, Committee
on Ways and Means, House of Representatives. GAO-03-710T.

Yang, Tongxuan. “Understanding the Defined Benefit versus Defined Contribution Choice.” Pension
Research Council working paper 2005-04, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania. 2005.




                                                                                                         27
Table 1: Plan Choice by Start Year


                                                          Start Year


                                Total   1999     2000       2001       2002     2003     2004
Variable                         (1)    (2)      (3)         (4)       (5)      (6)      (7)


Made an Active Choice           0.443    0.569    0.497       0.421     0.394    0.396    0.402
    Chose SMP                   0.153    0.220    0.215       0.138     0.115    0.118    0.125
    Chose Portable              0.186    0.204    0.175       0.186     0.190    0.182    0.180
    Chose Traditional           0.104    0.146    0.107       0.096     0.089    0.096    0.097
Defaulted into Traditional      0.557    0.431    0.503       0.579     0.606    0.604    0.598


Number of Observations         45,303    6,596    7,187       8,649     7,975    7,158    7,738




                                                                                                  28
Table 2:
Descriptive Statistics


                                                                  Plan Choice

                                      Made                                               Defaulted
                                      Active    Chose     Chose             Chose          into
                             Full
                            Sample    Choice    SMP       Portable        Traditional    Traditional
Variable                     (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)                 (5)          (6)


OCCUPATION
Academic*University           0.315     0.395     0.510      0.415               0.191        0.251
Staff*University              0.218     0.237     0.159      0.242               0.345        0.202
Police*University             0.003     0.002     0.001      0.003               0.005        0.004
Academic*Comm. College        0.233     0.179     0.190      0.143               0.229        0.275
Staff*Community College       0.151     0.141     0.108      0.152               0.170        0.159
Police*Community College      0.004     0.004     0.001      0.005               0.006        0.004
Other Type of Institution     0.077     0.042     0.032      0.042               0.055        0.104

PLAN STATUS
Active                        0.663     0.732     0.787      0.675               0.753        0.609
Disabled                      0.003     0.003     0.002      0.004               0.004        0.003
Retired                       0.000     0.000     0.000      0.000               0.000        0.000
Dead                          0.001     0.000     0.000      0.000               0.000        0.001
Left with Vested Benefits     0.016     0.022     0.025      0.024               0.014        0.011
Left Prior to Vesting         0.317     0.243     0.186      0.297               0.228        0.377

FINANCIAL
Earnings in $100,000s         0.241     0.318     0.390      0.303               0.237        0.180
Percentage Time Worked        0.722     0.803     0.799      0.838               0.745        0.659

DEMOGRAPHICS
Female                        0.568     0.582     0.525      0.612               0.611        0.557
Single                        0.262     0.340     0.306      0.401               0.280        0.200
Married                       0.590     0.626     0.669      0.563               0.677        0.561
Age                            41.5      42.2      41.9       40.9                45.0         40.9

Reciprocal Service
Agreement                     0.137     0.114     0.102      0.097               0.162        0.156


Number of Observations       45,303    20,049     6,920      8,421               4,708       25,254




                                                                                                     29
Table 3: Plan Choice by Group


                                                 Plan Choice

                                                                        Defaulted
                                                           Chose          into
                                SMP      Portable        Traditional    Traditional
Variable                        (1)        (2)                 (3)          (4)


OCCUPATION
Academic*University              0.247      0.245               0.063        0.445
Staff*University                 0.111      0.206               0.164        0.518
Police*University                0.028      0.162               0.155        0.655
Academic*Community College       0.125      0.114               0.102        0.660
Staff*Community College          0.109      0.186               0.117        0.588
Police*Community College         0.035      0.227               0.157        0.581

PLAN STATUS
Active                           0.181      0.189               0.118        0.512
Disabled                         0.092      0.239               0.146        0.523
Retired                          0.000      0.750               0.000        0.250
Dead                             0.000      0.087               0.087        0.826
Left with Vested Benefits        0.239      0.277               0.092        0.392
Left Prior to Vesting            0.090      0.174               0.075        0.662

DEMOGRAPHICS
Female                           0.141      0.200               0.112        0.547
Male                             0.168      0.167               0.094        0.571
Married                          0.164      0.168               0.113        0.555
Not Married                      0.134      0.216               0.089        0.561

RECIPROCAL SERVICE
Yes                              0.114      0.131               0.123        0.632
No                               0.159      0.195               0.101        0.546




                                                                                      30
Table 4: OLS Estimate of Plan Choice¹
                                                                                Dependent Variable
                                                                                       Any              Choose                Choose
                                                                                      Active           Traditional           Traditional
                                                                                                         Given
                                        SMP       Portable        Traditional         Choice           Traditional          Given Choice
Independent Variable                     (1)        (2)              (3)               (4)                (5)                   (6)

Community College                    -0.036 ***      -0.009              0.047 ***        -0.017 **             0.025 ***             0.081 ***
                                    (0.006)         (0.006)            (0.008)           (0.008)              (0.007)               (0.012)
Other Type of Institution             0.006          -0.012              0.009            -0.008               -0.004                 0.036 **
                                    (0.008)         (0.009)            (0.012)           (0.013)              (0.008)               (0.018)
Staff                                -0.097 ***      -0.032 ***          0.130 ***        -0.053 ***            0.078 ***             0.188 ***
                                    (0.005)         (0.005)            (0.006)           (0.006)              (0.006)               (0.008)
Staff*Community College               0.064 ***       0.043 ***         -0.107 ***         0.043 ***           -0.063 ***            -0.169 ***
                                    (0.007)         (0.008)            (0.009)           (0.010)              (0.009)               (0.015)
Police                               -0.231 ***      -0.076 **           0.308 ***        -0.221 ***            0.034                 0.336 ***
                                    (0.016)         (0.031)            (0.035)           (0.041)              (0.037)               (0.073)
Police*Community College              0.129 ***       0.152 ***         -0.282 ***         0.252 ***            0.039                -0.234 **
                                    (0.022)         (0.045)            (0.048)           (0.056)              (0.053)               (0.093)
Disabled                             -0.069 ***       0.015              0.054            -0.073 *             -0.037                -0.021
                                    (0.023)         (0.037)            (0.040)           (0.043)              (0.043)               (0.056)
Retired                              -0.183 ***       0.418 *           -0.242             0.106               -0.369 ***            -0.260 ***
                                    (0.038)         (0.227)            (0.231)           (0.256)              (0.023)               (0.051)
Dead                                 -0.153 ***      -0.093              0.245 ***        -0.285 ***           -0.107 *               0.236
                                    (0.020)         (0.059)            (0.063)           (0.083)              (0.063)               (0.229)
Left with Vested Benefits            -0.006           0.056 ***         -0.051 ***         0.000               -0.063 ***            -0.071 ***
                                    (0.016)         (0.017)            (0.018)           (0.018)              (0.021)               (0.019)
Left Prior to Vesting                -0.062 ***       0.000              0.061 ***        -0.091 ***           -0.052 ***            -0.010
                                    (0.004)         (0.004)            (0.005)           (0.005)              (0.005)               (0.008)
Earnings in $100,000s                 0.299 ***       0.065 ***         -0.364 ***         0.339 ***            0.100 ***            -0.140 ***
                                    (0.011)         (0.010)            (0.012)           (0.012)              (0.015)               (0.012)
Percentage Time Worked               -0.027 ***       0.141 ***         -0.115 ***         0.144 ***            0.054 ***            -0.034 **
                                    (0.007)         (0.008)            (0.009)           (0.010)              (0.009)               (0.015)
Female                                0.004           0.042 ***         -0.047 ***         0.060 ***            0.033 ***            -0.008
                                    (0.003)         (0.004)            (0.004)           (0.005)              (0.004)               (0.006)
Married                               0.029 ***      -0.032 ***          0.003             0.024 ***            0.047 ***             0.032 ***
                                    (0.005)         (0.005)            (0.006)           (0.006)              (0.007)               (0.006)
Age 15-19                             0.047          -0.043             -0.003            -0.078               -0.080 ***            -0.354 ***
                                    (0.047)         (0.045)            (0.067)           (0.068)              (0.013)               (0.044)
Age 20-24                            -0.017 **       -0.055 ***          0.072 ***        -0.100 ***           -0.034 ***             0.008
                                    (0.008)         (0.011)            (0.012)           (0.014)              (0.011)               (0.029)
Age 25-29                            -0.019 ***       0.003              0.016 **         -0.035 ***           -0.027 ***            -0.038 ***
                                    (0.006)         (0.007)            (0.008)           (0.008)              (0.007)               (0.011)
Age 30-34                             0.009 *        -0.006             -0.003            -0.019 ***           -0.032 ***            -0.046 ***




                                                                                                                                                  31
                                        (0.006)          (0.006)              (0.007)             (0.007)                   (0.007)       (0.009)
Age 40-44                                -0.008            0.001                0.007              -0.004                     0.003         0.012
                                        (0.006)          (0.007)              (0.008)             (0.008)                   (0.008)       (0.010)
Age 45-49                                -0.009           -0.005                0.014 *            -0.003                     0.014 *       0.026 **
                                        (0.006)          (0.007)              (0.008)             (0.008)                   (0.008)       (0.011)
Age 50-54                                -0.029 ***        0.001                0.028 ***          -0.005                     0.025 ***     0.048 ***
                                        (0.006)          (0.007)              (0.008)             (0.008)                   (0.008)       (0.011)
Age 55-59                                -0.035 ***        0.006                0.029 ***           0.024 ***                 0.068 ***     0.094 ***
                                        (0.007)          (0.007)              (0.009)             (0.009)                   (0.009)       (0.013)
Age 60-64                                 0.011           -0.033                0.022              -0.035                    -0.019        -0.004
                                        (0.018)          (0.024)              (0.027)             (0.032)                   (0.031)       (0.050)
Age 65+                                  -0.054 ***        0.027                0.026               0.062 **                  0.106 ***     0.161 ***
                                        (0.014)          (0.020)              (0.023)             (0.026)                   (0.025)       (0.041)
Reciprocal Service Agreement             -0.022 ***       -0.020 ***            0.043 ***          -0.025 ***                 0.013 **      0.063 ***
                                        (0.005)          (0.005)              (0.006)             (0.007)                   (0.006)       (0.011)
Start Year 2000                          -0.015 **        -0.028 ***            0.044 ***          -0.077 ***                -0.074 ***    -0.035 ***
                                        (0.007)          (0.007)              (0.008)             (0.008)                   (0.009)       (0.010)
Start Year 2001                          -0.083 ***       -0.017 ***            0.103 ***          -0.137 ***                -0.099 ***    -0.018 *
                                        (0.006)          (0.006)              (0.008)             (0.008)                   (0.009)       (0.010)
Start Year 2002                          -0.106 ***       -0.008                0.117 ***          -0.146 ***                -0.101 ***    -0.010
                                        (0.006)          (0.007)              (0.008)             (0.008)                   (0.009)       (0.011)
Start Year 2003                          -0.114 ***       -0.013 *              0.129 ***          -0.149 ***                -0.098 ***     0.010
                                        (0.006)          (0.007)              (0.008)             (0.009)                   (0.010)       (0.012)
Start Year 2004                          -0.107 ***       -0.012 *              0.122 ***          -0.141 ***                -0.098 ***    -0.003
                                        (0.006)          (0.007)              (0.008)             (0.009)                   (0.010)       (0.012)
% Made Choice on Campus                   0.238 ***        0.492 ***            0.358 ***           0.356 ***                 0.231 ***     0.018
                                        (0.078)          (0.078)              (0.058)             (0.047)                   (0.059)       (0.076)
Constant                                  0.207 ***        0.002                0.418 ***           0.194 ***                 0.061 ***     0.203 ***
                                        (0.013)          (0.018)              (0.043)             (0.031)                   (0.022)       (0.029)

Zip Code Controls (3-digit)?                Yes              Yes                 Yes                  Yes                      Yes           Yes

Adjusted R2                             0.1053            0.0446               0.1318             0.1305                    0.0647        0.0811
Number of Observations                  45,303            45,303               45,303              45,303                   29,962        20,049
¹ Standard Errors in Parentheses; ***, **, * Significant at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively




                                                                                                                                                        32
Table 5: Multinomial Logit Estimate of Plan Choice¹
                                                                    Plan Choice†

                                                  SMP                Portable         Traditional
Independent Variable                               (1)                 (2)               (3)

Community College                                       0.744 ***         0.788 ***            1.349 ***
                                                      (0.036)           (0.037)              (0.080)
Other Type of Institution                               0.447 ***         0.469 ***            0.552 ***
                                                      (0.034)           (0.029)              (0.040)
Staff                                                   0.432 ***         0.722 ***            1.957 ***
                                                      (0.018)           (0.025)              (0.089)
Staff*Community College                                 1.674 ***         1.460 ***            0.564 ***
                                                      (0.113)           (0.085)              (0.040)
Police                                                  0.061 ***         0.400 ***            1.520 *
                                                      (0.032)           (0.096)              (0.383)
Police*Community College                                3.852 **          3.683 ***            1.067
                                                      (2.595)           (1.144)              (0.363)
Disabled                                                0.458 **          0.931                0.715
                                                      (0.142)           (0.207)              (0.188)
Retired                                                 0.000 ***         5.167                0.000 ***
                                                      (0.000)           (7.164)              (0.000)
Dead                                                    0.000 ***         0.280 *              0.407
                                                      (0.000)           (0.212)              (0.302)
Left with Vested Benefits                               0.985             1.392 ***            0.634 ***
                                                      (0.103)           (0.136)              (0.089)
Left Prior to Vesting                                   0.498 ***         0.927 **             0.615 ***
                                                      (0.019)           (0.028)              (0.024)
Earnings in $100,000s                                  11.116 ***         4.319 ***            2.243 ***
                                                      (0.958)           (0.348)              (0.246)
Percentage Time Worked                                  1.231 ***         3.145 ***            1.644 ***
                                                      (0.080)           (0.195)              (0.122)
Female                                                  1.175 ***         1.426 ***            1.262 ***
                                                      (0.035)           (0.039)              (0.043)
Married                                                 1.401 ***         0.970                1.517 ***
                                                      (0.056)           (0.034)              (0.074)
Age 15-19                                               1.037             0.536                0.000 ***
                                                      (0.789)           (0.397)              (0.000)
Age 20-24                                               0.429 ***         0.613 ***            0.641 ***
                                                      (0.068)           (0.059)              (0.085)
Age 25-29                                               0.765 ***         0.953                0.753 ***
                                                      (0.044)           (0.044)              (0.050)
Age 30-34                                               1.029             0.908 **             0.713 ***
                                                      (0.046)           (0.038)              (0.042)
Age 40-44                                               0.932             0.996                1.029
                                                      (0.046)           (0.046)              (0.060)
Age 45-49                                               0.934             0.968                1.101 *
                                                      (0.048)           (0.047)              (0.064)
Age 50-54                                               0.799 ***         0.990                1.192 ***
                                                      (0.044)           (0.050)              (0.069)
Age 55-59                                               0.804 ***         1.081                1.567 ***
                                                      (0.050)           (0.060)              (0.095)
Age 60-64                                               1.214             0.771                0.887
                                                      (0.303)           (0.156)              (0.161)
Age 65+                                                 0.598 **          1.302                2.181 ***
                                                      (0.127)           (0.213)              (0.325)
Reciprocal Service Agreement                            0.812 ***         0.809 ***            1.187 ***
                                                      (0.038)           (0.035)              (0.056)
Start Year 2000                                         0.765 ***         0.693 ***            0.598 ***
                                                      (0.036)           (0.033)              (0.033)
Start Year 2001                                         0.424 ***         0.639 ***            0.483 ***
                                                      (0.021)           (0.029)              (0.026)
Start Year 2002                                         0.332 ***         0.645 ***            0.463 ***



                                                                                                           33
                                                       (0.017)               (0.030)                    (0.026)
Start Year 2003                                          0.307 ***             0.606 ***                  0.477 ***
                                                       (0.017)               (0.029)                    (0.027)
Start Year 2004                                          0.337 ***             0.617 ***                  0.471 ***
                                                       (0.018)               (0.030)                    (0.027)

Pseudo R2                                             0.0871
Number of Observations                                45,303
¹ Standard Errors in Parentheses; ***, **, * Significant at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels,
respectively
†Default into Traditional Plan is the Omitted Category




                                                                                                                      34
