                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     IDIOSYNCRATIC SHOCKS AND THE ROLE OF NONCONVEXITIES IN PLANT
                 AND AGGREGATE INVESTMENT DYNAMICS

                                             Aubhik Khan
                                             Julia Thomas

                                        Working Paper 12845
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12845


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2007




We thank Robert King, Narayana Kocherlakota, John Leahy, Robert Lucas, Marcelo Veracierto, seminar
audiences at Columbia, Michigan, Pompeu Fabra, Stanford, Wharton and the Federal Reserve Banks
of Minneapolis, Philadelphia, Richmond and St. Louis, participants in the April 2006 Penn State Financial
Constraints or Technological Differences Conference and the October 2006 Study Center Gerzensee
Microeconomic Adjustment and Macroeconomic Dynamics Conference, as well as session participants
at the 2004 Midwest Macro and SED meetings for useful comments and suggestions. Thomas thanks
the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and the National Science Foundation (grant #0318163) for research
support. The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not represent the views of Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia or the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Aubhik Khan and Julia Thomas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Idiosyncratic Shocks and the Role of Nonconvexities in Plant and Aggregate Investment Dynamics
Aubhik Khan and Julia Thomas
NBER Working Paper No. 12845
January 2007
JEL No. E22,E32

                                                ABSTRACT

We study a model of lumpy investment wherein establishments face persistent shocks to common
and plant-specific productivity, and nonconvex adjustment costs lead them to pursue generalized (S,s)
investment rules. We allow persistent heterogeneity in both capital and total factor productivity alongside
low-level investments exempt from adjustment costs to develop the first model consistent with available
evidence on establishment-level investment rates. Examining the implications of lumpy investment
for aggregate dynamics in this setting, we find that they remain substantial when factor supply considerations
are ignored, but are quantitatively irrelevant in general equilibrium. The substantial implications of
general equilibrium extend beyond the dynamics of aggregate series. While the presence of idiosyncratic
shocks makes the time-averaged distribution of plant-level investment rates largely invariant to market-clearing
movements in real wages and interest rates, we show that the dynamics of plants' investments differ
sharply in their presence. Thus, model-based estimations of capital adjustment costs involving panel
data may be quite sensitive to the assumption about equilibrium. Our analysis also offers new insights
about how nonconvex adjustment costs influence investment at the plant. When establishments face
idiosyncratic productivity shocks consistent with existing estimates, we find that nonconvex costs
do not cause lumpy investments, but act to eliminate them.

Aubhik Khan
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Ten Independence Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19106
mail@aubhik-khan.net

Julia Thomas
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Ten Independence Mall
Philadelphia, PA 19106-1574
and NBER
mail@juliathomas.net
1        Introduction
          Over the past fifteen years, an influential body of research has developed the argu-
ment that, in order to understand cyclical fluctuations in aggregate investment, we must
explicitly examine changes in the underlying distribution of capital across establishments.
This growing literature challenges the usefulness of smooth aggregative models for business
cycle research, emphasizing that there are important nonlinearities in aggregate investment
originating from nonconvexities at the establishment level.                In particular, it has been ar-
gued that nonconvex costs of adjustment lead establishments to adjust capital infrequently
in the form of lumpy investments and that occasional synchronization in the timing of es-
tablishments’ investments can sharply influence the dynamics of the aggregate series. As
explained by Caballero and Engel (1999), a large aggregate shock in such a setting may lead
to a substantial change in the number of establishments undertaking capital adjustment.
This, in turn, implies a time-varying elasticity of aggregate investment demand with respect
to shocks. The further claim is that such nonlinearities help explain the data.
        The substantial heterogeneity that characterizes (S, s) models of capital adjustment has
largely dissuaded researchers in the lumpy investment literature from undertaking general
equilibrium analysis.1 One early exception to this was the dynamic stochastic general equi-
librium model of Khan and Thomas (2003), where nonconvex adjustment costs caused plants
to adopt optimal (S, s) decision rules with respect to capital. There, the aggregate nonlin-
earities predicted by previous partial equilibrium studies were present when real wages and
interest rates were held fixed, but they disappeared in general equilibrium.                      Proponents
of lumpy investment have remained unconvinced by the finding, however, partly because
there were important discrepancies in the model’s microeconomic implications relative to
the data.         At the heart of the lumpy investment debate lies the distribution of capital
across establishments. As the distribution of investment arising in our early model diﬀered
sharply from that in the data, implying a similar mismatch for the distribution of capital
itself, researchers were led to question the relevance of its aggregate implications.
    1
        Examples of partial equilibrium (S, s) models include Caballero and Engel (1999), Caballero, Engel and
Haltiwanger (1995), Cooper, Haltiwanger and Power (1999) and Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006). Veracierto
(2002) provides a general equilibrium analysis of plant-level (S, s) policies caused by irreversible investment.
Bachman, Caballero and Engel (2006) study a version of our general equilibrium lumpy investment model ,
but follow a diﬀerent calibration strategy, as is discussed in section 6. Gourio and Kashyap (2006) modify
the Thomas (2002) environment to include random machine breakdowns and less uncertainty in capital
adjustment costs.



                                                        1
       One important limitation of the first-generation DSGE lumpy analysis was an assumption
that diﬀerences in capital were the sole source of heterogeneity across plants. Although
it could generate lumpy investments, the abstraction from persistent diﬀerences in plant-
specific productivity prevented the theory from usefully addressing a richer set of recently
documented establishment-level facts.2                For example, Cooper and Haltiwanger’s (2006)
summary of investment patterns in the LRD reveals negative capital adjustments among 10
percent of plants in the average year, while the model failed to generate any. Moreover, as is
the convention throughout the lumpy literature, there was a stark assumption regarding the
incidence of nonconvex adjustment costs, with these costs applying to all capital adjustments
irrespective of their size. As a result, the model reproduced the observed frequency of large
positive investment episodes (spikes) only by dramatically overstating the frequency of near-
zero (inactive) episodes.
       Confronting these issues, this paper reconsiders whether plant-level nonconvexities are
an essential element lacking in our standard models of the business cycle, this time in an
equilibrium setting where the resulting distribution of capital is empirically viable. Here,
we take two important steps away from the first-generation model to construct a model
that is quantitatively consistent with the available evidence on establishment-level capital
adjustment. First, we allow for persistent diﬀerences across plants not only in their capital
stocks but also in their total factor productivities. Next, we further generalize the model to
permit plants to undertake low levels of investment without incurring adjustment costs. As
we evaluate the aggregate implications of nonconvex capital adjustment costs in this more
realistic setting, our approach will be distinguished by a series of simple comparisons between
our lumpy investment economy versus an otherwise identical (nested) economy without
adjustment frictions. By undertaking these controlled comparisons, we can attribute any
diﬀerences we find entirely to the diﬀerence in adjustment technologies.
       Before exploring aggregate results, we first verify that our model satisfies two prereq-
uisites for a useful study.          We begin by confirming its consistency with the features of
the plant investment distribution that motivate our current work. Next, we confirm that
the lumpy investment technology therein has a substantial influence on dynamics that does
not evaporate with aggregation. Specifically, we show that, in partial equilibrium (that is,
with real wage and interest rates fixed at their steady-state values), nonconvex adjustment
costs at the plant sharply increase skewness and kurtosis in the distribution of aggregate
investment rates.
   2
       It has also been suggested that additional sources of persistent heterogeneity may reinforce the aggregate
eﬀects of lumpy microeconomic adjustment, and that their omission in our earlier work biased results against
aggregate implications.




                                                         2
   Having established our model’s consistency with previous predictions of aggregate non-
linearities throughout the partial equilibrium lumpy literature, we trace these features to
large changes in the target capital stocks adopted by adjusting plants (changes along the
intensive margin) in response to aggregate shocks that, in turn, induce large changes in
the numbers of plants actively undertaking these adjustments (changes along the extensive
margin). In particular, our environment generates asymmetries in the average distribution
of plants over capital, alongside rising adjustment hazards implying that the fractions of
plants paying fixed costs to undertake adjustment rise in the distance from the relevant
target capitals. We show that this combination leads to asymmetric changes along the ex-
tensive margin that amplify aggregate responses to positive shocks, but dampen responses to
negative shocks. Finally, we also confirm that, in partial equilibrium, aggregate investment
rates are less volatile and more persistent in the presence of nonconvex adjustment costs,
as consistent with the aggregate smoothing emphasized in Bachman, Caballero and Engel’s
(2006) recent equilibrium work on lumpy investment and in related work on investment
irreversibilities by Bertola and Caballero (1994). By delaying capital adjustment for some
establishments, fixed costs at the establishment level deliver gradual changes in aggregate
investment. Thus, partial equilibrium estimation may tend to emphasize these costs be-
cause, like convex adjustment costs, they deliver persistence in aggregate investment rates
that would otherwise be absent, bringing them closer to the data.
   Despite the sharp improvement in our current model’s ability to reproduce investment
patterns in the microeconomic data, our aggregate findings here reinforce those isolated
in our previous lumpy investment studies.          Microeconomic lumpiness continues to have
perceptible eﬀects on aggregate investment dynamics only when equilibrium factor supply
considerations are ignored.     General equilibrium itself matters tremendously in shaping
aggregate dynamics.      First, it is extremely eﬀective in smoothing changes in aggregate
series, yielding investment rates close to the postwar US data in both their cyclical variability
and persistence, irrespective of capital adjustment costs. Second, it dampens much of the
movement along the extensive margin that would otherwise distinguish the lumpy investment
economy, leaving no trace of aggregate nonlinearities. However, this is not a deficiency of
our theoretical environment relative to its empirical counterpart; it is a success.      In fact,
we show that the near-zero skewness and excess kurtosis in the distribution of aggregate
investment rates arising from our general equilibrium models (both lumpy and smooth)
matches the third and fourth moments from the aggregate data reasonably well, and far
more closely than does the partial equilibrium lumpy model.
   Whether nonconvex adjustment costs cause only a fraction of all plants to (uncon-
strainedly) adjust their capital stocks in any period (in the lumpy model), or whether all


                                               3
plants adjust their stocks in every period (in a control model without adjustment frictions),
households’ preferences for consumption smoothing imply equilibrium movements in relative
prices that sharply restrain changes in the target capitals to which these plants adjust in
response to aggregate disturbances. Moreover, these dampened changes along the intensive
margin immediately imply reduced changes in the value that plants in the lumpy investment
economy place on adjustment, thus eliminating large extensive margin changes. Without
these large movements in the numbers of adjusting plants, the nonlinearities distinguishing
the lumpy investment economy disappear. As a result, our model economy achieves through
modest movements along two margins the same aggregate investment dynamics that appear
in the frictionless control model through the intensive margin alone.
   Our development of a DSGE model consistent with richer aspects of the establishment-
level data has led us to some additional new results regarding the influence of nonconvex
adjustment costs, idiosyncratic risk and general equilibrium upon microeconomic investment
behavior that we believe may be of independent interest. First, we find that intertemporal
changes in the cross-sectional distribution of plant investment rates are sharply dampened in
general equilibrium. Although the reallocation of investment goods across plants in response
to idiosyncratic shocks is unaﬀected by equilibrium (as it generates no changes in aggregate
investment), we show that the micro-elasticity of response to aggregate shocks is greatly
reduced when the associated equilibrium movements in relative prices are permitted to feed
back into establishments’ decisions.    This indicates that equilibrium analysis is essential
for understanding investment dynamics even at the most disaggregated level, particularly
in times of large aggregate disturbances. Thus, it is precisely during those episodes where
partial equilibrium lumpy researchers (e.g., Caballero, Engel and Haltiwanger (1995), Ca-
ballero and Engel (1999), Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006)) have argued the distribution of
establishments over capitals is essential to understanding aggregate dynamics that a partial
equilibrium analysis most distorts the true distribution.
   Second, we find that the microeconomic role of nonconvex capital adjustment costs can
change substantially in the presence of persistent idiosyncratic risk. When plant-specific
productivity shocks are volatile relative to aggregate shocks, as suggested by the data,
nonconvex costs no longer cause the plant-level investment spikes that are the hallmark of
lumpy investment. Rather, their primary role shifts to one of eliminating some of these
spikes, as is necessary to move the model-implied average cross-sectional distribution in line
with the data. These costs now take on a secondary role in reproducing a stark asymmetry
in the occurrence of positive versus negative investment (spikes). Noting that each of these
eﬀects also arises in the presence of investment irreversibilities, and under combinations of
irreversibilities and convex capital adjustment costs, this finding suggests that there actually


                                               4
may be no distinct role for nonconvex costs even at the microeconomic level. As such, it may
be extremely diﬃcult to correctly disentangle the importance of nonconvex costs, relative
to other adjustment frictions, from the establishment-level investment data.


2     Model
      In our model economy, there are both fixed costs of capital adjustment and persistent
diﬀerences in plant-specific productivity, which together lead to substantial heterogeneity in
production. In this section, we describe the economy beginning with production units, then
follow with households and equilibrium. Next, using a simple implication of equilibrium, we
characterize the capital adjustment decisions of production units as a two-sided generalized
(S, s) policy. This decision rule for investment is what distinguishes the model from the
stochastic neoclassical growth model.

2.1     Production and capital adjustment
      We assume a large number of production units. Each establishment produces its output
using predetermined capital stock k and labor n, via an increasing and concave production
function, F :
                                               y = zεF (k, n) .

Here, z reflects stochastic total factor productivity common across plants, while ε is plant-
specific productivity. For convenience, we assume that z is a Markov chain, z ∈ {z1 , . . . , zNz },
where
                                        ¡                 ¢
                                      Pr z 0 = zj | z = zi ≡ π ij ≥ 0,
      PNz
and     j=1 π ij   = 1 for each i = 1, . . . , Nz . Similarly, we assume that ε ∈ {ε1 , . . . , εNε }, where
                                       ¡                ¢
                                     Pr ε0 = εm | ε = εl ≡ π εlm ≥ 0,
      PNε     ε
and     m=1 π lm    = 1 for each l = 1, . . . , Nε .
    In each period, a plant is defined by its predetermined stock of capital, k ∈ R+ , its
idiosyncratic productivity level, ε ∈ E ≡ {ε1 , . . . , εNe }, and its fixed cost associated with
(non-exempted) capital adjustment, ξ ∈ [0, ξ], which is denominated in units of labor. Given
the current aggregate state of the economy, the plant chooses its current level of employment,
production occurs, and its workers are paid. Next, the plant chooses its investment; in doing
so, it chooses whether it will pay or avoid its current adjustment cost.




                                                       5
       The plant’s capital stock evolves according to γk0 = (1 − δ) k + i, where i is its current
investment and δ ∈ (0, 1) is the rate of capital depreciation.3 After current production, the
plant can undertake an unconstrained investment only upon payment of its fixed adjustment
cost, ξ. Specifically, by forfeiting ωξ units of current output, where ω denotes the real wage
rate, the plant can invest to any future capital, k 0 ∈ R+ . Alternatively, because fixed costs
do not apply to adjustments that are suﬃciently minor relative to the existing capital stock,
the plant can avoid its fixed cost by selecting a constrained investment, i ∈ [ak, bk], where
a ≤ 0 ≤ b. In this case, the plant achieves future capital k 0 ∈ Λ (k) ⊆ R+ , where
                                              h1 − δ + a               1−δ+b i
                                   Λ (k) ≡                        k,        k .                         (1)
                                                         γ               γ
       For the plant, capital adjustment involves a nonconvexity; conditional on undertaking
an unconstrained adjustment, the cost ξ entailed is independent of the scale of adjustment.
At the same time, we assume that ξ varies across plants and over time for any given plant.
                                                                              £ ¤
Each period, every plant draws a cost from the time-invariant distribution G : 0, ξ → [0, 1].
As a result, given its end-of-period stock of capital, a plant’s current adjustment cost has
no implication for its future adjustment. Thus, it is suﬃcient to describe diﬀerences across
plants by their idiosyncratic productivity, ε, and capital, k. We summarize the distribution
of plants over (ε, k), using the probability measure μ defined on the Borel algebra, S, for
the product space S = E × R+ . The aggregate state of the economy is then described by
(z, μ), and the distribution of plants evolves over time according to a mapping, Γ, from the
current aggregate state; μ0 = Γ (z, μ). We will define this mapping below.
       Let v 1 (εl , k, ξ; zi , μ) represent the expected discounted value of a plant entering the
period with (εl , k) and drawing an adjustment cost ξ, when the aggregate state of the
economy is (zi , μ). We state the dynamic optimization problem for the typical plant using
a functional equation defined by (2) - (4). First we define the beginning of period expected
value of a plant, prior to the realization of its fixed cost draw, but after the determination
of (εl , k; zi , μ):
                                                     Z   ξ
                               0
                              v (εl , k; zi , μ) ≡           v1 (εl , k, ξ; zi , μ) G (dξ) .            (2)
                                                     0
Assume that dj (zi , μ) is the discount factor applied by plants to their next-period expected
value if aggregate productivity at that time is zj and current productivity is zi . (Except
where necessary for clarity, we suppress the indices for current aggregate and plant produc-
tivity below.) The plant’s profit maximization problem, which takes as given the evolution
   3
       Throughout the paper, primes indicate one-period-ahead values, and all variables measured in units of
output are deflated by the level of labor-augmenting technological progress, which implies output growth at
the rate γ − 1 along the balanced growth path.



                                                              6
of the plant distribution, μ0 = Γ (z, μ), is then described by
                                          "
                      v1 (ε, k, ξ; z, μ) = max zεF (k, n) − ω (z, μ) n + (1 − δ) k                             (3)
                                             n
                                 (                                                                    )#
                                                            ¡    0     0
                                                                           ¢             ¡   0   0
                                                                                                     ¢
                         + max −ξω (z, μ) + max
                                            0
                                                r ε, k ; z, μ , 0max r ε, k ; z, μ                         ,
                                                    k ∈R+                      k ∈Λ(k)


where r (ε, k 0 ; z, μ0 ) represents the continuation value associated with any future capital
stock:
                                            Nz
                                            X                 Ne
                                                              X
                   ¡              ¢                                      ¡                  ¢
                  r ε, k 0 ; z, μ0 ≡ −γk0 +    π ij dj (z, μ)    π εlm v0 εm , k 0 ; zj , μ0 .                 (4)
                                              j=1               m=1

       Given (ε, k, ξ) and the equilibrium wage rate ω (z, μ), the plant chooses current employ-
ment n. Next, the plant decides upon either an unconstrained or a constrained choice of
its capital stock for next period. The unconstrained choice, in the first term of the binary
maximum above, requires payment of the fixed labor cost of capital adjustment. However,
if k 0 ∈ Λ (k) is selected, the second term in the binary maximum applies, and this cost
is avoided. Rather than subtracting investment from current profits, we adopt an equiva-
lent but notationally more convenient approach in (3); there, the value of nondepreciated
capital augments current profits, and the plant is seen to repurchase its capital stock each
period. Since adjustment costs do not aﬀect the choice of current employment, we denote
the common employment selected by all type (ε, k) plants using N (ε, k; z, μ). Further, let
K (ε, k, ξ; z, μ) represent the choice of capital for the next period by plants of type (ε, k)
with adjustment cost ξ.

2.2       Households
        The economy is populated by a unit measure of identical households. Household wealth
is held as one-period shares in plants, which we denote using the measure λ.4 Given the
prices they receive for their current shares, ρ0 (ε, k; z, μ), and the real wage they receive for
their labor eﬀort, ω (z, μ), households determine their current consumption, c, hours worked,
nh , as well as the numbers of new shares, λ0 (ε0 , k 0 ), to purchase at prices ρ1 (ε0 , k0 ; z, μ). The
   4
       Households also have access to a complete set of state-contingent claims. However, as there is no
heterogeneity across households, these assets are in zero net supply in equilibrium. Thus, for brevity, we do
not explicitly model them.




                                                       7
lifetime expected utility maximization problem facing each of them is listed below.

                                         h ³         ´    Nz
                                                          X        ¡             ¢i
                       W (λ; z, μ) = max0 U c, 1 − nh + β    π ij W λ0 ; zj , μ0                              (5)
                                        c,nh ,λ                          j=1

                                                subject to
              Z                                              Z
                     ¡ 0 0        ¢ 0¡ £ 0  0
                                              ¤¢           h
         c+        ρ1 ε , k ; z, μ λ d ε × k ≤ ω (z, μ) n + ρ0 (ε, k; z, μ) λ (d [ε × k]) .
               S                                                               S

   Let C (λ; z, μ) describe the household choice of current consumption, N h (λ; z, μ) the
current allocation of time to working, and Λh (ε0 , k0 , λ; z, μ) the quantity of shares purchased
in plants that begin the next period with productivity ε0 and k 0 units of capital.

2.3       Recursive equilibrium
        A recursive competitive equilibrium is a set of functions,
                           ³                                                    ´
                             ω, (dj )Nz
                                     j=1 , ρ0 , ρ1 , v 1
                                                         , N, K, W, C, N h
                                                                           , Λh
                                                                                  ,

such that plants and households maximize their expected values, and the markets for assets,
labor and output clear:

   1. v1 satisfies (2) - (4), and (N, K) are the associated policy functions for plants.
                          ¡           ¢
   2. W satisfies (5), and C, N h , Λh are the associated policy functions for households.

   3. Λh (εm , k 0 , μ; z, μ) = μ0 (εm , k 0 ), for each (εm , k0 ) ∈ S.
                               Z "                             ³                      ´
                                                                                              #
       h
                                                        Rξ       γK(ε,k,ξ;z,μ)−(1−δ)k
   4. N (μ; z, μ) =                N (ε, k; z, μ) + ξJ                     k            G (dξ) μ(d [ε × k]),
                                                              0
                                 S
      where J (x) = 0 if x ∈ [a, b]; J (x) = 1 otherwise.
                    Z "                                                           #
                                               Rξ ³                         ´
   5. C (μ; z, μ) =    zεF (k, N (ε, k; z, μ))− γK (ε, k, ξ; z, μ)−(1 − δ) k G(dξ) μ(d [ε × k]).
                                                              0
                           S
                         Z
   6.    μ0 (εm , B)   =                                    π εlm G (dξ) μ (d [εl × k]), for all (εm , B) ∈ S, de-
                           {(εl ,k,ξ) | K(εl ,k,ξ;z,μ)∈B}
         fines Γ.




                                                              8
2.4     (S, s) decision rules
      Using C and N to describe the market-clearing values of household consumption and
hours worked satisfying conditions 4 and 5 above, it is straightforward to show equilibrium
                                                           βD1 U (Cj0 ,1−Nj0 )
requires that ω (z, μ) = D2 U (C,1−N )
                         D1 U (C,1−N ) and that dj (z, μ) = D1 U (C,1−N) . We may then com-
pute equilibrium by solving a single Bellman equation that combines the plant-level profit
maximization problem with these equilibrium implications of household utility maximiza-
tion. Defining p as the price plants use to value current output, we have the following two
conditions.

                                     p (z, μ) = D1 U (C, 1 − N )                            (6)
                                                D2 U (C, 1 − N )
                                     ω (z, μ) =                                             (7)
                                                    p (z, μ)

A reformulation of (2) - (4) then yields an equivalent description of a plant’s dynamic
problem. Suppressing the arguments of the price functions and defining Λ (k) as in (1),
                                      "Ã                            !
                     V 1 (ε, k, ξ; z, μ) = max         zεF (k, n) − ωn + (1 − δ) k p        (8)
                                            n
                                ½                                                  ¾#
                                             ¡ 0          ¢       ¡              ¢
                           + max −ξωp + max
                                        0
                                            R ε, k ; z, μ0 , max R ε, k0 ; z, μ0     ,
                                                  k ∈R+                        k0 ∈Λ(k)


where
                                            Nz
                                            X       Ne
                                                    X
                   ¡ 0         0
                                 ¢   0
                                                                ¡                  ¢
                  R ε, k ; z, μ ≡ −γk p + β    π ij    π εlm V 0 εm , k 0 ; zj , μ0 ,       (9)
                                                       j=1        l=1
                                                  Z    ξ
                                0
                               V (ε, k; z, μ) ≡            V 1 (ε, k, ξ; z, μ) G (dξ) .    (10)
                                                   0
    Equations (8) - (10) will be the basis of our numerical solution of the economy. This
solution exploits several results that we now derive. First, note that plants choose labor
n = N (ε, k; z, μ) to solve zεD2 F (k, n) = ω (z, μ). Next, we examine the capital choice
of a type (ε, k) plant drawing adjustment cost ξ. Define the value associated with the
unconstrained capital choice, E (ε, z, μ), and that associated with the constrained choice,
E C (ε, k, z, μ), as follow:
                                                       ¡               ¢
                                    E (ε, z, μ) ≡max
                                                 0
                                                      R ε, k 0 ; z, μ0                     (11)
                                                k ∈R+
                                                        ¡               ¢
                                C
                               E (ε, k, z, μ) ≡ max R ε, k0 ; z, μ0 .                      (12)
                                                           k0 ∈Λ(k)

Next, define the plant’s target capital as the unconstrained choice of k0 solving the right-hand
side of (11).

                                                            9
   Note that the solution to the unconstrained problem in (11) is independent of both k and
ξ, but not ε, given persistence in plant-specific productivity. As a result, all plants sharing
the same current productivity ε that pay their fixed costs to make unconstrained capital
adjustments will choose a common target capital for the next period, k0 = k∗ (ε, z, μ), and
achieve a common gross value of unconstrained adjustment, E (ε, z, μ). By contrast, plants
that do not pay adjustment costs, instead undertaking constrained capital adjustments
solving (12), will choose future capital that may depend on their current capital, k0 =
kC (ε, k, z, μ). (The exception occurs for plants with k∗ (ε, z, μ) ∈ Λ (k); for such plants, the
constraint in (12) does not bind, and the target capital is achieved without incurring an
adjustment cost.)
   Referring again to the functional equation in (8), it is clear that a plant will absorb its
fixed cost to undertake an unconstrained adjustment if the net value of achieving the target
capital, E (ε, z, μ) − ξωp, is at least as great as the continuation value under constrained
adjustment, E C (ε, k, z, μ). It follows immediately that a plant of type (ε, k) will undertake
unconstrained capital adjustment if its fixed cost, ξ, lies at or below some (ε, k)-specific
threshold value. In particular, let b
                                    ξ (ε, k; z, μ) describe the fixed cost that leaves a type
(ε, k) plant indiﬀerent between these investment options:


                  −p (z, μ) bξ (ε, k; z, μ) ω (z, μ) + E (ε, z, μ) = E C (ε, k, z, μ) .           (13)
                                      n                 o
Next, define ξ T (ε, k; z, μ) ≡ min ξ, b  ξ (ε, k; z, μ) , so that 0 ≤ ξ T (ε, k; z, μ) ≤ ξ. Any plant
with an adjustment cost at or below its type-specific threshold, ξ T (ε, k; z, μ), will pay the
fixed cost and adjust to its target capital.
   Using the target and constrained capital choices identified above, alongside the threshold
adjustment costs, the plant-level decision rule for capital may be conveniently summarized
as follows. Any establishment identified by the plant-level state vector (ε, k, ξ; z, μ) will
begin the subsequent period with a capital stock given by
                                       (
                                         k∗ (ε, z, μ)    if ξ ≤ ξ T (ε, k; z, μ)
             k 0 = K (ε, k, ξ; z, μ) =                                                           (14)
                                         kC (ε, k, z, μ) if ξ > ξ T (ε, k; z, μ).
                                                                     ¡                ¢
Thus, within each group of plants sharing a common (ε, k), fraction G ξ T (ε, k; z, μ) pay
their labor-denominated fixed costs to undertake an unconstrained capital adjustment. It
then follows that the market-clearing levels of consumption and work hours required to




                                                 10
determine p and ω using (6) and (7) are given by:
              Z ³
                                                ¡             ¢h                         i
      C =        zεF (k, N (ε, k; z, μ)) − G ξ T (ε, k; z, μ) γk ∗ (ε, z, μ) − (1 − δ) k
               S
               h       ¡              ¢ih                              i´
              − 1 − G ξ T (ε, k; z, μ) γk C (ε, k, z, μ) − (1 − δ) k μ (d [ε × k]) ,                 (15)
              Z "                  Z ξT (ε,k;z,μ)        #
      N =         N (ε, k; z, μ) +                ξG (dξ) μ (d [ε × k]) .                            (16)
                  S                      0

     Finally, based on (14), we can now describe the evolution of the plant distribution,
μ0 = Γ (z, μ). First, ³define ´the indicator function J (x) = 1 for x = 0; J (x) = 0 for x 6= 0.
Informally, for each εm , b k ∈ S,

                             "
            ³      ´ XNε       ³                  ´Z  ¡                  ¢
           μ εm , b
             0
                  k =    π lm J b
                           ε
                                k − k∗ (εl , z, μ)   G ξ T (εl , k; z, μ) μ (εl , dk)                (17)
                           l=1
                            Z h                                                           #
                                    ¡ T              ¢i ³                     ´
                          +    1 − G ξ (εl , k; z, μ) J bk − kC (εl , k, z, μ) μ (εl , dk) .


Consider the cases of b
                      k = k∗ (εl , z, μ), for each given εl , l = 1, . . . , Nε . The first line of equa-
tion (17) represents those plants (εl , k) that pay their fixed costs to adjust to this target.
However, our law of motion must also reflect those plants that reach k b = k ∗ (εl , z, μ) without
paying fixed costs. For such plants, kC (εl , k, z, μ) = k ∗ (εl , z, μ), so ξ T (εl , k; z, μ) = 0. Thus,
they are a subset of the plants avoiding fixed costs in the second line of (17), those with cur-
rent capital such that k ∗ (εl , z, μ) ∈ Λ (k). Next, consider the cases of b
                                                                            k 6= k∗ (εl , z, μ). Those
plants reflected in the second line for which k∗ (εl , z, μ) ∈
                                                             / Λ (k) are plants that face either
                                                                           γ    ∗
a binding upper constraint on their capital choice (with k <             1−δ+b k (εl , z, μ)) or a binding
lower constraint (with k >         γ    ∗
                                 1−δ+a k (εl , z, μ)).   Of this   group, those with kC (εl , k, z, μ) = b
                                                                                                         k
begin the next period with b
                           k.


3     Calibration
     We evaluate the plant-level and aggregate implications of nonconvex capital adjustment
costs using several numerical experiments across which we vary the stochastic process for
idiosyncratic shocks to plants’ total factor productivity and the parameterization of capital
adjustment costs.      All other production parameters, as well as preferences, are held con-
stant throughout. Each experiment is based on a 10,000-period model simulation, and the
same random draw of aggregate productivity is used in each. Below, we discuss functional
forms and parameter values for technology and preferences that are identical across models.


                                                    11
Thereafter, in section 3.2, we explain the choice of idiosyncratic shocks and the distribu-
tion of capital adjustment costs. The description of our numerical method is provided in
Appendix A.

3.1    Common parameters
      Across our model economies, we assume that the representative household’s period util-
ity is the result of indivisible labor (Hansen (1985), Rogerson (1988)): u(c, L) = log c + ϕL,
and the establishment-level production function takes a Cobb-Douglas form, zεF (k, N ) =
zεk α N ν . We fix the length of a period to correspond to one year, allowing us to use evi-
dence on establishment-level investment in selecting parameters governing the distributions
of adjustment costs and idiosyncratic productivities below.
   Model parameters, other than those involving idiosyncratic shocks and adjustment costs,
are selected to ensure agreement with observed long-run values for key postwar U.S. aggre-
gates in a nested frictionless version of our model without capital adjustment costs described
in Appendix B. As proven in lemma 2 of this appendix, macroeconomic aggregates are in-
sensitive to the presence of idiosyncratic productivity diﬀerences in the absence of capital
adjustment costs.     This allows us to choose parameter values for technology and pref-
erences that are consistent with empirical counterparts before specifying an idiosyncratic
shock process. For these parameters, we apply the same values to the lumpy investment
model. We are able to use this approach because the aggregate first moments across our
model economies are extremely similar.
   The mean growth rate of technological progress is chosen to imply a 1.6 percent average
annual growth rate of real per capita output, and the discount factor, β, is then set to
imply an average real interest rate of 4 percent. Given the rate of technological progress,
the depreciation rate, δ, is selected to match an average investment-to-capital ratio of 10
percent, corresponding to the average value for the private capital stock between 1954 and
2002 in the U.S. Fixed Asset Tables. Labor’s share is then set to 0.64 as in Prescott (1986);
given this value, capital’s share of output is determined by targeting an average capital-
to-output ratio of 2.353 as in the data. Next, the parameter governing the preference for
leisure, ϕ, is taken to imply an average of one-third of available time spent in market work.
Table 1 lists the resulting parameter values.
   In specifying our exogenous stochastic process for aggregate productivity, we begin by
assuming a continuous
               ³      shock following a mean zero AR(1) process in logs: log z 0 = ρz log z +
                      ´
η 0z with η 0z ∼ N 0, σ 2ηz . Next, we estimate the values of ρz and σ ηz from Solow residuals
measured using NIPA data on US real GDP and private capital, together with the total
employment hours series constructed by Prescott, Ueberfeldt, and Cociuba (2005) from


                                                12
CPS household survey data, over the years 1959-2002. Finally, we discretize the resulting
productivity process using a grid with 11 shock realizations; Nz = 11.

3.2      Plant-specific shocks and adjustment costs
       The remaining parameters involve the distribution of plant-specific productivity and
the adjustment costs facing plants in the lumpy investment economy. We determine idio-
                                                                            ³ ´Nε
syncratic shocks (εi )N ε
                      i=1 and the Markov  Chain determining their evolution  π εij by
                                                                                                    i,j=1
discretizing a log-normal process, log ε0 = ρε log ε + η 0ε using 15 values (Nε = 15). To main-
tain controlled comparisons, the same stochastic process is applied to both the frictionless
and the lumpy investment models. In the latter, fixed costs of investment are assumed to
be drawn from a uniform distribution, G(ξ) = ξ/ξ, and the range of investment rates that
do not incur such costs is assumed to be symmetric around 0; in other words, |a| = b.
      There is little agreement about the persistence of the idiosyncratic shock process, ρε .
(Compare, for example, the values in Comin and Phillipon (2005) to those of Cooper and
Haltiwanger (2006).) Given this, we simply set it equal to the persistence of the aggregate
shock, ρε = ρz .5        Next, the remaining plant-level parameters (σ ηε , ξ, b) are selected to
best match the empirical average distribution of plant investment rates, as summarized by
Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006).
      Constructing their own plant capital series using data on retirements and investment
from the Longitudinal Research Database, Cooper and Haltiwanger provide a detailed set
of time-averaged moments on plants’ investment rates, which are reproduced in the shaded
row of Table 2. They define any plant with an investment rate (ratio of investment to
capital) less than 1 percent in absolute value as inactive. Positive investment rates are
those at or exceeding 1 percent, while negative investment rates are those falling at or below
−0.01. Finally, positive spikes are investment rates exceeding 0.2, and negative spikes are
                    i
observations of     k   < −0.2.
      Several features of the time-averaged plant data are prerequisites for our study. First,
investment inactivity is relatively rare, occurring among only 8 percent of plants on aver-
age. Next, there is a sharp asymmetry in positive versus negative investment rates; in the
average year, roughly 82 percent of plants actively raise their capital stocks. Finally, the
columns summarizing observations of investment spikes indicate not only extreme invest-
ment episodes occurring among a nontrivial fraction of establishments (roughly 20 percent)
in the tails of the average plant distribution, but also right skewness. Here again we see a
sharp asymmetry; positive spikes are observed 10 times as often as negative spikes.
  5
      In a previous version of this paper, we instead selected a much lower persistence, ρε = 0.53, taken from
Cooper and Haltiwanger (2002). Our findings here are entirely unaﬀected by the change.


                                                      13
        Before proceeding, we discuss our reasons for assuming a region of capital adjustment
that is exempt from adjustment costs. Throughout the lumpy investment literature thus
far, it has been assumed that all active adjustments to a plant’s capital stock incur fixed
costs. Given that assumption, we show in the next section that the inclusion of idiosyncratic
productivity shocks is not suﬃcient to yield consistency with the average distribution of
investment rates in the plant-level data. Specifically, the traditional lumpy investment model
matches the average occurrence of large positive and negative investment episodes only by
substantially exaggerating the frequency of near-zero investment episodes. One possible
explanation for this tension in reconciling the theory with microeconomic data is that, in
reality, fixed adjustment costs apply only to those investments that are comparatively large
relative to a plant’s existing capital. Alternatively, it may be reasonable to suppose that
the fixed costs associated with relatively large capital adjustments, such as building a new
structure, are substantially greater than those associated with minor ones, such as installing
a new computer. We adopt a rough proxy for these distinctions by permitting some low-level
capital adjustments that are exempt from fixed costs. This generalization of the traditional
lumpy investment framework allows our model to overcome the tension noted above, making
it the first to succeed in matching the average distribution of plant investment rates.


4        Prerequisites
4.1        Consistency with microeconomic data
         A prerequisite for our current study is that our environment reproduce the key aspects
of the microeconomic data described above.                   In Table 2, we evaluate the microeconomic
performance of our model, comparing it to that of the traditional lumpy investment model
previously studied by Khan and Thomas (2003).6                     There, all non-zero investment rates
were subject to fixed adjustment costs (b = 0), and there were no plant-specific productivity
disturbances (Nε = 1, σ ηε = 0).              Row 1 presents the results for this special case of our
current model when the upper support of the adjustment cost distribution alone is selected
to best match the LRD data.
        The traditional lumpy model reproduces only one aspect of the micro data, the frequency
of positive investment spikes. There, some plants repeatedly draw relatively high fixed costs,
and hence forego capital adjustment, for several consecutive periods. Typically, when such
    6
        These moments from the cross-sectional distribution in each model’s steady state match closely with cor-
responding time-averages taken over long general equilibrium model simulations. While partial equilibrium
simulations yield similar results, they are more so when plants’ individual investment decisions are more
influenced by idiosyncratic relative to aggregate disturbances.



                                                        14
a plant finally takes action, its eﬀective capital stock lies far below the target to which it
invests, a result of ongoing depreciation and technological progress. This explains why fixed
costs cause positive investment spikes in this environment.7 However, in the average year,
there is no force leading any plant to lower its target capital, so no establishment has capital
exceeding its target.         As a result, this simple model cannot generate any of the negative
investment (and hence negative spikes) seen in the average cross-sectional distribution from
the LRD. While the model does achieve large asymmetries, it does so in a trivial sense.
Moreover, as noted above, it suﬀers a stark trade-oﬀ in generating suﬃcient observations of
positive spikes versus positive investment rates.
       The trade-oﬀ in reproducing observations of investment spikes versus inactivity is a com-
mon diﬃculty among quantitative models of lumpy investment, (see, for example, Cooper
and Haltiwanger (2006)). To achieve the former, generally there must be a suﬃcient num-
ber of plants that refuse to pay their adjustment cost draws for several consecutive periods
and thus see their actual capital stocks move far from their targets. This, in turn, means
that the upper support on adjustment costs must be suﬃciently high to ensure only a small
fraction of plants pay their fixed costs in the typical period. When adjustment costs apply
to all non-zero investments, this immediately implies far too much investment inactivity.
Roughly 79 percent of plants are inactive in the traditional lumpy model versus 8 percent
in the data and, in turn, the model delivers far too few observations of positive investment,
as reflected in column 4. This problem persists with the introduction of plant-specific pro-
ductivity shocks; again, inactivity exceeds 75 percent when observations of positive spikes
match those in the data.
       The sharp disparities between the moments summarizing actual plant-level investment
patterns and those arising in the traditional lumpy model of our previous work have moti-
vated the extensions we have undertaken here in arriving at our current model. When plants
face idiosyncratic productivity shocks, those shifting from relatively high productivities to
relatively low ones can find themselves with too much capital and choose to undertake neg-
ative investment. Moreover, if that drop in relative productivity is suﬃciently large, it may
result in a negative spike. Next, the tension between reproducing the empirical observations
of spikes versus inaction is alleviated by allowing for the possibility that not all investment
is subject to fixed costs. In this case, plants not paying their adjustment costs may exhibit
active investments, while nonetheless having their activities suﬃciently constrained that
they will eventually undertake an investment spike. As seen in row 2, roughly 75 percent
   7
       While fixed costs cause investment spikes here, they can have precisely the opposite eﬀect in environments
where plant-level productivity is associated with substantial idiosyncratic risk. We revisit this issue in section
7.2.



                                                        15
of plants now exhibit positive investments on average in our model, almost matching the 82
percent seen in the data.
      Aside from the moments of the time-averaged investment rate distribution presented in
table 2, we also report our model’s fit to some moments of establishment-level investment
dynamics that were not targets in our calibration. First, we find that the variability of plant
investment rates is reasonably well reproduced by our general equilibrium model. Simulating
1000 plants over 10, 000 periods, the standard deviation of the typical plant’s investment rate
is 24.4 percent in our model, while it is 33.7 percent in the LRD (Cooper and Haltiwanger
(2006)). Next, we consider the measure developed by Gourio and Kashyap (2006) to gauge
the importance of the extensive margin in explaining changes in investment spikes. Using
the LRD, they find that the correlation between the number of plants experiencing positive
investment spikes and the total investment in these plants (as a fraction of aggregate capital)
is 87 percent. Our model also predicts a sizeable role for the extensive margin in explaining
spikes, with a corresponding correlation of 66.9 percent.

4.2      Partial equilibrium aggregate nonlinearities and smoothing
       We begin our study of the implications of nonconvex capital adjustment costs by con-
firming that, in partial equilibrium, our model of lumpy investment exhibits important
nonlinearities that survive aggregation. As almost all of the existing analyses of lumpy in-
vestment have been conducted in partial equilibrium, this exercise is necessary to establish
our model’s consistency with these existing studies abstracting from market clearing move-
ments in real wages and interest rates.8 To confirm the large potential lumpy investment
has for reshaping our model’s aggregate dynamics, we simulate a partial equilibrium version
of the model and compare its results to those in the corresponding frictionless model (distin-
guished only by its upper support on adjustment costs, ξ = 0) in panel A of Table 3. Both
models are subject to the same 10,000 period random draw of aggregate shocks. In choosing
a margin along which to compare them, we follow the empirical investment literature, which
has focused on changes in investment rates (that is, movements in the unfiltered ratio of
investment to capital).

4.2.1      Nonlinearities

       The frictionless model serving as our control is an element of the set of models that
Caballero, Engel and Haltiwanger (1995) and Caballero (1999) refer to as linear, in that it is
a special case of a quadratic capital adjustment cost model. These authors term such models
  8
      See, for example, Caballero and Engel (1999), Caballero, Engel and Haltiwanger (1995) and Cooper,
Haltiwanger and Power (1999).


                                                   16
linear based on the result that, if shocks are normally distributed, then so too are investment
rates. Consistent with this, our frictionless model generates approximately zero skewness
and excess kurtosis in aggregate investment rates.9                In the lumpy investment model, by
contrast, nonconvex capital adjustment at the plant-level leads to a distribution of aggregate
investment rates that is both sharply right-skewed and fat-tailed. This is the central and
well-known nonlinearity in models of lumpy investment that has motivated such interest
in their aggregate implications, summarized by Caballero (1999) as follows. "What is the
aspect of the data that makes these models better than linear ones at explaining aggregate
investment dynamics? ... it is the flexible cyclical elasticity of the increasing hazard model
which allows it to better capture the high skewness and kurtosis imprinted on aggregate data
by brisk investment recoveries."
       In fact, lumpy investment in our model increases skewness roughly 3-fold and kurtosis
more than 15-fold relative to the frictionless control.              This vivid evidence of nonlinearity
in panel A establishes that our model is capable of delivering an aggregate role for lumpy
investment similar to that found in previous partial equilibrium studies and summarized
in Caballero’s (1999) survey. However, if one compares the two rows of this panel to the
near-zero third and fourth moments in the shaded row representing postwar U.S. investment
rates, it appears that the additional skewness and kurtosis generated by lumpy investment
does not improve model fit, but instead moves the model-implied investment series further
from the data.10

4.2.2       Smoothing

        While the lumpy investment literature has primarily focused on aggregate nonlinearities,
there is also a smoothing aspect associated with fixed capital adjustment costs that has been
emphasized in the recent work of Bachman, Caballero and Engel (2006). We conclude our
discussion of the partial equilibrium panel in table 3 by noting from its first two columns
that our model is consistent with this more recent focus. This may come as little surprise,
given an analogous finding by Bertola and Caballero (1994) in the context of investment
   9
       The faint suggestion of nonlinearity, more precisely skewness, that we observe in the frictionless model
arises from the log-normal distribution of aggregate shocks and decreasing returns to scale in the aggregate
production technology.
  10
     These aggregate investment rate moments are similar whether we use the private sector captial stock,
as we do here, or the business capital stock. In that case, persistence and standard deviation are 0.777
and 0.011, respectively, while skewness and excess kurtosis are −0.053 and −0.619.          Nonetheless, these
moments of the data do depend upon the level of aggregation. Examining investment rates from two-digit
U.S. manufacturing industries, Caballero and Engel (1999) find skewness and kurtosis of 0.61 and 0.74,
respectively, for equipment and 0.76 and 0.87 for structures.



                                                       17
irreversibilities.
       It is well-understood that, in partial equilibrium, the frictionless model lacks necessary
smoothing.         In contrast to the aggregate data, its aggregate investment rate is both far
too volatile and negatively auto-correlated. With real wages and interest rates held fixed,
aggregate capital in this model is entirely determined by the previous period’s aggregate
productivity.        Corresponding to this, the full response in aggregate investment demand
takes place immediately at the date of an aggregate shock. Thus, while productivity and
hence aggregate capital are persistent, investment is not. Turning to the second row, note
that lumpy investment improves model fit in these two columns by removing a substantial
fraction of the excess variability and introducing some persistence.
       In this smoothing respect, nonconvex costs in the lumpy investment model take on
the same aggregate role that convex capital adjustment costs have historically held in
representative-firm neoclassical investment models. In such models, convex costs smooth
aggregate capital adjustment along the intensive margin by inducing all plants to undertake
concurrent, but gradual, capital adjustment. In our model, by contrast, the aggregate ad-
justment is gradualized through the extensive margin, because fixed adjustment costs imply
that only a fraction of plants adjust their capital in any period.11
       Because they stagger the adjustments undertaken by individual plants in response to
aggregate shocks, nonconvex adjustment costs at the micro-level protract adjustments in
aggregate capital.         More specifically, fixed costs induce inaction among plants with rel-
atively high current costs or capital close to their target value. Thus, in the aggregate,
investment demand initially responds less to a change in aggregate productivity than in
the frictionless model without adjustment costs. However, because aggregate productivity
changes are very persistent, many initially inactive plants undertake capital adjustments
in subsequent periods. Thus, in partial equilibrium, fixed capital adjustment costs make
aggregate investment both less variable and more persistent.                   However, despite these im-
provements, the partial equilibrium lumpy model continues to exhibit more than 10 times
the variability, and far too little persistence, relative to the aggregate data.

4.2.3       Extensive margin

        Figure 1 provides further evidence of the substantial changes lumpy investment implies
for our model’s aggregate dynamics when relative prices are fixed at their steady state values.
  11
       In contrast to the aggregate nonlinearities that are our primary focus, the smoothing eﬀect of nonconvex
costs (associated with a reduction in the standard deviation of aggregate series) survives in general equilibrium
if these costs are suﬃciently large, in an otherwise plausibly calibrated model. We explore this issue further
in section 6.



                                                       18
The top panel shows the histogram of aggregate investment rates over the partial equilibrium
simulation in the lumpy model; the bottom panel shows the corresponding histogram for
the control model without adjustment frictions. Note first the abruptness in the frictionless
model’s investment rate distribution.     Looking then to the top panel, we see that fixed
adjustment costs smooth away some of this abruptness, as consistent with our discussion
above. Moreover, while the distribution in the lower panel appears roughly symmetric, the
inclusion of lumpy investment in the upper panel causes the distribution to lean rightward,
and shifts more mass into the tails.
   The added kurtosis arises from the fact that aggregate investment in the partial equi-
librium lumpy model is more responsive to large aggregate shocks than to small ones, as
consistent with the time-varying elasticity of investment rates stressed by previous authors
in this literature.   This follows directly from the rising shape of the hazards that govern
the fractions of plants undertaking (unconstrained) capital adjustment in a period. As will
be clear below, this shape implies that small shifts in the hazards yield minimal changes
in the numbers of adjusting plants, while larger shifts can generate disproportionately large
changes in these numbers.     The increased skewness arises from the fact that the model’s
investment series is more responsive to large positive shocks than it is to large negative ones.
As we will explain, this happens because there are usually more plants concentrated on the
lower ramps of the adjustment hazards, carrying too little capital relative to their targets,
versus the upper ramps associated with excess capital.
   Figure 2 illustrates the skewness arising in the partial equilibrium lumpy investment
model by showing the responses in aggregate capital following a two standard deviation
positive shock to aggregate total factor productivity versus a same-sized negative shock.
There, we plot capital’s percent deviation from steady state in the lumpy investment and
frictionless models under the assumption that the wage and real interest rate remain at their
steady-state values. In response to the positive shock in period 20, the rise in the lumpy
model’s aggregate capital stock, 58 percent, is roughly the same as in the frictionless model,
59 percent. However, following the negative shock in period 40, the aggregate capital stock
falls by 37 percent in the frictionless model, but by only 20 percent in the lumpy investment
model. Thus, while nonconvex adjustment costs do smooth the responses in aggregate
investment and thus capital to shocks, their eﬀect is very nonlinear; responses to positive
shocks are hardly aﬀected, while responses to negative shocks are greatly dampened.
   Skewness in the lumpy investment model’s aggregate responses is caused by asymmetric
changes in the numbers of plants undertaking (unconstrained) adjustments to their capital
stocks. To explore this asymmetry, we must examine how the distribution of plants over cap-
ital evolves in response to aggregate disturbances. For expositional ease, we abstract from


                                              19
plant productivity shocks in this discussion to consider the eﬀects of the two shocks above in
a common productivity version of our model. In this case, the endogenous aggregate state
contains a one-dimensional distribution of plants over capital, and, within any period, there
is a single adjustment hazard determining the fractions of plants that pay their fixed costs
to adjust from each capital level to one common target. This adjustment hazard and the
corresponding steady state distribution are shown in figure 3. The highest capital value at
which the distribution has positive mass is the target, k∗ , just below 1.38, which is adopted
by all plants that pay their fixed adjustment costs, absent changes in aggregate productivity.
The dashed curve, which may be read oﬀ the right vertical axis, shows adjustment rates as
a function of capital.
       Note that the adjustment hazard rises in the distance between current capital and the
capital stocks associated with the target, (the capital stocks from which a plant can reach k∗
                                                             γ          γ
for next period without suﬀering an adjustment cost, k ∈ [ 1−δ+b k∗ , 1−δ−b k∗ ]). The hazard
takes this rising shape because plants with capital further from the target are willing to
suﬀer larger fixed costs to correct their stocks, and thus have higher probabilities of capital
adjustment. The lowest capital level held by any plant is 0.653; those entering the period
with this stock adjust with full probability. We define the aggregate adjustment rate in our
model as the population-weighted sum of the fractions of plants adjusting to their target from
each current capital, which is 0.223 in the steady-steady of the common productivity model
shown in figure 3. Finally, notice that, because both physical and economic depreciation
continually erode nonadjusted capital stocks, plants enter the average period concentrated
along the left ramp of the hazard with capital at or below the target.12                This is essential
to the partial equilibrium lumpy model’s asymmetric responses to positive versus negative
shocks, as may be seen in figure 4.
       The left panel of figure 4 illustrates the extensive margin response to the two standard
deviation rise in productivity from above in figure 2, beginning with the bolded steady state
distribution and hazard of figure 3, and continuing to hold relative prices fixed at steady
state. Because changes in aggregate productivity are expected to persist, the positive shock
causes a large rise in the expected marginal product of capital that in turn raises target
capital sharply, to roughly 2.06. This leads the adjustment hazard to shift rightward, re-
centering at the much higher capitals associated with the new target.                 Given that plants
have all entered the period located along the left ramp of the steady state hazard (with
capital at or below the steady state target), this shift increases the gap between actual and
  12
       More generally, in our model with plant-specific productivity shocks, there is an adjustment hazard
associated with each plant productivity level. Nonetheless, given mean-reversion in the shocks, the downward
pressure of depreciation and technological progress continues to imply disproportionate concentrations of
plants along the left ramps of the hazards.


                                                     20
target capital for each of them, raising the value they place on capital adjustment. With
plants of each type now willing to pay larger fixed costs, adjustment rates increase sharply,
and the total number of adjusting plants jumps to 0.986. This rise along the extensive
margin reinforces the intensive-margin rise in the average investment undertaken by each
adjusting plant. As a result, aggregate capital rises by far more than it would in the absence
of an increase in adjustment rates. For the common productivity model, the 72 percent rise
in the aggregate capital stock exceeds the 59 percent rise in the frictionless model (where
idiosyncratic productivity diﬀerences do not aﬀect aggregate responses).
       By contrast, the right panel of figure 4 illustrates how the equivalent fall in aggregate
productivity leads to a sharp decrease in adjustment rates, again beginning with the bolded
steady state distribution and hazard. With the drop in expected future productivity, the
resulting fall in target capital, to 0.926, moves it down into the existing plant distribution,
and below the capital stock actually held by almost all plants. As a result, the fraction
of plants for which adjustment is suﬃciently valuable to oﬀset the associated fixed costs
declines markedly. This decline is most pronounced near the middle of the distribution,
where current capital, once adjusted for depreciation and exogenous technological progress,
is closest to the target capital stock for next period. As a result, the adjustment hazard
takes on a U shape over the mass of plants and, overall, the number of adjusting plants falls
from its average of 0.223 to 0.159. This fall in the adjustment rate oﬀsets some of the decline
in aggregate capital that would otherwise occur with the fall in target capital, leading the
aggregate capital stock to fall by only 13 percent, far less than the 37 percent fall in the
frictionless model.
       In sum, we have seen that the lumpy investment model can exhibit asymmetry in its
aggregate responses to shocks, and thus skewness in the distribution of aggregate investment
rates, because rightward versus leftward shifts in its adjustment hazards generate asymmetric
changes along the extensive margin in the number of adjusting plants. These changes are
suﬃciently large to drive pronounced aggregate nonlinearities in partial equilibrium, because
aggregate shocks are followed by sharp changes in target capital that cause large shifts in
adjustment hazards. Returning to our full lumpy model with heterogeneity in both capital
and productivity, this explains the sharp response following the positive shock in figure 2
(which, despite its adjustment frictions, very nearly reaches that in the frictionless control
model) and its markedly dampened response following the negative shock, and thus the
skewed distribution of partial equilibrium investment rates seen in the top panel of figure 1.13
  13
       Evidence of aggregate nonlinearity under partial equilibrium is even more extreme in the common pro-
ductivity case of our model analyzed above. There, skewness and kurtosis are 1.90 and 5.29, respectively.
Plant-specific productivity shocks on their own substantially reduce the lumpy investment model’s potential
for aggregate nonlinearities, because their presence implies more dispersion in the average distribution of


                                                     21
In the section below, we will explore the extent to which these large dynamic eﬀects persist
when we relax the fixed real wage and interest rate assumption maintained throughout this
section.


5     Aggregate Results
      Having established our model’s consistency with essential features of the microeconomic
data, as well as the existence of aggregate nonlinearities in partial equilibrium that make it
comparable to existing studies in the literature, we now examine its aggregate results.

5.1    Model fit
      Figure 5 presents the general equilibrium counterpart to the distribution of aggregate
investment rates in the lumpy versus frictionless model examined in figure 1.                     Here, we
report simulation results based on the same 10, 000 period random draw of aggregate shocks
as before, this time solving the models in equilibrium. Note that both model economies’
investment rates are greatly dampened by market-clearing movements in real wage and inter-
est rates; thus, the range of investment rates in figure 5 is nearly 10 times more compressed
relative to figure 1. Nonetheless, diﬀerences in the equilibrium histograms appear minimal,
with little evidence of added skewness or kurtosis in the lumpy investment panel.
    These observations are confirmed by the second and higher moments presented in panel
B of Table 3. There, we see an unambiguous improvement in model fit as we move from the
partial equilibrium lumpy investment row of panel A to its general equilibrium counterpart
in panel B. Persistence increases sharply, nearly reaching the empirical autocorrelation,
while the excessive volatility in column 2 is virtually eliminated. Moreover, comparing the
GE lumpy model to its PE counterpart, we see that equilibrium dramatically reduces the
skewness and excess kurtosis in the distribution of aggregate investment rates, bringing the
model far closer to the actual series. Viewing the four columns as a whole, the simulated
aggregate investment rate series matches its counterpart in the data relatively well when
the eﬀects of equilibrium are included in the lumpy investment environment, and far less so
when these eﬀects are ignored.
    Although the general equilibrium lumpy investment model yields empirically viable ag-
gregate investment dynamics, comparison of the two rows within panel B reveals that the
nonconvex investment technology faced by plants has no role in this success. Consistent
plants over capital, as well as greater symmetry in the typical concentration of plants along the left versus
right ramps of adjustment hazards. A more comprehensive explanation is provided in an earlier draft of this
paper and available on request.



                                                     22
with our observations in figure 5, here we see that diﬀerences in the aggregate dynamics of
the lumpy investment versus frictionless model are largely eliminated in general equilibrium.
Aggregate investment rates exhibit nearly identical volatility, skewness, and kurtosis across
the two model economies. Moreover, there is virtually no diﬀerence in persistence, which
again is far greater in both models than it was in panel A and very close to that in the
data. This similarity in aggregate investment rate dynamics across the lumpy and friction-
less economies extends to other key macroeconomic aggregates, as may be seen in Table
4. There, the variabilities and contemporaneous correlations of aggregate output, employ-
ment, consumption and investment indicate that the aggregate business cycle is essentially
unaﬀected by lumpy investment.
       Given the diﬀering investment technologies across these models, alongside the marked
diﬀerences they implied in the partial equilibrium dynamics of section 4.2, the explanation
for the similarities within panel B of Table 3 (as well as those in the histograms of figure
5 and the business cycle moments of table 4) must be traceable to the influence of the
representative household that they share in common. Persistence in aggregate investment
rates is an immediate result of households’ preference for consumption smoothing.                        The
omission of this channel in partial equilibrium places an emphasis on capital adjustment
costs in Panel A to generate some of this otherwise absent persistence. In equilibrium, by
contrast, adjustment costs are not necessary to smooth aggregate investment demand; this
is achieved far more eﬀectively through market-clearing changes in relative prices.

5.2       Why nonlinearities dissolve
        As discussed above, the nonlinearities generated by lumpy investment in partial equi-
librium arise because changes in aggregate productivity are followed by large movements in
target capitals that can cause sharp, concurrent changes in the fractions of plants under-
taking (unconstrained) capital adjustment. However, such synchronizations in the timing of
large investment projects would in turn imply large movements in households’ consumption.
When we impose market-clearing, this volatility is sharply restrained by procyclical real
interest rates, which dampen the changes in target capitals arising from aggregate shocks,
and thus dampen changes in adjustment rates.14
       Recall our earlier example in Figure 2, where we traced our model’s responses to a
large rise and fall in aggregate productivity.              In contrast to the asymmetry there, where
aggregate capital rose far more sharply following a 2-standard deviation positive aggregate
shock than it fell after the same-sized negative shock, the general equilibrium responses to
  14
       Procyclical wages further dampen fluctuations in the marginal profits associated with changes in plant-
level capital and thus in target capital stocks.


                                                       23
aggregate shocks are far more symmetric. Following the positive shock, capital now rises by
2.86 percent, while it falls by 2.53 percent with the negative shock. This reflects no greater
asymmetry than occurs in the near-linear frictionless model, where capital rises 2.86 percent
and falls 2.6 percent in response to the two shocks.
   The reason general equilibrium is so eﬀective in eliminating the lumpy investment model’s
aggregate nonlinearities is that it smooths away much of the movement in target capitals
that are essential in generating large changes along the extensive margin.         For example,
following the positive shock in figure 2, the average target capital stock (weighting the 15
productivity-specific targets by the ergodic distribution over productivities) rose more than
43 percent when our model was solved in partial equilibrium, thereby triggering suﬃciently
large rightward shifts in the adjustment hazards as to raise the total adjustment rate by 59
percentage points and the aggregate investment rate by 59 percentage points. In general
equilibrium, the same shock causes only a 5.1 percent rise in the average target. Because
real interest rates rise with an increase in aggregate productivity, plants’ incentive to increase
capital is mitigated. This restraining force is compounded by accompanying increases in real
wages, which both raise the price of current adjustment activities and reduce the benefits of
high future capital. As a result, shifts in the adjustment hazards are minimal, leading the
aggregate adjustment rate to rise by only 3.6 percentage points and the aggregate investment
rate to rise just 2.9 percentage points.
   Similarly, following the large negative aggregate shock, the fall in average target capital
is 5.5 percent in general equilibrium (versus 40.4 percent in partial equilibrium), yielding
only a 3 percentage point fall in the number of adjustors, and a 2.6 percentage point decline
in the aggregate investment rate (versus the 20.3 percentage point decline under partial
equilibrium). Thus, the rise and fall in the aggregate investment rate following these aggre-
gate shocks is an order of magnitude smaller in equilibrium and almost perfectly symmetric.
To appreciate the extent of this symmetry, one need only compare these outcomes with
those in the frictionless model. There, through changes in the intensive margin alone, the
aggregate investment rate rises by 2.91 percentage points and falls by 2.67 percentage points
in response to the two shocks.

5.3    Summary of aggregate results
      We summarize the primary results of this section as follows.        Despite the improved
match to microeconomic investment patterns, we find that lumpy plant-level investment
has no quantitatively relevant role in the dynamics of aggregate investment. When relative
prices are allowed to adjust to clear the markets for labor and goods, large fluctuations in
target capital stocks are smoothed dramatically, and thus so are changes in the numbers of


                                               24
plants undertaking relatively large capital adjustments. As a result, aggregate nonlinearities
associated with lumpy investment disappear, and the dynamics of aggregate investment,
labor supply and output are virtually indistinguishable from those in the standard frictionless
environment.
    In closing, we re-emphasize that the absence of aggregate nonlinearities must not be
viewed as a failure of the equilibrium lumpy (or frictionless) model, as these features are
not apparent in the aggregate data. With or without capital adjustment costs, our general
equilibrium models match the higher moments of aggregate investment rates from the data
reasonably well, far more so than the partial equilibrium lumpy model where skewness and
kurtosis are sharply overstated. Of course, the empirical improvements associated with the
shift to a general equilibrium model are not limited to investment’s higher moments. By
reducing changes in plants’ target capital stocks, market-clearing relative price movements
also smooth away the excessively large and abrupt fluctuations in aggregate investment
demand we saw in partial equilibrium, so that the resulting investment series matches the
empirical persistence and volatility almost perfectly. These results indicate that, irrespective
of capital adjustment costs, general equilibrium analysis has an essential role in explaining
the dynamics of aggregate investment in actual economies.


6    Robustness and reconciliation
     While the calibration of most parameters of our lumpy investment model is standard
and consistent with the method of Prescott (1986), we have selected the adjustment cost
parameters distinguishing this model from its frictionless counterpart, as well as the volatility
of plant productivity shocks, to match summary statistics taken from time-averages of the
microeconomic investment data. This approach diﬀers sharply from that taken in the recent
work of Bachman, Caballero and Engel (2006), and it implies far smaller fixed adjustment
costs. These authors choose the size of fixed costs in their single sector model to match the
volatility of sectoral investment rates from 3-digit manufacturing data. Defining a group
of plants drawing a common sectoral shock as a sector, and assuming sectoral changes do
not aﬀect real wages or interest rates, Bachman et. al. require large adjustment costs to
smooth sectoral capital reallocation suﬃciently to match the variability in the data. This
is because plants’ outputs are perfectly substitutable in their one sector environment, so
there are no sectoral relative prices adjusting in response to changes in economic conditions,
thereby dampening investment flows across sectors.
    As our equilibrium model does not show evidence of aggregate nonlinearities, while that
in Bachman et. al. does, we begin this section by considering whether the disparity in our


                                               25
findings may arise from the diﬀering size of our fixed costs, or from our lesser volatility
in plant-specific productivities. In row 1 of table 5, we return to the same 10,000 period
simulation used in our baseline results, this time reporting the resulting aggregate investment
rate moments when the upper support of the fixed cost distribution is raised 10-fold to
imply much larger adjustment costs in the model. In the next row, we make these costs
even larger, raising the upper support 25-fold, and simultaneously increase the variability
of idiosyncratic shocks to 3 times that of the aggregate shock.                          While these changes do
slightly reduce aggregate volatility, the third and fourth moments indicate that they have
little eﬀect in generating nonlinearities.
       Given that large increases in the size of our fixed adjustment costs and plant-specific
productivity variations fail to alter our baseline results, we next consider the second distin-
guishing feature of our model relative to that examined by Bachman et. al., the incidence
of adjustment costs. Our baseline calibration allows for a range of investment rates around
zero that are exempt from fixed costs, where the width of this range is taken to match
aspects of the average plant distribution. Bachman et. al. allow no such interval; instead,
they assume that, if a plant chooses not to pay its fixed cost, it must replace 50 percent
of the capital that it would otherwise passively shed through depreciation. In the third
row of table 5, we re-examine our model’s aggregate results when we modify the interval
of investment rates exempted from adjustment costs to allow plants to replace all of their
depreciated capital without incurring fixed costs; however, we do not force our plants to
undertake this investment. Again, we find negligible changes in the model’s aggregate dy-
namics relative to our baseline results, with no greater evidence of skewness or kurtosis.
From this, we conclude that it is not plants’ ability to undertake maintenance investment
without incurring adjustment costs that explains the nonlinearities uncovered in Bachman
et. al. and absent in our results.15
       In the remainder of this section, we take a diﬀerent approach toward isolating the sources
  15
       Motivated by arguments in Gourio and Kashyap (2006), we have also explored cases where adjustment
costs are both very large and highly predictable for plants, as well as cases with quite low returns to scale in
production, where the overall incidence of fixed costs is magnified by diﬃculties in concentrating production
among few plants. Our aggregate findings appear robust to such changes; in each case, the equilibrium lumpy
model exhibits no evidence of nonlinearities. For example, when we assume that fixed costs are drawn from a
beta distribution that is sharply right-skewed with most probability concentrated at its upper support (α = 3
            1                                           1
and β =     3 ),   and we select the upper support at   2   to imply total output lost to adjustment costs averages
3.5 percent of total investment (as in Gourio and Kashyap (2006)), the resulting third and fourth moments
for the model’s aggregate investment rate are 0.077 and −0.062 respectively. Continuing to assume the beta
distribution, these moments are 0.080 and −0.065 when we simultaneously reduce returns to scale from 0.90
                                                                  1
to 0.65 (while lowering ϕ to maintain total hours averaging       3
                                                                      and raising σηz to hold the variability of output
in the frictionless model unchanged relative to the baseline results).



                                                            26
of the disparate findings across these two equilibrium lumpy investment studies. We begin
by imposing each of the assumptions made by Bachman et. al. to reproduce their aggregate
nonlinearities, using essentially their parameter values (with an innocuous adjustment to
allow for a balanced growth path). Next, to gauge the importance of each, we remove one
assumption at a time so long as evidence of nonlinearities remains. A final assumption that
will be important in this exercise is that regarding the representative household’s attitude to-
ward risk and consumption smoothing. Across our lumpy investment and frictionless model
economies, the representative household has a unit elasticity of intertemporal substitution.
While this may be considered somewhat high, it lies within the range of standard values
applied in quantitative dynamic stochastic general equilibrium studies.16 By contrast, the
household in the Bachman et. al. lumpy investment economy is essentially risk-neutral,
with this elasticity exceeding 9. Such preferences imply far greater tolerance for fluctua-
tions in consumption, thus making the household supply of investment goods very flexible
and encouraging larger movements in target capital stocks and thus adjustment hazards.
       When we combine the large adjustment costs, high variance in plant-level productiv-
ity, and mandatory maintenance investment described above together with the near risk-
neutrality assumption, we obtain the Bachman et. al. nonlinearities in aggregate investment
rates; skewness rises from the 0.067 of our model nearly 5-fold, to 0.315. After removing the
extreme elasticity of intertemporal substitution, instead setting σ = 1, we find that roughly
half of this skewness remains, 0.151. Next, we eliminate the assumption that plants must
replace one-half of their depreciated capital in any period that they do not pay their fixed
costs, instead applying the more traditional assumption that such plants undertake zero
investment.17 This removes virtually all remaining skewness, despite the large adjustment
costs and volatile plant productivity shocks still in place. The result, at 0.071, is indistin-
guishable from that in our model. Thus, we find that the aggregate results of Bachman et.
al. are reconciled to ours with the removal of the two specific assumptions regarding house-
hold preferences and mandatory maintenance. The question of whether nonconvex capital
adjustment costs cause aggregate nonlinearities then appears simply a question about the
plausibility of these two assumptions.
  16
       The same value is chosen by Bachman et. al. for the household residing in their frictionless economy.
  17
       In a sense, required maintainence investment has the eﬀect of imposing a partial investment irreversibility.
Under this assumption, plants experiencing rises in their relative productivity will be reluctant to adopt a
high capital stock, as they may be forced to retain much of it in the future until they agree to pay a fixed
adjustment cost. This then compresses the steady-state distribution of plants over capital. As a result, any
given shift in adjustment hazards will imply greater changes in overall adjustment rates.




                                                         27
7     Additional Results
      We now turn to examine our model’s predictions involving plant-level investment. In
this section of additional results, we explore how plants’ investments are influenced by the
interaction of idiosyncratic shocks, fixed adjustment costs, and equilibrium price movements.

7.1    Role of general equilibrium in microeconomic dynamics
      Given the large influence of general equilibrium in our findings involving aggregate dy-
namics, we begin by considering how much information is lost in abstracting from market-
clearing price adjustments if our interest lies instead in the dynamics of highly disaggregated
series, such as the investments undertaken by individual production units. Naturally, when
idiosyncratic productivity shocks give rise to a nontrivial distribution of plants over in-
vestment rates, and the eﬀect of these plant-level shocks is large relative to that of the
calibrated aggregate shock, the time-averaged cross-sectional distribution is relatively unaf-
fected by equilibrium. Diﬀerences in plants’ investment rates, on average, represent largely
a reallocation of capital from one production unit to another, and such reallocations have
no eﬀect on aggregate investment. However, this does not imply that the dynamics of
plant-level investment are independent of equilibrium.
    The period-by-period distribution of plant investment rates changes over time in response
to aggregate shocks. Because the associated movements in relative prices feed back into
plant-level decisions, the extent of these changes may be sharply distorted in a partial
equilibrium study that omits market-clearing relative price adjustments. For example, when
the lumpy investment model is simulated for 10, 000 periods under partial equilibrium, the
standard deviation of the fraction of the economy’s plants exhibiting positive investment
spikes in each period is 0.12, and the standard deviation of the size of these spikes is 0.08.
When the same simulation is undertaken in general equilibrium, each of these standard
deviations falls to 0.01.
    We further illustrate this point through the comparison of some simple panel regressions
in Table 6. In row 1, we regress plant investment rates on changes in aggregate productivity,
∆z, and changes in plant-specific productivity, ∆ε, using simulated data from our general
equilibrium lumpy investment model. In row 2, we repeat this same exercise using data
from the lumpy model simulated in partial equilibrium. As expected, the coeﬃcients on ∆ε
across these two rows are large and essentially identical. However, plant investments are far
less responsive to changes in aggregate total factor productivity when the resulting market-
clearing price movements are included than they are when these restraints are ignored. The
general equilibrium coeﬃcient on ∆z reflecting plants’ investment elasticity to an aggregate


                                              28
shock, 0.423, is exaggerated 13-fold when real wage and interest rates are not allowed to
respond to the change in aggregate conditions.
   Because large aggregate shocks are relatively infrequent in our calibrated study, plants’
investment rates over long simulations are usually well-predicted by the partial equilibrium
model. However, the sharply diﬀering micro-level elasticity to changes in aggregate total
factor productivity naturally implies that a given plant will invest quite diﬀerently at some
times depending on whether or not it faces equilibrium prices.        Over those dates when
changes in aggregate productivity are large, the errors introduced by ignoring endogenous
movements in relative prices will be substantial. From this, we conclude that equilibrium
analysis is essential for understanding the dynamics of investment even at the most disag-
gregated level, most particularly in times of large aggregate disturbances. It may be useful
to recall that it is precisely during such times that existing partial equilibrium studies have
found substantial diﬀerences between lumpy investment models and standard linear models
with convex adjustment technologies (see, for example, Caballero, Engel and Haltiwanger
(1995) and Caballero and Engel (1999)).

7.2    Role of nonconvexities in microeconomic investment
      Throughout the lumpy investment literature, it has been maintained that nonconvex
capital adjustment costs cause lumpy investments at the plant. A brief comparison of the
average plant investment distribution in our model economy relative to that arising in ab-
sence of adjustment costs reveals that this is not necessarily true. In fact, if the eﬀect of
plant-specific shocks is large relative to aggregate shocks, as consistent with recent esti-
mates, their presence can completely overturn the previously understood role of nonconvex
adjustment costs at the plant.
   Absent diﬀerences in plant-level productivities, the standard model with frictionless in-
vestment implies a continuum of identical plants that, on average, undertake modest positive
investments in every period to replace their depreciated capital. The introduction of non-
convex capital adjustment costs to this environment necessarily generates the trademark
features of lumpy investment, inaction and spikes, since they lead some plants to delay
adjustment suﬃciently that their capital stocks drift far from that to which they eventu-
ally adjust. However, consider instead the frictionless model with idiosyncratic productivity
shocks reported in row 1 of Table 7. Here, before the inclusion of capital adjustment costs,
there is already a nontrivial cross-sectional distribution of plant investment rates determined
by the distribution of plant-specific productivity shocks. Notice that these volatile idiosyn-
cratic shocks on their own cause both positive and negative investment spikes in the average
year; in fact, these observations are overstated relative to the LRD. When fixed adjustment


                                              29
costs are added to this environment, moving from row 1 to row 2, we observe that fixed costs
do not cause additional lumpy investments, but instead eliminate some of their occurrences,
as indeed is necessary to achieve consistency with the data.
   Under frictionless capital adjustment, plants’ investments are, on average, extremely
responsive to changes in their individual productivities. Through a pure reallocation of
aggregate investment, the economy in row 1 exhibits positive investment spikes among plants
experiencing large increases in relative productivity, as well as negative spikes among those
suﬀering large decreases in relative productivity. Nothing restrains this reallocation, because
it can be costlessly reversed in any subsequent date. However, such reversals are not costless
in the economy with capital adjustment frictions. A plant in row 2 realizing raised relative
productivity will be more cautious in selecting its new target capital, knowing that, in some
nearby date when its productivity may fall, it may at the same time face a high fixed cost to
re-adjust its capital to a lowered target. Thus, even if it pays its current fixed cost to adopt
a new target, the plant’s investment is tempered by an eﬀort to avoid future adjustment
costs. A similar restraint applies to negative investment in response to a fall in relative
productivity. For this reason, fixed adjustment costs act to reduce the volatility of plant
investments, yielding fewer investment spikes.
   Beyond eliminating excess spikes, nonconvex costs can take on a secondary role that
further reduces the distance between model and actual plant data, but has not been empha-
sized in previous studies. Comparing the ratio of positive investment (spike) observations
to negative investment (spike) observations in row 1 versus row 2, we find that the adjust-
ment costs boost asymmetries in plant-level investment. Recall our explanation above for
why these costs eliminate excess spikes. Because depreciation and technological progress
automatically erode inactive plants’ eﬀective capital stocks, the reduction in a plant’s value
caused by a high future adjustment cost will be greater if a plant finds itself with too little
capital, rather than too much capital. As a result, plants are less cautious in raising their
capital stocks than in lowering them, so that the presence of fixed costs increases the fraction
of positive investment (spike) observations relative to negative ones.
   We emphasize the changed role of nonconvex costs in the presence of idiosyncratic shocks
because it is essential that we understand what these costs actually do if we are to establish
their importance in explaining establishment-level investment. If their role is to remove
investment spikes and cause asymmetry, as we have seen here, then the same eﬀect might
be similarly achieved by either investment irreversibilities or by combinations of fixed costs,
irreversibilities and convex costs. Thus there may be no aspect of microeconomic behavior
that is uniquely explained by the presence of nonconvex adjustment costs. Viewed another
way, if idiosyncratic shocks are the primary force explaining plant investment diﬀerences, it


                                              30
may be virtually impossible to use the establishment investment data to infer the relative
size or importance of these costs relative to other frictions.


8    Concluding Remarks
     We have studied a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model with nonconvex capital
adjustment costs and plant-specific diﬀerences in productivity. By introducing persistent
plant-level productivity shocks and allowing small investments exempt from adjustment
costs, our model reproduces essential empirical regularities involving establishment-level
investment. In this environment, equilibrium movements in real interest rates and wages
play an essential role in adding persistence to aggregate investment rates, bringing the
model closer to the data. An additional consequence of such movements in relative prices
is that they eliminate the implications of plant-level nonconvexities for aggregate dynamics.
In partial equilibrium, these nonconvexities lead to aggregate nonlinearities through large
changes in plants’ target capital stocks that drive large changes in the fractions of plants
adjusting to these targets. Such nonlinearities disappear in general equilibrium, however,
because procyclical movements in real wages and interest rates substantially dampen the
changes in plants’ target capital stocks that follow an aggregate shock.
    Throughout our analysis, we have assumed that output is perfectly substitutable across
production units. This makes the reallocation of resources, in response to idiosyncratic
shocks, optimal from the perspective of the representative household. Conversely, it also
encourages the avoidance of capital adjustment costs through the concentration of invest-
ment. If we instead considered an environment where firms produced distinct goods, such
disparities in the distribution of inputs would be more costly. This suggests that, for a
given distribution of idiosyncratic shocks and capital adjustment costs, more firms would
undertake unconstrained capital adjustments in each period. With the average fraction of
firms adjusting nearer one, this would move the model with fixed adjustment costs closer to
the frictionless environment without these costs. At the same time, it would also dampen
the aggregate response to shocks, given a stronger incentive to adjust production evenly
across the distribution of firms, and thus larger rises in overall adjustment costs. Thus,
we conjecture that such a generalization would move the lumpy investment model to more
closely resemble a linear model with convex capital adjustment costs.




                                              31
References
 [1] Bachman, R., R. J. Caballero and E. M. R. A. Engel (2006) “Lumpy Investment in
    Dynamic General Equilibrium,” Working Paper, Yale University.

 [2] Bertola, G. and R. J. Caballero (1994) “Irreversibility and Aggregate Investment,”
    Review of Economic Studies 61, 223-246.

 [3] Caballero, R. J. (1999) “Aggregate Investment,” chapter 12 in M. Woodford and J.
    Taylor (eds.) Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. IB. Amsterdam: North Holland.

 [4] Caballero, R. J and E. M. R. A. Engel (1999) “Explaining Investment Dynamics in
    U.S. Manufacturing: A Generalized (S, s) Approach,” Econometrica 67, 783-826.

 [5] Caballero, R. J., E. M. R. A. Engel and J. C. Haltiwanger (1995) “Plant-Level Adjust-
    ment and Aggregate Investment Dynamics,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
    2, 1-39.

 [6] Chirinko, R. S. (1993), “Business Fixed Investment Spending: Modeling Strategies,
    Empirical Results, and Policy Implications,” Journal of Economic Literature 31, 1875-
    1911.

 [7] Comin, D. and T. Philippon (2005) “The Rise in Firm-Level Volatility: Causes and
    Consequences,” NBER Working Paper No. 11388.

 [8] Cooper, R. W. and J. Ejarque (2001) “Exhuming Q: Market Power vs. Capital Market
    Imperfections,” Working Paper 611, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

 [9] Cooper, R. W., J. C. Haltiwanger and L. Power (1999) “Machine Replacement and the
    Business Cycle: Lumps and Bumps,” American Economic Review 89, 921-946.

[10] Cooper, R. W. and J. C. Haltiwanger (2002) “On the Nature of Capital Adjustment
    Costs,” University of Texas at Austin working paper.

[11] Cooper, R. W. and J. C. Haltiwanger (2006) “On the Nature of Capital Adjustment
    Costs,” Review of Economic Studies 73, 611-633.

[12] Gourio, F. and A. K. Kashyap (2006) “Investment Spikes: New Facts and a General
    Equilibrium Exploration,” Working Paper, Boston University.

[13] Hansen, G. D. (1985) “Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle,” Journal of Monetary
    Economics 16, 309-327.


                                           32
[14] Khan, A. and J. K. Thomas (2003) “Nonconvex Factor Adjustments in Equilibrium
    Business Cycle Models: Do Nonlinearities Matter?” Journal of Monetary Economics
    50, 331-360.

[15] King, R. G. and S. T. Rebelo (1999) “Resuscitating Real Business Cycles,” chapter 14
    in M. Woodford and J. Taylor (eds.) Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. IB. Amsterdam:
    North-Holland.

[16] Krusell, P. and A.A. Smith Jr., (1997), “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity, Portfolio
    Choice, and Equilibrium Asset Returns,” Macroeconomic Dynamics 1, 387-422.

[17] Prescott, E. C. (1986) “Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement,” Federal Reserve
    Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 10, 9-22.

[18] Rogerson, R. (1988) “Indivisible Labor, Lotteries and Equilibrium,” Journal of Mone-
    tary Economics 21, 3-16.

[19] Thomas, J. K. (2002) “Is Lumpy Investment Relevant for the Business Cycle?” Journal
    of Political Economy 110, 508-534.

[20] Thomas, J. K. (2004) “Multivariate Spline Interpolation,” E8313 Lecture Notes, Uni-
    versity of Minnesota.

[21] Veracierto, M. L. (2002) “Plant-Level Irreversible Investment and Equilibrium Business
    Cycles,” American Economic Review 92, 181-197.




                                            33
               Figure 1: Distribution of aggregate investment rates in partial equilibrium
                        0.4
obs relative to total                                                       Lumpy investment model
                        0.3


                        0.2


                        0.1


                          0
                         -0.4   -0.3   -0.2   -0.1   0       0.1      0.2   0.3    0.4     0.5       0.6




                        0.4
                                                                                  Frictionless model
obs relative to total




                        0.3


                        0.2


                        0.1


                          0
                         -0.4   -0.3   -0.2   -0.1   0       0.1      0.2   0.3    0.4     0.5       0.6
                                                     investment rate: I/K
                                               Figure 2: Partial equilibrium aggregate capital responses
                                      100
                                                                                                 Lumpy investment
                                                                                                 Frictionless
                                       80



                                       60
percent deviation from steady state




                                       40



                                       20



                                         0



                                       -20



                                       -40



                                       -60



                                       -80



                                      -100
                                          15        20          25          30         35          40               45
                                                                           time
               Figure 3: Steady state adjustment in common productivity lumpy model
               0.2                                                                    1




                                                                                            adjustment rates [--]
μ(k) [solid]




               0.1                                                                    0.5




                0                                                                     0
                     0     0.5        1            1.5         2       2.5        3
                                             current capital
                     Figure 4: Adjustment responses in the common productivity model
               0.2                                      1     0.2                                      1

                              2 sd Rise in z                                   2 sd Fall in z




                                                                                                             adjustment rates [--]
μ(k) [solid]




               0.1                                      0.5   0.1                                      0.5




                0                                       0      0                                       0
                0.6     0.8   1      1.2    1.4   1.6          0.6   0.8   1        1.2    1.4   1.6
                              current capital                              current capital
                        Figure 5: Distribution of aggregate investment rates in general equilibrium
                         0.2
obs relative to total                                                              Lumpy investment model
                        0.15


                         0.1


                        0.05


                          0
                         -0.06       -0.04       -0.02            0             0.02        0.04          0.06




                         0.2
                                                                                         Frictionless model
obs relative to total




                        0.15


                         0.1


                        0.05


                          0
                         -0.06       -0.04       -0.02            0             0.02        0.04          0.06
                                                         investment rate: I/K
                                Table 1. Baseline parameter values
       γ        β        δ        α        ν        ϕ        ρz      σηz        ρε      σηε       b         ξ
    1.016 0. 977 0.069 0.256 0.640 2.400 0.859 0.014 0.859 0.022 0.011 0.0083




              Table 2. Matching the time-averaged plant investment data
                                                                    Positive Negative Positive Negative
   average annual fraction of plants exhibiting:        Inaction
                                                                     Spike    Spike   Invest. Invest.
                      LRD data                           0.081       0.186       0.018        0.815       0.104
 (1) traditional lumpy                                   0.789       0.187       0.000        0.211       0.000
 (2) extended lumpy with plant-specific TFP              0.073       0.185       0.010        0.752       0.175
DATA: Cooper and Haltiwanger (2005). Traditional model: σηε = b = 0, upper support = 0.014 to fit positive spike obs.
  Table 3. Role of nonconvexities in aggregate investment rate dynamics
                                                     Standard
                                 Persistence                            Skewness             Kurtosis
                                                     Deviation
      postwar U.S.                  0.706              0.008              - 0.182            - 0.743
                             A. partial equilibrium models
(1) PE frictionless                - 0.069             0.128               0.358              0.140
(2) PE lumpy investment              0.210             0.085               1.121              2.313
                             B. general equilibrium models
(1) GE frictionless                 0.659              0.010               0.048               0.048
(2) GE lumpy investment             0.662              0.010               0.067             - 0.074
 DATA: Annual private investment-to-capital ratio, 1954 – 2002, computed using BEA tables.
                Table 4. Aggregate business cycle moments*
                                 Y           Z            N           C            I           K
                        A. Standard Deviations Relative to Output
(1) GE Frictionless           2.277       0.602        0.645       0.429        3.562       0.494
(2) GE Lumpy                  2.264       0.605        0.639       0.433        3.539       0.492
                     B. Contemporaneous Correlations with Output
(1) GE Frictionless                       1.000        0.955       0.895        0.976       0.034
(2) GE Lumpy                              1.000        0.956       0.900        0.976       0.034
 *
   The logarithm of each series is HP-filtered using a weight of 100. The first column of panel A
 reports percent standard deviations of output.
                                      Table 5. Robustness
                                                          Standard
                                         Persistence                       Skewness      Kurtosis
                                                          Deviation
            postwar U.S.                    0.706             0.008        - 0.182       - 0.743
baseline lumpy                              0.662             0.010         0.067        - 0.074
(1) big fixed costs                         0.677             0.009         0.071        - 0.066
(2) huge fixed costs and big σε             0.681             0.009         0.071        - 0.064

(3) no fixed costs for i ∈ [0,δk]           0.665             0.010         0.070        - 0.057




       Table 6. Equilibrium and the dynamics of plant investment rates
    Panel regressions from
    simulated lumpy models.                                                    adj.     S.E. of
                      plant i/k on:   constant       ∆z           ∆ε        R-squared regression

    (1) General equilibrium data       0.107        0.423        5.126       0.227      0.215
                                                    (0.047)      (0.032)


    (2) Partial equilibrium data                    5.464        5.414       0.289      0.233
                                       0.112        (0.051)      (0.034)
           Table 7. Role of fixed costs in plant-level investments

   average annual fraction                Positive   Negative   Positive   Negative
       of plants exhibiting:
                               Inaction
                                           Spike      Spike     Invest.     Invest.
          LRD data             0.081      0.186       0.018     0.815       0.104
(1) frictionless model         0.032      0.204       0.028     0.611       0.356

(2) lumpy investment model     0.073      0.185       0.010     0.752       0.175
                                       Appendices


A     Numerical method
     Solving the frictionless model is fairly straightforward, even in the presence of persis-
tent plant-level shocks. Despite a distribution of plants over capital and productivities,
the endogenous aggregate state vector may be characterized by total capital and a time-
invariant distribution of plants’ shares of the aggregate capital stock that are functions of
their idiosyncratic productivity levels (as shown in section B). Given the invariance in this
distribution of relative capital, the aggregate state vector contains only two time-varying ele-
ments, total capital and aggregate productivity, and standard methods may be used to solve
the model. The one novelty in our approach is that we apply a nonlinear solution method
using piecewise polynomial cubic spline interpolation of the planner’s value function. This
method is described briefly in Khan and Thomas (2003) and, in more detail, in Thomas
(2004). In partial equilibrium, the same nonlinear approach is applied to solving plants’
value functions for the lumpy investment models. Note that uncertainty in adjustment costs
implies that value functions are smooth objects.
    In contrast to its frictionless counterpart, the equilibrium lumpy investment model’s
aggregate state vector involves a nontrivial distribution of plants, which makes the compu-
tation of equilibrium more challenging. Our solution algorithm involves repeated application
of the contraction mapping implied by (8) - (10) to solve for plants’ start-of-period value
functions V 0 , given the price functions p (z, μ) and ω(z, μ) and the laws of motion implied
by Γ (z, μ) , (π ij ) and (π εlm ). This recursive approach is complicated in two ways. First,
recalling that a primary focus throughout this literature has been on lumpy investment’s
potential for generating aggregate nonlinearities, we must use a solution method that does
not rule them out. Moreover, we must adopt a non-local method, because plants’ (S, s) de-
cision rules can sometimes hit corners (when interior values for their threshold costs shift to
the boundaries of the cost distribution). As explained below, this implies that the number
of capital stocks with a positive measure of plants changes over time.
    The upper bound on the distribution of capital adjustment costs implies that all plants
adjust in finite time; in this sense, the economy has finite memory. Thus, at each idiosyn-
cratic productivity level, the distribution of plants over capital may be described using a
finite vector of capital levels and the associated number of plants holding each such level. At
the same time, while not high-dimensional, the distribution μ in the aggregate state vector is
still a large object. Even in the lumpy investment model without idiosyncratic productivity

                                              34
shocks, it involves 62 variables. The nonlinear solution method predicated by our focus on
aggregate nonlinearities makes this numerically intractable, so we use selected moments as
a proxy for the distribution in the aggregate state vector.
   More specifically, our solution adapts the method of Khan and Thomas (2003) to allow for
a two-dimensional distribution of plants over capital and idiosyncratic productivity. Thus,
we assume that agents use a smaller object in proxy for the distribution as they forecast
the future state to make decisions given current prices. In choosing this proxy, we apply a
variation on the method of Krusell and Smith (1997), assuming that agents approximate the
distribution in the aggregate state vector with a vector of moments, m = (m1 , ..., mI ), drawn
from the true distribution. Because our work involves discrete choices among producers, we
find that using the conditional means from I equal-sized partitions of the distribution is
eﬃcient, implying small forecasting errors.
   Our solution algorithm iterates between an inner loop and an outer loop, as in Krusell
and Smith (1997). In the inner loop, agents’ value functions are solved based upon a given
set of forecasting rules. Given these value functions, the economy is simulated in the outer
loop, where p is endogenously determined in each date. Throughout our simulations, we
use the actual distribution of plants over capital and productivity in each period, alongside
plants’ value functions (derived using the forecasting rules described above), to determine
equilibrium prices and quantities, and thus the subsequent period’s distribution. Next, the
resulting simulation data are used to update the forecasting rules, with which we return to
the inner loop, this two-step process continuing until the forecasting rules converge.
   Table A1 presents agents’ forecasting rules for the common productivity model. In
determining their current decisions, agents forecast the future proxy state, m01 , assumed to
be the logarithm of the first moment of the distribution of plants over capital, using the
logarithm of the mean of the current distribution, m1 (and current aggregate productivity).
Similarly, when solving for agents’ value functions, we have them assume that the valuation
of current output, p, is a log-linear function of this mean. Note that adjusted R-squareds
are very high, and standard errors are small; almost all the true variation in the mean of
the distribution, and in the relative price of output, may be anticipated using these simple
forecasting rules.
   In the full lumpy investment model, there is a two-dimensional distribution of plants over
capital and idiosyncratic productivity. Here, the 15-point discretization of the persistent
plant productivity process implies an aggregate state vector where 2029 levels of capital
have positive mass. Nonetheless, we find that the solution method described above is robust
to this additional source of heterogeneity. The equilibrium forecasting rules are presented in
Table A2. Note that there is no loss of accuracy in the forecasting rules with the introduction


                                              35
of persistent diﬀerences in plant-specific productivity, though we continue to use only the
unconditional mean of the distribution of capital as a proxy for the aggregate endogenous
state. This suggests that our general equilibrium solution method may be applied to a broad
class of models currently studied in partial equilibrium.




B     A characterization of the frictionless model
     In this appendix, we derive several analytical results for the full frictionless model
characterized by persistent plant-specific total factor productivity shocks and no nonconvex
costs of capital adjustment. In lemma 1, under the assumption of Cobb-Douglas production,
we establish that the plant decision rule for next period’s capital stock may be expressed
as the product of two functions whose arguments are the current plant-specific productivity
term and the aggregate state, respectively. Thus, in the absence of capital adjustment costs,
a plant’s decision rule for future capital is independent of its current capital. Moreover, this
decision rule is separable in plant-level and aggregate variables.
    It is then immediate that, given any initial distribution of plants, future distributions
involve only Nε time-varying values of capital with positive mass.                            The separability of
plants’ capital stock decision rules into a plant-specific and an aggregate component implies
that the shares of the aggregate capital stock across plant types are time-invariant. In other
words, the distribution of capital across plants, once normalized, satisfies a time-invariance
property. This property ensures that, in any period, the entire distribution of capital,
and thus production, may be described using a time-invariant share distribution and the
aggregate capital stock, as established in lemma 2. As a result, the aggregate capital stock
is suﬃcient to fully characterize variation in the endogenous state vector of the full version
of the frictionless model, just as under common productivity. Moreover, it follows that all
aggregate dynamics of the full model may be recovered using a representative firm approach,
although for brevity we omit the details here.
    We begin our analysis of the frictionless model by describing the problem of a plant. In
the absence of capital adjustment costs, the value of any plant of type (εl , k) will solve the
following functional equation:
                                        h
             v 1 (εl , k; zi , μ) = max0 zi εl F (k, n) − ω (zi , μ) n − γk0 + (1 − δ) k                     (18)
                                   n,k
                                       Nz
                                       X                        Nε
                                                                X              ¡                  ¢i
                                   +         π ij dj (zi , μ)         π εlm v 1 εm , k 0 ; zj , μ0 ,
                                       j=1                      m=1


                                                     36
subject to μ0 = Γ (zi , μ). Let N (εl , k; zi , μ) describe the plant’s employment choice and
K (εl , k; zi , μ) its decision rule for next period’s capital stock. The description of households
in section 2.2 of the text is unchanged.
   A recursive competitive equilibrium is a set of functions
                      ³                                                     ´
                        ω, (dj )Nz
                                j=1 , ρ ,
                                       1 0ρ , v 1
                                                  , N, K, W, C, N h
                                                                    , Λh
                                                                         , Γ

such that plants and households maximize their expected values and the markets for assets,
labor and output clear:

   1. v1 satisfies (18) and (N, K) are the associated policy functions for plants.
                         ¡           ¢
   2. W satisfies (5) and C, N h , Λh are the associated policy functions for households.

   3. Λh (εm , k 0 , μ; z, μ) = μ0 (εm , k 0 ), for each (εm , k0 ) ∈ S.
                          R
   4. N h (μ; z, μ) =     SN   (ε, k; z, μ) μ(d [ε × k]).
                      R ³                                                         ´
   5. C (μ; z, μ) =    S zεF (k, N (ε, k; z, μ)) − γK (ε, k, ξ; z, μ) + (1 − δ) k  μ(d [ε × k]).
                      R
   6. μ0 (εm , B) =                                  ε
                        {(εl ,k) | K(εl ,k;z,μ)∈B} π lm μ (d [εl       × k]), for all (εm , B) ∈ S, defines Γ.

B.1        Plant’s capital decision rule
      Let α ∈ (0, 1) represent capital’s share of production and ν ∈ (0, 1) be labor’s share,
where α + ν < 1. The choice of employment, n, solves maxn (sk α nν − ωn), where s = zε
                                                                      ¡ α ¢ 1−ν
                                                                              1
and ω is the real wage. This yields the employment decision rule n = νsk ω       , allowing us
                                 1    α ¡ ¢ ν
                                          ν
to express production as y = s 1−ν k 1−ν ω  1−ν . Production net of labor costs is then given
by the following:
                                                                   1       α
                                                                               ³ν ´    ν
                                                                                      1−ν
                                    y − ωn = (1 − ν) s 1−ν k 1−ν
                                                             .                                                                  (19)
                                                       ω
   Substituting (19) into (18), we remove the static employment decision:
                              h                           µ                               ¶    ν
       1                                         1     α                       ν              1−ν
      v (εl , k; zi , μ) = max (1 − ν) [zi εl ] 1−ν k 1−ν                                                                       (20)
                            0   k                                           ω (zi , μ)
                                                        ¶
                                     0
                                                              Nz
                                                              X                           Nε
                                                                                          X              ¡                 ¢i
                              −γk + (1 − δ) k +                        π ij dj (zi , μ)         π εlm v 1 εm , k0 ; zj , μ0 .
                                                              j=1                         m=1

The first-order condition is
                               Nz
                               X                        Nε
                                                        X                ¡                 ¢
                       −γ +          π ij dj (zi , μ)         π εlm D2 v1 εm , k0 ; zj , μ0 = 0.
                               j=1                      m=1



                                                              37
Combining this with the Benveniste-Scheinkman condition below,
                                                            µ            ¶ ν
                 1                              1     α
                                                         −1      ν        1−ν
            D2 v (εl , k; zi , μ) = α [zi εl ] 1−ν k 1−ν                      + (1 − δ) ,
                                                              ω (zi , μ)
we have a stochastic Euler equation for capital:
          Nz
          X                        Nε
                                   X             µ                       µ                      ¶    ν             ¶
                                                              1 ¡ ¢ α −1             ν              1−ν
    γ=          π ij dj (zi , μ)         π εlm    α [zj εm ] 1−ν k 0 1−ν                                  + (1 − δ) .   (21)
                                   m=1
                                                                                 ω (zj , μ0 )
          j=1

    Define the following terms:
                                                                         1−ν
                                         Ã   Nε
                                                                     ! 1−(α+ν)
                                             X                 1
                     L0 (εl ) =                    π εlm (εm ) 1−ν                                                      (22)
                                            m=1
                                         ⎛                                                          ⎞      1−ν
                                                                     PNz                                  α+ν−1

                                ⎜   γ − (1 − δ) j=1 π ij dj (zi , μ)            ⎟
                  L1 (zi , μ) = ⎝                           1 ³            ´ ν ⎠                                  .     (23)
                                   PNz                                      1−ν
                                  α j=1 π ij dj (zi , μ) zj1−ν ω(zνj ,μ0 )

Simplification of (21) and use of the definitions in equations (22) - (23) proves the following.

Lemma 1 The capital decision rule for a plant, K (εl , k; zi , μ), is independent of k and
takes the form L0 (εl ) L1 (zi , μ).

B.2     Aggregation
      The fact that plants’ future capital stocks are independent of their current capital stocks
is central to our aggregation result. This result is not shared by the lumpy investment model
because of the inaction arising from its fixed adjustment costs.
    We next exploit the implication from lemma 1 that the ratio of capital across any two
plants depends only on their lagged productivity levels to describe how the dynamics of
this economy may be solved as a standard optimal growth model, with the aggregate state
vector eﬀectively reduced to simply the aggregate capital stock and exogenous productivity.
    Let H = (h1 , . . . , hNε )T be the vector representing the time-invariant distribution of
plants over idiosyncratic shock values solving
                                ¯                                                     ¯
                                ¯ ε                                                   ¯
                                ¯ π 1,1    π ε1,2 · · ·                      π ε1,Nε ¯
                                ¯                                                     ¯
                                ¯ πε       π ε2,2 · · ·                      π ε2,Nε ¯¯
                                ¯ 2,1
                           H=¯ .              ..                                 ..   ¯ H.
                                ¯ ..           .                                  .   ¯
                                ¯                                                     ¯
                                ¯ ε                                                   ¯
                                ¯ π Nε ,1 π εNε ,2 · · ·                      ε
                                                                            π Nε ,Nε ¯

    Since capital decision rules are independent of current capital, it follows that all plants
with the same current idiosyncratic shock value, εl , will choose the same capital stock for

                                                               38
next period, kl = L0 (εl ) L1 (zi , μ), l = 1, . . . , Nε . Thus, there will be Nε capital values
with positive mass next period, and hl plants, all currently having the idiosyncratic shock
value εl , will begin the next period with kl . Define the mean of this distribution of capital
      P ε
K0 = N            0
          l=1 hl kl . Using lemma 1, we know

                                           Nε
                                           X
                                    K0 =          hl L0 (εl ) L1 (zi , μ) .                 (24)
                                            l=1

Toward establishing a time-invariant relative distribution of plants over capital, it is useful
to define the following share terms:

                                     L0 (εm )
                           χm ≡ PNε                 , m = 1, . . . , Nε .                   (25)
                                    l=1 hl L0 (εl )
                                                 ¡              ¢
Define the vector of these share terms as χ ≡ χ1 , . . . , χNε .
    While all plants with the same current idiosyncratic shock value will choose a common
capital stock for next period, their subsequent idiosyncratic productivities will diﬀer. Let
He describe the two-dimensional distribution of plants over εt−1 and εt . An element of this
Nε × Nε matrix, e hlm , represents the number of plants that had εt−1 = εl and have εt = εm :

                    e
                    hl,m = π l,m hl ,      for l = 1, . . . , Nε and m = 1, . . . , Nε .    (26)

In any period t + 1, where t ≥ 0, the distribution of plants is then completely characterized
by He and χ together with the aggregate capital stock, Kt+1 . This establishes lemma 2
below.

Lemma 2 Let K be the aggregate capital stock, and define kl ≡ χl K, l = 1, . . . , Nε . For
each εm , m = 1, . . . , Nε , μ (εm , kl ) = e
                                             hl,m ≥ 0, and elsewhere μ = 0.

    Thus, the distribution of plants over both idiosyncratic productivity levels and capital
stocks has Nε2 elements in all. More importantly, this distribution is completely characterized
by two time-invariant objects, H e and χ, and the aggregate capital stock. It follows, then,
that the aggregate state vector of the full frictionless model has only two time-varying
elements, aggregate capital and exogenous aggregate productivity.




                                                      39
      Table A1. Forecasting rules in common productivity lumpy model

                                           β1                β2               S.E.                R2
      z1                   m1’           0.006             0.802            0.20 e-3            0.9999
   (119 obs.)               p            0.998             -0.395           0.14 e-3            0.9999
      z2                   m1’           0.014             0.800            0.25 e-3            0.9999
  (298 obs.)               p             0.990             -0.393           0.15 e-3            0.9999
      z3                   m1’           0.021             0.798            0.25 e-3            0.9999
   (734 obs.)              p             0.981             -0.392           0.14 e-3            0.9999
      z4                   m1’           0.028             0.797            0.28 e-3            0.9999
  (1208 obs.)              p             0.972             -0.392           0.15 e-3            0.9999
      z5                   m1’           0.035             0.796            0.31 e-3            0.9999
  (1682 obs.)              p             0.963             -0.391           0.15 e-3            0.9999
      z6                   m1’           0.041             0.796            0.31 e-3            0.9999
  (1871 obs.)              p             0.953             -0.389           0.15 e-3            0.9999
      z7                   m1’           0.048             0.795            0.29 e-3            0.9999
  (1706 obs.)              p             0.944             -0.388           0.14 e-3            0.9999
      z8                   m1’           0.055             0.794            0.26 e-3            0.9999
  (1237 obs.)              p             0.935             -0.386           0.13 e-3            0.9999
      z9                   m1’           0.062             0.793            0.24 e-3            0.9999
   (751 obs.)              p             0.926             -0.386           0.11 e-3            0.9999
      z10                  m1’           0.070             0.791            0.26 e-3            0.9999
   (295 obs.)              p             0.917             -0.385           0.11 e-3            0.9999
      z11                  m1’           0.078             0.789            0.21 e-3            0.9999
   (99 obs.)               p             0.908             -0.384           0.11 e-3            0.9999
NOTE. – Forecasting rules are conditional on current productivity, zi. Each regression takes the form:
log (y) = β1 + β2 log (m ), where y= m ’ or p.
                                    
                       Table A2. Forecasting rules in full lumpy model
                                               β1               β2              S.E.               R2
       z1                   m1’              0.009            0.800           0.15 e-3          1.0000
    (119 obs.)               p               0.994            -0.397          0.03 e-3          1.0000
        z2                   m1’             0.016            0.798           0.22 e-3          0.9999
    (298 obs.)               p               0.986            -0.395          0.04 e-3          1.0000
       z3                    m1’             0.023            0.796           0.23 e-3          0.9999
    (734 obs.)               p               0.977            -0.394          0.04 e-3          1.0000
        z4                   m1’             0.030            0.795           0.26 e-3          0.9999
    (1208 obs.)              p               0.968            -0.393          0.05 e-3          1.0000
        z5                   m1’             0.037            0.794           0.27 e-3          0.9999
    (1682 obs.)              p               0.958            -0.392          0.05 e-3          1.0000
        z6                   m1’             0.044            0.079           0.28 e-3          0.9999
    (1871 obs.)              p               0.949            -0.391          0.05 e-3          1.0000
        z7                   m1’             0.051            0.793           0.26 e-3          0.9999
    (1706 obs.)              p               0.940            -0.389          0.05 e-3          1.0000
        z8                   m1’             0.058            0.792           0.24 e-3          0.9999
    (1237 obs.)              p               0.931            -0.388          0.05 e-3          1.0000
       z9                    m1’             0.065            0.792           0.23 e-3          0.9999
    (751 obs.)               p               0.921            -0.386          0.04 e-3          1.0000
       z10                   m1’             0.072            0.791           0.25 e-3          0.9999
    (295 obs.)               p               0.912            -0.384          0.05 e-3          1.0000
        z11                  m1’             0.079            0.791           0.19 e-3          0.9999
     (99 obs.)               p               0.903            -0.382          0.04 e-3          1.0000
NOTE. – Forecasting rules are conditional on current productivity, zi. Each regression takes the form:
log (y) = β1 + β2 log (m ), where y= m ’ or p.
                                    
