NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES FIRM VALUE MOVE TOO MUCH TO BE JUSTIFIED BY SUBSEQUENT
CHANGES IN CASH FLOW?
Borja Larrain
Motohiro Yogo
Working Paper 12847
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12847

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2007

For comments and discussions, we thank Andrew Abel, Tobias Adrian, Malcolm Baker, John Campbell,
Jonathan Lewellen, Craig MacKinlay, Michael Roberts, Robert Stambaugh, Stanley Zin, and seminar
participants at Dartmouth College, Federal Reserve Bank (FRB) of Boston, Federal Reserve Board,
Harvard University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Singapore Management University, Wharton
School, National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Asset Pricing Meeting 2005, Western Finance
Association Annual Meeting 2006, and NBER Summer Institute Capital Markets and the Economy
Workshop 2006. Maria Giduskova provided excellent research assistance. This paper was completed
while Borja Larrain was an economist at the FRB of Boston. He thanks his colleagues there for a great
research environment. The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and do not
reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, the Federal Reserve System, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Borja Larrain and Motohiro Yogo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Does Firm Value Move Too Much to be Justified by Subsequent Changes in Cash Flow?
Borja Larrain and Motohiro Yogo
NBER Working Paper No. 12847
January 2007, Revised August 2009
JEL No. G12,G32,G35
ABSTRACT
The appropriate measure of cash flow for valuing corporate assets is net payout, which is the sum
of dividends, interest, and net repurchases of equity and debt. Variation in net payout yield, the ratio
of net payout to asset value, is mostly driven by movements in expected cash flow growth, instead
of movements in discount rates. Net payout yield is less persistent than dividend yield and implies
much smaller variation in long-horizon discount rates. Therefore, movements in the value of corporate
assets can be justified by changes in expected future cash flow.

Borja Larrain
Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile
Escuela de Administracion
Avda Vicuna Mackenna 4860, Macul
Santiago, Chile
larrain@post.harvard.edu
Motohiro Yogo
University of Pennsylvania
The Wharton School
Finance Department
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
yogo@wharton.upenn.edu

1.

Introduction

This paper examines the present-value relation between the asset value and cash ﬂow of
US corporations. The total cash outﬂow from ﬁrms is net payout, which is the sum of
dividends, interest, equity repurchase net of issuance, and debt repurchase net of issuance.
Variation in net payout yield, the ratio of net payout to asset value, is mostly driven by
movements in expected cash ﬂow growth, instead of movements in discount rates. A variance
decomposition of net payout yield shows that 12% of its variation is explained by asset
returns, while 88% is explained by cash ﬂow growth. Moreover, net payout yield is less
persistent than other valuation ratios with an autoregressive coeﬃcient of 0.78. A model of
expected returns based on net payout yield implies relatively small variation in long-horizon
discount rates. Therefore, movements in the value of corporate assets can be explained by
changes in expected future cash ﬂow.
Our ﬁndings are somewhat surprising in light of previous studies on the present-value
relation between stock prices and dividends. Variation in dividend yield is mostly driven by
movements in discount rates, instead of movements in expected dividend growth (Campbell
and Shiller, 1988). A variance decomposition of dividend yield shows that 83% of its variation is explained by stock returns, while 17% is explained by dividend growth. Moreover,
dividend yield is highly persistent with an autoregressive coeﬃcient of 0.93. A model of
expected returns based on dividend yield implies large variation in long-horizon discount
rates. Therefore, movements in stock prices cannot be explained by changes in expected
future dividends (LeRoy and Porter, 1981; Shiller, 1981).
Our focus on net payout, instead of dividends, is motivated by three considerations.
First, a recent literature on corporate payout policy has broadened the scope of payout beyond ordinary dividends (see Allen and Michaely, 2003, for a survey). Because ﬁrms jointly
determine all components of net payout, instead of dividends in isolation, a comprehensive
measure of cash ﬂow is necessary for understanding asset valuation (Modigliani and Miller,
1961). Firms tend to use dividends to distribute the permanent component of earnings
2

because dividend policy requires ﬁnancial commitment (Lintner, 1956). Consequently, dividends change slowly and remain mostly independent of asset value. In contrast, ﬁrms tend
to use repurchases to distribute the transitory component of earnings because repurchase
and issuance policy retains ﬁnancial discretion. Consequently, repurchases and issuances of
both equity and debt are cyclical and move together with asset value (Hall, 2001a).1
The second motivation for focusing on net payout is the diﬀerence between the portfolio
view and the macro view of investment. Dividends are the appropriate measure of cash ﬂow
for an individual investor who owns one share of a value-weighted portfolio. The investor
essentially follows a portfolio strategy in which dividends are received and net repurchases
of equity are reinvested. In contrast, net payout is the appropriate measure of cash ﬂow
for a representative investor who owns the entire corporate sector. From a macro view, net
repurchases of equity and debt are cash outﬂows from the corporate sector that (by deﬁnition) cannot be reinvested. The value of corporate assets, instead of a stock price index, is
related to the underlying quantity of capital and ultimately enters the representative household’s intertemporal budget constraint (Abel, Mankiw, Summers, and Zeckhauser, 1989;
Hall, 2001b).
The third motivation for focusing on net payout is a recent literature that has shown the
shortcomings of dividend yield in measuring the magnitude of variation in discount rates.
Dividend yield is highly persistent, or even nonstationary, leading to fairly uninformative
inference on the exact magnitude of return predictability (see Stambaugh, 1999; Lewellen,
2004; Torous, Valkanov, and Yan, 2004; Campbell and Yogo, 2006). In addition, the forecasting relation between stock returns and dividend yield appears to suﬀer from structural
instability (see Viceira, 1996; Goyal and Welch, 2003; Lettau and Van Nieuwerburgh, 2006).
Partly in response to these problems, Robertson and Wright (2006) and Boudoukh, Michaely,
Richardson, and Roberts (2007) reexamine the evidence for return predictability using valuation ratios that include equity repurchase in addition to dividends. This paper is in the
1

See Guay and Harford (2000), Jagannathan, Stephens, and Weisbach (2000), and Dittmar and Dittmar
(2004) for related evidence on equity repurchase.

3

same spirit, but we focus on implications for long-horizon discount rates. We also use a more
comprehensive measure of cash ﬂow than includes payout to debt holders.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 develops an empirical framework for
studying the present-value relation between net payout and asset value, starting with the
ﬁrm’s intertemporal budget constraint. Section 3 describes our data on payout, issuance,
and asset value. Section 4 uses the present-value framework to decompose the variation in
net payout yield and asset returns. Section 5 presents analogous variance decompositions
for market equity, which allows us to compare and understand our main results for assets
(i.e., market equity plus liabilities). Section 6 concludes.

2.

Empirical framework

2.1.

The firm’s intertemporal budget constraint

To develop the ﬁrm’s intertemporal budget constraint, we ﬁrst introduce the following quantities.
• Yt : Earnings net of taxes and depreciation in period t.
• Ct : Net payout, or the net cash outﬂow from the ﬁrm, in period t. It is composed
of dividends, interest, equity repurchase net of issuance, and debt repurchase net of
issuance.
• It : Investment net of depreciation in period t.
• At : Market value of assets at the end of period t.
• Ct /At : Net payout yield at the end of period t.
• Rt+1 = 1 + Yt+1 /At : Return on assets in period t + 1.

4

Investment includes both capital expenditures (on property, plant, and equipment) and
investment in working capital. Because we are interested in the market value of assets, the
relevant notion of depreciation is economic, not accounting. Economic depreciation includes
capital gains and losses from changes in the market value of assets.
The ﬂow of funds identity states that the sources of funds must equal the uses of funds,

Yt = Ct + It .

(1)

At+1 = At + It+1 .

(2)

At+1 + Ct+1 = Rt+1 At .

(3)

The capital accumulation equation is

Eqs. (1) and (2) together imply that

This equation can be interpreted as the ﬁrm’s intertemporal budget constraint. It is analogous to a household’s intertemporal budget constraint: C represents consumption, A represents wealth, and R represents the return on wealth.

2.2.

Present-value relation between net payout and asset value

We use the ﬁrm’s intertemporal budget constraint to study the present-value relation between
net payout and asset value. The particular framework that we adopt is the log-linear presentvalue model of Campbell and Shiller (1988), which can be interpreted as a dynamic version
of the Gordon growth model that allows for time variation in discount rates and expected
cash ﬂow growth.
Let lowercase letters denote the log of the corresponding uppercase variables, and let ∆
denote the ﬁrst-diﬀerence operator. Let vt = log(Ct /At ) denote the log of net payout yield.
5

Log-linear approximation of Eq. (3) leads to a diﬀerence equation for net payout yield
vt ≈ rt+1 − ∆ct+1 + ρvt+1 ,

(4)

where ρ = 1/(1+exp{E[vt ]}). The constant in the approximation is suppressed (equivalently,
all the variables are assumed to be de-meaned) to simplify notation here and throughout the
paper.
Solving Eq. (4) forward H periods,
vt = rt (H) − ∆ct (H) + vt (H),

(5)

where

rt (H) =
∆ct (H) =

H

s=1
H


ρs−1 rt+s ,

(6)

ρs−1 ∆ct+s ,

(7)

s=1
H

vt (H) = ρ vt+H .

(8)

In the inﬁnite-horizon limit, Eq. (5) becomes

vt =

∞


ρs−1 (rt+s − ∆ct+s ).

(9)

s=1

The convergence of the sum is assured by the assumption that net payout yield is stationarity
(i.e., net payout and asset value are cointegrated).
Eq. (9) also holds ex ante as a present-value model

vt = Et

∞


ρs−1 (rt+s − ∆ct+s ).

(10)

s=1

Net payout yield summarizes a ﬁrm’s expectations about future changes in asset value and
6

cash ﬂow, just as the consumption-wealth ratio summarizes a household’s expectations about
future changes in wealth and consumption (Campbell and Mankiw, 1989). Eq. (10) says that
net payout yield is high when expected asset returns are high or expected cash ﬂow growth is
low. If movements in discount rates were perfectly oﬀset by movements in expected cash ﬂow
growth, then net payout yield would be constant. Therefore, net payout yield must forecast
independent (as opposed to common) variation in asset returns or net payout growth.
Rearranging Eq. (10),

at = c t + E t

∞


ρs−1 ∆ct+s − Et

s=1

∞


ρs−1 rt+s .

(11)

s=1

The ﬁrst two terms on the right side of this equation can be interpreted as expected net
payout under a constant discount rate. The last term on the right side is long-horizon
discount rates, which measures the magnitude of deviation from the constant discount rate
present-value model. We use Eq. (11) to assess whether changes in expected future cash ﬂow
justify movements in asset value.
In addition to the variation in expected long-horizon asset returns, the present-value
model allows us to measure the variation in unexpected asset returns. Subtracting the
expectation of Eq. (9) in period t from its expectation in period t + 1,
rt+1 − Et rt+1 = −(Et+1 − Et )

∞


ρ

s−1

s=2

rt+s + (Et+1 − Et )

∞


ρs−1 ∆ct+s .

(12)

s=1

This equation takes the view of an investor who rationalizes realized asset returns through
changes in discount rates and changes in expected cash ﬂow growth. Asset return is unexpectedly high when discount rates fall or expected cash ﬂow growth rises.

2.3.

VAR estimation

We model the joint dynamics of asset return, net payout growth, and net payout yield
through a vector autoregression (VAR). Let xt = (rt , ∆ct , vt ) be a column vector consisting
7

of the three variables. To simplify notation, assume that the variables are de-meaned so that
E[xt ] = 0. The VAR model is
xt+1 = Φxt + t+1 ,

(13)

where E[t ] = 0 and E[t t ] = Σ. The ﬁrst two rows of the model can be interpreted as
a vector error-correction model under the maintained assumption that net payout yield is
stationary. The vector of variables has the covariance matrix
Γ = E[xt xt ] = vec−1 [(I − Φ ⊗ Φ)−1 vec(Σ)].

(14)

The VAR model is identiﬁed by the moment restriction
E[(xt+1 − Φxt ) ⊗ xt ] = 0.

(15)

Let I denote an identity matrix of dimension three, and let ei denote the ith column of the
identity matrix. The present-value model, that is, the expectation of Eq. (4) in period t,
requires that the coeﬃcients satisfy the linear restrictions
(e1 − e2 + ρe3 )Φ = e3 .

(16)

The VAR model is therefore overidentiﬁed.2 We estimate the model by continuous-updating
generalized method of moments (GMM) (Hansen, Heaton, and Yaron, 1996). We test the
overidentifying restrictions of the model through the J-test (Hansen, 1982).

2.4.

Variance decompositions

As shown in the literature, long-horizon regressions have poor ﬁnite-sample properties (see
Hodrick, 1992; Valkanov, 2003; Boudoukh, Richardson, and Whitelaw, 2006). We therefore
2

An alternative estimation methodology is to drop one of the three forecasting equations from the VAR,
thereby imposing exact identiﬁcation. The results reported in the paper are essentially unchanged using this
alternative methodology.

8

estimate long-horizon variances and covariances through the VAR model (see Ang, 2002, for
a similar approach). We obtain point estimates as sample analogs of the corresponding population moments and standard errors through the delta method using numerical gradients.
2.4.1.

Variance of net payout yield

We decompose the variance of net payout yield into its covariance with future asset returns,
future net payout growth, and future net payout yield (Cochrane, 1992). The intertemporal
budget constraint, Eq. (5), implies the variance decomposition

Var(vt ) = Cov(rt (H), vt ) + Cov(−∆ct (H), vt ) + Cov(vt (H), vt ).

(17)

The VAR model implies that
Var(vt ) = e3 Γe3 ,

(18)

Cov(rt (H), vt ) = e1 Φ[I − (ρΦ)H ](I − ρΦ)−1 Γe3 → e1 Φ(I − ρΦ)−1 Γe3 ,

(19)

Cov(−∆ct (H), vt ) = −e2 Φ[I − (ρΦ)H ](I − ρΦ)−1 Γe3 → −e2 Φ(I − ρΦ)−1 Γe3 ,

(20)

Cov(vt (H), vt ) = e3 (ρΦ)H Γe3 → 0,

(21)

where the limits are taken as H → ∞.
2.4.2.

Variance of long-horizon discount rates

The VAR model implies that the present-value model, Eq. (10), can be written as
vt = e1 Φ(I − ρΦ)−1 xt − e2 Φ(I − ρΦ)−1 xt .

9

(22)

We estimate the variance of long-horizon discount rates and expected cash ﬂow growth
through the equations

Var Et

Var Et

∞



ρs−1 rt+s

s=1
∞

s−1

ρ

= e1 Φ(I − ρΦ)−1 Γ(I − ρΦ)−1 Φ e1 ,

(23)

= e2 Φ(I − ρΦ)−1 Γ(I − ρΦ)−1 Φ e2 .

(24)


∆ct+s

s=1

2.4.3.

Variance of unexpected asset returns

We decompose the variance of unexpected asset returns into the sum of the variance of
changes in discount rates, the variance of changes in expected cash ﬂow growth, and minus
twice the covariance between the two changes (Campbell, 1991). Eq. (12) implies the variance
decomposition

Var(rt+1 − Et rt+1 ) = Var (Et+1 − Et )


∞



ρs−1 rt+s


+ Var (Et+1 − Et )

s=2

−2Cov (Et+1 − Et )

∞

s=1

∞


ρs−1 rt+s , (Et+1 − Et )

s=2

∞



ρs−1 ∆ct+s


ρs−1 ∆ct+s . (25)

s=1

The VAR model implies that Eq. (12) can written as
e1 t+1 = −e1 ρΦ(I − ρΦ)−1 t+1 + e2 (I − ρΦ)−1 t+1 .

(26)

We estimate the variance of unexpected asset returns through the equation
e1 Σe1 = e1 ρΦ(I − ρΦ)−1 Σ(I − ρΦ)−1 ρΦ e1 + e2 (I − ρΦ)−1 Σ(I − ρΦ)−1 e2
−2e1 ρΦ(I − ρΦ)−1 Σ(I − ρΦ)−1 e2 .

10

(27)

3.

Data on payout, issuance, and asset value

3.1.

Flow of Funds data

Our primary data source is the Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States (Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2005), which has been available annually since
1946. We construct net payout and the market value of assets for the nonfarm, nonﬁnancial
corporate sector. We obtain the book value of liabilities (Line 21) and net worth (Line 44)
from Table B.102: Balance Sheet of Nonfarm Nonﬁnancial Corporate Business. We obtain
net dividends (Line 3), net new equity issues (Line 38), net increase in commercial paper
(Line 40), and net increase in corporate bonds (Line 42) from Table F.102: Nonfarm Nonﬁnancial Corporate Business. We obtain net interest payments from the National Income
and Product Accounts (NIPA) Table 1.14: Gross Value Added of Nonﬁnancial Domestic
Corporate Business.
We extend the sample back to 1926 with data from original sources, following the Federal
Reserve Board’s basic methodology.3 We refer to Wright (2004) for a related construction
that focuses on equity. We obtain the book value of liabilities and net worth from various
volumes of the Statistics of Income (US Treasury Department, 1950, Table 4). Liabilities are
the sum of accounts payable; bonds, notes, and mortgages payable; and other liabilities. Net
worth is assets minus liabilities. We exclude the liabilities and net worth for the industrial
groups “agriculture, forestry, and ﬁshery” and “ﬁnance, insurance, real estate, and lessors of
real property.” We obtain net issues of equity and corporate bonds from Goldsmith (1955,
Table V-14). Net issues of equity are the sum of net issues of common stock (Table V19) and preferred stock (Tables V-17 and V-18). We aggregate net issues over industrials,
utilities, railroads, the Bell system, and new incorporations. For the period 1926–1928, we
obtain dividends and interest payments, excluding the agriculture and ﬁnance sectors, from
Kuznets (1941, Tables 54 and 55). For the period 1929–1945, these data are from NIPA
3

Although all of the reported results are for the full sample 1926–2004, the results are essentially the
same for the postwar sample 1946–2004.

11

Table 1.14.
To compute the market value of net worth, we ﬁrst compute the book-to-market equity
ratio for all NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq stocks. Following Davis, Fama, and French (2000),
we compute the book equity for Compustat ﬁrms and merge it with the historical data
from Moody’s Manuals, available through Kenneth French’s webpage. We then merge the
book equity data with the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) Monthly Stock
Database to compute the aggregate book-to-market ratio at the end of each calendar year.
We exclude the standard industrial classiﬁcation (SIC) codes 100–979 and 6000–6799 to
focus on nonfarm, nonﬁnancial ﬁrms. The market value of net worth is the book value of
net worth divided by the aggregate book-to-market ratio.
An alternative way of constructing the market value of net worth is to use the market
value of equities outstanding (Line 35) from the Flow of Funds Table B.102. Because these
data are available only since 1946, our procedure has the advantage of yielding a consistent
time series since 1926. For the 1946–2004 subsample, we obtain essentially the same results
when we use the market value of equities outstanding from the Flow of Funds.
Net payout is the sum of dividends and interest payments minus the sum of net equity
and corporate debt issues. The market value of assets is the sum of the book value of
liabilities and the market value of net worth. The return on assets is computed from the
market value of assets and net payout through Eq. (3). All nominal quantities are deﬂated by
the December value of the consumer price index (CPI) from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
In constructing the market value of assets, we do not subtract the market value of ﬁnancial
assets.4 This procedure is appropriate for our application because we are interested in total
ﬁrm value. Equity and debt are ultimately claims to the ﬁrm’s cash ﬂow, whether they are
generated by the ﬁrm’s physical or ﬁnancial assets. Financial assets provide liquidity in the
4

A potential concern with this procedure is the issue of double accounting. Financial assets of one ﬁrm
can be equity or debt of another ﬁrm within the nonfarm, nonﬁnancial corporate sector. However, because
accounting rules make signiﬁcant cross-ownership between ﬁrms a matter of public information, the Flow of
Funds properly accounts for this potential problem through consolidation. Although some double accounting
could still be possible because of cross-ownership classiﬁed as short-term investment, such eﬀects are bound
to be small in practice.

12

productive process and can be considered a part of the ﬁrm’s working capital. In a related
data construction involving the Flow of Funds, Hall (2001b) subtracts oﬀ ﬁnancial assets
because his objective is to measure the quantity of physical capital in the corporate sector.

3.2.

Compustat data

Our secondary data source is a merge of the Compustat Annual Industrial Database and the
CRSP Monthly Stock Database. Because our construction requires the statement of cash
ﬂows, the data are available at annual frequency only since 1971. We exclude the SIC codes
6000–6799 to focus on nonﬁnancial ﬁrms. We construct net payout and the market value of
assets for publicly traded nonﬁnancial ﬁrms by aggregating ﬁrm-level data.
Table 1 lists the relevant variables from Compustat. We construct payout and securities
issuance from the statement of cash ﬂows as
D = DIV + EQ REP + INT + LTD REP + [−DEBT NET]+ ,

(28)

E = EQ ISS + LTD ISS + [DEBT NET]+ ,

(29)

where [·]+ is an operator that takes the positive part of the expression inside the brackets
(and takes the value zero if the the expression is negative). We refer to Richardson and
Sloan (2003) for a related construction. We use CRSP’s delisting data to account for equity
repurchases that occur during mergers, acquisitions, and liquidations. The terminal cash
outﬂow D from the ﬁrm is the delisting amount times the number of shares outstanding
(both from CRSP), whenever the delisting code is 233, 261, 262, 333, 361, 362, or 450.
We construct the market value of each ﬁrm as the sum of the market value of its common
stock, preferred stock, long-term debt, and other liabilities. The market value of common
stock is the price of common stock times the number of shares outstanding at the end
of calendar year. The market value of preferred stock is DIV PREF divided by Moody’s
medium-grade preferred dividend yield at the end of calendar year. Other liabilities consists

13

of LIAB CUR, and, if available, LIAB OTH, TAX, and MINORITY.
Our treatment of long-term debt follows the conventional procedure in the literature
(Brainard, Shoven, and Weiss, 1980; Bernanke and Campbell, 1988; Hall, Cummins, Laderman, and Mundy, 1988). We compute the market value of long-term debt by ﬁrst imputing
the maturity structure of bonds for each ﬁrm. All long-term bonds are assumed to be issued
at par at the end of calender year, with semiannual coupons payments, and with maturity
of 20 years. For a ﬁrm that exists in Compustat in 1958, its initial maturity structure is
given by Hall, Cummins, Laderman, and Mundy (1988, Table 2.3). For a ﬁrm that enters
Compustat in subsequent years, its initial maturity structure is given by the global maturity
structure for existing Compustat ﬁrms in that year. For a given ﬁrm, let LTDit be the book
value of bonds with i years to maturity at the end of year t. For each maturity i = 1, . . . , 19,
the book value of bonds is updated from year t to t + 1 through the formula

LTDit+1

⎧
⎪
⎨
=

LTDi+1
t

⎪
⎩ LTDi+1
t

if LTDt+1 − LTDt + LTD1t > 0

LTDt+1
otherwise
LTDt −LTD1t

.

(30)

New issues of 20-year bonds are given by the formula
1 +
LTD20
t+1 = [LTDt+1 − LTDt + LTDt ] .

(31)

The market value of long-term debt is the book value of bonds multiplied by the respective
price, summed across all maturities. The price of bonds at each maturity is computed from
Moody’s seasoned Baa corporate bond yield, assuming a ﬂat term structure.
One advantage of Compustat is that repurchase and issuance are separately observed.
Another advantage is that the market value of equity is directly observed, and the market
value of long-term debt can be imputed by explicitly accounting for the maturity structure.
This procedure leads to an arguably better measure of the market value of assets. The
disadvantages of Compustat are the short sample period and the lack of coverage of private

14

corporations. We therefore view the Flow of Funds as our main evidence and Compustat
as supporting evidence. In an average year during 1971–2004, ﬁrms in Compustat represent
54% of the assets in the Flow of Funds.

3.3.

Description of payout, issuance, and asset value

Table 2 reports descriptive statistics for the main variables. In the Flow of Funds, net payout
is 1.7% of assets on average with a standard deviation of 1%. Dividends are the largest
component of net payout. Net equity and debt repurchases represent a smaller component
of net payout on average, but they are as volatile as dividends. The autocorrelation of net
payout yield is 0.81, and its components are similarly persistent. The Compustat sample
paints a similar picture. Net repurchases of both equity and debt are smaller than dividends.
However, equity repurchase and issuance are comparable to dividends on average, while longterm debt repurchase and issuance represent a larger fraction of assets.
Fig. 1 shows the time series of net payout yield (Panel A) and its components (Panel B)
in the Flow of Funds. Net payout has been positive in every year since 1926, which has been
cited as evidence that the US economy is dynamically eﬃcient (Abel, Mankiw, Summers,
and Zeckhauser, 1989). The 1930s and the 1980s are periods of high net payout compared
with the other decades. These two peaks are driven by diﬀerent forces. The 1930s is a decade
of high dividends and high debt repurchase. This is explained by the diﬃculty that ﬁrms had
in issuing new debt during the Great Depression (Hickman, 1952). In contrast, the 1980s
is a decade of high equity repurchase and low debt repurchase. The high equity repurchase
is partly explained by merger activity in the 1980s (Baker and Wurgler, 2000; Andrade,
Mitchell, and Staﬀord, 2001). Allen and Michaely (2003) argue that cash distributions
related to merger activity are an important source of payout to shareholders (that is often
neglected by researchers).
Panel B of Fig. 1 shows that dividends have fallen relative to asset value throughout the
sample period. The downward trend is explained by the fact that earnings have fallen relative
15

to asset value, although dividends have not fallen relative to earnings (Fama and French,
2001; DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and Skinner, 2004). Equity repurchase has increased recently,
particularly after the adoption of the Securities and Exchange Commission Rule 10b-18 in
1982 (Grullon and Michaely, 2002). As reported in Panel A of Table 2, the correlation
between dividends and net equity repurchase, both as fractions of assets, is −0.47. In the
most recent decade, dividends are clearly low relative to asset value, but net payout is not
unusually low when put into historical perspective. Panel B of Fig. 1 also shows that periods
of high net equity repurchase tend to be periods of low net debt repurchase. As reported in
Panel A of Table 2, the correlation between net equity and debt repurchase, both as fractions
of assets, is −0.26.
As shown in Panel A of Fig. 2, net payout in Compustat is on average a higher fraction
of assets than in the Flow of Funds. This can be explained by the fact that ﬁrms that
go private disappear from Compustat but remain in the corporate sector as deﬁned by the
Flow of Funds. In Compustat, the terminal cash ﬂow (as equity repurchase) from a ﬁrm
that goes private is recorded as an outﬂow from the publicly traded sector. The Flow of
Funds nets out such transactions between public and private corporations. For example, the
leveraged buyouts of the 1980s explain why net payout yield peaks at 6% in Compustat and
at only 3% in the Flow of Funds during the same period. As reported in Panel B of Table 2,
the correlation between equity repurchase and long-term debt issuance, both as fractions of
assets, is 0.34 in the Compustat sample. Kaplan (1991) reports that 62% of large leveraged
buyouts during the period 1979–1986 remained privately owned in 1990.
Panel B of Fig. 2 identiﬁes hot markets for equity issuance during the period 1971–2004.
Equity issuance, as a fraction of assets, peaked in 1983. Equity issuance again peaked in 2000,
but not at an unusually high level when put into historical perspective. Much of the equity
issuance around 2000 resulted from equity-ﬁnanced mergers and executive compensation,
which are not part of cash transactions recorded in the statement of cash ﬂows. As shown in
Panel C, the market for long-term debt was particularly depressed in 1983, coinciding with

16

the hot equity market. Debt issuance rose throughout the rest of the 1980s and peaked in
1992.
Table 3 performs a simple accounting decomposition that summarizes the sources of
time variation in net payout yield. By deﬁnition, the variance of net payout yield is equal
to the sum of the covariances of net payout yield with its components. The covariances,
scaled by the variance of net payout yield, represent the fraction of the time variation in net
payout yield explained by each component. In the Flow of Funds sample, each of the four
components (dividends, interest, net equity repurchase, and net debt repurchase) accounts
for a similar fraction of the variation in net payout yield, between 20% and 30%. In the
Compustat sample, net equity repurchase plays a more prominent role, accounting for 45%
of the variation in net payout yield, while net debt repurchase accounts for only 5% of the
variation. Most of the variation in the net equity ﬂow is explained by repurchase (47%)
instead of issuance (−2%).

3.4.

Description of asset returns

Panel A of Fig. 3 shows the time series of real asset returns, together with real returns on
the CRSP value-weighted index. The correlation between asset returns and equity returns
is 0.97. As reported in Table 2, asset return has mean of 5.4% and a standard deviation
of 12.2% (see Fama and French, 1999, Table V). Panel B shows the time series of real net
payout growth, together with real dividend growth for the CRSP value-weighted index. The
correlation between net payout growth and dividend growth is 0.01. As reported in Table 2,
net payout growth has a mean of 3.8% and a standard deviation of 38.4%, which is much
more volatile than dividend growth.
A key empirical ﬁnding of this paper, shown in Section 4, is that the variation in net
payout yield is mostly explained by future net payout growth, instead of future asset returns.
Fig. 3 provides a simple intuition for our ﬁnding. Net payout growth is more volatile than
asset returns in the short run. If net payout yield is stationary, the volatility of net payout
17

growth must fall, through mean reversion, to that of asset returns in the long run. In
contrast, equity returns are more volatile than dividend growth in the short run. If dividend
yield is stationary, the volatility of equity returns must fall, through mean reversion, to that
of dividend growth in the long run.

4.

Valuation of corporate assets

4.1.

Variance decomposition of net payout yield

In Table 4, we estimate the joint dynamics of asset return, net payout growth, and net
payout yield through a VAR. Panel A reports estimates for the Flow of Funds, and Panel B
reports estimates for Compustat. As shown in the ﬁrst column, past asset returns and past
net payout growth have little forecasting power for asset returns; the coeﬃcients are not
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero. However, net payout yield is a better predictor of asset
returns. The evidence for predictability is stronger in Compustat with a t-statistic of two
and an R2 of 9%. As shown in the second column, past asset returns and past net payout
growth have little forecasting power for net payout growth. However, high net payout yield
strongly predicts low net payout growth, implying strong mean reversion in net payout. The
evidence for predictability is stronger in the Flow of Funds with a t-statistic of three and an
R2 of 15%. As shown in the last column, net payout yield has an autoregressive coeﬃcient
of 0.78 in the Flow of Funds.
Panel A of Table 5 reports the variance decomposition of net payout yield for the Flow
of Funds [see Eq. (17)]. At a one-year horizon, 2% of the variation in net payout yield is
explained by future asset returns, 21% is explained by future net payout growth, and 76% is
explained by future net payout yield. At longer horizons, the variation in net payout yield
is increasingly explained by future net payout growth. In the inﬁnite-horizon limit, 12%
of the variation is explained by future asset returns, while 88% is explained by future net
payout growth. The hypothesis that none of the variation in net payout yield is explained by
18

future asset returns cannot be rejected. The results are similar for Compustat as reported
in Panel B, but the shorter sample leads to somewhat larger standard errors.
We can summarize the variance decomposition in Table 5 in the language of cointegration.
Net payout, the cash outﬂow from the corporate sector, and the value of corporate assets
are cointegrated. When net payout yield deviates from its long-run mean, either net payout
or asset value must revert to the common trend to restore the long-run equilibrium. Asset
value is the permanent component of net payout yield, while any deviation in net payout
from asset value is transitory. Therefore, net payout yield mostly predicts net payout growth
instead of asset returns, especially over long horizons.
The dynamics of net payout yield, revealed by the variance decomposition, has important
implications for the present-value relation between asset value and net payout. The solid line
in Fig. 4 is the log real asset value of nonﬁnancial corporations in the Flow of Funds. The
dashed line is expected future net payout discounted at a constant rate, which is the sample
analog of the ﬁrst two terms in Eq. (11). The wedge between the two time series represents
long-horizon discount rates, which is the sample analog of the last term in Eq. (11). As
reported in Table 5, the standard deviation of long-horizon discount rates is 8% and within
one standard error of zero. Because the variation in long-horizon discount rates is relatively
small, asset value moves in lockstep with expected future net payout.

4.2.

The role of debt payout

Debt plays a key role in reducing the implied volatility of long-horizon discount rates. To
understand its role, we break up net payout into the sum of two pieces. Equity payout is the
sum of dividends and equity repurchase net of issuance, and debt payout is the sum of interest
and debt repurchase net of issuance. Because ﬁrms tend to oﬀset equity issuance through
debt repurchase, equity payout can understate the total cash outﬂow from the corporate
sector during periods of high equity issuance.
Table 6 reports estimates of a VAR in asset return, net payout growth, net payout-equity
19

payout ratio, and equity payout-assets ratio. Because net payout yield is the sum of the
net payout-equity payout ratio and the equity payout-assets ratio in logs, Table 6 can be
interpreted as an unconstrained version of the VAR model in Table 4. We loosely refer to
the net payout-equity payout ratio as debt payout because net payout minus equity payout
is equal to debt payout in levels.
As shown in the ﬁrst column of Panel A, the coeﬃcient on debt payout is negative,
and the coeﬃcient on the equity payout-assets ratio is positive. A high equity payout-assets
ratio predicts high asset returns, which implies that expected returns are low when net equity
issuance is high (Baker and Wurgler, 2000). At the same time, high debt payout predicts
low asset returns, which implies that expected returns are low when net debt repurchase is
high. However, high equity issuance tends to coincide with high debt repurchase as shown in
Table 2. Therefore, the combination of high equity issuance and high debt repurchase implies
much smaller variation in expected returns than that implied by the equity payout-assets
ratio alone.

4.3.

Variance decomposition of asset returns

Table 7 reports the variance decomposition of unexpected asset returns [see Eq. (25)].
Panel A reports the results for the Flow of Funds, and Panel B reports the results for
Compustat. In each panel, the ﬁrst estimate is based on the VAR in Table 4, in which the
main predictor variable is net payout yield. The second estimate is based on the VAR in
Table 6, in which the main predictor variables are the net payout-equity payout ratio and
the equity payout-assets ratio. Because the results are similar, we focus our discussion on
the ﬁrst estimate in Panel A.
Holding constant discount rates, 124% of the variation in asset returns is explained by
changes in expected cash ﬂow growth. The covariance between changes in discount rates
and expected cash ﬂow growth accounts for 38% of the variation in asset returns. That is,
news about rising discount rates are related to news about rising expected cash ﬂow growth.
20

This oﬀsetting eﬀect between asset returns and net payout growth explains why unexpected
asset returns are 24% less volatile than changes in expected cash ﬂow growth.
In contrast to equity returns (Campbell, 1991), the volatility of unexpected asset returns can be mostly explained by expected cash ﬂow growth for two reasons. First, asset
returns are less volatile than equity returns (see Panel A of Fig. 3), so there is less volatility
to explain. Second, and more important, changes in expected cash ﬂow growth are larger
when debt payout is included. Our ﬁndings are broadly consistent with previous empirical evidence. Campbell and Ammer (1993) ﬁnd that bond returns are mostly driven by
inﬂation expectations, instead of discount rates. Because nominal payments are ﬁxed for
pure-discount bonds, a change in expected inﬂation is eﬀectively a change in expected cash
ﬂow growth. Because net payout includes cash ﬂows to debt holders, changes in expected
cash ﬂow growth become a relatively important source of variation in asset returns.

5.

Valuation of market equity

This paper shows that the dynamics of net payout yield and its implications for long-horizon
discount rates are substantially diﬀerent from those for dividend yield. These diﬀerences can
arise not only because net payout incorporates cash ﬂows to debt holders, but also because
it incorporates cash ﬂows to equity holders in the form of net equity repurchases. To isolate
the latter channel, this section explains the role of equity repurchase and issuance in the
valuation of total market equity. The appropriate measure of cash ﬂow for valuing market
equity is equity payout, which is the sum of dividends and equity repurchase net of issuance.

5.1.

Dividend yield versus equity payout yield

Let P and D denote the price and dividend per share of equity. The return on equity from
period t to t + 1 is
Rt+1 =

Pt+1 + Dt+1
.
Pt
21

(32)

Let [·]+ be an operator that takes the positive part of the expression inside the brackets
(and takes the value zero if the expression is negative). Multiplying the numerator and the
denominator of Eq. (32) by the number of shares outstanding in period t,

Rt+1 =

MEt+1 + DIVt+1 + REPt+1 − ISSt+1
,
MEt

(33)

where
MEt = Pt × Sharest ,

(34)

DIVt+1 = Dt+1 × Sharest ,

(35)

REPt+1 = Pt+1 × [Sharest − Sharest+1 ]+ ,

(36)

ISSt+1 = Pt+1 × [Sharest+1 − Sharest ]+ .

(37)

Eq. (32) is the return on one share of equity, and Eq. (33) is the return on all outstanding
shares of equity. Equity return is the same in both cases, but they have diﬀerent implications
for cash ﬂow. An investor who owns one share receives dividends as the cash outﬂow from the
ﬁrm. An investor who owns all outstanding shares receives dividends and equity repurchase
as the cash outﬂow from the ﬁrm but, in addition, invests equity issuance as the cash inﬂow
to the ﬁrm. We refer to the ratio Dt /Pt as dividend yield, and the ratio (DIVt + REPt −
ISSt )/MEt as equity payout yield. The two valuation ratios coincide only in a world in which
the number of outstanding shares remains constant over time.
Dividend yield and equity payout yield represent a subtle but important diﬀerence between a microeconomic and a macroeconomic view of investment. This conceptual diﬀerence
can be understood in terms of portfolio strategies. Dividend yield is the appropriate valuation ratio for an investor who owns one share of equity; this investor receives dividends,
reinvests repurchases, and never invests additional capital. Equity payout yield is the appropriate valuation ratio for an investor who owns all outstanding shares of equity; this investor

22

receives dividends, receives repurchases, and invests issuances as additional capital. At the
macroeconomic level, a net repurchase of equity is an outﬂow from the corporate sector
that cannot be reinvested (except through a net issuance of debt). Therefore, the portfolio
strategy implicit in dividend yield is feasible only at the microeconomic level, whereas the
portfolio strategy implicit in equity payout yield is also feasible at the macroeconomic level.

5.2.

Description of equity payout yield

Fig. 5 shows the time series of dividend yield and equity payout yield for all NYSE, Amex,
and Nasdaq stocks for the period 1926–2004. As in Boudoukh, Michaely, Richardson, and
Roberts (2007), we construct equity payout yield for a monthly rebalanced value-weighted
portfolio using the CRSP Monthly Stock Database. We keep track of all cash ﬂows in
Eq. (33) for individual stocks, including potentially important terminal cash distributions
through CRSP’s delisting data. We then aggregate returns and cash ﬂows across all stocks
in the portfolio.
Dividend yield is less volatile and more persistent than equity payout yield. The high
persistence of dividend yield has led Boudoukh, Michaely, Richardson, and Roberts (2007)
to question its stationarity, ﬁnding evidence for a structural break in 1984. Dividend yield
is above equity payout yield for most of the sample period, indicating a net capital inﬂow
to the market equity of US corporations. Equity payout can be negative whenever issuance
exceeds dividends plus repurchase. The two striking troughs in equity payout yield at the
end of 1929 and 2000 are such episodes, which are interestingly at the end of stock market
booms.
Equity issuance, as measured by changes in shares outstanding, can represent transfer of
ownership instead of actual cash ﬂow. Important examples of such transactions are equityﬁnanced mergers and equity issued as part of executive compensation. In 2000, equity
issued through mergers accounted for 4.31%, and equity issued as executive compensation
accounted for 1.23% of the assets of Standard & Poor’s 100 ﬁrms (Fama and French, 2005,
23

Table 7). These transactions partly explain why equity payout yield falls to a historical low
in 2000.

5.3.

Variance decomposition of dividend yield

In Panel A of Table 8, we estimate the joint dynamics of equity return, dividend growth, and
dividend yield through a VAR. As shown in the ﬁrst column, past equity returns and dividend
growth have little forecasting power for equity return; the coeﬃcients are not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from zero. However, high dividend yield predicts high equity returns with a tstatistic of almost two (Campbell and Shiller, 1988; Fama and French, 1988). As shown in
the second column, neither past equity returns, dividend growth, nor dividend yield have
forecasting power for dividend growth. As shown in the last column, dividend yield has an
autoregressive coeﬃcient of 0.93.
Panel A of Table 9 reports the variance decomposition of dividend yield. At a one-year
horizon, 10% of the variation in dividend yield is explained by future equity returns, none
is explained by future dividend growth, and 90% is explained by future dividend yield. At
longer horizons, the variation in dividend yield is increasingly explained by future equity
returns. In the inﬁnite-horizon limit, 83% of the variation in dividend yield is explained
by future equity returns, while only 17% is explained by future dividend growth. The
variance decomposition shows that the transitory variation in discount rates is large relative
to the transitory variation in expected dividend growth. Roughly speaking, the permanent
component of dividend yield is dividends, while any deviation in stock price from dividends
is transitory.
The dynamics of dividend yield, revealed by the variance decomposition, has important
implications for the present-value relation between stock prices and dividends. The solid line
in Panel A of Fig. 6 is the log real value of the CRSP value-weighted index. The dashed
line is expected future dividends discounted at a constant rate. The wedge between the two
time series represents long-horizon discount rates, implied by a forecast of equity returns by
24

dividend yield. As reported in Panel A of Table 9, the standard deviation of long-horizon
discount rates is 35%, although this estimate is within two standard errors of zero. Because
the variation in long-horizon discount rates is large, the stock price index wanders far away
from expected future dividends. At the end of 2000, for example, the stock price index was
approximately 100% higher than expected future dividends discounted at a constant rate.

5.4.

Variance decomposition of equity payout yield

In Panel B of Table 8, we estimate the joint dynamics of equity return, equity payout growth,
and equity payout yield through a VAR. As shown in the ﬁrst column, high equity payout
yield predicts high equity returns with a t-statistic of four (Boudoukh, Michaely, Richardson,
and Roberts, 2007; Robertson and Wright, 2006). The R2 of the regression is 8%, compared
with 4% for the regression in Panel A that uses dividend yield. Equity payout yield leads to
stronger evidence for short-run predictability than dividend yield, in the sense that implied
expected returns have greater variation at the one-year horizon. As shown in the second
column, high equity payout yield also predicts low equity payout growth with a t-statistic
above two and an R2 of 29%. In contrast to dividends, there is strong mean reversion in
equity payout. As shown in the last column, equity payout yield has an autoregressive
coeﬃcient of 0.81, which is less persistent than dividend yield.
Panel B of Table 9 reports the variance decomposition of equity payout yield. The fact
that equity payout can be negative requires a technical (not conceptual) modiﬁcation to
the variance decomposition, which is explained in the Appendix. At a one-year horizon,
4% of the variation in equity payout yield is explained by future equity returns, 20% is
explained by future equity payout growth, and 76% is explained by future equity payout
yield. At longer horizons, the variation in equity payout yield is increasingly explained by
future equity payout growth. In the inﬁnite-horizon limit, only 16% of the variation in equity
payout yield is explained by future equity returns, while 84% is explained by future equity
payout growth. The variance decomposition shows that the transitory variation in discount
25

rates is small relative to the transitory variation in expected equity payout growth. Changes
in equity repurchase and issuance are highly predictable, while changes in dividends are not.
The solid line in Panel B of Fig. 6 is the log real market equity of NYSE, Amex, and
Nasdaq stocks. The dashed line is expected future equity payout discounted at a constant
rate. The wedge between the two time series represents long-horizon discount rates, implied
by a forecast of equity returns by equity payout yield. The ﬁgure shows that movements
in market equity cannot be explained entirely by changes in expected future cash ﬂow. At
the end of 2000, for example, market equity was approximately 50% higher than expected
future equity payout.
However, the wedge between the two time series in Panel B is smaller than the wedge
between the two time series in Panel A. Because equity payout yield is less persistent than
dividend yield, it implies smaller variation in long-horizon discount returns. As reported in
Panel B of Table 9, the standard deviation of long-horizon discount rates implied by equity
payout yield is 25%, which is smaller than the 35% implied by dividend yield. Ackert and
Smith (1993) report similar evidence for the Toronto Stock Exchange.

5.5.

The role of equity repurchase and issuance

A case study of the period 1945–1955 illustrates the role that equity repurchase and issuance
play in reducing the implied volatility of long-horizon discount rates. In the postwar period,
ﬁrms issued equity to ﬁnance high investment. Therefore, dividends remained unusually
high, while equity payout was much closer to the historical norm (see Fig. 5). Based on
an unusually high dividend yield, Panel A of Fig. 6 suggests that discount rates were high
in relation to expected dividend growth. Based on a lower equity payout yield, Panel B
suggests that discount rates were in line with expected cash ﬂow growth.
The two VAR models in Table 8 use diﬀerent sets of conditioning information and consequently represent diﬀerent models of expected returns. Table 10 explicitly links the two
models to clarify the role of equity payout in reducing the magnitude of variation in long26

horizon discount rates. We estimate a VAR in equity return, equity payout growth, equity
payout-dividend ratio, and dividend yield. Because equity payout yield is the sum of the
equity payout-dividend ratio and dividend yield in logs, Table 10 can be interpreted as an
unconstrained version of the VAR model in Panel B of Table 8. We loosely refer to log equity payout-dividend ratio as net equity repurchase because equity payout minus dividends
is equal to net equity repurchase in levels.
On the one hand, a high net equity repurchase predicts high equity returns, implying
that expected returns are low when equity issuance is high. On the other hand, a high
net equity repurchase predicts low equity payout growth. Therefore, net equity repurchase
captures independent variation in expected returns and expected equity payout growth. A
high dividend yield predicts, although not signiﬁcantly, both high equity returns and high
equity payout growth. Therefore, dividend yield captures common variation in expected
returns and expected equity payout growth. In the ratio of equity payout to market equity,
persistent variation in discount rates implied by dividend yield is partly oﬀset by variation
in expected equity payout growth.

5.6.

Variance decomposition of equity returns

Panel A of Table 11 reports a variance decomposition of unexpected equity returns, taking
the perspective of an investor who owns one share of equity and receives dividends as the
cash ﬂow. Holding constant discount rates, only 38% of the variation in equity returns is
explained by changes in expected dividend growth.
Panel B reports a variance decomposition of unexpected equity returns, taking the perspective of an investor who owns all outstanding shares of equity and receives equity payout
as the cash ﬂow. The ﬁrst estimate is based on the VAR in Table 8, in which the main predictor variable is equity payout yield. The second estimate is based on the VAR in Table 10,
in which the main predictor variables are the equity payout-dividend ratio and dividend
yield. Holding constant discount rates, at most 61% of the variation in equity returns can
27

be explained by changes in expected equity payout growth. The rest must be explained
by variation in discount rates, implying that equity returns cannot be explained entirely by
movements in expected cash ﬂow growth.
The covariance between changes in expected returns and expected equity payout growth
is positive, while the same covariance is negative in the case of dividend growth. That is,
news about rising discount rates are related to news about rising expected equity payout
growth. This is consistent with our ﬁnding in Table 10, that there is much common variation
in expected returns and expected equity payout growth.

6.

Conclusion

A large volume of research has shown that stock returns are predictable, and ﬁnancial
economists are in general agreement that discount rates are time varying. However, there is
still active debate on the exact magnitude of variation in discount rates, especially at long
horizons. Because true discount rates are ultimately unobservable, we can only infer their
movements based on variables that forecast returns. Valuation ratios are natural predictor
variables because they must forecast returns or cash ﬂow growth, provided that they are
stationary. We ﬁnd that valuation ratios based on comprehensive measures of cash ﬂow
to investors have important implications for the magnitude of variation in long-horizon discount rates. Equity payout yield, which incorporates equity repurchase and issuance, implies
variation in long-horizon discount rates that is about two-thirds of that implied by dividend
yield. Movements in discount rates are important for explaining stock market valuation, but
perhaps not to the degree suggested by previous research.
In this paper, we focus on a diﬀerent but related question of whether time-varying discount rates are important for the valuation of ﬁrms. Net payout yield, which incorporates net
repurchases of both equity and debt, implies small variation in long-horizon discount rates.
The value of corporate assets is mostly driven by changes in expected future cash ﬂow, in-

28

stead of changes in discount rates. Therefore, the constant discount rate present-value model
is a useful approximation for the valuation of corporate assets.

29

Appendix.

Present-value relation between equity payout and market equity

The return on equity, Eq. (33), takes the same form as the return on assets, Eq. (3). However,
Eq. (5) does not apply directly to equity payout yield because equity payout can be negative.
This appendix describes a technical (not conceptual) modiﬁcation to Eq. (5) that handles
this problem.
To make the connection with net payout yield explicit, we adopt the following notation
in this appendix.
• Dt : Dividends plus equity repurchase in period t.
• Et : Equity issuance in period t.
• Ct = Dt − Et : Equity payout in period t.
• At : Market equity at the end of period t.
• Ct /At : Equity payout yield at the end of period t.
In this notation, Eq. (33) is
At+1 + Dt+1 − Et+1 = Rt+1 At .

(38)

Let lowercase letters denote the log of the corresponding uppercase variables. Assume
that dt − at and et − at are stationary, and deﬁne the parameters
1
,
1 + exp{E[dt − at ]} − exp{E[et − at ]}
exp{E[dt − at ]}
θ =
.
exp{E[dt − at ]} − exp{E[et − at ]}

φ =

(39)
(40)

Empirically relevant values are φ < 1 and θ > 1 because E[dt − at ] > E[et − at ]. Deﬁne the
30

variable
vt = θdt − (θ − 1)et − at .

(41)

This is essentially the log of equity payout yield. The outﬂow and inﬂow must be treated
separately in Eq. (41) because equity payout can be negative.
Rewrite Eq. (38) as
log(1 + exp{dt+1 − at+1 } − exp{et+1 − at+1 }) = rt+1 − ∆at+1 .

(42)

First-order Taylor approximation of the left side of this equation leads to a diﬀerence equation
for equity payout yield
vt ≈ rt+1 − θ∆dt+1 + (θ − 1)∆et+1 + φvt+1 ,

(43)

up to an additive constant. Solving Eq. (43) forward H periods,
vt = rt (H) − ∆dt (H) + ∆et (H) + vt (H),

(44)

where

rt (H) =
∆dt (H) =
∆et (H) =

H

s=1
H

s=1
H


φs−1 rt+s ,

(45)

φs−1 θ∆dt+s ,

(46)

φs−1 (θ − 1)∆et+s ,

(47)

s=1
H

vt (H) = φ vt+H .

(48)

We estimate the joint dynamics of equity return, equity payout growth, and equity payout
yield through the VAR, Eq. (13), where xt = (rt , θ∆dt − (θ − 1)∆et , vt ) . We estimate the

31

variance decompositions of equity payout yield and unexpected equity returns through the
VAR model, as described in Subsection 2.4.

32

References
Abel, A. B., Mankiw, N. G., Summers, L. H., Zeckhauser, R. J., 1989. Assessing dynamic
eﬃciency: theory and evidence. Review of Economic Studies 56 (1), 1–19.
Ackert, L. F., Smith, B. F., 1993. Stock price volatility, ordinary dividends, and other cash
ﬂows to shareholders. Journal of Finance 48 (4), 1147–1160.
Allen, F., Michaely, R., 2003. Payout policy. In: Constantinides, G. M., Harris, M., Stulz,
R. M. (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance. Vol. 1A. Elsevier, Amsterdam,
Ch. 7, pp. 337–429.
Andrade, G., Mitchell, M., Staﬀord, E., 2001. New evidence and perspectives on mergers.
Journal of Economic Perspectives 15 (2), 103–120.
Ang, A., 2002. Characterizing the ability of dividend yields to predict future dividends in
log-linear present value models. Unpublished working paper. Columbia University, New
York, NY.
Baker, M. P., Wurgler, J. A., 2000. The equity share in new issues and aggregate stock
returns. Journal of Finance 55 (5), 2219–2257.
Bernanke, B. S., Campbell, J. Y., 1988. Is there a corporate debt crisis? Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity 1, 83–125.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2005. Flow of Funds Accounts of the
United States: Annual Flows and Outstandings. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, Washington, DC.
Boudoukh, J., Michaely, R., Richardson, M., Roberts, M. R., 2007. On the importance of
measuring payout yield: implications for empirical asset pricing. Journal of Finance 62 (2),
877–915.

33

Boudoukh, J., Richardson, M., Whitelaw, R. F., 2006. The myth of long-horizon predictability. Unpublished working paper. New York University, New York, NY.
Brainard, W. C., Shoven, J. B., Weiss, L., 1980. The ﬁnancial valuation of the return to
capital. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 453–511.
Campbell, J. Y., 1991. A variance decomposition for stock returns. Economic Journal
101 (405), 157–179.
Campbell, J. Y., Ammer, J., 1993. What moves the stock and bond markets? A variance
decomposition of long-term asset returns. Journal of Finance 48 (1), 3–37.
Campbell, J. Y., Mankiw, N. G., 1989. Consumption, income, and interest rates: reinterpreting the time series evidence. In: Blanchard, O. J., Fischer, S. (Eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 185–216.
Campbell, J. Y., Shiller, R. J., 1988. The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future
dividends and discount factors. Review of Financial Studies 1 (3), 195–228.
Campbell, J. Y., Yogo, M., 2006. Eﬃcient tests of stock return predictability. Journal of
Financial Economics 81 (1), 27–60.
Cochrane, J. H., 1992. Explaining the variance of price-dividend ratios. Review of Financial
Studies 5 (2), 243–280.
Davis, J. L., Fama, E. F., French, K. R., 2000. Characteristics, covariances, and average
returns: 1929 to 1997. Journal of Finance 55 (1), 389–406.
DeAngelo, H., DeAngelo, L., Skinner, D. J., 2004. Are dividends disappearing? Dividend
concentration and the consolidation of earnings. Journal of Financial Economics 72 (3),
425–456.

34

Dittmar, A. K., Dittmar, R. F., 2004. Stock repurchase waves: an explanation of the trends
in aggregate corporate payout policy. Unpublished working paper. University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI.
Fama, E. F., French, K. R., 1988. Dividend yields and expected stock returns. Journal of
Financial Economics 22 (1), 3–24.
Fama, E. F., French, K. R., 1999. The corporate cost of capital and the return on corporate
investment. Journal of Finance 54 (6), 1939–1967.
Fama, E. F., French, K. R., 2001. Disappearing dividends: changing ﬁrm characteristics or
lower propensity to pay? Journal of Financial Economics 60 (1), 3–43.
Fama, E. F., French, K. R., 2005. Financing decisions: who issues stock? Journal of Financial
Economics 76 (3), 549–582.
Goldsmith, R. W., 1955. A Study of Saving in the United States. Vol. 1. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ.
Goyal, A., Welch, I., 2003. Predicting the equity premium with dividend ratios. Management
Science 49 (5), 639–654.
Grullon, G., Michaely, R., 2002. Dividends, share repurchases, and the substitution hypothesis. Journal of Finance 57 (4), 1649–1684.
Guay, W., Harford, J., 2000. The cash-ﬂow permanence and information content of dividend
increases versus repurchases. Journal of Financial Economics 57 (3), 385–415.
Hall, B. H., Cummins, C., Laderman, E. S., Mundy, J., 1988. The R&D master ﬁle documentation. Technical working paper 72. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,
MA.
Hall, R. E., 2001a. Struggling to understand the stock market. American Economic Review
91 (2), 1–11.
35

Hall, R. E., 2001b. The Stock Market and Capital Accumulation. American Economic Review
91 (5), 1185–1202.
Hansen, L. P., 1982. Large sample properties of generalized method of moments estimators.
Econometrica 50 (4), 1029–1054.
Hansen, L. P., Heaton, J., Yaron, A., 1996. Finite-sample properties of some alternative
GMM estimators. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 14 (3), 262–280.
Hickman, W. B., 1952. Trends and cycles in corporate bond ﬁnancing. Occasional paper 37.
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Hodrick, R. J., 1992. Dividend yields and expected stock returns: alternative procedures for
inference and measurement. Review of Financial Studies 5 (3), 357–386.
Jagannathan, M., Stephens, C. P., Weisbach, M. S., 2000. Financial ﬂexibility and the choice
between dividends and stock repurchases. Journal of Financial Economics 57 (3), 355–384.
Kaplan, S. N., 1991. The staying power of leveraged buyouts. Journal of Financial Economics
29 (2), 287–313.
Kuznets, S., 1941. National Income and Its Composition, 1919–1938. Vol. 1. National Bureau
of Economic Research, New York.
LeRoy, S. F., Porter, R. D., 1981. The present-value relation: tests based on implied variance
bounds. Econometrica 49 (3), 555–574.
Lettau, M., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2006. Reconciling the return predictability evidence.
Unpublished working paper. New York University, New York, NY.
Lewellen, J., 2004. Predicting returns with ﬁnancial ratios. Journal of Financial Economics
74 (2), 209–235.

36

Lintner, J., 1956. Distribution of incomes of corporations among dividends, retained earnings,
and taxes. American Economic Review 46 (2), 97–113.
Modigliani, F., Miller, M. H., 1961. Dividend policy, growth, and the valuation of shares.
Journal of Business 34 (4), 411–433.
Richardson, S. A., Sloan, R. G., 2003. External ﬁnancing and future stock returns. Unpublished working paper. University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
Robertson, D., Wright, S., 2006. Dividends, total cashﬂow to shareholders and predictive
regressions. Review of Economics and Statistics 88 (1), 91–99.
Shiller, R. J., 1981. Do stock prices move too much to be justiﬁed by subsequent changes in
dividends? American Economic Review 71 (3), 421–436.
Stambaugh, R. F., 1999. Predictive regressions. Journal of Financial Economics 54 (3), 375–
421.
Torous, W., Valkanov, R., Yan, S., 2004. On predicting stock returns with nearly integrated
explanatory variables. Journal of Business 77 (4), 937–966.
US Treasury Department, 1950. Statistics of Income for 1945. Vol. 2. US Government Printing Oﬃce, Washington, DC.
Valkanov, R., 2003. Long-horizon regressions: theoretical results and applications. Journal
of Financial Economics 68 (2), 201–232.
Viceira, L. M., 1996. Testing for structural change in the predictability of asset returns.
Unpublished working paper. Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.
Wright, S., 2004. Measures of stock market value and returns for the US nonﬁnancial corporate sector. Review of Income and Wealth 50 (4), 561–584.

37

Table 1: Compustat variables used in data construction
Variable
DEBT NET
DIV
DIV PREF
EQ ISS
EQ REP
INT
LIAB CUR
LIAB OTH
LTD
LTD ISS
LTD REP
MINORITY
TAX

Data item
Changes in Current Debt
Cash Dividends
Dividends – Preferred
Sale of Common and Preferred Stock
Purchase of Common and Preferred Stock
Interest Expense
Current Liabilities – Total
Liabilities – Other
Long-Term Debt – Total
Long-Term Debt – Issuance
Long-Term Debt – Reduction
Minority Interest
Deferred Taxes and Investment Tax Credit

38

Item number
301
127
19
108
115
15
5
75
9
111
114
38
35

39

Standard
Correlation with
Mean deviation
Net equity
Equity Equity
Net debt
LTD
LTD Net STD
As fraction of assets
(percent) (percent) Autocorrelation Dividends repurchase repurchase issuance Interest repurchase repurchase issuance repurchase
Panel A: Flow of Funds 1926–2004
Net payout
1.69
0.97
0.81
0.45
0.34
0.53
0.55
Dividends
1.55
0.57
0.84
-0.47
-0.13
0.37
Net equity repurchase
-0.08
0.56
0.78
0.38
-0.26
Interest
0.85
0.44
0.93
-0.13
Net debt repurchase
-0.63
0.53
0.72
Asset return
5.36
12.20
0.09
Net payout growth
3.83
38.37
-0.04
Panel B: Compustat 1971–2004
Net payout
2.65
1.22
0.73
0.42
0.57
0.64
0.08
0.51
0.08
0.14
0.10
-0.02
Dividends
1.68
0.63
0.92
-0.30
-0.18
0.41
0.92
-0.57
-0.55
-0.16
0.01
Net equity repurchase
0.34
0.96
0.57
0.95
-0.38
-0.18
0.05
0.33
0.30
-0.23
Equity repurchase
1.32
0.89
0.67
-0.07
-0.01
-0.01
0.32
0.34
-0.26
Equity issuance
0.98
0.31
0.54
0.54
-0.20
-0.11
0.05
-0.04
Interest
1.80
0.67
0.87
-0.58
-0.38
0.07
0.00
Net debt repurchase
-1.17
0.79
0.62
0.58
-0.15
0.25
LTD repurchase
3.23
1.05
0.84
0.69
-0.13
LTD issuance
4.37
0.82
0.50
-0.11
Net STD repurchase
-0.03
0.24
0.40
Asset return
6.36
10.77
0.04
Net payout growth
6.73
25.83
-0.03

Table 2: Descriptive statistics for net payout and asset value
The table reports descriptive statistics for net payout and its components as fractions of the market value of assets. It also
reports descriptive statistics for asset return and net payout growth, which are both in logs and deﬂated by the consumer price
index. LTD = long-term debt; STD = short-term debt.

Table 3: Accounting for time variation in net payout yield
The table reports fraction of the variance in net payout yield explained by each of the components of net payout. Heteroskedasticity- and autocorrelation-consistent standard errors
are in parentheses.
Flow of Funds Compustat
Fraction of variance explained by
1926–2004 1971–2004
Dividends
0.27
0.22
(0.08)
(0.08)
Net equity repurchase
0.20
0.45
(0.08)
(0.15)
Equity repurchase
0.47
(0.14)
Equity issuance
-0.02
(0.04)
Interest
0.24
0.28
(0.05)
(0.07)
Net debt repurchase
0.30
0.05
(0.06)
(0.09)
Long-term debt repurchase
0.12
(0.14)
Long-term debt issuance
-0.06
(0.12)
Net short-term debt repurchase
0.00
(0.03)

40

Table 4: Vector autoregression (VAR) in asset return, net payout growth, and net payout
yield
The table reports estimates of a VAR in real asset return, real net payout growth, and
log net payout yield. Estimation is by continuous-updating generalized method of moments.
Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in parentheses. The J-statistic for the VAR
model in Panel A is 14.22 (p-value of 0%). The J-statistic for the VAR model in Panel B is
0.06 (p-value of 100%).
Lagged regressor
Asset return Net payout growth
Panel A: Flow of Funds 1926–2004
Asset return
0.10
0.49
(0.13)
(0.31)
Net payout growth
-0.01
0.05
(0.04)
(0.13)
Net payout yield
0.03
-0.21
(0.02)
(0.07)
0.01
0.15
R2
Panel B: Compustat 1971–2004
Asset return
0.07
0.21
(0.18)
(0.42)
Net payout growth
-0.02
0.07
(0.08)
(0.12)
Net payout yield
0.08
-0.19
(0.04)
(0.09)
0.09
0.12
R2

41

Net payout yield
0.39
(0.35)
0.06
(0.14)
0.78
(0.07)
0.61
0.15
(0.51)
0.09
(0.16)
0.75
(0.11)
0.60

Table 5: Variance decomposition of net payout yield
The variance of log net payout yield is decomposed into future asset returns, future net
payout growth, and future net payout yield. The last row of each panel reports the standard
deviation of expected asset returns and expected cash ﬂow growth in the inﬁnite-horizon
present-value model. The log-linearization parameter is ρ = 0.98. Estimation is through the
vector autoregression reported in Table 4. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are
in parentheses.
Fraction of variance in net payout yield explained by future
Horizon
Asset returns Net payout growth
Net payout yield
Panel A: Flow of Funds 1926–2004
One year
0.02
0.21
0.76
(0.02)
(0.08)
(0.07)
Two years
0.05
0.38
0.58
(0.05)
(0.11)
(0.11)
Five years
0.09
0.66
0.25
(0.10)
(0.16)
(0.12)
Ten years
0.12
0.82
0.06
(0.13)
(0.15)
(0.06)
Inﬁnite
0.12
0.88
(0.14)
(0.14)
Inﬁnite: standard deviation
0.08
0.53
(0.09)
(0.11)
Panel B: Compustat 1971–2004
One year
0.07
0.18
0.75
(0.04)
(0.10)
(0.10)
Two years
0.13
0.32
0.54
(0.07)
(0.15)
(0.16)
Five years
0.24
0.55
0.21
(0.12)
(0.20)
(0.17)
Ten years
0.29
0.66
0.04
(0.16)
(0.20)
(0.07)
Inﬁnite
0.31
0.69
(0.17)
(0.19)
Inﬁnite: standard deviation
0.13
0.30
(0.09)
(0.09)

42

43

Lagged regressor
Asset return Net payout growth
Panel A: Flow of Funds 1926–2004
Asset return
0.12
0.48
(0.12)
(0.31)
Net payout growth
0.00
0.05
(0.04)
(0.12)
Net payout−equity payout
-0.04
-0.21
(0.03)
(0.12)
Equity payout−assets
0.07
-0.23
(0.03)
(0.08)
0.10
0.15
R2
Panel B: Compustat 1971–2004
Asset return
0.06
0.21
(0.18)
(0.40)
Net payout growth
-0.02
0.05
(0.08)
(0.14)
Net payout−equity payout
0.06
-0.03
(0.05)
(0.12)
Equity payout−assets
0.08
-0.29
(0.04)
(0.09)
0.10
0.23
R2

0.11
(0.32)
-0.06
(0.09)
0.18
(0.10)
0.68
(0.11)
0.48
0.99
(0.44)
0.24
(0.19)
0.28
(0.21)
0.59
(0.13)
0.38

0.26
(0.30)
0.11
(0.11)
0.67
(0.09)
0.03
(0.09)
0.49
-0.84
(0.50)
-0.17
(0.12)
0.64
(0.14)
0.05
(0.08)
0.44

Net payout−equity payout Equity payout−assets

Table 6: Decomposing the vector autoregression (VAR) in asset return, net payout growth, and net payout yield
The table reports estimates of a VAR in real asset return, real net payout growth, log net payout-equity payout ratio, and log
equity payout-assets ratio. Estimation is by continuous-updating generalized method of moments. Heteroskedasticity-consistent
standard errors are in parentheses. The J-statistic for the VAR model in Panel A is 17.54 (p-value of 0%). The J-statistic for
the VAR model in Panel B is 0.06 (p-value of 100%).

Table 7: Variance decomposition of asset returns
The variance of unexpected asset returns is decomposed into the sum of the variance of
changes in expected asset returns, the variance of changes in expected cash ﬂow growth, and
minus twice the covariance between the two changes. The sum need not equal one because
of log-linear approximation error. Estimation is through the vector autoregression (VAR)
reported in Tables 4 and 6. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in parentheses.
Fraction of variance explained by changes in expected
VAR model Asset returns Net payout growth
−2×covariance
Panel A: Flow of Funds 1926–2004
Table 4A
0.14
1.24
-0.38
(0.28)
(0.40)
(0.63)
Table 6A
0.40
1.14
-0.54
(0.34)
(0.34)
(0.63)
Panel B: Compustat 1971–2004
Table 4B
0.65
1.12
-0.66
(0.65)
(0.47)
(1.11)
Table 6B
0.54
0.92
-0.34
(0.46)
(0.26)
(0.68)

44

Table 8: Vector autoregression (VAR) in equity return, dividend growth, and dividend yield
Panel A reports estimates of a VAR in real equity return, real dividend growth, and log
dividend yield. Panel B reports estimates of a VAR in real equity return, real equity payout
growth, and log equity payout yield. Estimation is by continuous-updating generalized
method of moments. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in parentheses. The
sample period is 1926–2004. The J-statistic for the VAR model in Panel A is 0.75 (p-value
of 86%). The J-statistic for the VAR model in Panel B is 2.90 (p-value of 41%).
Lagged regressor
Equity return Cash ﬂow growth Cash ﬂow yield
Panel A: Cash ﬂow = dividend
Equity return
-0.02
-0.15
-0.13
(0.15)
(0.09)
(0.10)
Dividend growth
0.14
0.00
-0.15
(0.18)
(0.14)
(0.14)
Dividend yield
0.09
-0.01
0.93
(0.05)
(0.04)
(0.04)
0.04
0.05
0.88
R2
Panel B: Cash ﬂow = equity payout
Equity return
0.13
-1.79
-1.96
(0.13)
(0.73)
(0.79)
Equity payout growth
0.02
-0.26
-0.29
(0.02)
(0.13)
(0.14)
Equity payout yield
0.04
-0.17
0.81
(0.01)
(0.07)
(0.07)
0.08
0.29
0.69
R2

45

Table 9: Variance decomposition of dividend yield and equity payout yield
In Panel A, the variance of log dividend yield is decomposed into future equity returns,
future dividend growth, and future dividend yield. The log-linearization parameter is ρ =
0.97. In Panel B, the variance of log equity payout yield is decomposed into future equity
returns, future equity payout growth, and future equity payout yield. The log-linearization
parameters are φ = 0.98 and θ = 2.5. The last row of each panel reports the standard
deviation of expected equity returns and expected cash ﬂow growth in the inﬁnite-horizon
present-value model. Estimation is through the vector autoregression reported in Table 8.
Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in parentheses. The sample period is 1926–
2004.
Fraction of variance in cash ﬂow yield explained by future
Horizon
Equity returns Cash ﬂow growth
Cash ﬂow yield
Panel A: Cash ﬂow = dividend
One year
0.10
0.00
0.90
(0.05)
(0.04)
(0.04)
Two years
0.18
0.02
0.80
(0.10)
(0.07)
(0.07)
Five years
0.37
0.07
0.57
(0.21)
(0.16)
(0.14)
Ten years
0.57
0.11
0.32
(0.30)
(0.26)
(0.16)
Inﬁnite
0.83
0.17
(0.38)
(0.38)
Inﬁnite: standard deviation
0.35
0.08
(0.19)
(0.15)
Panel B: Cash ﬂow = equity payout
One year
0.04
0.20
0.76
(0.02)
(0.06)
(0.07)
Two years
0.07
0.35
0.59
(0.03)
(0.10)
(0.11)
Five years
0.12
0.61
0.28
(0.05)
(0.13)
(0.14)
Ten years
0.15
0.77
0.08
(0.06)
(0.09)
(0.08)
Inﬁnite
0.16
0.84
(0.06)
(0.06)
Inﬁnite: standard deviation
0.25
1.27
(0.10)
(0.19)

46

47

R2

Dividend yield

Equity payout−dividends

Equity payout growth

Lagged regressor
Equity return

Equity return Equity payout growth
0.13
-1.74
(0.13)
(0.70)
0.02
-0.19
(0.02)
(0.14)
0.05
-0.34
(0.02)
(0.11)
0.01
0.31
(0.06)
(0.20)
0.08
0.31

Equity payout−dividends Dividend yield
-1.56
-0.35
(0.74)
(0.12)
-0.19
-0.03
(0.14)
(0.02)
0.63
-0.01
(0.11)
(0.02)
0.35
0.98
(0.22)
(0.04)
0.61
0.89

Table 10: Decomposing the vector autoregression (VAR) in equity return, equity payout growth, and equity payout yield
The table reports estimates of a VAR in real equity return, real equity payout growth, log equity payout-dividend ratio, and log
dividend yield. Estimation is by continuous-updating generalized method of moments. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard
errors are in parentheses. The sample period is 1926–2004. The J-statistic for the VAR model in is 3.13 (p-value of 54%).

Table 11: Variance decomposition of equity returns
The variance of unexpected equity returns is decomposed into the sum of the variance of
changes in expected equity returns, the variance of changes in expected cash ﬂow growth,
and minus twice the covariance between the two changes. The sum need not equal one
because of log-linear approximation error. Estimation is through the vector autoregression
(VAR) reported in Tables 8 and 10. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in
parentheses. The sample period is 1926–2004.
Fraction of variance explained by changes in expected
VAR model Equity returns Cash ﬂow growth
−2×covariance
Panel A: Cash ﬂow = dividend
Table 8A
0.49
0.38
0.14
(0.41)
(0.13)
(0.31)
Panel B: Cash ﬂow = equity payout
Table 8B
0.58
0.61
-0.20
(0.39)
(0.14)
(0.38)
Table 10
0.93
0.31
-0.25
(0.64)
(0.06)
(0.63)

48

0

.01

As fraction of assets
.02
.03

.04

Panel A: Net payout

1925

1935

1945

1955

1965
Year

1975

1985

1995

2005

.03

Panel B: Composition of net payout
Net equity repurchase
Net debt repurchase

−.02

−.01

As fraction of assets
0
.01
.02

Dividends
Interest

1925

1935

1945

1955

1965
Year

1975

1985

1995

2005

Figure 1: Net payout yield in the Flow of Funds
Net payout in Panel A is the sum of dividends, interest, net equity repurchase, and net debt
repurchase in Panel B. The data represent nonﬁnancial corporations in the Flow of Funds
for the period 1926–2004.
49

0

.01

As fraction of assets
.02
.03
.04

.05

.06

Panel A: Net payout

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Year

.04

Panel B: Equity payout and issuance

0

.01

As fraction of assets
.02
.03

Dividends
Equity repurchase
Equity issuance

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990
Year

50

1995

2000

2005

0

As fraction of assets
.02
.04

.06

Panel C: Debt payout and issuance

−.02

Interest
LTD issuance
1970

1975

1980

LTD repurchase
Net STD repurchase

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Year

Figure 2: Net payout yield in Compustat
Net payout in Panel A is the sum of Panel B, dividends plus equity repurchase minus
equity issuance, and Panel C, interest plus long-term debt (LTD) repurchase minus LTD
issuance plus net short-term debt (STD) repurchase. The data represent nonﬁnancial ﬁrms
in Compustat for the period 1971–2004.

51

Panel A: Asset return versus equity return

−.4

−.2

0

.2

.4

Asset return
Equity return

1925

1935

1945

1955

1965
Year

1975

1985

1995

2005

Panel B: Net payout growth versus dividend growth

−.8

−.4

0

.4

.8

Net payout growth
Dividend growth

1925

1935

1945

1955

1965
Year

1975

1985

1995

2005

Figure 3: A comparison of returns and cash ﬂow growth
Asset returns and net payout growth are those of nonﬁnancial corporations in the Flow of
Funds. Equity returns and dividend growth are those of the CRSP value-weighted index for
NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq stocks.
52

Asset value versus expected future net payout
2.0

Value of corporate assets

1.5

Expected future net payout
1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5
1925

1935

1945

1955

1965

1975

1985

1995

2005

Figure 4: Expected future net payout
The ﬁgure shows the real market value of assets for nonﬁnancial corporations in the Flow
of Funds. A vector autoregression in real asset return, real net payout growth, and log net
payout yield (reported in Table 4) is used to estimate expected future net payout discounted
at a constant rate. All series are deﬂated by the consumer price index and reported in
demeaned log units.

53

.08
.06
.04
.02
0
−.02
−.04

Dividend yield
Equity payout yield
1925

1935

1945

1955

1965
Year

1975

1985

1995

2005

Figure 5: Dividend yield and equity payout yield
Dividend yield is dividends divided by the CRSP value-weighted index for NYSE, Amex, and
Nasdaq stocks. Equity payout yield is equity payout (i.e., dividends plus equity repurchase
minus equity issuance) divided by the market equity of NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq stocks.

54

Panel A: Stock price versus expected future dividends
2.0

Stock price index

1.5

Expected future dividends
1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5
1925

1935

1945

1955

1965

1975

1985

1995

2005

1995

2005

Panel B: Market equity versus expected future equity payout
2.5

2.0

Total market equity
Expected future equity payout

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

-2.0
1925

1935

1945

1955

1965

1975

1985

Figure 6: Expected future dividends and expected future equity payout
Panel A shows the real value of the CRSP value-weighted index for NYSE, Amex, and
Nasdaq stocks. A vector autoregression (VAR) in real equity return, real dividend growth,
and log dividend yield (reported in Table 8) is used to estimate expected future dividends
discounted at a constant rate. Panel B shows the real market equity of NYSE, Amex, and
Nasdaq stocks. A VAR in real equity return, real equity payout growth, and log equity
payout yield is used to estimate expected future equity payout discounted at a constant
rate. All series are deﬂated by the consumer price index and reported in demeaned log units.
55

