NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERPERSONAL STYLES AND LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES
Lex Borghans
Bas ter Weel
Bruce A. Weinberg
Working Paper 12846
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12846

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2007

We are grateful to David Autor, Francine Blau, Nicole Fortin, Daniel Hamermesh, Masanori Hashimoto,
James Heckman, Tom Kniesner, Hajime Miyazaki, Joan Muysken, Derek Neal, Robert Roe and Bas
Straathof for helpful comments and discussions. Participants at the EALE, the IZA/SOLE Meeting,
Maastricht University, and the NBER Summer Institute are gratefully acknowledged for their comments.
We wish to thank ESRC SKOPE and Francis Green for making available the BSS data. We would
like to thank Alexandra Spitz-Oener for help with the German data. Ter Weel acknowledges financial
support from the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO), and Weinberg acknowledges
support from the National Science Foundation. Part of this work was done while Borghans and Ter
Weel were visiting the Department of Economics at Ohio State University and while Weinberg was
visiting MERIT and ROA at Maastricht University. We are grateful for their hospitality and support.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Lex Borghans, Bas ter Weel, and Bruce A. Weinberg. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Interpersonal Styles and Labor Market Outcomes
Lex Borghans, Bas ter Weel, and Bruce A. Weinberg
NBER Working Paper No. 12846
January 2007
JEL No. J21,J24,J31,J41
ABSTRACT
This paper develops a framework to understand the role of interpersonal interactions in the labor market
including task assignment and wages. Effective interpersonal interactions involve caring, to establish
cooperation, and at the same time directness, to communicate in an unambiguous way. The ability
to perform these tasks varies with personality and the importance of these tasks varies across jobs.
An assignment model shows that people are most productive in jobs that match their style and earn
less when they have to shift to other jobs. An oversupply of one attribute relative to the other reduces
wages for people who are better with the attribute in greater supply. We present evidence that youth
sociability affects job assignment in adulthood. The returns to interpersonal interactions are consistent
with the assignment model.
Lex Borghans
Department of Economics and ROA
Maastricht University
P.O. Box 616
6200MD Maastricht
The Netherlands
l.borghans@roa.unimaas.nl
Bas ter Weel
Department of Economics and UNU-MERIT
Maastricht University
P.O. Box 616
6200MD Maastricht
The Netherlands
b.terweel@merit.unimaas.nl

Bruce A. Weinberg
Department of Economics
Ohio State University
410 Arps Hall
1945 North High Street
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
weinberg.27@osu.edu

I. Introduction
There is a growing consensus that noncognitive skills are important for understanding
individual labor market outcomes. From the psychological literature it is known that
differences in personality have strong effects on individual behavior (John and Srivastava,
1999). In the economic literature, simple correlations between personality traits and outcomes
suggest that noncognitive skills are important in predicting individual labor market outcomes,
such as behavior and labor market success (Bowles, Gintis and Osborne, 2001). However, the
estimated relationship between psychological traits and outcomes varies substantially across
studies, and their effects are remarkably small. Understanding the role of noncognitive skills
for individual labor market outcomes requires an understanding of different types of
personalities from psychology as well as an understanding of behavior and assignment from
the economic literature.
Jobs vary in the types of interactions that are important. For instance, teachers and
nurses need cooperation and have to be relatively caring in dealing with pupils and patients.
Salespeople and managers have to be more direct in their interactions. Our model includes
both styles. In our model, different jobs emphasize different styles. While people can adjust
their behavior to suit their jobs to some extent, the most caring people will be assigned to jobs
where caring is relatively important and relatively direct people will be assigned to jobs in
which directness is important. Supply and demand determine prices and allocations, so
imbalances in supply and demand induce shifts of people to jobs in which they are less
effective, which lowers wages.
We study four of our model’s implications using British data (covering 1997-2001)
and German data (covering 1979-1998). We show that personality at age 16 is a good
predictor of later job assignment in the sense that relatively caring (direct) people end up
working in more caring (direct) jobs. Second, estimates from our assignment model reveal

1

that the relative supply and demand for directness – measured as the ratio of directness to
caring – determines wages. Third, we show that changes over time in the relative importance
of the styles are reflected in prices. We show that directness has become more important
relative to caring, and that this shift has increased the labor market returns to directness
relative to caring. Lastly, we show that the returns to interpersonal styles vary across jobs
with the types of interpersonal tasks performed.
The approach in this paper builds on intuitive observations in the psychological and
management literatures. Caring is needed to create a cooperative environment in which tasks
have to be carried out; directness is needed to communicate accurately. Especially in
nonhierarchical settings interpersonal interactions are essential because workers can benefit
from each other provided that they are able to communicate effectively. The main argument
of the model is that effective communication depends mainly on the balance between caring
and directness. Psychologists report that by agreeing with someone’s ideas and by praising
someone’s achievements, cooperation can be gained easily (Aronson, 1995). Interactions are
complicated because it is also important to provide adequate feedback and to convince people
about different ideas, without losing too much cooperation. Some people’s personalities are
more suited to building cooperation, while others are best when clear feedback has to be
provided. Most research, management training books, self-help books, and anecdotal evidence
has focused on caring, ignoring directness and the interplay between caring and directness.
People differ in the tradeoff between caring and directness. Caring people are
relatively good in establishing cooperation, but have difficulty being critical. Direct people
are able to provide plain comments without reducing cooperation, but generate less
cooperation.
Jobs also differ in their importance of caring and directness. Empathy can be a
disadvantage for salesmen, engineers have to be very clear in their communication and

2

effective performance in managerial jobs often requires making tough decisions regarding
others, such as discipline or even dismissal. Empathy can hamper performance in these jobs
and the relatively least caring people will be assigned to those jobs. Being relatively direct
will be particularly valuable in such jobs because making others take costly actions in the
manager’s interest requires the ability to persuade, convince and maybe even overrule others’
interests. The model exhibits a tradeoff between caring and directness in which both types of
interpersonal interactions can be either beneficial or detrimental in terms of labor market
outcomes.
There is now a small but burgeoning economic literature on people skills. Most
economic studies do not find particularly large effects of interpersonal interactions on wages.
For example, Machin, McIntosh, Vignoles and Viitanen (2001) find positive but rather small
labor market returns to sociability variables in Britain, but they do not consider the
assignment of different types of workers to different jobs. Mueller and Plug (2006) estimate
the effect of personality on earnings. Using the five factor model of personality they find that
some personality traits are penalized whereas others have positive returns. Fortin (2006)
investigates the impact of a variety of soft skills on earnings and finds that some have positive
premiums, while others do not. Krueger and Schkade (2005) show that workers who are more
gregarious, based on their behavior off the job, tend to be employed in jobs that involve more
social interactions. Kuhn and Weinberger (2005) provide evidence that people who held
leadership positions in high school earn higher wages and are more likely to be employed as
managers. Finally, early work by Filer (1983) suggests that personality is important in
explaining labor market outcomes and gender wage differentials.
Other work has focused on the development of noncognitive skills. Cunha, Heckman,
Lochner and Masterov (2005) and Cunha and Heckman (2006) focus on the lifecycle
development of noncognitive skills; Urzua (2006) on racial gaps; and Borghans, ter Weel and

3

Weinberg (2006) on whether changes in the importance of noncognitive skills can explain
trends in the gender and racial wage gaps in the United States. Postlewaite and Silverman
(2006) model investments in people skills. Finally, Borghans, Meijers and ter Weel (2006)
and Segal (2006) investigate the role of noncognitive skills in explaining cognitive test scores.
The present paper deviates from this literature by focusing on different types of interpersonal
styles and their effects on labor market outcomes, including the assignment of workers to jobs
and wages.

II. Interpersonal Interactions
This section develops the theoretical background, model and empirical implications.
We begin by discussing the literature on interpersonal interactions, on which we rely in
building our economic model of interpersonal interactions.

A. Different Kinds of Interpersonal Task Inputs
We start from, but move beyond, the view of interpersonal interactions in psychology,
management and the personality literature, which views interpersonal skills as being friendly,
accommodating others’ feelings, taking the role of the others by being empathetic,
communicating effectively without upsetting others and influencing others by presenting
opinions about situations or how to solve problems. The aim is to uncover if there are
different kinds of interpersonal interactions that are effective in different situations, in
different occupations, and for different persons.
Many work relationships consist of cooperation but go no further than this. They also
have to be sustained even though people may or may not like each other. There are often
conflicts between those at work, arising from opposing roles, competition and rivalry, or
conflicting views about how work should be done. The importance of interpersonal

4

interactions is a major subject of study in social psychology (Argyle, 1967; and Aronson,
1995). Social psychologists look at interpersonal interactions from a skills point of view,
drawing an analogy between people skills and motor skills. Just as someone with good motor
skills may know how to operate a machine, people with good interpersonal skills are thought
to know what to say and how to act in interpersonal relationships. And, just as people with
good motor skills are expected to earn higher wages, social psychologists expect a
relationship between interpersonal ability and pay. The estimates presented in these studies
are not conclusive and often consider one personality trait in isolation (see Mueller and Plug,
2006, for a brief discussion of these studies).1
The analogy between people skills and motor skills ignores the different facets of
interpersonal skills, which makes it important to find the right balance between them. As
discussed, interpersonal relationships at work involve being helpful and cooperative, but also
require directness and greater ability in one can interfere with the other.2
The multidimensionality of interpersonal styles is reflected in the personality literature
where the Five Factor Model (FFM) of personality is often used as an integrated framework
to study the effects of personality traits on behavior. The FFM contains five independent
categories sufficient to describe individual differences in personality (see McCrae and John,
1992, John and Srivastava, 1999, and Funder, 2001, for comprehensive overviews and
different taxonomies of traits). The dimensions include extraversion, agreeableness,
conscientiousness, neuroticism and openness. In particular, the separate dimensions of
extraversion and agreeableness are strongly related to interpersonal interactions. Extraversion
is characterized by facets such as gregariousness, assertiveness, activity and outgoingness.

1
Some economists have taken a similar view by including behavioral traits into wage equations. They have
established correlations, but there is no theoretical reason why some traits are rewarded more than others (see for
example Bowles, Gintis and Osborne, 2001, for an overview of this literature).
2
Another phenomenon in psychology is that caring or cooperation is contrasted with destruction in the sense that
if a person does not cooperate he will destroy (part of) the relationship (Goleman, 1996). We take a different
route by emphasizing caring as one input and directness as the other input into interpersonal interactions.

5

Agreeableness includes facets such as forgivingness, altruism, compliance and tender
mindedness. Studies consistently find that extraversion and agreeableness are distinct traits
(Eyseneck, 1991).
The literature in psychology has studied the labor market effects of personality traits,
but it does not find strong and consistent effects. For instance, many studies find significant
contributions of or penalties for neuroticism, openness and conscientious to behavioral
outcomes but not to agreeableness or extraversion. Often neuroticism is associated with
penalties in terms of job performance (Barrick and Mount, 1991) and higher values of
openness and conscientious are strongly correlated with higher cognitive and mental ability
which yield behavioral success (McCrea and John, 1992). Mueller and Plug (2006) find
insignificant returns to agreeableness and extraversion in their wage regressions for males and
females. We hypothesize that part of the reason for these weak results is that the studies do
not consider the assignment of workers to jobs.
In translating these findings in psychology into economics, we focus on two inputs,
the value of which depends on the occupational setting. The first is an input of high affiliation
related to the degree of acquiescing, agreeing, assisting, cooperating, obliging, initiating,
counseling, and advising. This input is needed to establish caring and liking. The other input
is one of low affiliation related to the degree of analyzing, criticizing, directing, judging,
instructing, and resisting. This input is necessary to provide assertiveness and to communicate
clearly. These inputs are a description of the interpersonal behavior. For simplicity these two
inputs are termed caring and directness, which is consistent with the definition of extraversion
and agreeableness from the FFM in the personality literature.
Job circumstances vary – while some jobs mainly require caring, other jobs mainly
require directness or a mix of the two. We argue that there is a tradeoff between the two
inputs and that the balance between the two determines productivity. People adjust their

6

behavior to the circumstances, but the ability to tradeoff between caring and directness
depends on personality.
Linde (1988) shows that aircrews with successful safety records had a higher level of
mitigation when addressing superiors. This level of mitigation was maintained in social
relationships. In accident and emergency situations (real and simulated), there was less
mitigation because messages delivered with mitigation are much less likely to be acted on,
which is consistent with some ability to adjust behavior. Several case studies suggest that
senior employees speak considerably faster and in ways that are more sophisticated than more
junior personnel but adjust their speech style to establish more effective cooperation when
engaged in cooperative projects (for example Thakerar, Giles and Cheshire, 1982). On the
other hand, sometimes there is no accommodation of interpersonal behavior when people
interact. For example, in professional situations where a certain distance between two parties
preserves identity rather than acceptance, people are less likely to accommodate their
behavior to establish cooperation (Giles and Coupland, 1991). Also, in a hierarchical situation
it is often more appropriate for a manager to behave like this towards a worker.

B. Model
In our model, two inputs determine productivity. It is assumed that productivity
depends on the effectiveness of interpersonal interactions (Y), which is a Cobb-Douglas
function of the degree of affiliation a worker puts in when interacting, caring (C), and on the
influence he exerts on the behavior of the others, directness (D):
(1)

Y = C 1− α D α .

In equation (1) α reflects the relative importance directness in a job.3 The parameter α
3

This way of approaching interpersonal relationships at work is related to Lazear (1989). He argues that the
tradeoff between cooperation and competition in a two-person game leads to an efficient wage structure that is
more compressed because it discourages conflicts. A similar argument is developed in Dewatripont and Tirole

7

describes the circumstances, and C and D are variables describing the interpersonal behavior
of a worker. The economy is characterized by competitive markets in which there is perfect
information about job requirements and worker skills.
Workers face a tradeoff in their interactions with others in that in any given situation
they can gain cooperation by avoiding giving criticism and deemphasizing potential
disagreements. This tradeoff can be written as
D = π 1 − π 2C .

(2)

The π parameters reflect the tradeoff between establishing a caring relationship by affiliation
and influencing the other by being direct. So, the π parameters reflect the worker’s

personality. Some people may be better in both tasks, but we focus on the tradeoff between
both inputs and assume that π 2 is increasing with π 1 . More specifically, π 2 = g (π ) and

π 1 = π . It is reasonable to assume that workers who are less effective in pure caring jobs
have an absolute advantage in jobs where directness is important. Formally we assume that

π
π
is decreasing in π (that is πg ' (π ) > g (π ) ), where
is the maximum level of caring
g (π )
g (π )
a worker can achieve. Substitution into equation (2) yields D = π − g (π )C .
Maximizing Y given α and π yields the following results:

1. D = απ : Any given worker will put more emphasis on directness in a job in
which directness is relatively more important compared to a job where caring is
relatively more important. At the same time, workers who have a natural
comparative advantage in being more direct will behave more direct in any given
job.

(1999) related to advocates. Our approach is also related to the approach in Prendergast (2003) where
communication is worse when people do not trust each other, but relations are improved when there is trust.

8

2. C = (1 − α )

π
: In a job that emphasizes the ability to be caring, workers shift
g (π )

the balance towards caring when engaged in interpersonal interactions. Since

π
is decreasing in π , workers with a natural comparative advantage in being
g (π )
more caring will be more caring in every job.

These expressions show that behavior is determined by circumstances and personality.
Substituting the optimal D and C into the production function (1) for a person with a
given value of π yields
⎛

(3)

Y =e

α ln(απ ) + (1−α ) ln ⎜⎜ (1−α )
⎝

π ⎞
⎟
g (π ) ⎟⎠

.

From equation (3) one can derive an expression for the wage as a function of job and personal
characteristics. By making distributional assumptions, an analytical solution can be derived.
We assume that π and α /(1 − α ) have a lognormal distribution: ln(π ) ~ N ( μ π , σ π2 ) and

ln(α /(1 − α )) ~ N ( μα , σ α2 ) .
Workers with a comparative advantage in directness will be relatively more
productive in jobs demanding directness. In equilibrium the worker with the highest value of

π is matched to the job with highest value of α , and so on. Making use of the lognormal
distributions, the optimal assignment in which higher values of π are matched to higher
values of α is

(4)

π =e

σπ ⎛ ⎛ α ⎞
⎞
⎜ ln ⎜
⎟ − μα ⎟⎟ + μπ
σ α ⎜⎝ ⎝ 1−α ⎠
⎠

.

Under perfect competition with complete information the wage structure w(π ) is such that at
the margin the difference between two workers’ wages equals their productivity differential in
the jobs they are assigned to.

9

Following an approach developed by Sattinger (1993), the premium associated with
increasing π at the margin equals the marginal product of π in the job to which the worker is
assigned in equilibrium. This leads to
(5)

⎛α
⎛ g (π ) − πg ' (π ) ⎞ ⎞
dw dY
⎛α
⎞
⎟⎟ ⎟⎟ = Y ⎜ + (1 − α )h(π ) ⎟ .
=
= Y ⎜⎜ + (1 − α )⎜⎜
dπ dπ
πg (π )
⎝π
⎠
⎝
⎠⎠
⎝π

The term h(π ) =

g (π ) − πg ' (π )
is the elasticity of substitution between ability in directness
πg (π )

and caring. Substitution of the optimal assignment (4) in equation (5) yields
(6)

⎛ ⎛ 1 − α ⎞ σ π / σ α σσ π μα − μπ
⎞
dw dY
=
= Y ⎜α ⎜
+ (1 − α )h(π ) ⎟ .
e α
⎟
⎜ ⎝ α ⎠
⎟
dπ dπ
⎝
⎠

When everyone is equally good in caring jobs, when π 1 = π 2 = π , h(π ) = 0 and the earnings
of relatively direct people will always be higher. It is more plausible to assume that relatively
caring people are more productive in caring jobs. This is the case when h(π ) < 0 . When
people who perform better in direct jobs are equally less productive (in relative terms) in
caring jobs, h(π ) = −1 . In that case, when π and α /(1 − α ) have the same distribution,
wages are independent of π . Each job is filled by the worker who is most productive in it.4
When both distributions have the same standard deviation, but when μα > μ π , there is a
shortage of direct people and consequently the wage will be increasing in directness.
Conversely, the slope of the wage function will be negative when σ α = σ π and μα < μ π .
When more direct workers are more productive in general (that is when h(π ) > −1 ) there will
be an additional positive term in this wage equation that is not related to the relative supply
and demand of personal characteristics.
Differences in the standard deviation of the distributions will lead to non-monotonic
A job with technology α would have the highest output if it were filled with a worker satisfying
Employing a worker with a higher or lower value of π will lead to a lower level of
productivity.

4

π = α /(1 − α ) .

10

effects. When μα = μ π and σ α is large compared to σ π there will be shortages for both very
caring and very direct workers. Consequently, people with extreme characteristics will earn
more than people with average characteristics. When μα = μ π and σ α is small compared to

σ π there are too many workers with extreme characteristics and wage for people with
average characteristics will be relatively high.
Our model implies that wages will depend on the supply and demand for directness
relative to caring in an intuitive way. Although caring is likely to be of importance in many
jobs, people who have a natural advantage in this input might get lower wages when the
relative supply of this type of people exceeds demand.

C. Empirical Implications

In general the distribution of π and α will not be as well shaped as assumed above to
obtain an analytical solution. Ekeland, Heckman and Nesheim (2004) show that differences in
the shape of both distributions can be used to identify assignment models. Given two
continuous distributions the optimal match between π and α can be described by the
function π (α ) . The relationship between the wage and job characteristics α can then be
described by:
(7)

⎛
dw dY
⎛α
⎞ dπ ⎞
=
= Y ⎜⎜ f (α ) + ⎜ − 1 + α ⎟
⎟⎟.
dα dα
⎝π
⎠ dα ⎠
⎝

The function f (α ) represents differences in compensating wage differentials between
occupations and productivity differentials between different types of workers as represented
by (1 − α )h(π ) . Several authors have noted that caring jobs might be less stressful and
therefore pay lower wages (for example Elger, 1990 and Green and McIntosh, 2001).
Inclusion of this function in the regression will pick up differences in non-pecuniary

11

⎛α
⎞
preferences. The function ⎜ − 1 + α ⎟ reflects the match for certain values of α . When this
⎝π
⎠
function is negative relatively direct workers are matched to relatively caring jobs. When it is
positive relatively caring workers are assigned to jobs requiring relatively more directness. By
constructing non-parametric estimates for

dw
dπ
⎛α
⎞
and
, the function ⎜ − 1 + α ⎟ can be
π
dα
dα
⎝
⎠

estimated under assumptions about the functional form of f (α ) .5 The sign of this function at
certain values of α indicates the relative shortage or oversupply of relatively direct or caring
workers.
A fundamental assumption is that people are heterogeneous making some workers
more suited to caring jobs while others are more suited for jobs requiring directness. To test
this assumption, we relate youth behavior, as an indicator of personal characteristics, to
occupational choice.

III. Data

We perform a number of analyses, with a variety of data requirements. We study wage
premiums associated with jobs requiring interpersonal skills at a point in time and how these
skills change over time. These analyses require cross-sectional data and repeated crosssectional data with information on job tasks and wages. We also study how youth sociability
is related to the choice of adult jobs. This analysis uses a longitudinal data set with
information on youth sociability, in which it is also possible to observe adult job choice.
All of our analyses require measures of the tasks performed by workers in jobs. We
obtain measures of job tasks for Britain from the First (1997) and Second (2001) British Skills
Survey (BSS) of the ESRC Centre on Skills, Knowledge and Organisational Performance
(SKOPE). SKOPE initiated the first edition of the BSS in 1997 with the goal of “investigating
5

We use a linear specification because a quadratic term was statistically insignificant.

12

the skills used at work in Britain … [and] to collect data from individual jobholders on a rich
array of variables characterizing British jobs. The intention is that the survey generates a more
valid and detailed picture of skills than is normally available from examining individuals’
qualifications or their occupations” (Ashton, Davies, Felstead and Green, 1998, p.5). The
most innovative feature of the data is that it embeds principles and procedures for job analysis
in a representative survey. The second BSS is an update of the first and has a similar
structure.
A representative sample of 2,467 individual jobholders was interviewed face-to-face
in 1997. In 2001 the survey was increased to include 4,470 workers. Both surveys give the
importance of 36 job activities and key skills (coded into five levels), including problem
solving, noticing mistakes, mathematical ability, reading and writing, physical skills, the
ability to plan activities, knowledge about products and the workplace and interpersonal
interactions. The first BSS contains question about individual performance in the tasks that
are investigated.
For Germany we use four waves of data collected by the Bundesinstitut für
Berufsbildung (BIBB), Berlin and Institut für Arbeitsmarkt- und Berufsforschung der
Bundesanhalt fur Arbeit (IAB), Nürnberg. These BIBB/IAB data include a wealth of

information on job tasks in 1979, 1985, 1991 and 1998. The main advantage of the BIBB/IAB
is that it contains four waves of data on job tasks over a relatively long period of time (19791998). Each round contains around 30,000 observations. These data contain information about
job tasks similar to the BSS. The task measures in the BIBB/IAB are binary indicators for
whether a particular task is performed. Besides interpersonal interactions – divided in to
caring and directness – four other job tasks have been identified: non-routine analytic, routine
cognitive, routine manual and non-routine manual job tasks. To maintain a comparable
sample, we restrict the sample to people living in West Germany.

13

To study the relationship between youth sociability and adult job choice, we use the
1970 British Cohort Study (BCS), which contains information about youth sociability. The
BCS follows people born in the week of 5-11 April 1970. The 1986 wave, conducted at age
16 contains information about sociability and personality. We relate these measures of youth
sociability to labor market outcomes at age 30 in 2000. To obtain measures of job tasks for
BCS respondents, we merge data on job tasks from the BSS into the BCS, at the occupation
level. Table A3 in the Data Appendix shows the definitions of the sociability constructs and
presents some descriptive statistics.

A. Job Task Measures

In our British data, we construct a variable that combines caring and directness and
then break these components apart. Caring is defined as the average of the importance of job
tasks on dealing with people; working with a team of people; counseling, advising or caring
for customers or clients; and listening carefully to colleagues. Directness is defined as the
average importance of the following job tasks: Instructing, training or teaching people;
making speeches or presentations; persuading or influencing others; and selling a product.
Factor analysis reveals that this split of interpersonal styles into caring and directness is a
valid distinction. Using the principal components in the empirical analysis instead of the
averages does not change the results qualitatively.
The importance of task measures is self-assessed by the respondents to the survey on a
five point scale. The question asked is the following: “In your job, how important is …?” The
response scale offered is the following: Essential, very important, fairly important, not very
important, and not at all important. Table A1 in the Data Appendix presents the average
importance of the aggregated task measures for both years (1997 and 2001).
The effectiveness of job tasks is measured by the answers to the following question:

14

“When your job involves …, are you able to do this effectively?” Five possible categories
were offered: Always, nearly always, often, sometimes and hardly ever. We use the answers
to this question as a measure of skill in estimating the assignment model. Questions used to
measure skill have been subject of substantial debate among economists, psychologists and
sociologists, especially in the literature regarding the importance of language skills (see
Borghans and ter Weel, 2006 for a brief discussion). Answers to self-assessed skill questions
may be influenced by social desirability and self-referencing motives. It is not clear how such
biases will affect our estimates. The questions focus on respondents’ ability to perform job
tasks as opposed to their general ability because these questions are less subject to self-esteem
biases. Furthermore, the questions are directly linked to the tasks that must be fulfilled, which
is likely to directly influence the performance of the job and therefore wages. Rather than
collecting information about an abstract skill, the question is competence based. Finally,
Spenner (1990) reports evidence from a number of studies finding high correlations between
self-assessed measures of skill obtained by this method and similar ways of questioning and
measures obtained from objective judgments by experts and external expert systems used to
develop for example the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT).
Three variables are selected to measure general educational development (GED):
reading, writing, and mathematical ability. These variables are comparable to the GED
definitions provided in the U.S. DOT on language, reasoning and mathematical development.
The importance of planning job, knowledge of the organization and its products, problem
solving, noticing problems and (procedural) faults, and physical skills and work are also
constructed.
In our German data, task measures are also self-assessed. Respondents in the surveys
have to indicate whether they carry out a certain task or not. Occupational requirements are
measured by respondents’ job tasks, depicted in the survey by the activities that employees

15

have to perform at the workplace. Following Spitz-Oener (2006) we aggregate these activities
into five task categories: Interpersonal tasks (split into directness and caring), non-routine
analytical tasks, routine cognitive tasks, routine manual tasks, and non-routine manual tasks.
Caring is defined as serving and accommodating; advising customers and clients; and helping
out others. Directness is defined as the average of negotiating, lobbying, coordinating and
organizing; teaching or training; selling, buying, or advertising; and entertaining or
presenting. The individual score on a task measure is defined as the number of tasks a
respondent carries out divided by the total number of tasks in a category multiplied by 100.
To obtain a consistent series over time we have aggregated this information at the two digit
occupational level.6
The Data Appendix contains additional information about the data. Tables A1 and A2
give the definitions and provide relevant descriptive statistics (see also Ashton, Davies,
Felstead and Green, 1998 and Spitz-Oener, 2006 for a detailed description of the British and
German data).
Table A4 in the Data Appendix presents correlations between our measure of
interpersonal styles and a number of main worker characteristics for Britain and Germany.
The correlation coefficients suggest that directness and caring are positively correlated with
the level of education and hourly wages. The correlation coefficient for directness is generally
higher. In addition, the level caring in an occupation is positively correlated with the fraction
of women in that occupation. In the empirical analysis we always control for the fraction of
women in an occupation and include dummies for educational levels. Note that we are
interested in the tradeoff between caring and directness and not in differences in absolute
levels of caring and directness. A person who is better in both caring and directness will face
similar tradeoffs compared to a person who is worse on both.

6

It is not possible to create series at the three digit level because of the relatively long time span of the data.

16

Finally, more background information about the data sources used in this paper is
described in Data Appendix A1-A4.

IV. Results

The empirical results come in four parts. First we document differences in the
importance of caring and directness across occupations, and then present estimates relating
early sociability to current employment. As a third piece of evidence we present reduced form
wage equations. Finally, we document the results from estimating the assignment model.

A. Differences between Occupations

For most jobs interpersonal tasks are important. Nevertheless there are large
differences in the importance of interpersonal tasks across jobs. Table A5 lists the importance
of interpersonal tasks in the 25 largest occupations in Britain in 1997. The first column reports
the importance of directness, the second column reports the importance of caring, the third
column reports the ratio of the importance of directness relative to caring, and the fourth
column reports the absolute difference between the importance of directness and the
importance of caring. The occupations are ranked by the ratio of the importance of directness
relative to caring. Service jobs, in which dealing with others and taking care of others is
important, are the most caring occupations. In these jobs not only is caring important, but
directness is relatively unimportant. At the other side of the spectrum, jobs that involve selling
and influencing others place the most weight on directness. Although these jobs also require
caring (to establish relationships with others), the mean directness in these occupations is
among the highest and the absolute difference between directness and caring is largest in
these occupations.
The importance of the other job tasks is largely unrelated to relative importance of

17

directness relative to caring. We have investigated how the relative importance of directness
is related to the other task variables formally by regressing each task variable on the ratio of
directness and caring, controlling for level of education and gender. The only task showing a
relationship was math for which the coefficient (standard error) was equal to 0.101 (0.043).

B. Early Sociability and Employment

A person’s abilities in interpersonal tasks will affect the occupation in which he
works. We check for this assignment by estimating the relationship between youth sociability
and the importance of caring and directness in the occupation in which a person works as an
adult. Youths who are more caring are expected to be in occupations where caring tasks are
more important as adults. Given the often difficult dynamics of adolescent society, we expect
popularity to be more related to directness (see Eder, Evans, and Parker, 2003), and more
popular children to be employed in occupations where directness is most important. Evidence
that these aspects of youth sociability are correlated with the importance of interpersonal tasks
in adult occupations will validate our measures of the importance of caring and directness and
show that variations in the extent to which people are caring and direct are an important
determinant of occupational choice. How youth sociability is related to the importance of
other tasks will depend on whether interpersonal skills complement other skills. If they do,
people with stronger interpersonal skills will tend to be in jobs where other tasks are more
important. The relationship will also depend on whether youth sociability is associated with
uncontrolled aspects of ability and motivation.
We test our model’s assignment implications by regressing the importance of job tasks
in a person’s occupation on measures of youth sociability. Our measures of sociability come
from the 1986 wave of the BCS, which includes a variety of behavioral measures of
sociability, including the number of friends the respondent has; the frequency with which the

18

respondents spent time with friends during the school year and during holidays; and the
frequency with which the respondents spent time with friends during their leisure (as opposed
to nonsocial leisure activity). Also included are self-descriptions of sociability. The 2000
wave of the BCS includes data for these individuals when they are 30 years old. To obtain
measures of the importance of directness and caring and other tasks, each BCS respondent
was assigned the mean of the task variables for his three digit occupation calculated from the
2001 BSS.
Table I presents the regression results. The first row shows that all of the indicators of
sociability are positively correlated with the importance of interpersonal tasks in a person’s
three digit occupation. We next focus on how youth sociability is related to the importance of
directness and caring on the respondents’ adult jobs. We have a self-description as having a
caring nature, which we expect to be correlated with taking a job where caring is important.
We have two variables that capture popularity, a self-description as being popular or outgoing
and the number of friends the person has. The second and third rows show these results. It is
striking that differences in social character in terms of being a caring person are strongly
related to the importance of caring in the current occupation, but not to the importance of
directness. Being popular, as measured by the self-descriptions or the number of friends, is
strongly related to being in an occupation where directness is important, but not to the
importance of caring. The other behavioral measures of sociability, which presumably do not
pick up specific types of sociability, are related to the importance of both directness and
caring.
The remaining rows report the relationship between the youth sociability measures
and the importance of other job tasks. With the exception of planning activities, which likely
have an interactive component, there are no systematic relationships.
The last row replicates studies that simply include sociability in an earnings

19

regression. Behavioral indicators are not correlated with wages, which suggests that youth
sociability is not capturing differences in ability. Below we show that, once we account for
their multifaceted nature, people skills strongly affect wages.
A potential concern with the way in which we relate sociability indicators at age 16 to
jobs with particular features at age 30 is that more direct people put more emphasis on the
direct tasks they carry out rather than on the caring tasks in their jobs. The same might be true
for more caring people putting more emphasis on caring tasks when they are interviewed.
This concern derives from the fact that the information on the task content of the job comes
from self-reported declarations of the workers themselves. To investigate whether our
estimates are biased in this way, we constructed caring and directness indicators from the
fourth edition of the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT), which was collected in 1977.
Job tasks in the DOT were determined by trained examiners from the U.S. Department of
Labor using a unified framework. 12,000 occupations were assessed along 44 objective and
more subjective dimensions. We selected variables from the DOT temperaments and variables
from the DOT interest factors to signify interests, tastes and preferences for certain kinds of
activities that are entailed in job performance.7 We constructed a crosswalk between the U.S.
and U.K. occupations, which is available upon request, to append the DOT occupation
characteristics to the 2001 BSS. Table A6 presents the definitions of caring and directness
from the DOT. We use the sum of these variables normalized by their standard deviations.
The correlation between the importance of directness (caring) from the BSS and that
from the DOT is 0.437 (0.233), which are both significant at the 1 percent level. The
correlation between the preferred measure of interpersonal styles from both sources equals
0.477 and is also significant at the 1 percent level. Our measures of youth sociability from the
BCS are all statistically significantly related to the DOT measures of job tasks in the expected
7
See Borghans, ter Weel and Weinberg (2006) for a detailed description of the DOT measures of interpersonal
styles.

20

way.
Our finding that youth sociability is strongly related to the interpersonal tasks in
peoples’ subsequent occupations validates for our measures of interpersonal tasks. It also
validates our division between caring and directness in that both job tasks are associated with
different aspects of social character. Finally, these results suggest that the importance of
interpersonal tasks and the ability to perform those tasks are important determinants of
occupational choice.

C. Reduced-Form Wage Estimates

In this section we present reduced-form wage estimates. We first document the
estimates from cross-sectional wage regressions. Secondly, we present panel estimates.
Thirdly, we show results controlling for changes in the distribution of unobservable ability in
occupations by investigating how changes in job tasks affect wages. Finally, we present
estimates showing that the prices of directness relative to caring vary across jobs.

C.I. Cross-Sectional Estimates

We begin by estimating reduced-form models of the relationship between wages and
interpersonal tasks. Consider the model
wijt = x jt β t + z i Γt + γ i + ε ijt .

In this formulation, wijt denotes the log wage of worker i employed in occupation j at time t;
x jt denotes the tasks performed in occupation j at time t; z i denotes the observable

characteristics of worker i; γ i denotes unobserved characteristics that affect his wage; and ε ijt
gives the error term. Our main interest is the coefficient on the importance of directness
relative to caring on the wages of the people in an occupation, β t .

21

Provided that individual ability is not correlated with the interpersonal tasks, a
regression of wijt on x jt and z i at a point in time will give the price of interpersonal tasks. By
running these regressions on data from a variety of years, it is possible to determine how the
prices of interpersonal tasks have changed over time.
Tables II and III present cross-sectional wage regressions for Britain and Germany.
The coefficients for the importance of directness relative to caring are positive and
statistically significant in all years for both countries, indicating that directness has a positive
return relative to caring. The measures for the two countries are different, making it difficult
to compare the results directly, but we find that directness has a higher return than caring in
both countries, increasing our confidence in the estimates. Moreover the return to directness
relative to caring increases over time in both countries. For Britain a one standard deviation
increase in relative directness increases wages by 9.6 percent in 1997 and 10.8 percent in
2001. For Germany a one standard deviation increase in the relative importance of directness
would increase wages by 3.8 (1979), 5.2 (1985), 8.5 (1991), and 10.2 (1998) percent.
In keeping with our estimates, the reported importance of directness increases relative
to caring. To better understand these shifts we decompose this increase in the relative
importance of directness into within and between occupation components. Overall, there is an
increase in the relative importance of directness by 0.002 points per year between 1997 and
2001 (from 0.719 to 0.726) in the UK, and this increase is statistically significant at the one
percent level. When the relative importance of directness in occupations in 1997 is weighted
by the change in employment in each occupation between 1997 and 2001, the relative
importance of directness increased by 0.005 points per year due to shifts in employment
between occupations, and this increase is significant at the one percent level. The within
occupation change is negative: when we weight the importance of people skills in occupations
in 1997 and 2001 by employment in 2001, the relative importance of directness falls by 0.003

22

points per year.
In Germany, the importance of directness relative to caring rose substantially by some
0.015 points per year between 1979 and 1997 (from 0.765 to 1.033). Between occupation
shifts account for an increase in the relative importance of directness of 0.003 points per year;
this is significant at the one percent level. The importance increased by 0.013 points per year
within occupations. Thus, in contrast to Britain, the within occupation change is larger than
the between occupation change in Germany.

C.II. Panel Estimates
One concern with our estimates of the returns to directness relative to caring is that
there may be a correlation between the importance of directness relative to caring in an
occupation and the unobserved ability, γ i , of the people in that occupation. Although the
cross-sectional wage estimates combined with the within and between occupations
components discussed above do not suggest such a relationship, we probe these results in a
number of ways. First, we relate changes in wages to changes in the importance of the
interpersonal tasks within occupations. Implicit in this approach is that any differences in
unobserved ability across occupations do not change substantially over time.
Figure I plots changes in log hourly wages against changes in the importance of
directness relative to caring at the occupation level in Britain between 1997 and 2001. The
size of the bubbles is proportional to occupational employment. There is a positive
relationship between changes in the relative importance of directness and changes in log
hourly wages. The slope (standard error) of this relationship (weighted by the square root of
employment in the occupation) is 0.141 (0.035).
Table IV reports regressions of changes in log wages on the importance of the
interpersonal tasks in Britain for the period 1997-2001. Also included are changes in the other

23

task measures and human capital variables. The estimates show a strong relationship between
changes in the relative importance of directness and changes in wages, although one that is
weaker than the cross-sectional estimates. A one standard deviation change in the relative
importance of directness increases wages by 15.6 percent. The second column in Table IV
reports 2SLS estimates in which we instrumented the importance of job tasks by the selfassessed importance of males. By doing so, we want to exclude the possibility that we are
picking up differences between men and women in reporting the importance of job tasks. The
results are similar to the OLS estimates.
Figure II reports similar results for Germany for the period 1979-1998. The slope
(standard error) of the relationship (weighing occupations by the square root of their 1979
employment) between the 1979-1998 change in relative importance of directness and the
change in log wages is 0.0012 (0.0003). Given these estimates, a one standard deviation
increase in the relative importance of directness raises wages by 19.8 percent.
Table V presents fixed effect estimates of the returns to interpersonal interactions in
Germany. The returns to directness relative to caring are relatively large and statistically
significant in this period. The estimates are in the range of the cross-sectional estimates. A
one standard deviation increase in the relative importance of directness increase log wages by
about 20 percent.

C.III. Controlling for Worker Flows
The preceding estimates look at changes in the importance of tasks within
occupations, but workers may be moving between occupations as the tasks required by jobs
change. Although we do not have panel data on individuals, the 2001 BSS contains
information on respondents’ previous occupations. We use this information to address
concerns with changes in the distribution of unobserved ability in occupations by looking at

24

how changes in job tasks affect wages for people who were in an occupation before the
change.8
Dropping the observable characteristics, z i , and including them in the unobservable,

γ i , we let w jt denote the mean log wage in occupation j at time t, which equals
w jt = x jt β t + γ jt + ε jt .

Here, γ jt and ε jt denote the mean of the characteristics and the error term in occupation j at
time t.
Let j (i,τ ) denote individual i’s occupation at time τ . Using the 1997 BSS, we
estimate wages and tasks for each occupation, restricting the sample to those who will still be
in their prime working years in 2001. Using our data on the previous occupation, we match
each 2001 respondent to the mean log wage, w j (i ,1997 )1997 , and tasks, x j (i,1997 ),1997 , for his
1997 occupation estimated from the 1997 BSS, which equals
w j (i ,1997 )1997 = x j (i ,1997 )1997 β1997 + γ j1997 + ε j1997 .
The difference between person i’s log wage in 2001 and the mean log wage in 1997 in
his 1997 occupation is

wij1 − w j (i,1997 )1997 = xij 2001β 2001 − x j (i,1997 )1997 β1997 +
.
γ i − γ j (i,1997 )1997 + ε ij 2001 − ε j (i,1997 )1997
This expression can be rewritten as,
wij 2001 − w j (i ,1997 )1997 = (xij 2001 − x j (i ,1997 )1997 )β 2001

+ x j (i ,1997 )1997 (β 2001 − β1997 ) + (γ i − γ j (i ,1997 )1997 ) + (ε ij 2001 − ε j (i ,1997 )1997 )

.

Given the synthetic cohort structure, and the assumption that the heterogeneity is time

8

The 2001 survey gives each respondent’s occupation 5 years earlier, which is close to the time of the 1997
survey.

25

(

)

invariant, Cov x j (i,1997 ),1997 , γ i − γ j (i,1997 ),1997 = 0 . This result is obtained, because

γ j (i,1997 ),1997 is the mean of γ i across all of the people in occupation j at time 1997, and
x j (i ,1997 ),1997 is constant across all people for in occupation j in 1997.

(

)

Unfortunately, Cov xij 2001 − x j (i,1997 ),1997 , γ i − γ j (i,1997 ),1997 ≠ 0 because some of
the people in occupation j in 2001 were in different occupations in 1997. To address this
problem, we estimate the equation by 2SLS. Our instrument for xij1 − x j (i,0 ),0 is the change
between 0 and 1 in the tasks in the person’s time 0 occupation, x j (i,0 )1 − x j (i,0 ),0 . As with
x j (i ,0 ),0 , this quantity takes on the same value for all people in occupation j at time 0, so

(

)

Cov x j (i ,0 )1 − x j (i,0 ),0 , γ i − γ j (i ,0 ),0 = 0 because γ j (i ,0 ),0 is the mean of γ i across all of the

people in occupation j at time 0. Thus the identification of β 2001 comes from changes in tasks
within a worker’s original occupation, which eliminates potentially endogenous mobility.
Table VI contains estimates for Britain. As shown, the change in the task variables
gives the wage premiums associated with them in 2001, and their levels give the change
between 1997 and 2001. The estimate for 2001 is quite close to that shown in Table II, as is
the implied estimate of 0.251 for 1997. Taken as a whole, these estimates indicate a large
premium for jobs where directness is important relative to caring.

C.IV. Interactions between Skills and Job Tasks
The preceding results show that people skills affect job assignments, that there is a
premium associated with directness relative to caring, and that this premium has increased
over time. Before turning to our structural estimates, we provide reduced-form evidence that
the returns to directness relative to caring vary systematically across jobs.
To do this, we estimate wage regressions for individual occupations,

26

wij = π i β j + z i Γ j + ε ij .
In this formulation, wij denotes the log wage of worker i employed in occupation j; π i
denotes his effectiveness in direct tasks relative to caring tasks, which is available on the 1997
BSS; z i denotes the observable characteristics of worker i; and ε ij gives the error term, which
we assume is uncorrelated with z i . We allow the effect of directness relative to caring, β j to
vary across occupations.
We retain these occupation specific premiums for directness relative to caring, β j ,
and in a second stage regress them on the importance of directness relative to caring in the
occupation. Formally, we estimate

β j = α jφ + ξ j .
Here α j gives the relative importance of directness in occupation j and φ gives the premium
to directness relative to caring in occupation j. We expect the relative premium to directness
to be highest in occupations where directness is relatively important.
Figure III plots the premium to directness relative to caring, β j , against the
importance of directness relative to caring, α j , for the 277 occupations in the 1997 BSS. The
figure shows that in occupations when directness is relatively important, the premium for
directness is higher. The slope (standard errors) of the estimated relationship in Figure III is
1.210 (0.605) with a constant of –0.838 (0.442). In occupations where caring is important
relative to directness, there is a positive premium to caring relative to directness. The
premium for directness increases with its importance, so that there is a positive premium to
directness relative to caring in the occupations where directness is most important.
Repeating the analysis including the square of π i , not just a linear term, allows us to
calculate the mix of directness relative to caring among workers at which wages are the
highest in each occupation. Formally, we estimate,
27

wij = π i β 1 j + π i β 2 j + z i Γ + ε ij .
2

We then construct Peak j = −

β1 j
for each occupation. Figure IV plots these points against
2β 2 j

the relative importance of directness in that occupation. The graph shows that the relative
effectiveness of directness at which wages are highest increases with the importance of
directness in a job. The slope (standard errors) of the estimated relationship in Figure IV is
5.446 (1.517). This confirms our assumption that different jobs require different mixes of
directness relative to caring.

D. Wages in an Assignment Model

Our reduced-form results show a substantial, positive wage premium to directness
relative to caring. This section provides structural estimates of our assignment model. We
estimate the relationship between wages and the relative importance of directness and also the
matching function, which links workers’ styles to the relative importance of directness in their
jobs. These functions are estimated using kernel regressions.9 Figure V shows the density of
the importance of directness relative to caring across jobs. The figure shows that the
importance of directness relative to caring is between 0.25 and 1.25 in virtually all jobs.
The relationship between the importance of directness relative to caring and wages is
shown in Figure V. The horizontal axis gives the importance of directness relative to caring. It
shows that wages tend to be higher in jobs that require relatively more directness. Only in the
extreme right tail, where the relative importance of directness is larger than 1.25 (and there
are few observations) does the relationship reverse.
Figure VII plots the relationship between the importance of directness relative to
caring and workers’ styles, indicating how workers are matched to jobs. It shows the
9

The estimates are based on Epanechnikov weights, with bandwidth of 0.5, calculated at 100 points in the range
of the relative importance of caring in a job. The data used to carry out this analysis are taken from the 1997
BSS.

28

matching function relating peoples’ performance in direct tasks relative to caring tasks to the
requirements of their job. In the relevant segment there is a strong, positive relationship
between job requirements and abilities.
The derivatives of the wage and matching functions can be obtained from these kernel
estimates. For every grid point, we estimate the derivative by taking the difference in the
kernel estimates between two consecutive grid points divided by the distance between these
points. These derivatives are shown in Figures VIII and IX. Figure VIII shows that the
derivative of the wage function is positive in the range where most observations lie. The
derivate of the matching function in Figure IX shows the change in workers’ ability to be
direct relative to caring when moving from any given job to a job that requires slightly more
directness. A large derivative implies a low supply of workers with the usual set of
characteristics in these jobs, in that small changes in job requirements are associated with
large changes in workers’ characteristics. Estimates beyond 1.25 are imprecise.
We use these derivatives to estimate equation (7). Table VII reports the results. Taking
the grid points as observations, we estimate WLS regressions of the derivative of the wage
function on the derivative of the matching function, controlling for the importance of
directness relative to caring (to control for compensating differentials). The kernel densities
shown in Figure V are used as weights. Formally, we estimate,
(8)

d ln w
dπ
= β 0 + β1
+ β 2π + ε .
dα
dα

A high value of

dπ
implies that when directness is slightly more important in a job,
dα

employers hire workers that are much more direct. This means that there is a relatively low
supply of direct workers compared to the demand for this type. If relative supply and demand
determines wages, a low supply will be associated with a large increase in wages. If the
derivative of the matching function explains much of the variation in the derivative of the

29

wage function it indicates that the relative supply and demand of interpersonal styles
determines wages.
The estimate of β 1 in Table VII is positive and significant in keeping with the relative
supply-demand explanation. The positive sign of this parameter implies that there is on
average an oversupply of relatively caring workers, yielding a premium for relatively direct
workers. The level of directness itself is generally insignificant and unstable, suggesting that
there are no compensating wage differentials. When we include an interaction between the
derivative of the matching function and the importance of directness (results not reported), the
interaction is insignificant, indicating that the negative relationship is rather constant across
the job distribution. These results suggest that workers are on average less direct than jobs
require. On the other hand, there do not appear to be substantial differences between workers’
abilities and job requirements in the variance of directness relative to caring. In the
assignment this implies that every worker is matched to a job that requires more directness,
with roughly the same gap throughout the population.
As shown in column (2), regression-adjusting wages for age (and its square) and
educational attainment yields similar, but somewhat smaller, effects for the derivative of the
matching function. The estimates in columns (3) and (4) show that the results are similar
without weights.
Our kernel estimates may generate autocorrelation in the variables. To address this
problem, we allow for a moving average structure in the error term. As shown in the
remaining columns (5) and (6), including a lag in the estimation model does not affect the
results.
The estimates indicate that the relationship between wages and the interpersonal
requirements of a job are largely explained by the supply and demand for directness relative
to caring. Confirming the importance of supply and demand relative to compensating

30

differentials, for instance, the required level of caring or directness does not influence wages
directly. Our estimates also suggest that the failure to account for differences in the returns to
the various types of interpersonal skills across jobs and the assignment of people to jobs may
explain the weak effect of simple regressions in which wages are regressed on personal
characteristics (see Machin, McIntosh, Vignoles and Viitanen (2001), Mueller and Plug
(2006) and Fortin (2006)). Our results also indicate that the returns to interpersonal styles may
change over time with shifts in supply and demand.

V. Conclusion

Despite informal arguments that interpersonal styles are important for understanding
individual labor market outcomes and are becoming more important, economists have done
little to analyze their economic consequences in terms of wages and job assignment. This
paper provides a first step in this direction, developing a framework to understand the labor
market consequences of interpersonal styles and demonstrating the relationship between
interpersonal styles and labor market outcomes.
The framework focuses on tradeoff between directness, which facilitates clear
communication, and caring, which establishes cooperation. Workers are assumed to be
heterogeneous with respect to these inputs and occupations are assumed to require different
levels of both inputs. Workers are most productive when they work in a job that best matches
their style best, but any given worker adjusts the extent to which he is direct relative to caring
to suit his circumstances. Our model yields a number of results for wages and the assignment
of workers to jobs. For instance, workers with a comparative advantage in caring will be
assigned to relatively caring jobs, within which they earn higher wages. The returns to caring
and directness will be determined by relative supply and demand.
We test the model’s implications for occupational assignment using British data.

31

Behavioral measures of youth sociability are good predictors of the jobs that people hold as
adults. Estimates from an assignment model indicate that the demand and supply for direct
relative to caring workers determines wages. British data (covering 1997-2001) and German
data (covering 1979-1998) show that directness has a higher wage premium than caring and
that the premium to directness has increased relative to caring.

Data Appendix
A.1. British Skills Survey
The British Skills Surveys (BSS) comprise two cross-sectional surveys conducted in
1997 and 2001; each contains a representative sample of the British population. The
interviewers assess the importance of 36 job activities and key skills, including problem
solving, noticing mistakes, mathematical ability, reading and writing, physical skills, the
ability to plan activities, knowledge about products and workplace and interpersonal
interactions. Nine job task categories are constructed from these detailed job tasks. These are
listed in Table A1. The changes in the importance of job tasks are analyzed in Section IV.
Ashton, Davies, Felstead and Green (1998) provide a detailed overview of the interview set
up and the design of the BSS survey. They also present basic analyses of the core variables.
Felstead, Gallie and Green (2002) provide an overview of the second BSS.
The usual approach in job analyses is for experts to visit people at their workplace to
evaluate job requirements. In practice each occupation is evaluated based only upon a couple
of representative examples, and these evaluation studies are updated infrequently. Information
from job analyses therefore reflects experiences gathered over a long period of time, and
might miss changes in portions of an occupation that differ from the typical job in the
occupation title. The main advantage of the BSS data is that information is obtained about job
requirements at two distinct points in time for all jobs, with the data being representative of
all people within each category. The two waves of the BSS codes job requirements on a five
point scale, which gives us a much more nuanced picture compared to the binary information
in most job analyses.
For some of the empirical analyses the individual data are aggregated to three digit
1990 U.K. Standard Occupational Classification (SOC90) codes, of which there are 371. For
Britain samples of the Standard Occupational Classification 1990 (SOC90) are available. The
SOC90 was published to replace both the Classification of Occupations 1980 (CO80) and the
Classification of Occupations and Dictionary of Occupational Titles (CODOT). The SOC90
includes nine major groups divided into 22 sub-major groups of occupations. These 22 groups
can be divided into 371 unit groups, which are defined as occupations. These unit groups are
the aggregate results of over 26,000 job titles. All observations used are for workers who are
not self-employed and aged 20 to 60.
Standard U.K. measures of education are used. These are university degree,
professional degree, NVQ3, NVQ2, NVQ1, and no degree. University and professional
degrees are equivalent to a U.S. college degree. NVQ3 would be similar to some college,
NVQ2 and NVQ1 are comparable to a high school degree, and workers without a degree are
dropouts. In 1997 (2001) 22.3 (30.4) percent of the respondents in the survey had obtained a
university or professional degree, 15.2 (19.0) percent a NVQ3 degree, 43.3 (37.0) percent a
NVQ2 or NVQ1 degree, and 19.2 (14.6) percent of the respondents had no degree. The

32

average (standard deviation) age of the respondents is 39.0 (10.3) in 1997 and increases to
40.3 (10.4) in 2001. The average (standard deviation) gross hourly wage is GB₤ 7.43 (9.25) in
1997 and increases to GB₤ 9.75 (10.95) in 2001.
The analysis in Section V.D. requires the use of both the importance and effectiveness
of job tasks. In the 1997 BSS the effectiveness of the 36 job tasks is gathered by using the
answers to the following question: “If your job requires … are you able to do this
effectively?” The answers range from always to never. The answers to these questions are
aggregated to the same categories as those presented in Table A1. Unfortunately, the
effectiveness questions were not included in the 2001 wave of the BSS. The means (standard
deviations) of these effectiveness variables on a 1-5 scale are: interpersonal skills 3.950
(0.633), directness 3.654 (0.815), caring 4.246 (0.574), math 4.101 (0.911), reading 4.274
(0.698), writing 4.078 (0.860), physical ability 4.066 (0.855), problem solving 3.986 (0.647),
noticing mistakes 4.317 (0.535), planning of activities 4.185 (0.636), and knowledge of the
organization 4.107 (0.585).
A.2. BIBB/IAB
The data collected by the Bundesinstitut für Berufsbildung (BIBB) in Berlin and
Institut für Arbeitsmarkt- und Berufsforschung der Bundesanstalt für Arbeit (IAB) in
Nürnberg are representative surveys of the German workforce. This BIBB/IAB database
contains four waves of cross-sectional worker surveys: 1979, 1985, 1991 and 1998. The
surveys contain standard demographic and labor market variables and are particularly rich in
detail about workers’ jobs, job attributes, the tools used in these jobs, the skills necessary to
perform a job, and how these skills were obtained. The sampling frame for the survey is the
employed German population age 16 to 65. Each survey has about 30,000 respondents. The
largest possible sample is used. We only remove workers from the former East Germany, who
were included in the last two surveys, self-employed people, and people who were
unemployed. The questions in the three surveys are similar but not exactly comparable. We
report details on the variables we use in Table A2 and have analyzed changes in the
importance of job tasks in Section IV.C.
The German education system has three main levels of education, which are best
classified according to vocational education classes. This classification yields a better proxy
for level of education than years of schooling, since the German system requires most pupils
to take training courses after graduation. In 1979 (1998) 8.2 (16.6) percent of the workers had
acquired a high level of education (comparable to a college degree or higher in the United
States), 73.4 (69.2) percent a medium level of education (comparable to some college and
high school), and 18.4 (14.2) percent a low level of education (including those who dropped
out of school). Investigating educational developments in Germany by including 1985 and
1991 yields a steady shift towards higher levels of education over the period 1979-1998.
The average (standard deviation) age of the workforce in 1979 equals 37.4 (11.6) and
38.9 (10.6) in 1998. The pattern of age is relatively constant over time. The average (standard
deviation) gross hourly wage is equal to DM 11.5 (9.45) in 1979 and increases to DM 20.6
(21.9) in 1998. In 1985 the average gross hourly wage equals DM 14.1 (12.8) and in 1991 it is
equal to DM 17.0 (17.9). These numbers suggest a relatively smooth pattern of wages over
time in Germany.
For the analysis of changes over time, we follow Spitz-Oener (2006). The data are
aggregated into consistent occupation cells at the two digit level. Because of changes in the
German occupational classification it is impossible to match the data at a more disaggregated
level. All four waves are categorized according to the 1988 German occupational
classification, which yields 83 occupations in all four years.

33

A.3. British Cohort Study
The 1970 Birth Cohort Study (BCS) follows along the lines of the National Child
Development Study (NCDS) and originates in the British Birth Survey of over 17,000 babies
born in Britain in the week 5-11 April 1970. We use the BCS and not the NCDS because the
NCDS does not contain sociability variables.
Four major follow-up surveys have monitored the changing health, education, social
and economic circumstances of the surviving cohort members – in 1975, 1980, 1986, and
1996. Our focus is on the sociability questions asked in 1986 when the cohort members were
16 years old. The latest major survey was held in 2000 and contains data on respondents’
labor market status at the age of 30, for people who were in paid work and not self-employed.
In the empirical analyses the 2001 BSS is appended to the 2000 BCS. We estimate the
importance of the nine job tasks in each three digit occupation in the 2001 BSS. Each BCS
respondent is then assigned the mean of these task variables for his three digit occupation. We
the estimate the effect of sociability at age 16 on the choice of occupation as measured by
these job tasks. Table A3 presents the definitions and descriptive statistics for our sociability
variables.
A.4. Occupations
Tables A5 presents information about the job tasks in specific occupations in 1997.
There are 344 occupations identified in the BSS at the three digit level. Table A5 splits
interpersonal skills into caring and directness and reports the mean importance of these job
tasks for the 25 largest occupations in Britain in 1997. Performing the same analysis for 2001
yields comparable results.

References
Argyle, M. 1967. The Psychology of Interpersonal Behaviour. London: Pelican Books.
Aronson, E. 1995. The social animal. New York: W.H. Freeman & Co.
Ashton, D., B. Davies, A. Felstead, and F. Green. 1998. “Work Skills in Britain.” SKOPE
Monograph No. 1, University of Oxford.
Barrick, M.R., and M.A. Mount. 1991. “The Big Five Personality Dimensions and Job
Performance: A Meta Analysis.” Personnel Psychology 44(1):1-26.
Borghans, L., H. Meijers, and B. ter Weel. 2006. “The Role of Noncognitive Skills in
Explaining Cognitive Test Scores.” Discussion Paper No. 2429, Bonn: IZA.
Borghans, L., and B. ter Weel. 2006. “Do We Need Computer Skills to Use a Computer?
Evidence from Britain.” Labour 20(3):505-532
Borghans, L., B. ter Weel, and B.A. Weinberg. 2006. “People People: Social Capital and the
Labor-Market Outcomes of Underrepresented Groups.” Working Paper No. 11985,
Cambridge Mass.: NBER.
Bowles, S., H. Gintis, and M. Osborne. 2001. “The Determinants of Earnings: A Behavioral
Approach.” Journal of Economic Literature 39(4):1137–1176.
Costa, D.L., and M.E. Kahn. 2003. “Cowards and Heroes: Group Loyalty in the American
Civil War.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(2):519-548.
Cunha, F., and J.J. Heckman. 2006. “Formulating, Identifying and Estimating the Technology
of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation.” Working Paper, University of
Chicago.
Cunha, F., J.J. Heckman, L. Lochner, and V. Masterov. 2005. “Interpreting the Evidence on
Life Cycle Skill Formation.” Working Paper No. 11331, Cambridge. Mass.: NBER.
Dewatripont, M., and J. Tirole. 1999. “Advocates.” Journal of Political Economy 107(1):139.

34

Eder, D., C.C. Evans, and S. Parker. 2003. School Talk: Gender and Adolescent Culture. New
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
Ekeland, I., J.J. Heckman, and L. Nesheim. 2004. “Identification and Estimation of Hedonic
Models.” Journal of Political Economy 112:S60-109.
Elger, T. 1990. “Technical Innovation and Work Reorganization in British Manufacturing in
the 1980s: Continuity, Intensification or Transformation?” Work, Employment and
Society 4:67-102.
Eyseneck, H.J. 1991. “Dimensions of Personality: 16, 5, or 3? Criteria for a Taxonomic
Paradigm.” Personality and Individual Differences 12:773-790.
Felstead, A., F. Green, and D. Gallie. 2002. “Work Skills in Britain 1986-2001.” Nottingham,
DfES Publications.
Filer, R.K. 1983. “Sexual Differences in Earnings: The Role of Individual Personalities and
Tastes.” Journal of Human Resources 18(1):82-98.
Fortin, N. 2006. “Greed, Altruism, and the Gender Wage Gap.” Working Paper, University of
British Columbia.
Frank, R.H, T. Gilovich, and D.T. Regan. 1993. “Does Studying Economics Inhibit
Cooperation?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 7(1):159-171.
Funder, D.C. 2001. “Personality.” Annual Review of Psychology 52: 197-221.
Giles, H., and N. Coupland. 1991. Language, Context and Consequences. Cambridge: Open
University Press.
Gilligan, C. 2001. In A Different Voice: Psychological Theory and Women’s Development.
Cambridge Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Goleman, D.P. 1996. Emotional Intelligence. Why it Can Matter More than IQ. London:
Bloomsbury Publishing.
Green, F., and S. McIntosh. 2001. “The Intensification of Work in Europe.” Labour
Economics 8:291-308.
Heckman, J.J., J. Stixrud, and S. Urzua. 2006. “The Effects of Cognitive and Noncognitive
Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior.” Journal of Labor
Economics 24(3):411-482.
John, O.P., and S. Srivastava. 1999. “The Big Five Trait Taxonomy: History, Measurement,
and Theoretical Perspectives.” in Handbook of Personality: Theory and Research. eds.
O.P. John and L.A. Pervin. New York: Guilford Press.
Krueger, A.B., and D. Schkade. 2005. “Sorting in the Labor Market: Do Gregarious Workers
Flock to Interactive Jobs?” Working Paper, Princeton, NJ.
Kuhn, P., and C. Weinberger. 2005. “Leadership Skills and Wages.” Journal of Labor
Economics 23(3):395-436.
Lazear, E.P. 1989. “Pay Inequality and Industrial Politics.” Journal of Political Economy
97(3):561-580
Linde, C. 1988. “The Quantitative Study of Communicative Success: Politeness and
Accidents in Aviation Discourse.” Language in Society 17:357-399.
Machin, S., S. McIntosh, A. Vignoles, and T. Viitanen. 2001. “Basic Skills, Soft Skills and
Labour Market Outcomes: Secondary Analysis of the National Child Development
Study.” Research Report No. 250, DfEE Research Centre, London.
McCrae, R.R., and O.P. John. 1992. “An Introduction to the Five-Factor Model and Its
Applications.” Journal of Personality 60(2):175-215.
Mueller, G., and E. Plug. 2006. “Estimating the Effect of Personality on Male-Female
Earnings.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 60(1):3-22.
Ortmann, A., and L. K. Tichy. 1999. “Gender Differences in the Laboratory: Evidence from
Prisoner’s Dilemma Games.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 39:327339.

35

Prendergast, C. 2003. “The Limits of Bureaucratic Efficiency.” Journal of Political Economy
111(5):929-958.
Postlewaite, A., and D. Silverman. 2006. “Non-Cognitive Skills, Social Success, and Labor
Market Outcomes.” Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Sattinger, M. 1993. “Assignment Models of the Distribution of Earnings.” Journal of
Economic Literature 31:831-880.
Segal, C. 2006. “Motivation, Test Scores and Economic Success.” Working Paper, Harvard
Business School.
Smith, P.C., and L.M. Kendall. 1963. “Retranslation of Expectations: An Approach to the
Construction of Unambiguous Anchors for Rating Scales.” Journal of Applied
Psychology 57:149-155.
Spenner, K.I. 1990. “Skill: Meaning, Methods and Measures.” Work and Occupations
17:399-421.
Spitz-Oener, A. 2006. “Technical Change, Job Tasks, and Rising Educational Demands:
Looking outside the Wage Structure.” Journal of Labor Economics 24(2):235-270.
Thakerar, J.N., H. Giles, and J. Cheshire. 1982. “Psychological and Linguistic Parameters of
Speech Accommodation Theory.” in Advances in the Social Psychology of Language.
eds. C. Fraser and K. R. Scherer, 205-255. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Urzua, S. 2006. “The Role of Abilities and Schooling Choices in Explaining Racial Labor
Market Gaps.” Working Paper, University of Chicago.
U.S. Department of Labor, Manpower Administration. 1972. Handbook for Analyzing Jobs
Washington, DC.

36

Table I
Correlation between Behavioral Indicators at Age 16 and the Importance of Job Tasks in
Current Occupation at Age 30
(Dependent Variables: Importance of Job Tasks)
Standard
deviation
of the dep.
variable

Selfdescribed
social
character:
Caring

Interpersonal interactions

0.492

- Caring

0.454

- Directness

0.647

Math

0.596

Reading

0.484

Writing

0.590

Physical strength and
Stamina
Problem solving

0.833
0.502

Noticing mistakes

0.311

Planning of activities

0.484

Knowledge of the
organization
Log hourly wage

0.412

0.006
(0.007)
0.012
(0.006)
0.004
(0.008)
-0.009
(0.010)
0.011
(0.006)
0.022
(0.007)
-0.012
(0.012)
-0.009
(0.006)
-0.002
(0.005)
0.007
(0.006)
-0.008
(0.005)
-0.011
(0.013)
2,655

Importance of tasks in
current job at age 30

n

0.711

Behavioral indicators at age 16
SelfLog of the
described
number of
social
friends
character:
Popular/out
going
0.019
0.021
(0.007)
(0.012)
0.003
0.010
(0.007)
(0.011)
0.025
0.031
(0.009)
(0.014)
0.001
-0.016
(0.010)
(0.018)
0.003
-0.014
(0.007)
(0.011)
0.011
-0.006
(0.008)
(0.013)
0.014
0.052
(0.013)
(0.021)
-0.004
0.005
(0.007)
(0.012)
-0.004
-0.007
(0.005)
(0.008)
0.016
0.024
(0.007)
(0.012)
-0.004
-0.025
(0.006)
(0.010)
0.011
-0.009
(0.014)
(0.024)
3,670
3,915

Social
behavior
during
school
term and
holidays
0.003
(0.001)
0.003
(0.001)
0.003
(0.001)
0.000
(0.001)
0.000
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
0.000
(0.001)
0.000
(0.000)
-0.000
(0.001)
0.003
(0.001)
0.000
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)
3,344

Social
behavior
during
leisure
time
0.006
(0.002)
0.005
(0.002)
0.007
(0.002)
-0.005
(0.002)
0.001
(0.001)
0.003
(0.002)
0.004
(0.003)
0.000
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.005
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.003)
3,267

Note: Standard errors in brackets. The data on sociability and wages are taken from the BCS. The task measures
in the current occupation are occupational averages appended from the BSS 2001. All regressions are OLS and
control for gender, marital status and level of education. The definitions of the variables are provided in the Data
Appendix Table A1.

37

Table II
Cross-Sectional Wage Regression for Britain, 1997-2001
(Dependent Variables: Log Wages)
1997
0.283 (0.124)
0.084 (0.027)
0.084 (0.052)
0.067 (0.050)
-0.068 (0.025)
0.122 (0.056)
-0.007 (0.068)
-0.048 (0.043)
0.016 (0.054)
247

Interpersonal interactions (directness/caring)
Math
Reading
Writing
Physical strength and Stamina
Problem solving
Noticing mistakes
Planning of activities
Knowledge of the organization
n

2001
0.327 (0.162)
0.090 (0.030)
0.085 (0.056)
0.057 (0.051)
-0.120 (0.026)
0.155 (0.057)
0.004 (0.071)
0.035 (0.048)
-0.009 (0.026)
265

Note: Robust standard errors in brackets. All data are taken from the BSS 1997 and 2001. All regressions include
controls for gender, marital status and level of education and are weighted by occupation size. The definitions of
the variables are available from the Data Appendix A1 and Table A1.

38

Table III
Cross-Sectional Wage Regression for Germany, 1979-1998
(Dependent Variables: Log Wages)

Interpersonal interactions
(directness/caring)
Analytical
Routine cognitive
Routine manual
Non-routine manual
n

1979
0.098 (0.025)

OLS
1985
1991
0.114 (0.049)
0.161 (0.068)

1998
0.175 (0.069)

0.091 (0.042)
0.089 (0.032)
-0.012 (0.006)
-0.025 (0.009)
65

0.094 (0.041)
0.084 (0.031)
-0.012 (0.005)
-0.031 (0.011)
65

0.098 (0.045)
0.093 (0.041)
-0.011 (0.006)
-0.033 (0.017)
65

0.097 (0.043)
0.096 (0.037)
-0.012 (0.006)
-0.031 (0.015)
65

Note: Robust standard errors in brackets. The data are taken from the four waves of the BIBB/IAB data from
Germany. All regressions include controls for gender, marital status and level of education and are weighted by
occupation size. The definitions of the variables are available from the Data Appendix A2 and Table A2.

39

Table IV
Relationship between Changing Wages and Changing Importance of Interpersonal
Interactions in Britain, 1997-2001
(Dependent Variables: Change in Log Wages)
OLS
0.087 (0.037)
-0.018 (0.029)
0.059 (0.043)
0.062 (0.038)
-0.083 (0.035)
0.024 (0.050)
0.013 (0.069)
-0.019 (0.044)
0.050 (0.052)
247

Interpersonal interactions (directness/caring)
Math
Reading
Writing
Physical strength and Stamina
Problem solving
Noticing mistakes
Planning of activities
Knowledge of the organization
n

2SLS
0.112 (0.044)
-0.033 (0.033)
0.071 (0.048)
0.060 (0.039)
-0.080 (0.038)
0.026 (0.053)
0.020 (0.066)
-0.032 (0.048)
0.069 (0.058)
247

Note: Robust standard errors in brackets. In the 2SLS estimates the male importance of job tasks for the task
measures are used to instrument the task measures. The changes in task measures are occupational averages
appended from the British Skills Surveys 1997 and 2001. All regressions include controls for gender, marital
status and level of education and are weighted by occupation size in 1997. The definitions of the variables are
available from the Data Appendix A1 and Table A1.

40

Table V
Relationship between Wages and Interpersonal Interactions in Germany, 1979-1998
(Dependent Variables: Change in Log Wages)
Fixed effects
0.135 (0.024)
0.085 (0.031)
0.067 (0.030)
-0.032 (0.015)
-0.013 (0.010)
260

Interpersonal interactions (directness/caring)
Analytical
Routine cognitive
Routine manual
Non-routine manual
n

Note: Robust standard errors in brackets. The data are taken from the four waves of the BIBB/IAB data from
Germany. All regressions include controls for gender, marital status and level of education and are weighted by
occupation size. The definitions of the variables are available from the Data Appendix A2 and Table A2.

41

Table VI
Relationship between Wages and the Importance of Interpersonal Interactions in Britain,
1997-2001
(Dependent Variables: Log Wage minus Log Wage in Old Occupation in Previous Survey)
Coefficients (standard errors)
0.312 (0.153)
0.140 (0.048)
0.057 (0.067)
-0.052 (0.030)
0.083 (0.062)
0.049 (0.054)
-0.128 (0.029)
-0.069 (0.047)
0.091 (0.063)
-0.061 (0.134)
0.069 (0.049)
-0.058 (0.068)
-0.022 (0.025)
0.053 (0.065)
0.039 (0.056)
-0.028 (0.019)
-0.008 (0.041)
0.027 (0.057)
3,951

Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ

Interpersonal interactions (directness/caring)
Problem solving
Noticing mistakes
Math
Reading
Writing
Physical strength and Stamina
Planning of activities
Knowledge of the organization
Interpersonal interactions (directness/caring)
Problem solving
Noticing mistakes
Math
Reading
Writing
Physical strength and Stamina
Planning of activities
Knowledge of the organization
n

Note: Robust standard errors in brackets. In the 2SLS estimates the male importance of job tasks for the task
measures are used to instrument the task measures. The changes in task measures are occupational averages
appended from the British Skills Surveys 1997 and 2001. All regressions include controls for gender, marital
status and level of education and are weighted by occupation size. The definitions of the variables are available
from the Data Appendix A1 and Table A1.

42

Table VII
The Relationship between the Derivative of the Wage Function and Matching Function

Derivate of the matching
function ( dπ / dα )
Average level of worker
caring
Constant
Regression-adjusted wages
Weighted
MA

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

4.879
(0.728)
-1.370
(.458)
.908
(0.378)
No
Yes
No

2.180
(0.499)
3.511
(2.702)
-3.037
(2.418)
Yes
Yes
No

1.576
(0.510)
-.541
(2.766)
-297
(2.476)
No
No
No

3.282
(0.608)
-0.602
(0.382)
0.305
(0.315)
Yes
No
No

4.050
(1.171)
-1.423
(1.288)
1.087
(1.090)
No
Yes
Yes

2.708
(1.05)
-0.692
(1.071)
0.473
(0.914)
Yes
Yes
Yes

Note: Standard errors in brackets. The data are taken from the 1997 BSS. The explanatory variable is

d ln w
, based
dα

on the first difference of the kernel estimate of the log of wages (or regression-adjusted wages) as a function of the relative
importance of directness. Estimates are LS, with or without weights or regressions with MA1 structure for the error term.

dπ
dα

is based on the first difference of the kernel estimate of the matching function, that is the function that describes the

relative skills of people with respect to directness versus caring and as a function of the relative importance of directness.

43

Figure I
Changes in Wages and the Importance of Interpersonal Tasks at Work
in Britain, 1997-2001
3
2.5

Change in Log Wages

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
-2.5

-1.5

-0.5

-0.5

0.5

1.5

2.5

-1
-1.5
-2
Change in Importance of Relative Directness

Note: The size of the bubbles indicates the relative size of the occupation. See the Data Appendix A1 and Table
A1 for more details on the definition of interpersonal tasks.

44

Figure II
Changes in Wages and the Importance of Interpersonal Tasks at Work
in Germany, 1979-1998
1.5

Change in Log Wages

1

0.5

0
-250

-150

-50

50

150

250

350

450

-0.5

-1
Change in Importance of Relative Directness

Note: The size of the bubbles indicates the relative size of the occupation. See the Data Appendix A2 and Table
A2 for more details on the definition of interpersonal tasks.

45

Figure III
Assignment: The Within-Job Returns to a Worker’s the Effectiveness in Relative Directness
and the Relative Importance of Directness in the Job
2.500
2.000

Estimated Coefficient

1.500
1.000
0.500
0.000
0.400
-0.500

0.500

0.600

0.700

0.800

0.900

1.000

1.100

-1.000
-1.500
Relative Importance of Directness

Note: n=277. The relative importance of directness is determined by dividing the individual score on the
importance of directness by the importance of caring aggregated to the occupational level. The size of the dots is
proportional to the number of workers in the occupation. The data used for this analysis are from the 1997 BSS.

46

Figure IV
Assignment: The Effectiveness in Relative Directness for which the Within-Job Quadratic
Wage Function Reaches a Maximum and the Relative Importance of Directness in the Job
6.000

Estimated Coefficient (-b/2a)

5.000
4.000
3.000
2.000
1.000
0.000
0.450
-1.000

0.550

0.650

0.750

0.850

0.950

1.050

-2.000
Relative Importance of Directness

Note: n=277. The relative importance of directness is determined by dividing the individual score on the
importance of directness by the importance of caring aggregated to the occupational level. The size of the dots is
proportional to the number of workers in the occupation. The data used for this analysis are from the 1997 BSS.

47

0

.5

Density
1

1.5

2

Figure V
Kernel Estimation of the Density of the Importance of Directness Relative to Caring

0

.5
1
1.5
Importance of directness relative to caring

2

Note: n=277. The relative importance of directness is determined by dividing the individual score on the
importance of directness by the importance of caring aggregated to the occupational level. The data used for this
analysis are from the 1997 BSS.

48

1.4

1.6

Ln Wage
1.8
2

2.2

2.4

Figure VI
Kernel Estimate of the Wage as a Function of the Relative Importance of Directness in a Job

0

.5
1
1.5
Importance of directness relative to caring

2

Note: n=277. The relative importance of directness is determined by dividing the individual score on the
importance of directness by the importance of caring aggregated to the occupational level. The data used for this
analysis are from the 1997 BSS.

49

.7

Worker directness relative to caring
.8
.9
1

1.1

Figure VII
Kernel Estimate of the Matching Function, Describing the Relationship between the
Relative Importance of Directness versus Caring in a Job and the Worker’s Degree of
Directness versus Caring

0

.5
1
1.5
Importance of directness relative to caring

2

Note: n=277. The relative importance of directness is determined by dividing the individual score on the
importance of directness by the importance of caring aggregated to the occupational level. The data used for this
analysis are from the 1997 BSS.

50

-2

Derivative of Ln wage function
-1
0
1

2

Figure VIII
Derivative of the Estimated Wage Function

0

.5
1
1.5
Importance of directness relative to caring

2

Note: n=277. The relative importance of directness is determined by dividing the individual score on the
importance of directness by the importance of caring aggregated to the occupational level. The data used for this
analysis are from the 1997 BSS.

51

-.4

Derivative of assignment function
-.2
0
.2

.4

Figure IX
Derivative of the Estimated Matching Function

0

.5
1
1.5
Importance of directness relative to caring

2

Note: n=277. The relative importance of directness is determined by dividing the individual score on the
importance of directness by the importance of caring aggregated to the occupational level. The data used for this
analysis are from the 1997 BSS.

52

Table A1
Definitions of Job Task Measures from the British Skills Surveys (BSS) in 1997 and 2001
Tasks

Definition

Interpersonal
Dealing with people; working in a team of people; instructing, training or teaching people; making speeches or presentations;
Interactions
persuading or influencing others; selling a product; counseling, advising or caring for customers; and listening carefully to colleagues
- Directness
Instructing, training or teaching people; making speeches or presentations; persuading or influencing others; and
selling a product
Dealing with people; working in a team of people; counseling, advising or caring for customers; and listening
- Caring
carefully to colleagues
Math
Adding subtracting, multiplying or dividing numbers; calculations using decimals, percentages or fractions; and calculations using
more advanced mathematical or statistical procedures
Reading
Reading written information such as forms, notices or signs; reading short documents such as short reports, letters or memos; and
reading long documents such as long reports, manuals, articles or books
Writing
Writing materials such as forms notices or signs; writing short documents (for example, short reports, letters or memos); and writing
long documents with correct spelling and grammar (for example, long reports, manuals, articles or books)
Physical
Physical strength (for example, to carry, push or pull heavy objects; physical stamina (to work for long periods on physical
ability
activities); and skill or accuracy in using your hands or fingers (for example, to mend, repair, assemble, construct or adjust things)
Problem
Working out the cause of problems or faults; thinking of solutions to problems; and analyzing complex problems in depth
solving
Noticing
Paying close attention to detail; spotting problems or faults; checking things to ensure that there are no errors; and noticing when
mistakes
there is a mistake
Planning
Planning your own activities; planning the activities of others; organizing your own time; and thinking ahead
Organizational
knowledge
n

Knowledge of how to use or operate tools/equipment; knowledge of particular products or services; specialist knowledge or
understanding; knowledge of how your organization works; and using a computer, pc, or other types of computerized equipment

Note: All data are taken from the BSS 1997 and 2001.

53

Mean (st.dev.)
1997
2001
3.468
3.545
(0.933)
(0.875)
2.828
2.937
(1.129)
(1.112)
3.915
4.017
(0.895)
(0.835)
2.753
3.130
(1.290)
(1.108)
3.688
3.752
(1.020)
(0.996)
3.303
3.374
(1.064)
(1.066)
2.807
2.893
(1.213)
(1.200)
3.577
3.683
(1.133)
(1.000)
4.211
4.260
(0.822)
(0.740)
3.588
3.701
(1.003)
(0.943)
3.505
3.673
(0.872)
(0.828)
2,467
4,470

Table A2
Definitions of Job Task Measures from the BIBB/IAB and Descriptive Statistics for 1979 and 1998
Tasks

Definition

Interpersonal
Negotiating, lobbying, coordinating and organizing; teaching or training; selling, buying, advising, or advertising;
Interactions
entertaining or presenting; serving and accommodating; and helping others
- Directness
Negotiating, lobbying, coordinating and organizing; teaching or training; selling, buying, or
advertising; and entertaining or presenting
Serving and accommodating; advising customers and clients; and helping out others
- Caring
Non-routine
analytic
Routine
cognitive
Routine
manual
Non-routine
manual
n

Research, evaluation, and planning; making plans, constructions, designing, and sketching; and working out
rules/prescriptions
Calculating, and bookkeeping; correcting of texts/data; measuring length/weight/temperature
Operating or controlling machines, and equip machines
Repairing or renovation of houses/apartments/machines/vehicles; and restoring of art/monuments

Note: All data are taken from the BIBB/IAB 1979 and 1998.

54

Mean (st.dev.)
1979
1998
5. 862
35.034
(10.101)
(31.795)
4.728
31.213
(9.208)
(28.928)
6.996
38.855
(14.474)
(48.743)
4.431
15.946
(13.285)
(26.701)
14.021
20.429
(20.384)
(40.319)
33.619
13.735
(47.241)
(34.422)
5.457
16.111
(13.228)
(36.764)
25,105
34,343

Table A3
Definitions of Sociability from the British Cohort Study at Age 16 (1986 Wave)
Measure
Self description of
character: caring
Self description of
character:
popular/outgoing
Number of friends
Social behavior
during school term
and holidays

Social behavior
during leisure time

Variable Construction

Sociability Variables
Definition
Loving; Taking part in charity Shy (reversely entered); and Quiet (reversely entered)
Friendly; Outgoing; Shy (reversely entered); and Quiet (reversely entered)
Boy or Girlfriend; Number of best friends; Number of friends in school; and Number of friends
outside school
Stay at home with boy/girlfriend; Stay at home of boy/girlfriend; Go to the cinema etc. with
boy/girlfriend; Stay at home with other friends; Spend time at the homes of other friends; Go with
friends to cinema, disco etc.; Go out with friends do nothing special; Stay at home by yourself or with
family; Go out by myself or with family; Go to a friend’s house; Have friends round to my house; Go
to a youth club/organization; Go out with brothers/sisters; Do community/volunteer work; Go to a
meeting/political club; Go out with my boy/girlfriend; and Go out with friends
Go to a friend’s house; Have friends round to my house; Go to a youth club/organization; Go out with
brothers/sisters; Do community/volunteer work; Go to a meeting/political club; Go out with my
boy/girlfriend; and Go out with friends

Note: All data are taken from the 1986 wave of the 1970 British Cohort Study.

55

The questions asked are
whether you are engaged in
the social activities listed in
the previous column. The
response categories of the
social activities are generally
ranging from 0 tot 5. We
made dummy variables 0=0
and 1=1-5. For the number
of friends we just used the
absolute number of friends.
Other individual variables,
such as having a
boy/girlfriend are dummy
variables

Mean
(Standard
Deviation)
2.270
(1.102)
2.772
(0.861)
12.780
(5.482)
19.118
(9.513)

17.023
(4.048)

Table A4
Correlation between Interpersonal Style Measures and Worker Background Characteristics in Britain and Germany
A. British Skills Survey 1997
Directness
Caring
Interpersonal Interactions
Hourly Wage
Level of Education
Female
Age

Directness

Caring

0.594***
0.805***
0.439***
0.409***
0.071
0.111*

0.862***
0.144**
0.207***
0.232***
0.028

Directness

Caring

0.651***
0.840***
0.495***
0.358***
0.087
0.100*

0.868***
0.336**
0.380***
0.285***
0.050

Interpersonal
Interactions

0.277***
0.323***
0.184***
0.068

Hourly Wage

Level of Education

Female

0.353***
-0.178***
0.158***

0.143**
-0.169***

-0.056

Hourly Wage

Level of Education

Female

0.284***
-0.180***
0.119***

0.112**
-0.248***

0.048

B. British Skills Survey 2001
Directness
Caring
Interpersonal Interactions
Hourly Wage
Level of Education
Female
Age

Interpersonal
Interactions

0.378***
0.367***
0.226***
0.025

56

C. German BIBB/IAB 1979
Directness
Caring
Interpersonal Interactions
Hourly Wage
Level of Education
Female
Age

Directness

Caring

0.424***
0.898***
0.042***
0.290***
0.093
0.048**

0.559***
-0.008
0.043***
0.054***
0.018*

Directness

Caring

0.264***
0.442***
0.085***
0.310***
0.087
0.060**

0.440***
-0.005
0.095***
0.229***
-0.024**

Interpersonal
Interactions

0.077***
0.211***
0.187***
0.054**

Hourly Wage

Level of Education

Female

0.117**
-0.095***
0.054***

0.048**
-0.079***

-0.015*

Hourly Wage

Level of Education

Female

0.188***
-0.078***
0.064***

0.029*
-0.125***

-0.047***

D. German BIBB/IAB 1998
Directness
Caring
Interpersonal Interactions
Hourly Wage
Level of Education
Female
Age

Interpersonal
Interactions

0.097***
0.337***
0.095***
0.042**

Note: The British data are taken from the BSS 1997 and 2001.The German data are taken from the BIBB/IAB 1979 and 1998. *** indicates significant correlation coefficients
at the 1 percent level; ** at the 5 percent level and * at the 10 percent level.

57

Table A5
The Mean Importance of Caring and Directness for the 25 Largest Occupations in Britain
Job Tasks
Occupation Name
Directness
Technical and wholesale sales representatives
3.983
Marketing and sales managers
3.727
Software engineers
3.350
Production, works and maintenance managers
3.510
Managers and proprietors in service industries n.e.c.
3.321
Other financial institution and office managers n.e.c.
3.407
Computer analyst/programmers
3.035
Metal working production and maintenance fitters
2.800
Storekeepers and warehousemen/women
2.743
Secondary (and middle school deemed secondary) education teaching professionals
3.495
Nurses
3.484
Welfare, community and youth workers
3.231
Educational assistants
3.099
Accounts and wages clerks, book-keepers, other financial clerks
2.649
Primary (and middle school deemed primary) and nursery education teaching professionals
3.080
Clerks (n.o.s.)
2.705
Counter clerks and cashiers
2.707
Cleaners, domestics
1.873
Care assistants and attendants
2.930
Filing, computer and other records clerks (including legal conveyance)
2.533
Sales assistants
2.488
Drivers of road goods vehicles
1.824
Local government clerical officers and assistants
2.430
Other secretaries, personal assistants, typists, word processor operators n.e.c.
2.167
Receptionists
2.304

Interpersonal
Caring
Ratio
4.394
0.906
4.298
0.867
3.949
0.848
4.243
0.827
4.179
0.795
4.332
0.786
3.920
0.774
3.685
0.760
3.620
0.758
4.621
0.756
4.816
0.723
4.597
0.703
4.421
0.701
3.813
0.695
4.663
0.661
4.105
0.659
4.168
0.649
2.889
0.648
4.528
0.647
4.040
0.627
4.167
0.597
3.173
0.575
4.276
0.568
4.000
0.542
4.517
0.510

Math
Absolute
0.411
0.571
0.599
0.733
0.858
0.925
0.885
0.885
0.877
1.126
1.332
1.366
1.322
1.164
1.583
1.400
1.461
1.016
1.598
1.507
1.679
1.349
1.846
1.833
2.213

3.895
3.485
3.265
3.716
3.297
3.765
3.466
3.224
3.043
3.485
3.030
2.804
3.279
4.136
3.530
3.167
3.403
2.238
2.125
2.931
2.884
2.273
3.000
2.719
2.583

Reading/ Physical
Writing
3.999
2.408
3.716
1.944
3.787
1.803
3.861
2.265
3.305
2.754
3.912
1.947
3.449
2.096
3.638
3.856
3.353
3.514
4.233
2.691
4.165
3.412
4.051
2.403
3.336
2.807
3.691
1.926
4.230
2.683
3.557
2.157
3.569
2.313
2.682
3.392
3.629
3.559
3.509
2.316
2.976
3.224
2.979
3.616
3.754
2.518
3.643
2.293
3.628
2.341

Note: All data are from the BSS 1997. The measures of the importance of job tasks are the means of the importance of a task within the specific occupation. For
reading/writing the occupational average of the two is taken. Ratio is computed as the ratio of directness and caring in an occupation. Absolute is defined as the absolute
difference between directness and caring in an occupation.

58

Table A6
Definitions of Job Task Measures from the Dictionary of Occupational Titles in 1977
Task

Variable

DOT definition

Mean
(st. dev.)

Mean
(st. dev.)
Women

Directness

Direction, control or
planning (DCP)
Influencing people
(INFLU)
DOT Interest Factor

Adaptability to accepting responsibility for the direction, control or planning of an activity
Adaptability to influencing people in their opinions, attitudes or judgments about ideas or things
A preference for activities resulting in prestige or esteem of others as opposite to a preferences
for activities resulting in tangible productive satisfaction

Directness
Caring

Feeling, ideas or facts
(FIF)
Dealing with people
(DEPL)
DOT Interest Factor

Adaptability to situations involving the interpretation of feelings, ideas or facts in terms of
personal viewpoint
Adaptability to dealing with people beyond giving and receiving instructions
A preference for activities involving business contacts with people as opposite to a preference
for activities of a scientific or technical nature

Caring

Note: The data are taken from the U.S. Department of Labor (1972).

59

0.208
(0.284)
0.110
(0.244)
0.048
(0.373)
0.366
(0.674)
0.018
(0.087)
0.468
(0.388)
0.265
(0.475)
0.751
(0.772)

0.177
(0.259)
0.106
(0.212)
0.075
(0.293)
0.358
(0.592)
0.018
(0.080)
0.582
(0.378)
0.358
(0.489)
0.958
(0.749)

Men
0.233
(0.301)
0.114
(0.231)
0.026
(0.426)
0.373
(0.732)
0.018
(0.092)
0.377
(0.372)
0.191
(0.449)
0.586
(0.749)

