                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    TAXATION, WAGE VARIATION,
                          AND JOB CHOICE



                          James N. Brown

                         Harvey S. Rosen



                     Working Paper No. 1284




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            March 1984




This work was supported in part by the National Bureau of Economc
Research, the Hoover Institution, and the Industrial Realtions
Section of Princeton University. We are grateful to members of the
Microeconomnics Seminar at the University of Virginia and the Labor
Workshop at the University of Pennsylvania for useful suggestions.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #128)4
                                               March 198)4




                Taxation, Wage Variation and Job Choice



                                  ABSTRACT



     This paper examines the effect of earnings taxes on the variability

of wages over time. We estimate a "hedonic wage locus" which indicates

how the market allows individuals to substitute the mean level of the

wage for its variability across jobs. Information from this locus is

used to estimate the parameters of individuals' indifference curves

between the mean and temporal variation of hourly wages. On the basis

of these utility function parameters, we predict that lowering the rate

of taxation on earnings would on average lead workers to choose jobs

with a higher pre—tax mean wage and with greater wage variation.




                                              James N. Brown and
                                              Harvey S. Rosen
                                              Department of Economics
                                              Princeton University
                                              Princeton, NJ 085)4)4
                                               (609) 452—1tOOO
I.    Introduction


     According to standard theoretical considerations, a worker chooses

that job (among those feasible) whose characteristics maximize his

utility. In the process, the worker equates his marginal rate of

substitution between any two job attributes with the marginal rate of

transformation between them. As the individual's economic environment

changes, so too may these marginal rates of substitution and transfor-

mation, leading to a change in the characteristics of the worker's opti-

mal job package. In particular, one might well expect the worker's tax

situation to affect his choice.

     In this paper, we examine the effect of earnings taxes on one

important job attribute, the variability of wages over time. In our

model, we assume that each job can be characterized by the mean and

variance of hourly wages over time. These are calculated using longi-

tudinal data, and the results used to estimate a "hedonic wage locu"

which indicates how the market allows individuals to substitute the

mean level of the wage with its variability across jobs. We use the

information obtained from this locus to estimate the parameters of

individuals' indifference curves between the mean and temporal variation

of hourly wages. Given these utility function parameters, we then pre—

dict how individuals' job choices would change in response to alter—

native proportional rates of taxation on earned income. The results

indicate that lowering the rate of taxation on earnings would on average

lead workers to choose jobs with a higher pre—tax mean wage and with

greater wage variation.
                                    —2—

     In Section II, we model an individual worker's choice of wage

variability and demonstrate that wage variability may     increase   or

decrease utility. To the extent wage variability Is foreseen and the

worker is able to increase his labor supply in high wage years,

variability is desirable. On the other hand, to the extent wage

variability is not foreseen and the worker is risk averse, it is

undesirable. Our    discussion   formalizes this distinction and shows

its Implications.

     In section III we adopt specific functional forms so that the

theory can be used as the basis for empirical analysis, which follows

in Section IV. Section V concludes the paper with some suggestions for

future research.



II. Theoretical Considerations


     Each worker chooses a job that is characterized by a particular

combination of mean and temporal variation In the hourly wage. In this

section, we begin by considering the worker's preferences for mean and

variation in hourly wages. We then consider, in turn, the worker's

opportunity set for the choice of a job and the optimal job choice.



     A. The Worker's Preferences for Mean and Variation in Hourly Wages


         Consider an individual at the beginning of his working life

who, having accumulated some given level of education, is choosing from

a set of alternative lifetime jobs. At each job, the derived demand
                                 —3—

schedule for the worker's services will generally embody some variation,

due to variation in the supply of complementary and substitutable fac—

tors of production or in the demand for final products. As a result,

the hourly wages paid on each job, although perhaps constant over some

intervals (e.g., within years) will generally vary across intervals

(e.g., across years). Some of this variation may be foreseen by the

worker but, in general, some portion of this variation will not be

foreseen.

     Wage variation that is not foreseen by the worker complicates the

worker's interteinporal allocation of the lifetime wealth offered by any

job and may reduce the worker's realized lifetime utility. Neverthe-

less, to the extent that the worker can benefit from the opportunities

for substitution created by variable wages, exposure to wage variation

may still be considered a good, even though some or all of that

variation may be unpredictable to the worker. Whether the worker pre-

fers or dislikes exposure to wage variation will depend on two things:

first, the degree to which that variation can be predicted and second,

the worker's tastes ——in particular, the overall concavity of the

worker's utility function and the substitutability between the various

arguments of that function.

     To illustrate these points, consider a worker whose lifetime

utility function is given by


         (1)
                    U(C1, L1, C2, L2, •..,   C,   LN)


where N denotes the length of the individual's working life,
                                                                  C
                                 —4—

denotes consumption of market goods in period i, L denotes the pro-

portion of the time endowment devoted to leisure in period i, and

where U(s) is assumed to be an everywhere Continuous, twice differen-

tiable, strictly concave function. Assume that the worker can borrow

and lend freely at a constant rate of interest, but is constrained to

have zero net assets at the end of his working life. Ignoring taxes,

the worker's budget constraint is given by

                        N
                    A + [w.(1—L) —     C}(1+r)1    =   0
          (2)
                      1=1 -    -

where   A denotes the initial level of assets,    w denotes the hourly

wage in period 1, and r is the rate of interest. Assume also that

the wage in period i is given by


          (3)       w. =   i+   + v

where c1 denotes a zero—mean, non—stochastic component of the period—

I wage which Is foreseen by the worker prior to job choice; and v1 denotes

a zero—mean component of the period—i wage which is stochastic to the

worker prior to job choice, but which becomes fully known to the worker

immediately after job choice.' We define:




  'For example, c might represent an anticipated trend component of
   earnings attriutable to seniority—related compensation, while
   might represent unanticipated job— or employer—specific factors
   revealed to the worker only after the worker's job choice has been
  made.
                                    — 5—



         (4)    Var (c1) =        for    all I

                              2
                Var (v1) =        for   all I


                Coy (c., c) =


                Coy (v1, v.) =


                Coy (c1, v) = 0         for all 1, j.


Given these assumptions, the actual wage sequence to be realized by the

worker is uncertain prior to job choice, but becomes fully known by the

worker immediately after job choice. Thus, the criterion on which the

worker's job choice In period zero rests is


         (5)         E0V(w1, ..., WN; A,r)


where V(.) denotes the indirect utility function associated with

equation (1). In this expression, the expectation is taken over the

"period zero' distribution of wages in all future periods.


     Taking a second—order expansion about the point (p, ...,            u; A,r),
expression (5) can be restated as


         (6)         E0V(W1, ..., WN; A,r)


        V(ii, ...,   i; A,r) +4E0                       (w1—iixw-i.i).


        Applying Roy's identity, expression (6) can be simplified to
                                  — 6—



         (7)       E0V(w1, ...,          A,r)


                                          N N
                   i;   A,r) +4X(.)                (1+r)' S1.() p1.
                                                            3     3
                                         1=1 j=1



                                                (1+r) S.(.) -
                                  1=1 j=1




                 +4                   (1+r)
                                                   (1-L1(•)) (1_L(.)) 1ij


where X(.) denotes the marginal expected utility of wealth in period

 zero', S denotes the Slutsky—compensated derivative of time worked

in period I with respect to the wage in period j, and where all func-

tions are evaluated at the point (it,      ..., p;   A,r).

     As is evident from expression (7), the expected level of lifetime

utility associated with any particular job depends (approximately) on

two basic things: The mean level of wages realized over the worker's

lifetime and the variance—covariance structure of those wages. To a

second—order approximation, a higher mean level of wages, ceteris pan—

bus, increases the first term on the right hand side of (7) without

altering the other terms, so it clearly Increases utility. The effect

of the variance—covariance structure of wages is less clear, however.

     One fundamental determinant of this effect, shown in the second

and third terms on the right hand side of (7), is the substitutability

(as measured by the S1 ) between the various arguments of the worker's

utility function. Ceteris paribus, an Increase in the covariance of
                                   —7—

wages in period i and j       increases expected utility If leisure in

periods I and j       are substitutes, and decreases expected utility If

leisure in periods I and j are complements. Also, the more respon-

sive is the demand for leisure In any period i to the wage in period

i, the more positive is the effect of wage variance on expected

utility.2

       The second fundamental determinant of the effect of wage variation

on expected utility Is evident In the last terra on the right hand side

of (7). This term reflects the effect on expected utility of the

worker's ex ante uncertainty regarding lifetime wealth.3 The assump-

tion of perfect foresight immediately after job choice guarantees that

the uncertainty of wages prior to job choice has no effect on the

worker's ultimate consumption and labor supply behavior. It therefore

guarantees that this uncertainty will have no effect on the lifetime

utility realized by the worker, conditional on any given hourly wage

sequence. Nevertheless, as long as A is diminishing in wealth, the

unconditional period "zero" expected lifetime utility for the worker

generally Is reduced by this uncertainty. Only in the case where the

worker's marginal utility of wealth Is constant          = 0)   Is this

effect absent.

       It is natural to measure the strength of the worker's "taste' for



  2Strict concavity of the worker's utility function Implies that the
   Sjj matrix In (5) is positive semi—definite, and thus that the
   second and third terms on the right hand side of (6) are positive.
 3              N N
     The term      (1+rY1(1—Lj(•))(1—L1(.)i1ja, is equal to the
           1=1 j=1
  period "zero" variance of realized lifetime wealth.
                                            —8—


wage variation by the marginal change in the mean value of hourly wages

that would just compensate the worker for a marginal increase in the

variation of hourly wages about their mean value. Assuming for siinpli—

city that £        and   v are uncorrelated over time, differentiation

of expression (7) with respect to .i,                     a2,       and      shows that

the compensating differential asssociated with fully foreseen wage

variation can be expressed as


                                            N
                                                 (1-Er)     S
                                                                ii
     (8a)                            —  _________
                                     _.!_1
                    dE0V(.) = 0                  (1+r) [l—L.(.)]
                                                           1
                                           1=1


while   the compensating differential associated with intially unforeseen

wage variation Is




                                                  (l+r) {s1 i3X(.)
                                                              A A [1—L(.)]2]
     (8b)                               1 i=l
            9a2
              V              = 0
                                    =2                          N
                  dE0v(.)                                            (1+r)1 [1—L(.)]
                                                            1=1



From these expressions, we can make two observations.

        First, from expression (8a), It can be seen that the worker unam-

biguously prefers wage variation which can be foreseen to the absence of

such variation. Wreover, the greater the worker's ability to respond

to variable wages (more precisely, the larger the S1 ), the greater
                                    —9—

will be the worker's preference for such wage variation. Second, expres-

sion (8b) indicates that the worker may either prefer or dislike wage

variation that is initially unforeseen. As with foreseeable wage

variation, the worker's preference for initially unforeseen wage

variation Is more positive, the greater the worker's ability to substi-

tute leisure across periods. Unlike the case of foreseeable wage

variation, however, the uncertainty regarding realized wealth that is

implied by initially unforeseen wage variation introduces an additional,

negative effect on the worker's expected utility. This effect is more

negative, the greater the overall concavity of the workers utility func-

tion (or more precisely, the more negative the value of             Without

further restrictions on the worker's utility function, therefore,

expression (8b) cannot be signed.

     At this point, it is important to emphasize that our empirical

focus in this paper is on wage "variation" rather than wage "uncertainty".

We cannot observe directly the indicators of wage uncertainty that are

relevant to individuals. We see only ex post wage variation, some com-

ponent of which may have been forseen by the worker. Given this fact,

any empirical analysis of workers' responses to wage uncertainty must

rest on some prior assumption linking ex post wage variation to ex ante

wage uncertainty.4 Rather than employ such an assumption, we choose

Instead to focus simply on wage variation.




 4For some examples, see Weiss [1972], Abowd and Ashenfelter [1980],
  and Johnson [1980].
                                 —10—

      In the absence of further information regarding worker's prefer-

ences and regarding the exact distinction between foreseen and unfore-

seen variation for each individual, the most we can say is that the

worker will be more likely to prefer wage variation, the more fore-

seeable that variation is, and the greater the worker's intertemporal

substitutability of leisure. The more rapidly diminishing the worker's

marginal utility of wealth, the more likely it is that the worker will

be observed to require a positive wage premium for exposure to wage

variation.

      More explicitly, if we define a as the variance of the wage,

then on the assumption that

                                     = aa2
                                 V       C




the assumption that s and v are uncorrelated implies that


                              aC2= (l\2
                                    l+c w


and

                              a2 = (——-)a2
                               v    l+c* w


Consequently, expressed in terms of the observable a2 rather than the

unobservable components a2 and a , expression (7) becomes
                                                     —11—


(9) EV (w1, w2, ...,               w1   A,r)



                        p; A,r) +4      X(.)                (l+rY
                                                                    s1 {()Pjj +


       +                           (l+r)
           4                                    (l_L1(.))(l_L(.))[(_)i1Ja2


while the compensating differential observed for ci2 (as opposed to

a2     or a)       iS   given by


                                                            1 X(.)
(10)       .i
           —                            =
                                            1
                                            —
                                            2
                                                 N
                                                           +
                                                 (1+rY [sf1 2 A 1-4-a                [l—L(.)]
                                                                                                2

                                                1=1
               2                                              N
                                                                   (l+r) [l—L1(')]
                   dE0V(.) = 0                               1=1



As discussed above, it can be seen from expression (10) that the

worker's compensating differential will be larger as the share of unpre-

dictable wage variation in total wage variation is larger (a larger),

and as the worker's marginal utility of wealth is more rapidly

diminishing (aA              larger negative). The compensating differential

will be smaller as the worker is more able to substitute leisure across

periods (S11 larger negative).



           B. The Worker's Opportunity Set for Combinations of_Mean and
               Variance in Hourly Wages


           Across individuals, one might expect to find considerable

variety in tastes for wage variation. In terms of our theoretical
                                    —12—

model, the indirect utility function V(.) might   differ   from person

to person, or the relative shares of       and a2 In total wage
variation might differ from person to person. At the same time,

profit—maximizating firms, because of the nature of their tech-

nologies, might find it in their Interests to offer employees dif-

ferent combinations of i   and   a• Using Rosen's [1974] terminology,

In equilibrium, workers and firms are perfectly matched when their

respective "offer" and "value" functions for variability and return

are tangent, and the value of the tangent gives the implicit price of

variability in terms of expected return. The joint envelope of all

offer and value functions comprises a "market locus", which shows how

the market will permit workers and employers to substitute variability

and return.

       Of course, wage variation is not the only important job

attribute. Presumably, individuals and firms are matched on the basis

of a large number of individual and firm—specific characteristics.

Denoting these other characteristics by the vector Z, the constraint

facing the worker In his choice of a specific combination of mean and

variance in the hourly wage can be summarized by the market locus,


       (11) p= f(a2,Z).


       It is important to emphasize that we assume equation (11) to be

generated by the optimizing behavior of firms and workers. The rela-

tionship between the level of wages (or earnings) and its variance has

been studied in a number of quite different contexts. For example,
                                      —13—

simple mathematical models in which income at any time is modelled as a

sum of random shocks from previous periods yield predictions on the

mean—variance relationship in income, and similar arguments could be

applied to wages.5 Obviously, any observed empirical relationship can

be consistent with a large number of interpretations, and we have found

no way to "prove' that ours is better than such a mechanistic point of

view. We merely note that an equilibrium interpretation is in the

spirit of much other theoretical and empirical work on labor markets.

(See for example, C. Brown [1980].)

       Theory provides few clues as to the functional form of the

market locus given by (11). In part, this indeterminacy results from

the ambiguity involved in characterizing the individual worker's pre-

ferences for mean and variance in the hourly wage. In addition, the

presence of heterogeneous tastes and technologies in the market rein-

forces this indeterminacy. At this very general level, aside from the

existence of some equilibrium relation such as (11), theory provides

little structure for data analysis.



       C. The Worker's Optimal Job Choice


       Utility maximization requires that the 'worker equate his margi-

nal rate of substitution between i' and a2 to the marginal rate of


transformation implicit in the set of wages for jobs among which he




  5See Mincer [19701 for a critical discussion of such models.
                                    —14—

can choose. More explicitly the worker's optimal choice of a job is

characterized by the following equality:

               di                    _df(.)
                                        da
                    W dE0V(.) = 0          W


where f(s) is given by (11). Given the theoretical ambiguities dis-

cussed above, condition (12) yields no unambiguous comparative

statics results. As a basis for estimation of worker preferences,

however, it can be of value. Coupled with the hypothesis of un-

changing preferences and augmented by empirical information, moreover,

condition (12) can serve as a basis for the prediction of worker be-

havior. The following section exploits this fact by stating equation

(12) in a specific form suitable both for the estimation of worker

preferences and the subsequent prediction of worker behavior.



III. Empirical Specification


       Empirical implementation of equation (12) requires a specific

functional form. Consider first the right—hand—side of (12), which is

derived from (11). The first issue in specifying (11) is the selec-

tion of the variables in the vector Z. As noted above, jobs are

characterized by a large number of attributes.6 We make no attempt

to include all possible attributes. Instead, we consider only two,

education (ED) and years of experience (EXP), which have been shown in




      Brown [19801 discusses a number of possibilities.
                                    —15—

other studies to be important.

          With respect to the form of f(), we note that deriving a

closed form expression for the market locus on the basis of under-

lying utility and production functions is virtually an intractable

problem. (This point has been emphasized by Rosen [1974].) In our

view, the most sensible approach is to choose a convenient functional

form that fits the data fairly well. We have selected the commonly used

semilogarithmic specification


          (13) in k =     + *1EDk + *2"k + *3"k + *4k +


where the subscript k indexes individuals.7 (For simplicity we

suppress the w subscript on o In equation (13) and hereafter.)

          If the usual additive error term is appended to (13), then it

can be estimated by ordinary least squares.8 Note that although the

    are identical across individuals, the implied values of
                                                                a



depend upon levels of 1'k and ak, and hence vary from person to

person.



  7Several other functional forms were examined, including some which
   allowed for Interaction among the right hand side variables. The
   substantive Implications of these other functional forms were not
   much different from those of (13). These results are reported in
   the Appendix.

  8Although the individual chooses p and   jointly, ordinary least
   squares estimation of (13) is nevertheless appropriate within a
   single market, if within such a market all participants face the
   same market locus. In contrast, going across markets, differen-
   ces In opportunity sets may lead to wealth effects on choice
   that require simultaneous equations methods in the estimation of
   (13).
                                    —16—

      We turn next to the parameterization of preferences. In

keeping with the earlier theoretical treatment of the worker's pre-

ferences for mean and variation in hourly wages, we seek a specifica-

tion that does not constrain the sign of the worker's marginal rate of

substitution between k and          It would also be desirable if the

specification did not constrain the relation between this marginal

rate of substitution and the overall level of wealth (as measured by

      Nor should the specification predetermine the effect of a tax

change upon the pre—tax mean and variation of the wage.9 At the

same time, however, the chosen specification should economize on the

number of parameters to be estimated and should provide a convenient

basis for subsequent prediction. We assume that the indirect utility

function for the kth worker is given by'°


                                   N
      V(w1,w2 ..., wN;   A,r) =
                                  i=l
                                      [i   —
                                               exp[_(Okwl)   kj]




where k is a parameter that varies across individuals, and          is

one minus the kth worker's marginal tax rate." If we approximate

this function by a second order Taylor series and then take the



  9As is well—known from the literature on taxation and portfolio be-
   havior, a tax can either increase or decrease the equilIbrium
   variability of a portfolio. See Feldstein [1969]. Similar con-
   siderations apply here.

 10This is the distribution function of the Weibull distribution. See
   Mood, Graybill and Boes [1974, p. 542].

 ''For simplicity, we assume the worker's marginal tax rate to be
   Independent of the worker's wage in period I • We interpret
  as Incorporating the Individual worker's values of A and r
                                           —17—

 expected value, we find that



        (14)
                                            k(okkk_1 + (l_)(ekpk)1J
                 k
                       dE0 V(.) = 0




        Estimates of the market locus (13) together with the first—

order condition (12) and slope of the indifference curve (14) enable

us to compute a value of 8i for each nd1v1dua1. From the market

locus, we know that for the kth individual, the marginal trade—off

between mean and variation of hourly wages is given by



       (15)
                       2
                           =   — (*4   + 2*Sck).
                               2ak

By the first—order condition, expression (15) must equal the value of

expression (14) for the kth individual:


               _____                   1            Bkl               1
       (16)
                2k     (*4+2*5ak =--       [8(Ou)     + (18k)(ekpk)       1




Equation   (16) does not yield a closed form expression for 8k' but a

solution can be found using numerical methods. Note that equation

(16) allows the calculation of a unique k for each Individual in the

sample. Unlike previous studies in this area (e.g., Weiss [1972]),

heterogeneity in tastes Is allowed.

       Using these estimates of k in conjunction with the opportunity

locus parameters, we can estimate each individual's response to a
                                    —18—

hypothetical change in the tax rate faced by that individual.

Specifically given      and ek,      (13)   and (16) can be regarded as two

equations in the two unknowns        and ak. Consider now a case In

which the tax rate of only the mth individual changes. In general,

when 0 changes, new values for p
      m                                  and a       are required to solve the
                                    ni           m
equations. The solution to this simultaneous non—linear system can be

found using numerical methods. In this way, we obtain predictions of

how variance and return combinations for this Individual would change

If his tax rate were modified.

       In the same way, we can repeat the exercise for each mdlvi—

dual, computing how his U*K and ak would change if he alone were to

face a change in his existing 0k •       Below we report the sample aver-

ages of the changes so generated.

       It is tempting to use these sample averages to predict the

aggregate response that might follow from a change in tax rates for

all workers. However, if every worker's tax rate were simultaneously

modified, the market locus itself would shift, leading to a further

readjustment not captured by the sample averages reported here. Only

if firms were homogenous could these sample averages be used to pre-

dict aggregate responses to general changes in tax rates. In this

case the market locus would coincide with the firm's value functions

and, because the locus would depend only on firms' preferences, any

change in exogeneous factors influencing workers' opportunity sets

(for example, tax rates) would leave the market locus unchanged and

would cause workers merely to relocate along this fixed locus. A more
                                     —19—

general analysis would allow for a "supply response" that would shift

the locus, but this is beyond our scope.'2

       In addition to calculating how taxes modify workers' selections
of k and k' j would         be useful to obtain some measure of the impact of

tax changes on welfare. Looking at the differences between mean wages

under alternative tax regimes is not enough, because the variability

of wages also changes. A natural way to take both the mean and

variance of wages associated with a given tax system into account Is

provided by the compensating differentials previously estimated.

       Specifically, within our framework, the expected utility for

the kth worker associated with any job can be approximated by the

linear function

                               +                22
       (17)
                 EOVk(•)           10k'k   + n2ekJk.

where the 's are parameters. A change in expected utility is given

by

       (18)
                 Eovk(s) 1°k'k + n2A(ekak).
       Neither        nor       can be observed directly, so the actual

effects on expected utility cannot be directly calculated. Neverthe—

less, a close alternative is possible. On the basis of equation (17),

expected utility on any job can be converted into monetary units by

dividing by




 '21n the literature using cross—sectional data to estimate the
   elasticity of hours of work with respect to the post—tax wage, it
   Is typically (Implicitly) assumed that the structure of before—tax
   wages Is invariant with respect to the tax change. The assumption
   of a fixed locus Is our analogue to this standard assumption.
                                         —20—


          (19)          E V(•)       + 0k'k + -'---   (Oa).
Equation (19) gives the approximate monetary value of the expected

utility on any job for any particular individual. (Recall that

is "like" dV/d.) From (19), it follows that for a discrete change

                 2
in k and

                        E0V (.)                           2 2
          (20)


Thus, given 21 , the              effect of any change on the monetary value of

expected utility for any individual can be calculated. Moreover,

unlike           or         taken separately, the ratio                is observable

——   it   is just the compensating variation in k that would leave the

individual's utility unchanged in the face of a marginal increase in

a. As indicated by equation (14), this compensating variation is

                                                      1
given by — [Bk(OkPk)               + (1_k)(Okiik) ].            Substituting   this

expression into (20), we find


                     EOVkS) =                             8k'+                 —       22
          (21) A
                       a1
                                °k'k      1
                                          1 Ik(0kPk)                1è6k11k)       A(OkcYk)

values of which corresponding to alternative tax rates are also reported

below.
                                     —21—

 IV.   Data   and Results


         A. Data

         Because our framework requires the computation of   i    and   a2
f or each worker, data that record individuals' wage rates over time

are required. We use data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics for

the years 1970 to 1976. Given that the model assumes individuals to

choose lifetime jobs, we restrict our sample only to those indivi-

duals who do not change jobs during the sample period. As Hall [1982]

has noted, lifetime jobs are indeed quite important in the U.S. eco—

nomy. We include only white males in order to avoid possible compli—

cations that might arise because of labor market discrimination and

anticipated career interruptions. After deleting a few observations

due to unusable data, we were left with 728 observations.

         The theory assumes that individuals respond only to real magni-

tudes, so all wage rates were converted to 1970 levels by deflating

with the Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer's Price Index (all

Items). The period—zero expected wage for each individual,       k was
calculated as the arithmetic mean of the individual's wage rates over

the seven—year period. The mean value of Uk in our sample was $4.77.

The variable         was calculated as the sample variance of the

wage.1-3 Its average value was $0.59. The other variables required




13We emphasize again that our focus is on "variation" of the hourly
  wage, rather than Its "risk" or "uncertainty". Nore elaborate
  methods for calculating the expected wage and its dispersion could
  have been used. Given the potential for inaccuracy in modelling
  expectations, however, It seemed to us desirable to use the
  simplest formulation possible.
                                   —22—

for estimation are education, experience and the marginal federal

income tax   rate.   These were measured by their 1976 values.14



        B. Results


        Our first step was to estimate the market locus. We estimated

the following relation:


(22) 'k= 4.638 + •O584EDk + .O371EXPk —                   + .OO476ak —
                                            .000S44EXPk                   8.19x106ak
           (0.74) (.00359)     (.00495)    (9.42x105) (4.81x104) (1.69x106)

                                                                          R2 =   0.55,

where the numbers in parentheses are standard errors. The coefficients

on education, experience and experience squared are similar in magnitude

to those that have been found in other studies. The coefficient on the

linear term in a is positive and that on the quadratic term is negative.

At low levels of          k increases as        increases, but at high


levels it decreases.15 Evaluated at the means, the elasticity of     'j




with   respect to a is .23.

        The model developed in Section II highlighted the theoretical in-

determinacy of the effect of        upon       In our empirical work, we




 14th our sample, the mean value for ED is 12.2 (std.dev.=3.01); for
   EXP, 26.2 (std.dev.=9.54); and for the marginal Federal income tax
   rate, 0.26 (std.dev.=0.0713).

 '5As mentioned above, we experimented with several functional forms.
   These results, which are reported in the Appendix, indicate that
   the implied values of k'k are not very sensitive to changes
   in functional form.
                                     —23—

find that the quadratic term in (22) does not dominate until        takes

on a value of $2.90, and in our sample, there are only a few obser—

vations for which         exceeds this value. Thus, we now see that for

most of the people In our sample, increases In a require a compen-

sating increase in p. The "positive" effect of wage variation asso-

ciated with inter—temporal substitutability is outweighed by the

"negative" effect associated with risk aversion. This result Is con-

sistent with recent research on Intertemporal labor supply, which

suggests that Intertemporal substitutIon elasticities are indeed quite

small. (See, e.g. MaCurdy [1981].)

       With equation (22) in hand, k/ak can be computed for each

individual, Substituting this and the individual's value of          Into

the first—order condition (16), we can calculate a k for each indivi-

dual. The average value of        in our sample was 0.541, with a sample

standard deviation of 0.105. The relatively large standard deviat±on

suggests considerable heterogeneity of tastes, a phenomenon that has

also been noted In studies of other types of labor supply decisions

(see Heckman and Willis [1977]).

       Finally, with estimates of k' we can predict how
                                                           ak, k' and
the money—equivalent value of the Individual's bundle would change

under alternative tax regimes. To Illustrate, we consider a case in

which each individual's tax rate is reduced by one—third, and use

equations (13) and (16) to find the new equilibrium values of

and ak .   We   then substitute these Into equation (21) to find

                  the money—equivalent value of the change in utility.
                                 —24—

In a second simulation, we compute the individual's new equilibria

when the tax is removed altogether, 0 = 1.   The results of this second

exercise must be regarded with particular caution, however, because

our parameter estimates are probably more reliable for analyzing local

than global changes.

       The first entry in row 1 of Table I shows the average expected

pre—tax marginal wage (ilk) under the status quo, the second when the

tax rate is reduced by one—third, and the third when the tax rate Is

zero. The second row gives the same Information for the temporal

standard deviation      of the wage. Our estimates Indicate that to

a first approximation, if tax rates were cut by one—third, the

average pre—tax wage would increase by about 1.2%, and its variability
                                                                  16
(measured by the standard deviation) would increase by about 5.0%.

Removing taxes altogether would increase the pre—tax wage and its

standard deviation by approximately 3.3% and 15.2% respectively.

       The third row of the table shows the average change in the ex-

pected marginal after—tax wage (0kilk) under the alternative regimes

As noted above, this measure Is likely to misrepresent the welfare

effect of a tax change, because it does not take into account that the

variability ofthe wage stream changes as well. To the extent that

individuals are averse to variability, the difference in net wages

overstates the welfare change, and vice versa. In row 4, we report




 16
   As emphasized above, it should be kept in mind that these implica-
   tions are only approximate, for they Ignore any changes in the
  market locus that might be Induced by a general change in taxes.
                                       —25--




                                     Table 1*



                                  Tax Simulations




                                               Tax Rate
                                               Reduced       Tax Rate
                                                 by          Equal to
                       Status Quo              One—Third       Zero


(1)    p                 $4.77                    $4.83      $4.93
                        (0.052)                   (0.053)    (0.054)

(2)    a                $0.59                     $0.62      $0.68
                        (0.017)                   (0.017)    (0.020)


(3)    t(Op)                                      $0.46      $1.41
                                                  (0.0095)     (.0291

(4)        1                                      $0.36      $1.04
           a1 E0V(.)                              (0.0068)   (0.019)




*Numbers in parentheses are standard errors of the means. Variables
are defined in the text.
                                   —26—

the approximate monetary equivalent of the utility change, which takes-

into account both changes in the mean wage and its variability.


This is —-              as defined by equation (21).
             E0V(.)),
       When taxes are lowered by one—third, the combined effect of the

higher pre—tax wage and the lower tax rate is to raise the average ex—

pected net wage by $0.46. The result in row 4 indicates that taking

the concomitant increase in wage variability into account lowers the

monetary equivalent value of the change to $0.36. Similarly, the

change in the net wage induced by setting tax rates equal to zero,

$1.41, exceeds the monetary equivalent value of $1.04

       We conclude that in the long run, tax reductions would induce

increases in both pre— and post—tax wage rates. However, due to

simultaneous increases in the variability of wages, measuring the

welfare effects by merely comparing changes in net wages would

substantially overestimate the welfare gain to Individuals.



V. Conclusions


       We have examined how taxes affect the trade—off between the ex-

pected level of the wage and its variance. The data we examine

indicate that reductions In tax rates would lead to a substantial

Increase In the level and variability of people's pre—tax wages.

Given the absence of any earlier analyses of this kind, it is dif-

ficult to say whether or not effects of the magnitude we have found

are "reasonable". To us, they seem well within the bounds of possibility
                                —27—

       A considerable amount of sensitivity analysis was done to

assure that our substantive results were not too dependent on par-

ticular choices of functional forms. Nevertheless, it may be the case

that generalizing the theoretical framework could change the outcome.

Several possibilities are worth pursuing:

       1.   In our model, the variability—return locus is invariant

with respect to changes in the tax rate. Although partial equilibrium

analysis of the relationship between taxes and risk—taking has a long

tradition (see Tobin [1958]), ideally one would want to analyze how

the locus itself would shift in response to changes in tax rates.

       2. The analysis ignores the interaction between financial

portfolio and occupational decisions. It might be, for example, that

people can buy assets whose returns are negatively correlated with
                                            17
their wages, and thereby hedge their risks.

       3. The individual's decision is taken in isolation from'-the

labor supply behavior of other. family members. There is a substantial

literature suggesting that husbands' and wives' hours of work deci-

sions are made jointly. It would be interesting to examine whether or

not spouses choose "job portfolios" which allow family variability to

be diminished.




 17Landskroner [19771 discusses the theoretical issues that surround
   this problem.
                                      —28—



                                  APPENDIX



         Theory   does not give much guidance with respect to the

appropriate functional form for the market locus. In this appendix,

we report two alternatives to the specification (13) described in

the text.


         1. Instead of a quadratic in a, its logarithm Is entered:


      ln p = 4.1443 + 0.0566ED + 0.0379EXP — 0.000554EXP2 + 0.192 £n a
            (0.082) (0.0037)    (0.00497)   (0.0000945)    (0.0135)

                                                                R2 =    0.55


The elasticity of p with respect to a is 0.192, a bit below the figure

of 0.23 generated by the equation in the text.


       2. The level of the mean wage, rather than its logarithm, is

the dependent variable. Interactions between education and experience

are included to allow for non—linearities:


in p = 172.16 — 27.91ED + 1.75 ED2 + 9.77EXP — .230 EXP2 + .583 EXP.ED
       (124.53) (14.01)      (0.45)          (4.26)   (0.052)   (0.214)


     +   2.39 a  — .00322 a2
         (0.262)   (0.001)
                                                                    =   0.55


The elasticity evaluated at the mean is 0.25
                                 —29—

                             BIBLIOGRAPHY


Abowd, John and Orley Ashenfelter, "Anticipated Unemployment, Tern—
       porary Layoffs and Compensating Wage Differentials", Princeton
       University, Industrial Relations Section Working Paper #137,
       June 1980.

Brown, Charles, "Equalizing Differences in the Labor Market', Quar—
       terly Journal of Economics, February 1980, pp. 113—134. —

Feldstein, Martin S., "The Effects of Taxation on Risk Taking",
       Journal of Political Economy 77, 1969, pp. 755—764.

Hall, Robert, "The Importance of Lifetime Jobs in the U.S. Economy",
       American Economic Review 72, No. 4, September 1982,
       pp. 716—724.

Heckman, James and Robert Willis, "A Beta—logistic Model for the Ana-
       lysis of Sequential Labor Force Participation by Married
       Women', Journal of Political Economy, February 1977, pp.27—58.

Johnson, William R., "The Effect of a Negative Income Tax on Risk—
       Taking in the Labor Market", Economic Inquiry, 18, July 1980,
       pp. 395—407.

Landskroner, Yoram, "Nornnarketable Assets and the Determinants of the
       Market Price of Risk', Review of Economics and Statistics,
       LIX, 4, November 1977, pp. 482—492.

MaCurdy, Thomas E., "An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Lif e—
       Cycle Setting, Journal of Political Economy 89, December
       1981, pp. 1059—1085.

Mincer, Jacob, "The Distribution of Labor Incomes: A Survey with
       Special Reference to the Human Capital Approach", Journal of
       Economic Literature, VII, No. 1, March 1970, pp. 1—26.

Mood, Alexander-N., Franklin A. Graybill and Duane C. Boes,
       Introduction to the Theory of Statistics, McGraw—Hill: New
       York, 1974.

Rosen, Sherwin, "Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets", Journal of
       Political, Economy 82, 1974, pp. 34—55.

Tobin, James, "Liquidity Preference as Attitude Toward Risk",   Review
       of Economic Studies 25, February 1958, pp. 65—86.
                                 —30--

Weiss, Yoram, "The Risk Element in Occupational and Educational
       Choices", Journal of Political Economy LXXX, November 1972,
       pp. 1203—1213.
