NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRESCRIPTION DRUG INSURANCE AND ITS EFFECT ON UTILIZATION AND
HEALTH OF THE ELDERLY
Nasreen Khan
Robert Kaestner
Swu Jane Lin
Working Paper 12848
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12848

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2007

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Nasreen Khan, Robert Kaestner, and Swu Jane Lin. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Prescription Drug Insurance and Its Effect on Utilization and Health of the Elderly
Nasreen Khan, Robert Kaestner, and Swu Jane Lin
NBER Working Paper No. 12848
January 2007, Revised June 2007
JEL No. I12,I18,J14
ABSTRACT
The Medicare Modernization Act was recently established, to provide limited drug coverage to the
elderly. However, there is limited evidence on how drug coverage might affect health. The goal of
this paper is to obtain causal effects of prescription drug coverage on drug use, use of other medical
services and health of the elderly. We use fixed-effects analysis to control for unmeasured person-specific
effects that may confound the relationships of interest. Results show prescription drug coverage, particularly
public coverage, significantly increased the utilization of prescription drugs, but had no discernable
effect on hospital admissions or health.
Nasreen Khan
University of New Mexico
Albuquerque, NM 87131-0001
nkhan@salud.unm.edu
Robert Kaestner
Institute of Government and Public Affairs
University of Illinois at Chicago
815 West Van Buren Street, Suite 525
Chicago, IL 60607
and NBER
kaestner@uic.edu

Swu Jane Lin
College of Pharmacy
Department of Pharmacy Administration
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60612
Slin5@uic.edu

In 2005, elderly (65 years of age or above) people in the United States spent $120.6
billion on prescription drugs or an annual out-of-pocket expenditure of $1,113 per person, which
is approximately 5% of the average income of an elderly person (KFF, 2005). These figures
become more worrying when one considers that a substantial portion of the elderly lack
insurance coverage for prescription drugs. For example in 2002, only 55% of the elderly had
uninterrupted prescription drug coverage (KFF, 2005). Advocates for the elderly worry that the
combination of rising costs of drugs, limited incomes, and limited insurance coverage creates
circumstances for many elderly to go without essential medication, which may have adverse
health outcomes. Indeed, studies have indicated that the elderly often skip doses, and that some
do not fill prescriptions due to cost (Steinman, Sands & Covinsky, 2001; Kitchman, et al. 2002;
Saver, Doescher & Jackson, 2004).
Until recently, Medicare did not cover outpatient prescription drugs. Elderly people had
to pay out-of-pocket or obtain coverage from other sources such as Public (Medicaid, Veterans
Affair and State Pharmaceutical Assistance Programs), employer-sponsored retiree benefits,
Medicare Advantage plans (HMO), and privately purchased Medigap policies. In 2003, the
Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Drug Act (MMA) established a
drug benefit for the Medicare population. The program, which started in January 2006, provides
prescription drug coverage through private firms with varying levels of cost sharing based on a
patient’s expenditures for prescription drugs (CCH, 2003).
While political objectives were an important part of the explanation of the timing and
design of the MMA, creation of the MMA was also motivated by a desire to improve the health
of the elderly by lowering the cost of prescription drugs, which in turn would stimulate their use
and improve health. Although plausible, there is relatively little evidence to support the

1

presumed causal relationships underlying the MMA. Few studies have examined the effect of
prescription drug coverage on prescription drug use among the elderly and even fewer have
examined its effect on health. This study examines the relationship between prescription drug
coverage, prescription drug utilization, hospitalization, and the health of the elderly population.
Analyses are based on a nationally representative sample from the Medicare Current Beneficiary
Survey (MCBS) from the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services (CMS) for years 19922000. The study paid particular attention to the non-random nature of prescription drug coverage
and the selection bias caused by it. The goal of the study was to obtain estimates of the effect of
prescription drug coverage on prescription drug utilization and health that can plausibly be given
a causal interpretation.

Conceptual Framework--Demand for Prescription Drug Coverage
Economic theory assumes that people are risk averse—they prefer a certain outcome to
an uncertain one even if the actuarial value of both is the same. Therefore, people will be willing
to pay to reduce the financial risk associated with illness by buying insurance. The willingness
to buy insurance increases with financial risk, which is a function of both the probability of
illness and the size of the expected loss associated with illness. Willingness to pay also depends
on the degree of risk aversion, as some people’s dislike for risk is stronger than others (Cutler &
Zeckhauser, 2000).
This model of the demand for insurance is consistent with recent trends in prescription
drug use. Technological advances in both pharmaceutical and medical treatments have increased
the importance of prescription drugs for maintaining good health, particularly for the elderly.
Costs of prescription drugs have also increased significantly over time. Thus there is

2

considerable uncertainty about the financial risk of illness as it relates to prescription drugs and
this uncertainty has increased over time. As a result, the demand for prescription drug coverage
among the elderly has been growing in recent years (see Figure 1). The greater desire for
prescription drug coverage among the elderly led, in part, to the MMA.
This model of insurance also has important implications for empirical analyses of the
effect of prescription drug coverage. It suggests that those with insurance will differ from those
without insurance. Those with insurance are likely to be at greater risk illness (need of
prescription drugs) and/or be more risk averse. This may be exacerbated by imperfect risk
adjustment. So prescription drug use would likely differ between those with and without
insurance even if there was no insurance. Most empirical studies have not adequately accounted
for this selection effect (Davis, Poisal, Chulis, Zarabozo, & Cooper, 1999; Lillard, Rogowski, &
Kington, 1999; Blustein, 2000; Adams, Soumerai, & Ross- Degnan, 2001). Thus, it is unclear
how to interpret estimates of the effect of prescription drug coverage reported in earlier studies,
as they might be seriously biased estimates of the causal effect of prescription drug coverage on
prescription drug utilization and health.
A second principle of the simple insurance model is that insurance-induced utilization of
prescription drugs could have relatively few health benefits. Most elderly people use
prescription drugs, even if they do not have insurance. So the increased use of prescription drugs
associated with insurance, what we will refer to as marginal use, may have fewer health benefits
than average use of prescription drugs. Moreover, lower prices are likely to result in some overutilization—for which the marginal costs are greater than the marginal benefits (Zweifel &
Manning, 2000).

3

The argument in support of the MMA is that providing prescription drug insurance would
make prescription drugs more affordable, thereby increasing their use. In turn, this increased use
would lead to better health. While the first part is likely true, the magnitude of the response to
insurance remains uncertain, as previous studies have not adequately addressed the selection
issue and, therefore, have not credibly identified the causal effect of prescription drug coverage
on utilization. More importantly, there is little evidence as to the effect of prescription drug
coverage on health. So even if utilization of prescription drugs increases with insurance
coverage, it is unknown whether such an increase would significantly improve health in a
general population.

Prior Literature
Our review of the literature is limited to studies of elderly populations that have been
controlled in some way for confounding factors. We begin with studies that use cross-sectional
data. Typically, these studies report that insurance coverage, or more generous insurance
coverage, results in relatively large increases in utilization of prescription drugs (DHHS, 2000).
Stuart and Zacker (1999) reported 15.5% lower annual prescription use for dual eligible
Medicare enrollees living in states that imposed Medicaid co-payments compared to those living
in states with no co-payments. Blustein (2000) found that drug coverage was associated with a
40% increase in antihypertensive drug purchases by hypertensive patients. Federman, Adams,
Ross-Degnan, Soumerai & Ayanian (2001) reported 84% lower odds of HMG-CoA reductase
inhibitors (statins) use among elderly with high cholesterol without drug coverage as compared
to those with employer-sponsored coverage. Lillard et al. (1999) found that insurance coverage
significantly increased the probability of any drug use by 12.2% for those with private insurance.

4

Several studies have used quasi-experimental research designs. The typical approach is
to compare use of prescription drugs pre and post a change in prescription drug coverage or
policy (e.g., an increase in co-payment, limit on number of prescriptions). For example,
Soumerai et al., (1991) analyzed the impact of a three prescriptions per month limit in the New
Hampshire Medicaid program on prescription drug use and hospitalization rates. New Jersey
was used as a comparison state. Their analysis was limited to non-institutionalized, white, dualeligible people who had an average of three prescriptions per month at baseline, including use of
at least one prescription drug for a chronic condition. Their results indicated a 35% decline in
drug use after the cap was imposed and no significant changes in hospitalization rates.
Johnson et al. (1997) and Chandra et al. (2007) examined the effect of increased
prescription drug cost sharing in Medicare managed care plans. Johnson et al. (1997) reported
that a 2$ (66%) increase in co-payment resulted in a significant decrease in prescription use of
approximately 8% and that it had no effect on hospitalization rates. Chandra et al. (2007)
calculated a price elasticity of demand of between -0.46 and -0.2 for Medicare PPOs and -1.4 for
Medicare HMO. These elasticities imply reductions in prescriptions filled from the pre-policy
mean of 2 to 6% in the PPO and 14.2% in the HMO. In addition, although they found a
significant increase in hospitalization rates in the HMO plan (which had increases in copayments for both prescription and office visits), there was no effect in the PPO plan (which only
had an increase in prescription co-payments).
Gawrisankaran and Town (2004) examined the effect of Medicare Managed Care
Organization (MCO) penetration with and without prescription drug coverage on elderly
mortality using payments to MCO’s as instruments. Their preferred (instrumental variables)
estimates indicated that a 10-percentage point increase in non-drug MCO penetration increased

5

mortality by 2.8%. Yang, Gilleskie and Norton (2004) analyzed the effect of supplemental
insurance, with and without prescription drug coverage, on prescription drug expenditure,
hospital services, and health using MCBS data. They used a dynamic panel model that modeled
health as a function of current and lagged utilization. Their results indicated drug coverage
increased drug expenditure by 20-35% over a 5-year period and decreased mortality slightly.
The results from these studies consistently show that prescription drug coverage, and the
lower cost sharing associated with it, increased utilization of prescription drugs by elderly
patients. However, there is a wide range of estimates, which likely reflects the different
populations examined. In addition, the observational studies lacked a credible strategy to
address selection (Stuart & Zacker, 1999; Lillard et al. 1999; Blustein, 2000; Federman et al.
2001). The quasi experimental studies, while better on this point, have either focused on lowincome (Medicaid) population (Soumeari et al. 1991) or on a specific managed care population
(Johnson et al. 1997; Gawrisankaran & Town, 2004; Chandra et al. 2007). Therefore, there is
little in these studies that can be used to draw inferences for a broader population of elderly.
With respect to health, there is almost no evidence of the effect of prescription drug coverage. It
is clear that additional studies are warranted. Specifically, studies that examine a representative
sample of elderly people, that pay special attention to issues of selection, and which include
prescription utilization and health as outcomes.

Empirical Strategy
The fundamental identification problem in estimating the effect of prescription drug
coverage on utilization and health is that the same person is never simultaneously observed with
and without prescription drug coverage. It is unlikely that the self-selection into coverage is

6

random. To address this issue, we use a multivariate regression model with controls for personspecific fixed-effects.1 Longitudinal data provides a potential solution to the selection problem
because over time people move into and out of prescription drug coverage. Thus, we can
observe the same person with and without coverage, although at two different points in time. If
this movement is random (conditional on measured covariates) then we can identify the causal
effect of prescription drug coverage. The time aspect of this approach, however, introduces the
possibility that unmeasured temporal influences (e.g., health status) might change, and bias the
estimates of the causal effect of prescription drug coverage.
There are two conditions that determine the efficacy of the fixed-effect analysis. First,
there should be sufficient variation in prescription drug coverage within individuals over time.
Stuart et al. (2001) reported that 10.6% of non-institutionalized elderly who did not have
coverage in 1995 found coverage in 1996, while 7.4% of those who had coverage in 1995 lost it
in 1996. Our analysis indicated that, on average, 14% of the sample either gained or lost
coverage each year (see Table 2). So there is evidence of significant within-person variation in
prescription drug insurance. The second condition is that movement into or out of prescription
drug insurance should be random, conditional on controlling for measured characteristics and
unmeasured person-specific fixed-effects.

To assess the plausibility of this assumption, we

conducted a variety of analyses. All of these analyses provided evidence consistent with the
assumption underlying the fixed-effect approach. The most compelling of these is a comparison
of changes over time in prescription drug use and health status between those who would
eventually obtain insurance (“treatment group”) and those who either always had insurance or
never had insurance (“comparison group”). The fixed-effect approach assumes that, changes in
prescription drug use and health over time would be the same for the “treatment” and

7

“comparison” groups conditional on covariates. We present the details of this analysis later, but
note here that there was no evidence, that trends in prescription drug use or health differed
between the “treatment” and “comparison” groups. Similar results were reported by Briesacher
et al. (2005) who examined medical care spending before and after gaining prescription
insurance coverage of Medicare beneficiaries. While we cannot definitively test the assumption
of the fixed effects approach, we believe the evidence supports the plausibility of this approach.
The fixed-effects approach is implemented using the following regression model:
Yist = α i + γ s + δ t + β PC ist + X ist Γ + eist
i = 1,..., N (persons)
s = 1,...,51 (states)
t = 1992,...2000 (years)

(1)

where the dependent variable (Y), prescription drug use for example, of a person (i) in state (s)
and at time (t) is a linear function of person-specific fixed-effects (αi), state ( γ ), and year ( δ )
effects. State and year dummy variables control for unobserved state or time invariant factors
that might be related to utilization. These could include differences in prescribing patterns across
geography or technological advances in medicine over time. The vector X represents time
varying individual characteristics that might affect drug use such as demographic and
socioeconomic factors. PC represents prescription drug coverage of person (i) in state (s) and at
time (t). Γ and β are the parameter estimates for individual level variable and prescription drug
coverage, respectively, and e is the error term and represents unmeasured aspect of utilization.
Estimates of equation (1) are obtained using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) for binary
dependent variables and Poisson regression for discrete outcomes. We recognize that OLS might
not be the most efficient estimator for binary dependent variables, but in the fixed-effect context,
common methods used in these circumstances (e.g. Logistic regression) have limitations that

8

make OLS preferred. For example, the fixed-effect Logistic model assumes that the personspecific fixed-effect has an infinite distribution and as a result drops observations for which the
dependent variable does not change over time even though there may be significant variation in
the right hand side variables. The Poisson model also has an advantage over other methods (e.g.,
Negative Binomial) in the fixed-effect context (Cameron & Trivedi, 1998; Allison & Waterman,
2000).2 In both cases (OLS and Poisson), standard errors need to be constructed to account for
likely biases.3 Therefore, we construct what are commonly referred to as robust standard errors
(Wooldridge, 2002). Despite the preference for OLS and Poisson, use of Logistic and Negative
Binomial regression yielded qualitatively similar results to those reported.

Data
The primary data source used in the analyses is the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey
(MCBS)—Cost and Use file from CMS. MCBS is a national representative, continuous, survey
of aged, disabled and institutionalized Medicare beneficiaries (CMS, 2000). The MCBS sample
is drawn from the Medicare enrollment file. When the survey started in 1991, there was no limit
on duration of follow-up. In 1994, it was decided that a panel will retire after 4 years. So for
some individuals there are more than 4 years of data. In addition, approximately 6,000 new
people are added to the survey each year to account for non-response and death, to maintain a
target sample size of 12,000 individuals. Each respondent is interviewed three times per year
over a 4-year period. However, the bulk of the information is recorded on an annual basis. The
response rate for the first round is 83% and for the 12th round is approximately 70% (ResDAC,
2003).
The first round of interviews starts in the fall of a given year. In the first round,
information regarding health and prescription insurance, insurance premiums, demographics,

9

health status, and information on access to care is collected. After the first round, subjects are
advised to retain receipts, bills, prescription vials, and any related paperwork to document their
prescription use. In the following rounds, information is obtained on prescriptions purchased,
charges incurred, and sources of payment for the prescriptions obtained since the previous
interview. Respondents are also asked about utilization of other medical services since last
interviewed. Aggregated information on the use of medical services from Medicare claims files
is also included in the data.
For the purpose of this analysis, data from 1992 to 2000 were used. The sample was
restricted to non-institutionalized elderly without end-stage renal disease. Individuals with partial
year information were removed from the analysis.4 We also excluded individuals from four US
territories and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. Finally, states with fewer than 100
observations were removed from the analysis due to estimation concerns with small cell size.
The final sample size was 73,490 person-years observation representing an average of 8,166
people per year and a total of 29,120 unique individuals. Of these 29,120 people, 17% had only 1
year of data5, 20% had 2 years of data available data, 51% 3 years, 9% 4 years, and 4% had 5
years of data.
MCBS respondents report multiple sources of prescription drug coverage and some have
coverage for only a few months in the year. Multiple coverage was due to elderly switching from
one source of coverage to another or having more than one source of coverage at the same time.
To account for this, insurance coverage was calculated for each month. Individual who reported
multiple coverage in a month were assigned to the more generous source in the following
hierarchical order: public, employer-sponsored, HMO, Medigap, and no drug coverage.6 A
similar hierarchy was used by Laschober et al. (2002). Finally, the proportion of months in each

10

category was calculated. These categories were then used as independent variable in the
regression analysis. In addition, any drug coverage was also defined as the proportion of months
with coverage (all sources combined).7
Several measures of utilization were constructed from self-reported data. Any
prescription use was a dichotomous variable equal to 1 if any prescription was reported and 0
otherwise. However, 86% of Medicare beneficiaries use at least one prescription drug in a year
(Davis, et al., 1999). As a result, measuring use in this way is limited. Therefore, utilization is
also measured using the reported annual number of prescriptions used.
We also examined the effect of prescription drug coverage on hospitalizations. Assuming
a beneficial effect of prescription insurance coverage on health, one would expect lower
hospitalizations rate for covered individuals, compared to those without prescription coverage.
Here prescription coverage would act as a substitute for hospitalization, which is desirable from
both consumer and provider perspectives because prescription drugs are less invasive, have
fewer complications and have lower cost.
We used a variety of measures of health. A dichotomous variable representing poor
health was constructed in which poor health was coded if self-reported health was fair or poor,
and good health represent if self–reported health was excellent, very good or good.
A detailed measure of health that is more directly related to prescription use might be
more appropriate. Several studies have indicated that prescription drugs improve functional
disability. Antiarthritic drugs have been shown to improve gait and walking ability (Hamilton et
al., 2001; Genovese et al., 2005; Canete et al., 2006). Similarly, studies have indicated that
antidiabetic treatment is associated with improved health status and quality of life (Reza, Taylor,
Towse, Ward & Hendra, 2002; Bech, Moses & Gomis, 2003). Prescription drugs used for

11

mental, cardiovascular and respiratory disorders have also been shown to improve quality of life
(Croog et al., 1986; Testa, Anderson, Nackley & Hollenberg, 1993; Israel, Cohn, Dube &
Drazen, 1996; Feldman et al., 2003; Hjalmarson et al., 2000; Roman et al., 2005) . Given this
evidence, we used activities of daily living (ADL) and instrumental activities of daily living
(IADL) as measures of health. These measures have been used extensively in prior studies of
elderly health (Blustein, 2000; Federman et al., 2001).
Activities of daily living include eating, dressing, bathing, walking, transferring into and
out of a chair, and using the toilet. Instrumental activities of daily living include making meals,
using the phone, going shopping, managing money, and doing light or heavy housework. The
minimum and maximum scores that an elderly person can have on the ADL and IADL are 0 and
6. Finally, a composite measure of functional disability was constructed that sums ADL and
IADL. The composite score values would; therefore range from 0 to12. Furthermore, as
prescription drugs can impact some measures of functional disability more than others, the effect
of prescription drug coverage on each item of the ADL and IADL was also assessed. Prior
studies have used each item separately and have shown that each individual item is a sensitive
measure of functional disability (Cook, Richardson, Pietroban, Silva & Turner, 2006).
The analysis controls for age, sex, race, education, urban residence, income, marital
status, and smoking status. All analyses include state and year fixed effects.

Results
Descriptive Analysis

12

The average characteristics of the entire sample and by drug coverage category are
presented in Table 1, which reports weighted estimates.8 The average age of the sample was 75
years; 58% were women and 11% were non-white. Almost every respondent was married at least
once in their life and 29% had at least some college education. Average annual income was
$25,546 (2000 dollars).
It was evident that there was significant use of prescription drugs by this population.
Almost every individual in the sample reported having at least one prescription use. The average
number of annual prescriptions was approximately 20. This figure included refills and
represented approximately 6 prescriptions per person among those with at least one prescription.
Sixty-two percent of the sample had prescription drug coverage with the majority of the coverage
provided by employers. In terms of health, 22% of the elderly respondents reported poor or fair
health.
Table 1 also shows descriptive information by prescription drug insurance coverage.
Elderly people with low incomes and who were living in rural areas were significantly less likely
to have any prescription drug coverage. Notably, the demographic and socio-economic
differences between those with and without coverage, while often statistically significant were
not very large. There was, however, significant heterogeneity among those who had coverage—
individuals covered by public programs were quite different than individuals covered by other
programs. People with public insurance coverage were similar to those without insurance in
terms of demographic and socio-economic characteristics. Therefore, when individuals with
different categories of drug coverage were combined, the socio-economic differences between
those with and without drug coverage were smaller.

13

Is there a relationship between prescription drug coverage, and prescription drug use and
health evident in Table 1? In the case of use of prescription drugs, those with insurance have
greater use and there is a gradient in terms of use according to the generosity of insurance.
Those with public insurance, who pay nothing out-of-pocket, have the greatest use and those
with Medigap, which is least generous, have the least use. Part of the greater use of prescription
drugs may be due to differences in health. Those with public insurance coverage were least
healthy. Generally, elderly without insurance coverage reported worse health than individuals
with employer, HMO or Medigap insurance coverage. Those in public programs had
significantly worse health compared to all others, even those without drug coverage.
Figure 1 shows trends in drug coverage from 1992 to 2000. In 1992, 52% of the elderly
reported no prescription drug insurance coverage. This dropped to 31% in 2000. Coverage from
public programs remained more or less stable. The gain in coverage came mostly from employer
sponsored and HMO coverage.9
Figure 2, shows number of prescriptions per person. Elderly in public coverage had the
highest prescription drug utilization. The graph also indicates that utilization increased over time.
The average number of prescriptions increased by 47% for public programs, 59% for employersponsored, 42% in HMO plans, and, 46% with Medigap coverage. For those without any drug,
coverage the number of prescriptions increased by 50%.
Was the increase in drug coverage and prescription use associated with improved health?
There does not seem to be any trend toward better health, except for those in public programs.
There was a slight improvement in functional disability (ADL plus IADL) for elderly in public
coverage (Figure 3). For the other groups, it remained stable. The proportion of elderly with poor
health also remained stable (Figure 4).

14

One issue critical to our research design was whether there was sufficient within-person
variation in prescription drug coverage. Table 2 shows this variation between year t and year t+1.
A series of 2-year constant sample panels were created for 92-93, 93-94, 95-96, 97-98, 98-99,
and 99-00. The first year of each panel was denoted by year t and the second year by year t+1,
and then the panels were aggregated. Individuals with only 1 year of data were not included in
this table. In each panel there were approximately 5,000 individuals. The data in Table 2 are
consistent with the trend shown in Figure 1 and indicate that individuals gained coverage over
the years. On average, 14% of the sample changed coverage in each year. The majority of gain
was through employer-sponsored coverage, but an equal number of individuals lost employer
sponsored coverage. The most stable coverage was public. Overall, the data in Table 2 suggest
that there was sufficient variation in prescription drug coverage to implement the fixed-effect
approach.

Regression Analysis
Tables 3 to 5 display estimates of the effects of prescription drug coverage on use of
prescriptions drugs and hospitalizations. Column 2 presents the estimates of the effect of
prescription drug coverage from models that do not include person-specific fixed-effects or
controls for individual health. In column 3, estimates are from a model that includes measures of
health, as determined by an indicator of poor health and the number of chronic diseases.
Including measures of health is intended to control for unmeasured time-varying determinants of
prescription drug coverage that are not accounted for by fixed-effects and that might confound
estimates. However, we recognize that this approach could be problematic because health could

15

be affected by drug coverage. Finally, results from the fixed-effect models are presented in
columns 4 and 5, corresponding to models in columns 2 and 3.
Estimates of the effect of prescription drug insurance coverage on any drug use are
displayed in Table 3 and show that drug coverage had a positive effect on any drug use. Elderly
people with public coverage were 8.7 percentage points more likely to have at least one
prescription than those with no coverage. Those with employer-sponsored and HMO coverage
had a 4.5 percentage point greater probability of having a prescription filled than those without
insurance. Finally, for those with Medigap, the probability of at least one prescription was 1.9
percentage points greater than those with no coverage. Adding health indicators to the model
(column 3) had little effect on estimates for HMO and Medigap coverage, but significantly
reduced estimates of public and employer coverage. This finding suggests that cross-sectional
estimates are likely to be biased.
Columns 4 and 5 present the fixed-effects estimates. Coefficients on the drug coverage
variables decreased significantly relative to estimates in columns 1 and 2. Estimates in column 4
are small (close to zero) and are no longer statistically significant. Further, we did not see any
difference in coefficients between column 4 and 5, when measures of health were added to the
fixed-effect models. This suggests that much of the selection into insurance status is accounted
for by including controls for person-specific fixed-effects and lends support to the credibility of
our fixed-effects results.
Table 4 displays estimates of the effect of drug coverage on annual number of
prescriptions. Estimates in column 2 indicate that public coverage increased prescription drugs
use by 46.7%, employer-sponsored coverage increased it by 19.7%, HMO coverage by 14.7%
and Medigap increased utilization by 17% relative to the uninsured. Adding measures of health

16

(column 3) had little effect on estimates, except for public coverage. In general, the results
indicated very high utilization among those insured and are similar to previous cross-sectional
findings (Bluestein, 2000; Federman et al., 2001). Controlling for individual fixed-effects
revealed a different story. Here, at best, prescription drug coverage has only a moderate effect on
utilization. Public coverage increased annual number of prescriptions by 13.7%. Having
employer sponsored or HMO coverage increased the annual number of prescriptions by 6%.
Medigap coverage had no significant impact on prescription use. Adding measures of health had
no effect on fixed-effect estimates bolstering the plausibility for our research approach.
Table 5 presents estimates of the effect of drug coverage on hospitalization. Estimates in
column 2 indicate that elderly with public insurance coverage are 6.3 percentage points more
likely to have a hospitalization than those without insurance. This is a large effect and, as we
will see, primarily a selection effect. Those with Medigap and employer-sponsored insurance
also have higher rates of hospitalization than the uninsured, but for these people the coefficients
are small—1 to 1.4 percentage points. Adding health status to the model (column 3) reduced the
effect of public insurance coverage on hospitalization significantly, and fixed-effect estimates
indicated that prescription drug coverage had no statistically significant effect on hospitalization.
Most fixed-effect estimates are small relative to the mean; public insurance coverage is
associated with the largest effect, 2.3 percentage point, which is approximately 9% of the mean
of the uninsured. Overall, estimates in Table 5 suggest that prescription drugs and
hospitalization, if related, are complementary treatments.
The next set of tables (Tables 6-8), display estimates of the effect of drug coverage on
health, as measured by: poor health status, functional disability (ADL plus IADL), individual
measures of ADL and IADL. Table 6 shows the effect of prescription drug insurance coverage

17

on probability of being in poor health. Estimates from models without person specific fixedeffect suggest that public prescription drug coverage was associated with a higher probability of
poor health and that HMO coverage was associated with a lower probability of being in poor
health. Adding the number of chronic conditions reduced the magnitude of the estimate for
public coverage. Controlling for person-specific fixed-effects, however, reduced these estimates
greatly and they were no longer statistically significant. Notably, adding the number of chronic
conditions to the fixed-effect model had no effect on the estimates of drug coverage. There is
little evidence that prescription drug coverage is related to self-reported poor health.
Tables 7 and 8 present estimates of the effect of drug coverage on functional disability
(ADL plus IADL score in Table 7) and individual IADL and ADL items (Table 8). Here, we just
discuss the fixed-effect estimates and only fixed-effect estimates are reported in Table 8.
Estimates in Tables 7 and 8 provide little evidence that prescription drug coverage is associated
with an improvement in ADL or IADL conditions except for those in the HMO group.
Prescription drug coverage through a Medicare HMO is associated with approximately 8% fewer
functional disabilities. The average score (ADL plus IADL) for uninsured people was 1.53;
therefore, drug coverage through a Medicare HMO would be expected to decrease it by 0.13. A
similar positive, yet small, impact of HMO coverage was observed for individual ADL and
IADL items (Table 8). Those with HMO coverage experienced reduced disability in bathing,
dressing, getting out of chair, and heavy housework. Estimates remain similar when we added
measures of health to the model (results not shown).

18

Low Education Group Analysis (Results not Presented)
It is of interest to investigate whether prescription drug coverage has a different effect for
economically disadvantaged individuals. Economically disadvantaged individuals are more
likely to be in poor health and in greatest need of medical care. Prescription drug coverage might
be more beneficial to them compared to other groups who can still purchase prescription drugs in
the absence of insurance. For example, the RAND Health Insurance Experiment did not find any
effect of health insurance on the health of the general population, but the study indicated
reduction in blood pressure for low-income population with poor health status (Brook, Lynch, &
Riley, 1983). Hence, the effect of prescription drug coverage was assessed for a sample of
elderly with no high school education—the group most likely to be in poor health and with
limited incomes. In general, the results for this group (not shown) were similar to the analysis
using the entire sample. Drug coverage had a positive impact on utilization, and controlling for
person-specific fixed-effects reduced the magnitudes of the estimates but they remain
statistically significant. Estimates for the low-educated sample suggested a slightly larger effect
for public coverage and smaller effect for employer-sponsored coverage. For example, results
from fixed-effect analyses indicated that public coverage among the low-educated was
associated with 15% increase in annual number of prescriptions; compared with 13.7% for the
entire sample. There was no significant impact of drug coverage on health for this sample.

Specification Tests for Fixed-Effect Analysis
The fixed-effect analysis assumes that, in the absence of any change in prescription drug
coverage, changes in prescription drug use and health would be the same for those who switch
coverage as those who do not switch coverage. To assess the validity of this assumption, we
examined the trend in prescription drug use pre- and post-switching insurance status for people

19

who gain coverage (True Switchers), people who never have coverage (Nevers), and people who
always have coverage (Always). For those who did not switch insurance (Always and Nevers),
we randomly assign them a (pseudo) switch year. Figure 5 displays these trends. The X-axis
indexes time prior to and after the switch of insurance; zero represents the switch year and years
pre- and post-switch are labeled accordingly. The Y-axis is the average annual number of
prescriptions filled. One year prior to switch (-2 to -1), prescription drug use was rising in a
similar way for all groups. In the year of the switch (-1 to 0), prescription drug use increased
more rapidly for switchers than non-switchers. In the year subsequent to switching (0-1), the
trend in prescription drug use is again about the same for switchers and non-switchers. This
pattern supports the fixed-effect approach because it shows that in the absence of a change in
insurance status, trends in prescription drug use are the same for those who switch and do not
switch insurance status. We show a similar figure (Figure 6) for the number of chronic
conditions. In this case, there is some evidence that the trend in chronic conditions differs
slightly for those who gain insurance after the switch. In the year of the switch, the number of
chronic conditions increased more for those who switched than for those who did not switch.
To further assess whether the fixed-effect approach is valid, we estimated models
identical to those in Tables 3 through 8, using all observations for non-switchers and only
observations on switchers in years prior to switching. We randomly assign those who were true
switchers a pseudo-switch year—a year in which they supposedly gained prescription drug
coverage. If switchers and non-switchers have similar trends in outcomes, we would expect the
coefficient on this pseudo insurance coverage variable to be zero, which is exactly what was
found for all outcomes (prescription drug use, hospitalization, poor health, and number of

20

chronic conditions). In summary, a variety of specification tests provide strong evidence that the
fixed-effect design is valid and that estimates could plausibly be interpreted as causal.
Given that statistical analyses indicated that changes in prescription drug insurance
coverage appeared to be exogenous (random), conditional on measured covariates and controls
for time-invariant person-specific effects, a natural question to ask is why? What are the
exogenous factors that caused people to switch insurance coverage? There are a few possible
explanations. One factor is the expansion of Medicaid eligibility thresholds (Bruen et al., 1999,
2003; Stone and Yacker, 2002; Schneider et al., 1999). There was also a significant expansion of
Pharmaceutical Assistance Programs (PAP) across states. In 1992, only 19 states had some form
of PAP program by 2000 almost all states had included some form of drug coverage to their low
income elderly who did not qualify for Medicaid. These changes might account for switches into
public coverage observed in Table 2.
Expansion of Medicare managed care might account for some of the changes in coverage.
Between 1996 and 1999, enrollment in Medicare risk plan (e.g., HMO) increased by 5.1
percentage points (Laschober, et al., 2002). However, the 1997 Balanced Budget Act decreased
payments to MCOs and, as a result, many MCOs either terminated or reduced the benefits
provided (Pizer and Frakt, 2002; Booske et al. 2002). Those disenrolled and living in areas of
low managed care penetration were more likely to enroll in Medigap plans (Laschober et al.
1999; Booske et al. 2002).
For those who gained employer coverage, data from the MCBS indicated that some did
so through their spouses or by starting employment. Many picked up drug coverage subsequent
to retirement. A Kaiser/Hewitt 2002 Retiree Health Survey reported that 16% of the employers
in the survey provided options for stand-alone drug plans or discount cards (KFF, 2002). Hence,

21

some employees could be expected to pick-up prescription drug benefits at a later time. Results
from the same survey indicated that many employers had increased drug co-payments, which
could results in employee’s withdrawing from those plans. Overall, there appeared to be
plausible explanations for the statistical finding that switches in prescription drug coverage
appear to be exogenous, conditional on measured covariates and controls for time-invariant
person-specific effects.

Conclusions
January 1, 2006 was a historical day for the elderly in the United States. For the first
time, a drug benefit became part of the Medicare program. The program is estimated to have a
net cost of $593 billion over a 10-year period (CBO, 2005). However, very little is known as to
what can be expected from this expansion as there is little research examining the effects of
prescription drug coverage on prescription drug use, medical care use, and health of the elderly
that can be considered “causal”. In this study, we have tried to address this shortfall.
Several studies have indicated that the elderly skip doses or do not fill prescriptions due
to cost (Steinman et al., 2001; Kitchman et al., 2002; Saver et al., 2004). For these elderly,
insurance can help because it decreases the price of the drugs, making them accessible. The
results of this study indicated that drug coverage increased drug use and thereby improved
access. However, the magnitude of the effect of drug coverage on utilization was smaller than
that found in most previous studies. Public insurance coverage increased prescription drug
utilization by 14%, and employer-sponsored and Medicare HMO coverage increased utilization
by 6%. These estimates were statistically significant. Medigap prescription drug coverage did not
have any significant effect on prescription drug use. These results are consistent with the

22

generosity of these different insurance plans. Medicaid is the most generous and Medigap the
least generous.
Did the greater use of prescription drugs associated with insurance improved health and
lower rates of hospitalization? Generally, we found the answer to this question to be “no.” We
did not find consistent evidence that prescription drugs are a substitute for hospitalization. Nor
did we find much evidence that prescription drug coverage improved health and functional
disability. The lone exception was prescription drug coverage obtained through a Medicare
HMO. In this case, prescription drug coverage was associated with improved functional
disability. Similar results were obtained for a sample of low-educated people.
Perhaps it is to be expected that prescription drug insurance would have few health
benefits given that prescription drug coverage had relatively small effects on prescription drug
use. Alternatively, absence of effect could be due to inappropriate pharmacotherapy either
because of excess unnecessary utilization that could even be harmful or non-adherence to
therapy on the part of consumers (Budnitz et al., 2006; Zhan et al. 2001; Lazarou, Pomeranz &
Corey, 1998). We also acknowledge the limitations of our data in estimating the effect of drug
coverage on health. Perhaps, more appropriate measures of health would be intermediate and
disease specific health outcomes such as reduction in HbA1c for diabetic patients or blood
pressure for hypertensive patients.
So what do these results imply about the benefits of Medicare Part D? It is difficult to
estimate the actual impact of Medicare Part D from this study because the program has copayments and an expenditure range during which coverage is not provided. Based on the results
of fixed-effect analysis, one would expect to observe a relatively small increase in utilization,
particularly because Part D is not very generous. For example, a 6% increase, which is what we

23

found for employer-sponsored insurance would result in an increase of 6 to 9 million
prescriptions annually, provided all uninsured avail of the new benefit.
The analysis also has implications for medication therapy management programs
(MTMP) introduced as a part of MMA (CCH, 2003). It is believed that efficacy of prescription
drugs depends on proper prescribing and compliance to medication. Under MMA, the providers
of drug coverage are required to establish an MTMP for seriously ill beneficiaries. The basic
premise is to improve therapeutic outcomes and reduce adverse event by monitoring medication
use, coordinating therapy, and providing education and training on drug use. Indeed, prior
research supports that intervention by health care providers improves clinical, economic and
humanistic outcomes (Buntig & Cranor 2006). Our finding of no effect of drug coverage on
health suggests simply providing drug coverage might not be sufficient to improve health and
that other interventions such as MTMP might be necessary.

24

Endnotes
1

We also experimented with instrumental variables approach. However, the instruments (Medicaid eligibility
thresholds, managed care payment rates, employer characteristics) while statistically significant in first stage, were
weak and second stage estimates were too imprecise to be informative.
2
The negative binomial model is not a true fixed effect model. It does not fully eliminate the influence of
unmeasured personal characteristics (Allison & Waterman, 2000).
3
To adjust Poisson standard errors, Allison and Waterman (2000) and Wooldridge (2002) suggest adjusting
standard errors using deviance statistics. Specifically, the method multiplies the standard error from the Poisson
regression by the square root of the ratio of Pearson chi-square goodness of fit statistics to its degrees of freedom.
4
These are 5,250 individuals whom MCBS label as “ghosts”. Ghosts are individuals who enter the survey in the fall;
these individuals are reassigned identification numbers next year. However as these ghosts identification numbers
were reused in the initials years of surveys, it becomes difficult to follow these individuals. Moreover, as ghosts
enter the survey in the fall they only have part year information available, therefore it was decided to remove this
part year information from the analysis. In addition, elderly who died during the interview year, their information
was not used for that year (4,842 observations).
5
These people will drop out of fixed effects analyses. However, dropping them from all analyses does not alter the
results.
6
In defining drug coverage from public sources, if the individual reports coverage from either Medicaid or any other
public source besides Medicare, it was assumed that the supplemental coverage provides drug coverage. This was
done because specific drug coverage was not asked when persons reported Medicaid coverage. The vast majority of
those on Medicaid have drug coverage (DHHS 2000).
7
We also constructed alternative measures of drug coverage using five mutually exclusive categories that were
created based on the proportion of coverage in a year. For instance, if the person reported Medicaid coverage for
five months but had no coverage for the other seven months this person was assigned to “no drug coverage”
category. All analyses were done with this alternative set of variables and results were virtually the same as those
presented in the text.
8
The standard errors, presented were calculated using the balanced repeated replication weights provided with the
data. Replicated weights are sampling weights produced by creating several small samples. MCBS contains 100
replication weights. Estimates were calculated using both the full sample weight and each of the replicate weights
and then the difference in the estimate was used to calculate the standard error. The mean statistics produced with
unweighted and weighted sample were similar.
9
In the period from 1999-2000 a slight drop in employer sponsored coverage can be observed, which is consistent
with reports in prior studies (William Mercer Inc. 2001; Stuart, Singhal et al. 2003). However, a more recent study
by Kaiser Family Foundation (2005) reported only 18% uninsured in 2002. Hence, it appears that the overall trend
in drug coverage continued to increase even after year 2000.

25

References
Adams, A.S., Soumerai, S.B., & Ross-Degnan, D. (2001). The case for a Medicare drug
coverage benefit: a critical review of the empirical evidence. Annual Review of Public
Health, 22, 49-61.
Allison, P., & Waterman, R. (2000). Fixed Effects Negative Binomial regressions models.
Retrieved on 2006, from http://www.ssc.upenn.edu/~allison/FENB.pdf
Bech, P., Moses, R., & Gomis, R. (2003). The effect of prandial glucose regulation with
repaglinide on treatment satisfaction, wellbeing and health status in patients with
pharmacotherapy naive Type 2 diabetes: a placebo-controlled, multicenter study. Quality
of Life Research, 12(4), 413-425.
Beers, M.H. (2002). Explicit criteria for determining potentially inappropriate medication use by
the elderly. Archives of Internal Medicine, 157, 1531-1536.
Blustein, J. (2000). Drug coverage and drug purchases by Medicare beneficiaries with
Hypertension. Health Affairs (Millwood), 19(2), 219-230.
Booske, B.C, Lynch, J., & Riley, G. (2002). Impact of Medicare managed care market
withdrawal on beneficiaries. Health Care Finance Review, 24(1), 95-115.
Briesacher, B., Stuart, B., Doshi, J., & Wrobel, M. (2005). Medicare beneficiaries and the impact
of gaining prescription drug coverage on inpatient and physician spending. Health
Services Research, 40(5 Pt 1), 1279-1296.
Brook, R. H., Ware, J. E., Rogers, W. H., Keeler, E. B., Davies, A. R., Donald, C. A., et al.
(1983). Does free care improve adult's health? Results from a randomized controlled trial.
New England Journal of Medicine, 309(23), 1426-1433.
Bruen, B.K., Wiener, J.M., Kim, J., & Miazad, O. (1999). State Usage of Medicaid Coverage
Options for Aged, Blind and Disabled people. Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute.
Bruen, B.K., Wiener, J.M., & Thomas, S. (2003) Medicaid Eligibility Policy for Aged,
Blind, and Disabled Beneficiaries. Washington, D.C: The Urban Institute.
Budnitz, D.S., Pollock, D.A., Weidenbach, K.N., Mendelsohn, A.B., Schroeder, T.J., & Annest,
J.L. (2006). National surveillance of emergency department visits for outpatients adverse
drug events. Journal of American Medical Association, 295 (15), 1858-1866.
Bunting, B., & Cranor, C. (2006). The Asheville Project: long-term clinical, humanistic, and
economic outcomes of a community-based medication therapy management program for
asthma. Journal of American Pharmacist Association, 46, 133-147.

26

Cameron, A.C., & Trivedi, P.K. (1998). Regression analysis of count data. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Canete, S., Juan, A. F. S., Perez, M., Gomez-Gallego, F., Lopez-Mojares, L. M., Earnest, C. P.,
et al. (2006). Does creatine supplementation improve functional capacity in elderly
women? Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 20(1), 22-28.
CBO. (2005). CBO estimate for Medicare Modernization Act. Washington, D.C.: Congressional
Budget Office.
CCH. (2003.). Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003: law
and explanation. Chicago, IL: CCH Incorporated.
Chandra, A., Gruber, J., & McKnight, R. (2007). Patient cost – sharing, hospitalization offsets,
and the design of optimal health insurance for the elderly. National Bureau of Economic
Research, working Paper. 12972.
CMS. (2000). Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey. Retrieved 2003, from
http://www.cmms.gov/MCBS/default.asp
Cook, C.E., Richardson, J.K., Pietroban, R., Silva, H.M., & Turner, D. (2006). Validation of the
NHANES ADL scale in a sample of patients with report of cervical pain: factor analysis,
item response theory analysis, and line item validity. Disability and Rehabilitation,
28(15), 929-935.
Croog, S. H., Levin, S., Testa, M. A., Brown, B., Bulpitt, C. J., Jenkins, C. D., et al. (1986). The
effects of antihypertensive therapy on the quality of life. New England Journal of
Medicine, 314(26), 1657-1664.
Cutler, D. M., & Zeckhauser, R. J. (2000). The anatomy of health insurance. In A. J. Culyer & J.
P. Newhouse (Eds.), Handbook of Health Economics pp. 566-643). North Holland:
Elsevier.
Davis, M., Poisal, J., Chulis, G., Zarabozo, C., & Cooper, B. (1999). Prescription drug coverage,
utilization, and spending among Medicare beneficiaries. Health Affairs (Millwood),
18(1), 231-243.
DHHS. (2000) Prescription Drug Coverage, Spending, Utilization and Prices: Report to the
President. Department of Health and Human Services.
Federman, A.D., Adams, A.S., Ross-Degnan, D., Soumerai, S.B., & Ayanian, J.Z. (2001).
Supplemental insurance and use of effective cardiovascular drugs among elderly
Medicare beneficiaries with coronary heart disease. Journal of American Medical
Association, 286(14), 1732-1739.

27

Feldman, H., Gauthier, S., Hecker, J., Vellas, B., Emir, B., Mastev, V., et al. (2003). Efficacy of
donepezil on maintenance of activities of daily living in patients with moderate to severe
Alzheimer's disease and the effect of caregiver burden. Journal of the American
Geriatrics Society, 51(6), 737-744.
Genovese, M. C., Becker, J. C., Schiff, M., Luggen, M., Sherrer, Y., Kremer, J., et al. (2005).
Abatacept for rheumatoid arthritis refractory to tumor necrosis factor alpha inhibition.
New England Journal of Medicine, 353(11), 1114-1123.
Gowrisankaran, G., & Town, R. J. (2004). Managed Care, drug benefits and mortality: An
analysis of the elderly. National Bureau of Economic Research, working Paper 10204.
Hamilton, J., Brydson, G., Fraser, S., & Grant, M. (2001). Walking ability as a measure of
treatment effect in early rheumatoid arthritis. Clinical Rehabilitation, 15(2), 142-147.
Hjalmarson, A., Goldstein, S., Fagerberg, B., Wedel, H., Waagstein, F., Kjekshus, J., et al.
(2000). Effects of controlled-release Metoprolol on total mortality, hospitalizations, and
well-being in patients with heart failure: the Metoprolol CR/XL Randomized Intervention
Trial in congestive heart failure (MERIT-HF). MERIT-HF Study Group. Journal of
American Medical Association, 283(10), 1295-1302.
Israel, E., Cohn, J., Dube, L., & Drazen, J.M. (1996). Effect of treatment with Zileuton, a 5Lipoxygenase inhibitor, in patients with asthma. A randomized controlled trial. Zileuton
Clinical Trial Group. Journal of American Medical Association, 275(12), 931-936.
Johnson, R.E., Goodman, M.J., Hornbrook, M.C., & Eldredge, M.B. (1997). The effect of
increased prescription drug cost-sharing on medical care utilization and expenses of
elderly health maintenance organization members. Medical Care, 35(11), 1119-1131.
KFF (2002). The current state of retiree health benefits. Findings from the Kaiser/Hewitt 2002
Retire Health Survey. Washington, D.C.: Kaiser Family Foundation.
KFF. (2005). Medicare chart book 2005. Washington, D.C.: Kaiser Family Foundation.
Kitchman, M., Neuman, T., Sandman, D., Schoen, C., Safron, D., Montgomery, J., et al. (2002).
Seniors and prescription drugs- findings from a 2001 survey of seniors in eight states.
Washington: The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, The Commonwealth Fund, and
Tufts-New England Medical Center.
Lazarou, J., Pomeranz, B. H., & Corey, P. N. (1998). Incidence of adverse drug reactions in
hospitalized patients: A meta-analysis of prospective studies. Journal of American
Medical Association, 279(15), 1200-1205.
Laschober, M. A., Kitchman, M., Neuman, P., & Strabic, A. A. (2002). Trends in Medicare
supplemental insurance and prescription drug coverage, 1996-1999. Health Aff
(Millwood), Supp Web Exclusives, W127-138.

28

Lillard, L.A., Rogowski, J., & Kington, R. (1999). Insurance coverage for prescription drugs:
effects on use and expenditures in the Medicare population. Medical Care, 37(9), 926936.
Pizer, S. D., & Frakt, A. B. (2002). Payment policy and competition in the Medicare + choice
program. Health Care Finance Review, 24(1), 83-94.
ResDAC. (2003). Cumulative Response Rates for Each MCBS Panel 1991-1999 as Compiled
from Table 1.2 in the 1996 and 1999 Access to Care Documentation. Retrieved on
September 11, from http://www.resdac.umn.edu/MCBS/mcbsFAQ.asp
Reza, M., Taylor, C.D., Towse, K., Ward, J.D., & Hendra. T.J. (2002). Insulin improves wellbeing for selected elderly type 2 diabetic subjects. Diabetes Research and Clinical
Practice, 55(3), 201-207.
Roman, G.C, Wilkinson, D.G., Doody, R.S., Black, S.E., Salloway, S.P., & Schindler, R.J.
(2005). Donepezil in vascular dementia: combined analysis of two large-scale clinical
trials. Dementia, 20, 338-344.
Saver, B.G., Doescher, M.P.& Jackson, J.E. (2004). Seniors with chronic health conditions and
prescription drugs: benefits, wealth, and health. Value Health, 7(2), 133-143.
Schneider, A., Fennel, K., & Keenan, P. (1999) Medicaid Eligibility for the Elderly.
Washington, D.C: Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured, Kaiser Family
Foundation.
Soumerai, S.B., Ross-Degnan, D., Avorn, J., McLaughlin, T., & Choodnovskiy, I. (1991).
Effects of Medicaid drug-payment limits on admission to hospitals and nursing homes.
New England Journal of Medicine, 325(15), 1072-1077.
Steinman, M.A., Sands, L.P., & Covinsky, K.E. (2001). Self-restriction of medications due to
cost in seniors without prescription coverage. Journal of General Internal Medicine,
16(12), 793-799.
Stone, J., & Yacker, H.G. (2002). Prescription drug coverage for Medicare beneficiaries:
Medicaid and state pharmaceutical assistance programs. Congressional Research
Services.
Stuart, B., Shea, D.G., & Briesacher, B. (2001). Dynamics in drug coverage of Medicare
beneficiaries: finders, losers, switchers. Health Affairs, 20(2), 86-99.
Stuart, B., & Zacker, C. (1999). Who bears the burden of Medicaid drug co-payment policies?
Health Aff (Millwood), (March/April), 201-212.

29

Testa, M.A., Anderson, R.B., Nackley, J.F., & Hollenberg, N.K. (1993). Quality of life and
antihypertensive therapy in men. A comparison of Captopril with Enalapril. The Qualityof-Life Hypertension Study Group. New England Journal of Medicine, 328(13), 907-913.
Wooldridge, J.M. (2002). Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. Massachusetts:
The MIT Press.
Yang, Z., Gilleskie, D.B., & Norton, E.C. (2004). Prescription Drugs, Medical Care, and Health
Outcomes: A Model of Elderly Health Dynamics. National Bureau of Economic
Research. working paper 10964.
Zhan, C., Sangel, J., Bierman, A.S., Miller, M.R., Friedman, B., Wickizer, S.W., & Meyer, G.S.
(2001) Potentially inappropriate medication use in the community-dwelling elderly.
Journal of American Medical Association, 286(22), 2823-2829.
Zweifel, P., & Manning, W. G. (2000). Moral hazard and consumer incentives in health care. In
A. J. Culyer & J. P. Newhouse (Eds.), Handbook of Health Economics (pp. 409-459).
North Holland: Elsevier.

30

0.6

Proportion with Coverage

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0
1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

Year
No Coverage

Public

Employer

HMO

Medigap

Figure 1. Trend in Prescription Drug Coverage (weighted)

31

Average Annual Prescriptions Used

33

30

27

24

21

18

15

12
1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

Year
No drug Coverage

Public

Employer

HMO

Medigap

Figure 2. Trend in Average Annual Number of Prescriptions (weighted)

32

3.00

Functional Disability

2.50

2.00

1.50

1.00

0.50

0.00
1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

Year
No drug Coverage

Public

Employer

HMO

Medigap

Figure 3. Trend in Functional Disability (weighted)

33

0.50

Proportion with Poor Health

0.40

0.30

0.20

0.10

0.00
1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

Year
No drug Coverage

Public

Employer

HMO

Medigap

Figure 4. Trend in Health Status (weighted)

34

25
24
23

Drug Use

22
21
20
19
18
17
16
-2

-1

0

1

Switch Year
Nevers

True Switchers

Always

Figure 5. Trend in Prescription Drug Use Before and After Drug Coverage Switch, for Switchers and Non-Switchers

35

4

Number of Chronic Conditions

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1
-2

-1

0

1

Switch Year
Nevers

True Switchers

Always

Figure 6. Trend in Number of Chronic Conditions Before and After Drug Coverage Switch, for Switchers and Non-Switchers

36

Table 1. Average Sample Characteristics, Weighted
Individual characteristics
(1)
Sex (proportion)
Race (proportion)

Age (years)
Income ($)
Urban(proportion)
Marital status (proportion)

Education (proportion)

Smoking status (proportion)

Prescription drug utilization
Hospitalization
Health status
Observations

Variable description

Entire sample

No drug
coverage

Any drug
coverage

Public

Employer

HMO

Medigap

(2)
Femalea b
Whitea b
African-American b
Othera b
Agea b
Incomea b
Urbana b
Married b
Widoweda b
Divorced b
Separateda b
Not married b
No high schoola b
High School b
Some collegea b
College plusa b
Never smoked b
Former smokera b
Current smokera b
Any prescriptiona b
# of prescriptions b
Hospitalizationa b
Poor healthb
Functional disability b

(3)
0.58
0.88
0.08
0.03
75
25,546
0.74
0.56
0.33
0.06
0.01
0.04
0.37
0.33
0.15
0.14
0.40
0.48
0.12
0.89
20
0.17
0.22
1.39
73,490

(4)
0.57
0.90
0.07
0.02
76
22,908
0.67
0.56
0.34
0.06
0.01
0.03
0.40
0.34
0.14
0.12
0.40
0.47
0.13
0.86
17.45
0.17
0.22
1.35
27,690 (38%)

(5)
0.59
0.87
0.08
0.04
75
27,084
0.79
0.56
0.33
0.06
0.01
0.04
0.36
0.33
0.15
0.16
0.40
0.49
0.11
0.91
21.83
0.18
0.22
1.41
45,800
(62%)

(6)
0.70
0.69
0.19
0.12
76
12,699
0.73
0.31
0.50
0.10
0.03
0.06
0.65
0.21
0.08
0.06
0.44
0.43
0.14
0.92
27.68
0.23
0.38
2.43
11,650
(16%)

(7)
0.54
0.93
0.05
0.01
74
33,543
0.80
0.67
0.25
0.04
0.01
0.03
0.25
0.37
0.17
0.21
0.38
0.52
0.10
0.90
20.27
0.17
0.17
1.08
21,353
(29%)

(8)
0.57
0.88
0.07
0.05
75
25,593
0.95
0.57
0.31
0.08
0.01
0.03
0.31
0.36
0.19
0.14
0.35
0.53
0.12
0.90
19.41
0.15
0.17
1.05
6,985 (10%)

(9)
0.63
0.96
0.03
0.01
76
29,951
0.67
0.55
0.36
0.05
0.00
0.04
0.28
0.36
0.18
0.18
0.44
0.46
0.11
0.88
20.24
0.17
0.19
1.28
5,812
(8%)

Notes:
Source: MCBS Survey Cost and Use File, 1992-2000
a
The difference was found to be statistically significant between no drug coverage and drug coverage group using t-test or chi-square test at p < 0.05. The
standard errors are adjusted for complex survey design using replication weights
b
The difference was found to be statistically significant between different sources of drug coverage using chi-square or one-way ANOVA at p < 0.05. The
standard errors are adjusted for complex survey design using replication weights

37

Table 2. Average Change in Prescription Drug Insurance Coverage Between Time (t) and Time (t+1)

Public (t)
Employer (t)
HMO (t)
Medigap (t)
No coverage (t)
Total
(%)

Public (t+1)
# (%)
6482
(14.63)
119
(0.27)
61
(0.14)
54
(0.12)
475
(1.07)
7191
(16.23)

Employer (t+1)
# (%)
53
(0.12)
11526
(26.01)
181
(0.41)
267
(0.62)
848
(1.91)
12884
(29.07)

HMO (t+1)
# (%)
54
(0.12)
267
(0.60)
3338
(7.53)
60
(0.14)
599
(1.35)
4318
(9.74)

Medigap (t+1)
# (%)
14
(0.03)
322
(0.73)
19
(0.04)
2331
(5.26)
853
(1.92)
3539
(7.99)

No coverage (t+1)
# (%)
168
(0.38)
719
(1.62)
286
(0.65)
724
(1.63)
14487
(32.69)
16384
(36.97)

Total
# (%)
6771
(15.28)
13748
(29.23)
3885
(8.77)
3445
(7.77)
17262
(38.95)
44316
(100%)

%
Change

14%

38

Table 3. Estimates of the Effect of Prescription Drug Insurance Coverage on Any Prescription Drug Use

(2)
OLS
Type of Prescription Drug Insurance

0.087
[0.005]**
Proportion of months employer-sponsored 0.044
[0.004]**
0.045
Proportion of months HMO
[0.006]**
0.019
Proportion of months Medigap
[0.007]**
Mean of dependent variable for uninsured 0.863
72970
Observations
Proportion of months public

(3)
OLS with
measures of
health
0.050
[0.005]**
0.029
[0.004]**
0.042
[0.006]**
0.014
[0.006]*
0.863
72619

(4)
OLS fixed-effect

(5)
OLS fixed-effect
with measures of
health

0.019
[0.011]
0.010
[0.007]
0.008
[0.010]
0.002
[0.008]
0.863
72970

0.017
[0.011]
0.008
[0.007]
0.007
[0.010]
0.003
[0.008]
0.863
72619

Notes:
Source: MCBS Survey Cost and Use File, 1992-2000
Reference category is months with no drug coverage
Covariates included in model are female, age categories (age70-74, age75-79, age 80 or more), race categories (African-American, other race), marital status
(widowed, divorced, separated, not married), income categories (income $10,000-$15,000 income, income $15,000-$20,000, income $20,000-$30,000, income
$30,000-$40,000, income $40,000-$50,000, income $50,000 or more), education categories (no completed high school, high school completed, some college),
rural, smoking status (current smoker, former smoker), year fixed effect, state fixed effect.
Column 3 and 6 includes indicator for general health status and number of chronic conditions categories (1-2, 3-4, 5 or more)
Robust standard errors in brackets
* significant at p < 0.05; ** significant at p< 0.01%

39

Table 4. Estimates of the Effect of Prescription Drug Insurance Coverage on Annual Number of Prescriptions
(2)
Poisson
Type of Prescription Drug Insurance

0.467
[0.018]**
Proportion of months employer-sponsored 0.197
[0.015]**
0.147
Proportion of months HMO
[0.022]**
0.170
Proportion of months Medigap
[0.023]**
Mean of dependent variable for uninsured 17.90
72970
Observations
Proportion of months public

(3)
Poisson with
measures of
health
0.293
[0.015]**
0.143
[0.013]**
0.153
[0.019]**
0.144
[0.020]**
17.86
72619

(4)
Poisson
fixed-effect

0.137
[0.018]**
0.060
[0.013]**
0.059
[0.017]**
0.007
[0.013]
18.72
63520

(5)
Poisson fixedeffect with
measures of
health
0.129
[0.018]**
0.060
[0.013]**
0.059
[0.017]**
0.011
[0.014]
18.67
63174

Notes:
Source: MCBS Survey Cost and Use File, 1992-2000
Reference category is months with no drug coverage
Covariates included in model are female, age categories (age70-74, age75-79, age 80 or more), race categories (African-American, other race), marital status
(widowed, divorced, separated, not married), income categories (income $10,000-$15,000 income, income $15,000-$20,000, income $20,000-$30,000, income
$30,000-$40,000, income $40,000-$50,000, income $50,000 or more), education categories (no completed high school, high school completed, some college),
rural, smoking status (current smoker, former smoker), year fixed effect, state fixed effect.
Column 3 and 6 includes indicator for general health status and number of chronic conditions categories (1-2, 3-4, 5 or more)
Robust standard errors in brackets
* significant at p < 0.05; ** significant at p< 0.01%

40

Table 5. Estimates of the Effect of Prescription Drug Insurance Coverage on Hospitalizations
(2)
OLS

0.063
[0.006]**
0.010

0.029
[0.006]**
0.002

0.023
[0.018]
0.015

(6)
OLS fixed-effect
with measures of
health
0.019
[0.018]
0.014

[0.004]*
-0.005
[0.006]
0.014
[0.007]*
0.17

[0.004]
-0.002
[0.006]
0.010
[0.006]
0.17

[0.010]
0.006
[0.013]
0.015
[0.012]
0.17

[0.010]
0.007
[0.013]
0.017
[0.012]
0.17

72970

72619

72970

72619

Type of Prescription Drug Insurance
Proportion of months public
Proportion of months employersponsored
Proportion of months HMO
Proportion of months Medigap
Mean of dependent variable for
uninsured
Observations

(3)
OLS with measures
of health

(4)
OLS fixed-effect

Notes:
Source: MCBS Survey Cost and Use File, 1992-2000
Reference category is months with no drug coverage
Covariates included in model are female, age categories (age70-74, age75-79, age 80 or more), race categories (African-American, other race), marital status
(widowed, divorced, separated, not married), income categories (income $10,000-$15,000 income, income $15,000-$20,000, income $20,000-$30,000, income
$30,000-$40,000, income $40,000-$50,000, income $50,000 or more), education categories (no completed high school, high school completed, some college),
rural, smoking status (current smoker, former smoker), year fixed effect, state fixed effect.
Column 3 and 6 includes indicator for general health status and number of chronic conditions categories (1-2, 3-4, 5 or more)
Robust standard errors in brackets
* significant at p < 0.05; ** significant at p< 0.01%

41

Table 6. Estimates of the Effect of Prescription Drug Insurance Coverage on Self-reported Poor Health
(2)
OLS
Type of Prescription Drug Insurance

0.114
[0.007]**
Proportion of months employer-sponsored 0.006
[0.005]
-0.018
Proportion of months HMO
[0.007]*
0.007
Proportion of months Medigap
[0.008]
Mean of dependent variable for uninsured 0.23
72836
Observations
Proportion of months public

(3)
OLS with
measures of
health
0.072
[0.007]**
-0.008
[0.005]
-0.018
[0.007]**
0.001
[0.008]
0.23
72619

(4)
OLS fixedeffect

0.030
[0.017]
-0.000
[0.009]
-0.007
[0.011]
0.002
[0.010]
0.23
72836

(5)
OLS fixedeffect with
measures of
health
0.025
[0.017]
-0.002
[0.009]
-0.007
[0.011]
0.001
[0.010]
0.23
72619

Notes:
Source: MCBS Survey Cost and Use File, 1992-2000
Reference category is months with no drug coverage
Covariates included in model are female, age categories (age70-74, age75-79, age 80 or more), race categories (African-American, other race), marital status
(widowed, divorced, separated, not married), income categories (income $10,000-$15,000 income, income $15,000-$20,000, income $20,000-$30,000, income
$30,000-$40,000, income $40,000-$50,000, income $50,000 or more), education categories (no completed high school, high school completed, some college),
rural, smoking status (current smoker, former smoker), year fixed effect, state fixed effect.
Column 3 and 6 includes indicator for number of chronic conditions categories (1-2, 3-4, 5 or more)
Robust standard errors in brackets
* significant at p < 0.05; ** significant at p< 0.01%

42

Table 7. Estimates of the Effect of Prescription Drug Insurance on Functional Disability (ADL plus IADL Score)
(2)
Poisson
Type of Prescription Drug Insurance

0.450
[0.024]**
Proportion of months employer-sponsored 0.011
[0.024]
-0.131
Proportion of months HMO
[0.037]**
0.040
Proportion of months Medigap
[0.036]
Mean of dependent variable for uninsured 1.53
73353
Observations
Proportion of months public

(3)
Poisson with
measures of
health

0.220
[0.021]**
-0.028
[0.021]
-0.102
[0.033]**
0.034
[0.032]
1.53
73009

(4)
Poisson
fixed-effect

0.025
[0.034]
0.021
[0.029]
-0.082
[0.040]*
-0.017
[0.032]
1.53
40075

(5)
Poisson
fixed-effect
with
measures of
health
-0.008
[0.034]
0.019
[0.029]
-0.084
[0.040]*
-0.016
[0.032]
1.53
39824

Notes:
Source: MCBS Survey Cost and Use File, 1992-2000
Reference category is months with no drug coverage
Covariates included in model are female, age categories (age70-74, age75-79, age 80 or more), race categories (African-American, other race), marital status
(widowed, divorced, separated, not married), income categories (income $10,000-$15,000 income, income $15,000-$20,000, income $20,000-$30,000, income
$30,000-$40,000, income $40,000-$50,000, income $50,000 or more), education categories (no completed high school, high school completed, some college),
rural, smoking status (current smoker, former smoker), year fixed effect, state fixed effect.
Column 3 and 6 includes indicator for general health status and number of chronic conditions categories (1-2, 3-4, 5 or more)
Robust standard errors in brackets
* significant at p < 0.05; ** significant at p< 0.01%

43

Table 8. Estimates of the Effect of Prescription Drug Insurance Coverage on Individual Items of Functional Disability
(2)
Walking

(3)
Bathing

(4)
Dressing

ADL
(5)
Eating

0.011
[0.016]

0.005
[0.013]

0.015
[0.011]

Proportion
of months
employersponsored

0.010
[0.008]

-0.001
[0.006]

Proportion
of months
HMO

-0.000
[0.011]

Proportion
of months
Medigap

0.004
[0.010]

Type of
Prescription
Drug
Insurance
Proportion
of months
public

(6)
Using
chair

(7)
Toilet

(8)
ADL

(9)
Heavy
housework

(10)
Light
housework

(11)
Making
meals

0.017
[0.009]*

0.006
[0.014]

0.028
[0.010]**

0.081
[0.045]

-0.001
[0.017]

0.016
[0.013]

0.024
[0.012]*

0.003
[0.005]

0.001
[0.004]

-0.010
[0.007]

0.002
[0.005]

0.006
[0.022]

0.018
[0.009]

0.003
[0.007]

-0.019
[0.007]*

-0.018
[0.007]**

0.003
[0.004]

-0.022
[0.009]*

-0.008
[0.006]

-0.062
[0.027]*

-0.029
[0.013]*

-0.000
[0.008]

0.005
[0.006]

-0.001
[0.004]

-0.012
[0.008]

0.006
[0.005]

0.002
[0.025]

-0.010
[0.011]

IADL
(12)
Shopping

(13)
Using
phone

(14)
Paying
bills

(15)
IADL

0.012
[0.014]

0.012
[0.011]

0.024
[0.012]*

0.087
[0.048]

0.000
[0.006]

0.010
[0.007]

0.006
[0.006]

-0.005
[0.005]

0.033
[0.025]

-0.002
[0.009]

-0.004
[0.007]

-0.006
[0.009]

-0.004
[0.008]

-0.013
[0.007]

-0.058
[0.030]

0.002
[0.008]

-0.006
[0.007]

0.002
[0.008]

0.003
[0.007]

0.001
[0.007]

-0.010
[0.029]

0.25
0.12
0.07
0.03
0.13
0.06
0.66
0.33
0.12
0.10
0.16
0.08
0.08
0.86
Mean of
dependent
variables for
uninsured
72,951
72,957
72,956
72,956
72,950
72,939
72,938
72,949
72,950
72,954
72,954 72,945
72,911
Observations 72,953
Notes:
Source: MCBS Survey Cost and Use File, 1992-2000
Reference category is months with no drug coverage
Covariates included in model are female, age categories (age70-74, age75-79, age 80 or more), race categories (African-American, other race), marital status
(widowed, divorced, separated, not married), income categories (income $10,000-$15,000 income, income $15,000-$20,000, income $20,000-$30,000, income
$30,000-$40,000, income $40,000-$50,000, income $50,000 or more), education categories (no completed high school, high school completed, some college),
rural, smoking status (current smoker, former smoker), year fixed effect, state fixed effect.
Column 3 and 6 includes indicator for general health status and number of chronic conditions categories (1-2, 3-4, 5 or more)
Robust standard errors in brackets
significant at p < 0.05; ** significant at p< 0.01%

44

