                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         PENSIONS AND THE
                       RETIREMENT DECISION


                          Barry Nalebuff

                        Richard Zeckhauser



                      Working Paper No. 1285




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           March 19814




This paper was prepared for the National Bureau of Economic
Research Conference on Pensions, Labor and Individual Choice, March
23—26, 1983, Dorado Beach, Puerto Rico. We received great insight
and support from Andrew Nevin, Brian Sullivan provided excellent
research assistance. John Dunlop, Jerry Hausman, Larry Summers,
and seminar participants at Princeton, U.C.S.D., and N.B.E.R. pro-
vided stimulating comments. Cathy Lydon worked magic with the word
processor, Nancy Jackson with the red pencil. The research
reported here is part of the NBER'S research program in Pensions.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                          NBER Working Paper #1285
                                          March 198)4




               Pensions and the Retirement Decision


                             ABSTRACT



     Pensions influence retirement decisions. The analysis provides
a framework for assessing the phenomenon. The qualitative features
of most defined benefit pension plans in the United States, as the
first section demonstrates, can be used to induce optimal retirement
choices. Pensions are viewed as a form of forced savings; their
purpose is to enable the worker to "commit himself" by making it in
his own self—interest to retire at an appropriate age. The remaining
sections examine the use of pensions in populations that are hetero-
geneous with respect to such features as disutility of work or
expected lifespan.

     Given heterogeneity, a major policy concern is whether pen-
sions are actuarially fair to different groups, retirement cohorts,
etc. It is proven that optimal pension plans cannot be actuarially
more than fair, in the sense that someone who retires later must
impose a smaller cost on the pension pooi than he would were he to
retire earlier. However, there are differences in life expectancy
among cohorts defined by retirement age: late retirees generally
live longer. Late retirees may thus impose a greater expected cost
on the pension fund under an optimal plan; interestingly, they do
impose a higher cost than those retiring earlier under most common
pension funds.

     In a first—best world, a separate pension plan would be
designed for each group of workers. But, government—mandated
retirement programs and legislation regulating private pensions
require common treatment of different workers. Such homogenization
is shown to work to the possible detriment of workers as a whole.

     Pensions are a workhorse compensation mechanism. They provide
an additional instrument beyond wages for attracting, motivating,
sorting, and retaining workers, while facilitating appropriate
retirement decisions.




Barry Nalebuff                           Richard Zeckhauser
Society of Fellows                       J.F.K. School of Government
Harvard University                       Harvard University
78 Mount Auburn Street                   79 Boylston Street
Cambridge, MA 02138                      Cambridge,MA 02138
                                               I. INTRODUCI'ION

     Pensions facilitate labor contracting. They provide an additional instrument beyond wages for attracting,

sorting. and motivating workers. The key difference from other forms of labor compensation is that pensions

are paid during the last years of one's life, usually as a contingent claim with payments continuing as long as one
lives. The late-payment feature has the advantage of allowing the reward that an individual receives to depend

not only on the present period but also on future experiences. Its disadvantage is that it may hinder a worker's
lifetime allocation of income unless he can trade on well functioning capital markets.

     The contingent claims feature has obvious risk-spreading advantages. However, contingent claims markets

are often flawed in that they change incentives for individuals to engage in various types of behavior and
induce them to "purchase" inappropriate claims. The problem of moral hazard is not severe here. Individuals

have quite adequate incentives, apart from the pensions they will receive, to increase their survival. Similarly,
problems of adverse selection may be limited, because pensions tend to be universal in a workplace, and pen-

sion considerations are unlikely to be the critical factor in job choices. Moreover, individuals are not likely to

have substantial information about their life expectancy early in life, at the time pension benefits start to be
accrued.

     Given their contingent claims nature, and the fact that they are paid at the end of one's life, the most direct

labor market effect of pensions may be on individuals' retirement decisions. In most pension plans, the per

period benefits and expected payouts that a worker receives depend significantly on the age at which he retires.

The central purpose of this analysis is to explore the effects of pensions on retirement decisions, and to discuss
the implications of those effects for policy choice.

     Part 1(A) of this analysis lists the major results. Part 1(B) explores the factors influencing individuals' retire-

ment decisions, the factors that motivate our subsequent formulations. We then provide a capsule overview of

the historical reasons leading to the introduction of pensions. The section concludes with a summary of the
labor market effects of pensions apart from retirement decisions.

     Part II examines the effects of pensions on retirement. Pensions encourage retirement; indeed that is one

of their primary purposes. Since it is difficult to monitor a worker's true disutility of work or to make contracts

in which the worker commits himself to retire, pensions arc used to help induce appropriate retirement be-
havior. In this second best-world, Sonic of the risk- spreading beneFits of pensions are sacrificed. Because many

factors unrelated to retirement have contributed to the development of pensions, pensions are also structured

                                                          1
to deal with substantial non-retirement issues. Rctore looking at optimal pensions, Part II considers retirement

decisions bascd on typical pensions taken from a survey of pensions [Survey of Selected Pensions. Rankers

Trust, 1979].

     Part Ill introduces the major complication of populations that are heterogeneous with respect to expecta-

tions of lifespan and disutility of work. It explores the design of optimal pensions under such circumstances.

The critical question is how the size of an optimal pension should vary with retirement age. Confusion has
reigned on the issue of actuarial fairness. We hope to dethrone it just a bit.

     Part IV examines the effects of requiring pension offers to be the same among workers with dissimilar

preferences, life expectancies, and pioductivity profiles. Social Security programs and numerous regulations
now in effect in the United States encourage or require common structures. We show that all workers may lose

from such commonality, no matter what plan is adopted.

     Part V presents the conclusions.



1(A) Summary of Results
     Our paper includes several models. We list here some of the major results, grouped under three headings.



                                             Appropriate Retirement
     1. It is a stylized fact that wages frequently exceed productivity in the later periods of work life. Because
workers are unable to commit themselves to retire under appropriate circumstances (i.e., when disutility ex-

ceeds productivity, not wages), they will choose to work too long. Pensions can be used to force workers to save

more than they want to save. Since these excess savings are accessible only upon retirement, workers choose to

retire earlier. In the new equilibrium, firms can pay higher wages, raising the worker's lifetime expected utility.



                               Optimal Pensions with Unmonitorable Information

     2. Actuadal Treatment of Cohorts. Most defined benefit pension plans appear to be actuarially unfair to

late retirees. However, when workers can estimate their life span, those who expect to live longer choose to
retire later and the pattern of actuarial benefit may be reversed.

     3. Actiiarial'lreatrncntoflndivkluals. The structure ot optimal pension plans, i.e., those that maximize ex

ante expected utility, must make it actuarially unfavorable for an individual to retire later.

                                    -
                                                         2
     4. l)isutility lJnmonitorable. The optimal pension plan when disutility of work is unmonitorable offers
a benefit that rises with retirement age up to a point and is then level. This point, in effect, is the maxium

retirement age.

     The rising portion of the pension curve sacrifices risk-spreading to discourage workers from retiring too

early. Under the optimal plan, assuming that death dates do not correlate with disutility, cohorts that retire later

receive lower expected pension benefits.



                             Common Pension Plan for Heterogeneous Populations

     5. Consider the optimal pension plans for each group of workers with different characteristics. if as
required and encouraged by law, these plans are merged, then problems of adverse selection and moral hazard

may make all groups worse off. Indeed there may be no common pension plan that is superior for any group of

workers to what they each received when treated separately.




                                                        3
1(11) \Vhy People Retire

     The purpose of this analysis is to identify the role olpensions in affecting individuals' retirement decisions.

At the outset, it is important to identify why retirement occurs; seven factors play a role in our models. They

are: (1.) decreasing productivity;

     (2.) increasing disutility of labor:

     (3.) outside employment opportunities;

     (4.) entitlements for retiring, such as pensions;

     (5.) information about health and longevity;

     (6) inclivisihility nf1ihiir; ni1

     (7.) declining marginal utility ofconsurnption.

     The first five factors are obviously related to the passage of time. Were they constant over time, and were

labor perfectly divisible, then there would be no reason to retire. Individuals would work the same amount
each. period. Full divisibility of labor would lead to scaled-down participation in the labor force rather than

retirement. Obviously, in many instances labor is divisible at a price. One can work part time, but at a less than

proportional salary. The analysis is simplified by assuming complete indivisibility of labor.

     Given indivisibility of labor, individuals might still choose to work throughout their lives unless marginal

utility from consumption declines. Thus, as is standard, individuals are assumed to have a concave period

utility of consumption (though in some instances, to facilitate exposition, marginal utility may be constant).
With decreasing productivity or increasing disutility of labor as one ages, it will be reasonable for individuals to

consider retirement toward the end of their lives. If outside employment Opportunities decline over time, the

date of retirement from a given company will be advanced. Retirement patterns from the public employment

sector illustrate this point: many individuals leave military service or civil service at a time when they can still

get a good outside job offer.

     Entitlements may also be a function of age. Both Social Security and private pensions are age related.
Presumably. individuals make some rough calculation of the value to them of the entitlements streams for

different retirement dates, and choose accordingly. A matter of central concern in this analysis is the structure of

returns that an individual can expect from retirement, the effect that this will have on individual decisions, and

ultimately the structure of the pension plans that will be supportable in a competitive marketplace.

    In valuing the entitlements to be received on retirement, a key consideration is how long the individual

                                                         4
 expects to live. If working one more ycal yields a 10 percent increase in the per-period benefit, the additional

 year may be a worthwhile sacrifice for a person with a life expectancy of 25 years, hut not for one with an eight-

 year life expectancy.

      Though two factors—indivisibility of labor and declining marginal utility of consumption—are in them-
 selves sufficient to explain why individuals would take periods of leisure in their lives, they do not explain why

 these periods should be at the end of one's life. This phenomenon is better explained by age's adverse effects

on productivity and disutility of work, in conjunction with the important role of uncertainty. The disutility of

labor at later ages is something workers cannot predict accurately at an early age. They also learn more about

their longevity as they age. This suggests that if the discount rates for the disutilty of work and consumption are

the same, it is best to work at the beginning of life and to make decisions on when to retire later when more
information is available.



1(C) Historical Origins of Private Pensions

     In 1875, the American Express Company established the first formal private pension. Only permanently
disabled workers who were over 60 and had worked at least 25 years in the firm were eligible [Webb (1932)]. As

a large holder of railroad companies, American Express employed workers in dangerous jobs, many of whom,

once injured, had no means of supporting themselves; guaranteeing workers an income if disabled made them

more likely to accept dangerous jobs. By 1905, the railroads had created 12 formal plans,covering 488,000
workers, or 35 percent of all railroad employees. By 1929, over 80 percent of all railroad workers were covered

by some sort of retirement plan [Greenough and King (1976)].

     Other industries, not all in hazardous fields, also began pension plans, and by 1920 almost 400 existed.

Companies began to realize the benevolent and economic consequences of retirement plans. Before long, this

mostly discretionary and non-legally binding form of retirement compension was seen as a moral obligation of

the employer. Corporations welcomed this interpretation, but to become a permanent institution in the private

sector, pensions had to produce some tangible economic benefits to the employer. '[lie employee's 'gold watch'

represented an investment, not just a gift.

    Most significantly, pensions enabled the employer to retire older and incapacitated workers. Previously,

employers were forced to adopt such inefficient alternatives as retaining employees on the payroll at reduced

pay, reassigning them to less demanding jobs, or offering occasional relief packages to aiticularly needy

                                                       5
 retirees. By establishing a formal pension plan, the employer could remove these workers in an orderly and
 employee-approved fashion without fear of adverse public reaction. When the maximum retirement age was

 fixed, retirement became ingrained as part of working life. Pensions allowed the employer to retire less produc-

 tive workers while retaining an air of equity and appreciation for a job well done. Replacement of these older

 workers with younger, more agile ones, would increase labor productivity through the increased efficiency of

 a younger work force. Pension plans thus became an instrument for fostering the retirement of their older
workers with a minimum of employee resistance. During the 1920s, one midwestern life insurance company

introduced its pension plan with a frank assessment of its goal: "These benefits are granted voluntarily by the

company in ordcr...to enable it to discontinue without hardship those who are past their best work and thereby

hasten the promotion of younger employees." EN.I.C.B., pp. 28-31].




     While the employers emphasized the reward aspect of a pension for those actually retiring, the emphasis

for the active workers was upon earning the reward; it encouraged them to give the kind of service that was
of greatest value to the company. "In provision for old age relief based on continuity of employment, business

organizations thought they had found one means not only of preventing strikes but also of promoting long,

loyal and uninterrupted services." [N.I.C.B., pp. 34-36]. Presumably long and continuous service records would

mean reduced labor turnover, and lower training costs. Thus, pensions provided not only a means of replacing

older workers with more efficient younger ones, but it made younger employees more reluctant to quit and
increased their efficiency; from the employers' standpoint, the economic cost of a pension could be more than
offset by the improvement of labor productivity.




     Pensions strengthened the worker's allegiance to the firm at the expense of his loyalty to his union.
Employers understood the unions' dislike of these plans and became determined to maintiin control Over pcfl-

sions. Over 95 percent of the workers co'ered by pension plans paid nothing into the scheme. By not requiring

worker contributions and making the benefits discretionary, management could bar unions from involvnient in

retirement policy and set the requirements themselves. As a result, employers gained considerable leverage over

employees' work decisions. The effect, it was hoped, would be a reducion in strikes and a weakening of union

                                                      6
 appeal.1



 1(D) Pcnsions and Labor Market Performance

       Many economic factors contributed to the historical development of pensions. Feldstein (1982, p.1)
 identifies the myopia argument for forcing workers to protect themselves for old age, when their productivity

 will be lower, Moreover, since pensions can be a means of backloading compensation, they may be an impor-

 tant factor in rewarding, motivating, and tying workers to firms. By delaying rewards, the firm can better deal
 with uncertainty that is resolved over time. As information on worker's effort level or productivity accumulates,

 the firm discovers how much to pay him. Many of the standard adverse selection and moral hazard problems

 disappear as the time span becomes sufficiently long (assuming that there is no efficiency cost to withholding
 earlier rewards).

      Pensions have considerable advantages as a delayed reward mechanism. In contrast to wages that rise
 faster than productivity, pensions reallocate resources to a time period to which the individual himself wishes

to reallocate resources. There is, of course, a limit on the amount that can be efficiently reallocated to the
retirement period. Until this constraint becomes binding, pensions need not entail any efficiency loss. In this
respect, they differ from others common means of withholding or backloading rewards, such as wage streams

that rise faster than productivity or big prizes in contests (promotion lotteries). The function of pensions as a
reward and motivational mechanism is widely cited in relation to retention of workers. But, pensions may also

come to play a significant role in sorting workers by quality and motivating them.

      Many market imperfections may be mitigated through the use of pensions. For example, the firm may be
able to invest at a greater rate of return than the worker can, whether because of tax wedges or transactions costs

in raising funds. If some funds are left for the firm to invest through pensions, both parties gain. In general,
this analysis looks at the benefits that go to the worker and firm together. The predominant prediction is that
possible efficiencies will he pursued.
 1The union auernpted to counter these employer- sponsored plans by instituting independent pension plans
of their own. While the firms concentrated on providing ftiturc old age benefits, the unions initially offered
only gciieral benefit progranis immediate benefits for sickness, disability, death and strikes appc-alcd more
to the younger worker they were trying to attract, 11mev gradually expanded the scope of progmaro benefits
and soon locused pimmarily on old-age payments. By 192K, about 40 percent of union members belonged to
national unions oli'cnng one form or another of old-age benefits. 'Iliese pensions were funded by assessments
on union members and they became mci casingly burdensome as the number of older workers increased.
l<aming union clues became more difficult especially with the advent of the Depression. Other demands on
tile unions' treasnncs, combined with the nation's financial chaos, resulted in the almost complete collapse
of all union welfare plans by the carI I 930s After social security was adopted in 1935, only a handful of
union plans survived and it was not until the Second World War that million interest in pensions revived.


                                                                 7
      Pensions have a straightforward tax benefit as a ftwni of compensation. They are not taxed at the time

 they are earned and returns to these investments are not taxed along the way. In any single instance, it is a
complex problem to figure out the precise tradeoff between a dollar of pension and a dollar of compensation.

 But virtually all analyses agree that under current tax provisions it is desirable to use some element of pensions

as part of the wage package (see Woodbury: AER, March 1983).
      Why should the government be promoting the use of pensions in this way? In 1983, some might
say that the problem for our economy is insufficient capital formation. But, government favoritism for
pensions stretches back to periods when it was thought that insufficient consumption in the economy was the

predominant problem. One possible explanation is that pensions tend to protect the government, much as flood

insurance and health insurance—both subsidized—protect it. If people reach old age without a visible means of

support, the government will be forced to support them.2




2At present, this is done through the Supplemental Security Jncome program.


                                                             8
                                       II. PENSIONS ANI) RE'I]REMENF

      We have argued that pensions serve several functions distinct from their effects on retirement. This sug-

 gests that pension plans will remain part of OUf economy, inevitably affecting retirement, conceivably in an
 adverse fashion. As we observe pension plans in operation, it may be difficult to determine their intended
 consequences for retirement, since they serve multiple purposes. Moreover, we may not be able to tell whether
 their design is optimal. At some junctures, we will discuss the form of optimal pension plans given retirement

objectives, stripping away other concerns. We shall also make predictions about the consequences of pensions
that have traditional structures on workers' retirement decisions.

      Why should pensions be used to affect retirement? A variety of reasons are identified in the models below.

They center on problems stemming from an inability to make enforceable contracts. Firms typically do not
reduce a worker's wages as he grows older, even though his productivity declines. If productivity could be
predicted as a function of age, then in the first-best contract, the worker would agree in advance to retire at
a particular age and the firm would offer a level wage over his lifetime. Even in this simplified world, where
critical uncertainties about the evolution of productivity have been eliminated, present regulatory structures

would make such contracting impossible. Congress recently raised the mandatory retirement age to 70. In
March 1983, such "protection" was accorded as well to state and local workers. There is some speculation that

prohibitions on mandatory retirement will be further relaxed.

     Many firms have discovered that the best way to guard against having to keep low productivity workers on

the payroll is to offer them pension inducements to depart. Such inducements are also in the interest of workers,
who would otherwise not be in a position to "promise" to retire.

     Pensions play a second major role vis-a-vis retirement by spreading risks in heterogeneous populations.

Suppose productivity and earnings were constant, but individuals come to differ over time in their disutility for

work. The critical policy issue is how to induce those with low disutility to continue working while providing

adequately for those who, say for reasons of ill health, are unable to continue productive endeavors, or could do

SO only at unacceptable cost.

     The analysis here focuses on these two concerns: inducing appropriate retirement and spreading risks
associated with factors affecting retirement. In past discussion of these issues, much has been made of the
question of the acturial fairness of pension plans. Such fairness is likely to turn out to he a legal issue as well as

an economic one. We believe that acturial fairness is an elusive Concept, with at least several dilfeicnt potential

                                                         9
definitions. Moreover, there is no concept of actuarial fairness that does a good job of capturing what we should

cxpect from pension plans across a variety of situations.



11(A) The Retirement Decision

      As a worker ages, several factors become important in influencing his decision to retire. Savings and
pension entitlements grow with work tenure; this raises the level of sustainable consumption during retirement.

This increase in consumption is further enhanced by the fact that additional work shortens the retirement
period. The disutility from work also rises as the worker ages and his health deterioriates. Eventually, produc-

tivity and outside opportunities decline, although real wages may not fall to reflect this fact. Near retirement.

workers have a more accurate idea of their life expectancy. They are better able to compare the tradeoff
between working and retirement. Other issues, such as the presumed improvement in the quality of life and
incresed longevity from retirement, are also important when making the retirement decision.

     The incentives to retire increase with age. The main factors influencing retirement are sketched below,




                                                                                                              L (R)




                          rXllars
                                                                                                             C2(R)



                                                                                                             F(P)



                                                                              P.

                                                                           Figure 1

where L(R)     = disutility of work at age R; W(R) =             wage   at R; C2(R) =   retirement consumption given
retirement at age R; F(R) = productivity at age R.

     The individual should continue working until the utility of working plus the higher retirement
                                                                                                          consump-
tion it affords falls short of the utility of retirement.




                                                            10
  11(13) Savings and Appropriate Retirement

       The decision to retire is based largely on a worker's post-retirement income and his perceived health and

 life expectancy. Workers with sufficient foresight can save for themselves. Alternatively, their employer can

 provide forced savings as part of the total compensation package. In the second-best world of labor contracting,

 it is not always advantageous for workers to have the option of choosing their level of savings. When a worker

 cannot commit himself to retire at the optimal age, pensions can induce him to retire earlier. By forcing a
 worker to save too much, pensions offset the externality created by the fact that wages do not fall during an

 older employee's less productive years.

       Firms base wages on the expected productivity of a worker over his lifetime with the firm. The wage
 schedule is decided in advance and is based on a worker's expected retirement age. Given the schedule, the

 worker is then free to choose when to retire. But, his actions must be consistent with what the firm expected him
 to do.

       Because wages stay constant over a worker's lifetime, he will not have sufficient incentives to retire when

 productivity is declining. Laws against mandatory retirement prohibit contractual agreements to retire at a
 prespecified age, and firms realize that, without a binding commitment, workers will delay their retirement.

 Accordingly, they reduce lifetime wages to compensate for the period of high wages and low productivity
before retirement.

      Pensions help solve this problem by providing economic incentives to retire at an earlier age.3 Pensions
put aside higher savings than the worker would choose and make them accessible only upon retirement. They

provide the counterbalance that speeds up retirement that otherwise would be suboptimally delayed bywages
higher than productivity.

      Under any given wage schedule, an employee would be better off if he could select both his savings and his

retirement age. But the same wage schedules are then not feasible. Workers who feel that they arc being forced

to save too much are not attracted by contracts without pensions because the freedom to save is more than offset

by the resulting lower wages (due to employer's inability to induce retirement).

     We illustrate this use of pensions in a simple model in which workers care only aboutconsumption and
leisure. They start with a firm at age Y0 and stay with the firm until they retire at age R. Wages are constant and

3Pension.s can also provide an cfl'cctive wage adjustment if they arc actuarially unthir to Workers who
postpone telirement [I azcar (1983)J. however, as discussed later, pensions that appear unfair may only be
a reflection of the heterogeneous lifespans in the population.


                                                               11
equal to expected productivity. A worker of age Y has productivity F(Y). The risk-neutral cirlployer, if he is

to attract any workers in a competitive equilibrium, must maximize hiS workers' expected utilities subject to the

zero profit constraint. Initially, we assume that the discount rate is zero for both workers and firms and that

everyone knows his exact lifespan. The results can be extended to include positive discounting and uncertain

life expectancy under the assumption that. perfect annuity markets exist.

      The worker's period utility is represented by U(C,L),



                         oU(C,L)/oC >0; 82U(C,L)/8C2 <0; aU(C,L)/oL <0,                                          (2.1)

where C is consumption and L is labor supply. Institutional requirements force the labor supply to be either L

or 0. The age-productivity profile is assumed first to rise as the worker gains experience and eventually to fall if

the worker stays past a sufficiently old age.

      It is optimal for consumption levels to be constant, given the labor supply, as there is declining marginal

utility from consumption. The worker chooses his consumption while employed, C1, and his consumption when

retired.        Since   both wages and consumption (while working) are constant, savings will also be a constant

fraction, a, of salary. The retirement decision, R, is constrained by the condition that savings must be sufficient

to meet the cost of the expected retirement consumption. Total lifetime utility is given by



                                          (R — Y0)U(c1, it) + (T — R)U(c2, 0)                                    (2.2)

      Consumption is financed out of earnings and savings. The budget constraint fir a worker earning wage
W can be separated into two parts, work-life and retirement. When working, his consumption is by definition

equal to his salary net of savings,



                                                            = W(1 —a).                                           (2.3)

The retirement age and post-retirement consumption are jointly determined. Given a desired level of pOSt

retirement consumption, a worker retires when his accumulated savings are sutticicnt to finance his consump-

tion. For a worker who knows that his life span is exictly 'I' years, this implies:
4As discussed earlier, there are tax advantais for savings in pensions. These deferred taxes result, all other
things eqlai. in an cifcctivcly lower discount rate for savings held by the firm. 'Ibis provides an additional
argument for pensions.


                                                                  12
                                                    WaFR—Y0]=[T—R]G2.                                      (2.4)

      A worker's lifetime wage is based on his expected productivity,



                                               W= j     Yo
                                                             F(Y)dY/[R—Y0}.                                (2.5)

 Assuming competitive conditions, a firm knowing a worker's R would offer him the wage defined by (2.5). If

 the worker could commit himself to retire at a prespecifled time, he would select R to maximize his utility,

 taking into account the effect on his wages of postponing retirement. (If there were uncertainties to unfold in
 the future, he would make contingent retirement commitments contingent on his condition).

      Unfortunately, a worker cannot commit himself to retire at a prcspecificd age. His wages must be deter-

 mined in advance, and independently from his actual retirement decision. Moreover, if productivity declines

later in life as is commonly the case, wages are likely to exceed productivity. A worker deciding on retirement

will equate marginal disutility with wage, whereas efficiency requires that it be equated with productivity. This

constellation of factors creates an inefficient situation. Workers, unable to commit themselves in advance to a
retirement date, will choose to retire "too late".

     The firm meets its zero profit constraint by choosing wages based on when it expects its employees to
retire, These assumptions must be consistent with the worker's chosen retirement age given the specified wage

rate. With this wage W over which he has no control, a worker chooses C1, C'2, a, and R to maximize his
lifetime utility subject to (2.3) and (2.4).

The Lagrangian may be written as


                               Max
                           Ci, C'2, a2R
                                               I.     U(C1, L)[R —   iJ + U(C2, O)[T — R]                 (2.6)



                           + X[W(1 — a)— C"] + j4WaR — Y0) — c2(T —.-R)].

The constrained optimal choice of',, C'2, a, and R yields



                                        Cj: U1(C1,L)[R—Y0J-—X=O                                           (2.7)

                                                              13
                                        C2: U2(2, O)fT R] — 4T — R] = 0                                        (2.8)



                                             a: — XW + jtW[R — Y0] = 0                                         (2.9)



                                   R: [U(C1, L) — U(C2, 0)] + 14Wa + C2] = 0                                  (2.10)

where U1 (C, L) = oU(C, L)/OC.
      The equations may be combined to provide two first-order conditions that are more intuitive:



                                                     U1(C11L) = U1(C2,0),                                     (2.11)


                                                            U(C2, 0) — U(Ci, L)
                                            Ui(C210)=                                                         (2.12)
                                                                     Wa+C2
Because there are perfect capital markets, resources will be transferred from the work period to the retirement

period until the marginal utilities of consumption are equalized. Working longer brings an extra Wa + in
savings. This must be balanced by the loss in utility from delaying retirement.

      The optimal solution is determined by jointly solving equations (2.3), (2.4), (2.10), (2.11), and (2.5); this
yields C, C, a, R' and the resulting W. If, at the retirement age, wages exceed productivity, F(R*) > W,
then workers will have incentives to work for an inefficiently long time. The firm can partially correct this

problem by forcing workers to save more.5 Raising savings in this way is shown to induce earlier retirement,
and this in turn ultimately results in higher wages.

      Since C1, C2, a, and R are all chosen optimally, small changes in their values will not affect expected

utility. The only way to improve expected utility is to raise W,



                                                + ÔEU dC2 8EU da ÔEU dR 9EU
                       dEU       ÔEU dC3
                                                  9C dW + ôa dW + oR dW + ow
                               —
                               —                                                                              213
                       dW        8C1 dW



                                                   = ?(1—a)+,taR— Y0)
Iargcr pcrinns increase workers' forced savings. To raise savings in equilibrium, we must assume that
workers cannot fully counter this eiicci by borrowing against their pension to restore current consumption.
We assume that there is no borrowing of this sort.


                                                                14
                                             = U1(C1,L)(R— Y0)> 0.

In equilibrium, as determined by equation (2.5), the wage rate is a function of the retirement age and produc-

tivity,


                                              dWF(R)—W
                                               dR        R—Y0                                           (.214

Theorem 1:      Under the assumption that F(R) < W, increasing the savings rate, a, above a* improves
expected utility, dLL > 0.
Proof:    From the assumptions of the theorem, earlier retirement raises wages,            < 0. Higher wages
improve expected utililty [equation (2.13)]. Thus, it only needs to be demonstrated that raising a hastens
retirement. This part of the proof is longer and more complicated. Differcntiating the budget constraints (2.3)
and (2.4) shows



                                                                                                        (2.15)



                            —R] — [Wa +              — a[R —            —
                                                                             W[R — Y0} =   0.           (2.16)
                                                                YOIç!
As W is affected by a only through R, we use equation (2.14) to substitute



                                                       = a[W_FR)]/                                      (2.17)

into Equation (2.16). Collecting terms, rewrite equation (2.16) as



                              [aFcR)+c2}= dc2[TR]WERY]                                                 (2.16')

    To determine dG2/da, difFerentiate Equation (2.12),


                      dG2                     1Ui(Ci, L)L + U1(C2, 0)(W + a)]
                                                                                                        (2.18)


                                                       15
Note from Equation (2.11) that U1(c1, L)     = U,(G2, 0). l'hus. substitute the value of dCj/da from (2.15) and
collect terms,


                                   dC2 — __________              [F(R) —   wjifL__
                                   dWa+C2)A(R—Y0)(Wa+C2)A                                                     L2 19)
where A   = —U11(C2, 0)/U1(C2, 0) is the measure of absolute risk aversion. It is now possible to sign dR/da
using (2.16'), (2.19) and (2.4),


                       dR —                         —W[R—Y01
                       da      aF(R)+C2 + Wa[W—F(R)]/[C2(Wa+C2)A]
                                                                                          <0                  (.220)

Changes in a affect expected utility only through changes in W. The argument above demonstrates that when

savings are "too high," retirement takes place earlier, wages are higher, and workers are better off. Essentially,

when choosing at and Rt, workers neglect the impact on their wages. This externality is reduced if the firm
chooses a > at; the worker is induced to retire earlier and expected utility increases.

     When the firm can choose the savings rate, its optimal choice, a,         is   greater than at (again under the
assumption that F(Rt) < W). Theorem 1 shows that raising a above at improves expected utility. The proof
that the optimal a is above at is left to the reader (and is available on request).

     If firms are providing pensions that are larger than workers' desired savings then why do we observe
any private savings taking place? Savings in the form of pensions is not a perfect substitute for other types
of savings. In particular, since pensions are accessible only upon retirement after the age of 55, they can-

not provide capital needed for large purchases (such as a house) or insurance against pre-retirement events
such as illness or unemployment. Some forms of savings outside of pensions—notably investment in home

ownership—arc encouraged and subsidized by the government. The value of their house, net of mortgage,
forms the largest part of most families' savings.




                                                         16
  11(C) life-Expectancy_and Retirement — Who Gains, Who LOSeS
        A major role of pensions is to induce workers to retire. This role will become even more important if

  the current movement against mandatory retirement succeeds. Pcnsions may provide economic incentives to

  retire in two significant ways: (1) pensions provide savings that can be accessed only during retirement; (2)
 pensions may not be actuarially fair to workers who retire after normal retirement age. The forced savings role

 of pensions is discussed in the previous section. This section concentrates on the actuarial value of the pension
 as a function of the retirement date.

       Workers in their later years earn wages greater than their productivity and thus have incentives to working

 after their first-best retirement date. Lazear (1982) argues that it is possible to correct for this externality by
 reducing the actuarial value of pensions to workers who postpone retirement. Changing thc compensation

 through pensions is a graceful way to lower the "effective" wage (salary plus pension value) and restore incen-
 tives to retire early.

       A first look at the data seems to confirm this observation (see the Appendix). Most defined benefitplans

 reduce benefits only by 4% to 6% for each year of early retirement (before age 65). For workers retiring after

 65, pensions arc generally not increased (except to take account of extra years of service). If all workers had

 identically distributed life spans, then, as illustrated in the model below, an actuarially fair benefit reduction
 for early retirement would be close to 9.6% and benefits would be similarly increased for late retirement.6 This

 significantly larger factor reflects the fact that early retirement gives an extra year of benefits now; the costs
occur over a discounted and uncertain future and are proportionally less important.

      Consider a worker with pension P per year that is reduced (increased) by fraction b for eachyear of early

(late) retirement, Workers know only the probability distribution of their death date. The real discount rate is
3%,7 No retirement is allowed before age 55. At age 55, a worker's chance of living untilage 55 +r is G(r). With

a uniform distribution of life spans bewtwcen 55 and 90, G(r) = I - r/35. The equality defining an actuarially

fair adjustment for retirement at age 55+ r - 1 is


                                         35                                    p35
                          [1 — b(r)]PJ         e°31[I — t/35]dt = PJ e03t[1 — t/35]dt                          (2.21)
                                         r—J                                   r
°ltulow (1981) demonstrated that workers who retire early should take advantage of the early retirement
option rather than wait until the noirnal retirement age before collecting benefits.

7lf inflation were recocuized in the design of the pension plan. and if it were constant, all caluclations
using real dollars would pertain. Gi en that most pension plans deal in noioinal dollars, sariable inflation
rates impose risk costs on the worker unless inflation indexation is pr:rfect and immediate.


                                                                17
 This implies


                                                                          f7
                                   b(r) rj e03t[35 — t]dt = Jr—1
                                                               e_3t[35 — t]dt.                                    (2.22)

 At age 65, r =    10 and   the appropriate penalty for early retirement is



                        b(r) = {[33.3t — 55.5]e°3' J1O}/{[33 3t — 55                 5]e°31 }             .096.   (2.23)

 Results   above suggest that with most penalties smaller than 6 percent per year of early retirement (and no
 bonus for late retirement), workers who retire late receive relatively less pension benefits than those who retire

 early.

       Appearances may be deceiving. When workers have different life spans and know these differences, then

 the decision about when to retire is highly correlated with age. Workers who know that they have relatively

 longer life spans work later into their life. The literature of gerontology suggests that workers who retire early

have shorter life spans. For example, the work of Haynes et al (1979) demonstrates that the mortality rate of
early retirees is higher than would be expected if no self-selection was occurring.

      The fact that pensions do not seem to rise very fast with retirement age may reflect the different life

expectancies for the different retiring age groups. Indeed, given the structure and parameters of most defined
benefit plans, workers who postpone retirement receive relatively more benefits than those who retire earlier.
Otherwise there would be a severe problem of adverse selection. If workers who retire early were given larger

benefits to compensate them for their shorter life expectancy, then workers with long life expectancies would

also retire early.8 The pension plan could not afford to pay pensions based on short life expectancies to workers

with long life spans who retire early.9 The model presented below shows that workers who retire early are

actuarially penalized in a typical defined benefit pension plan. This may be necessary to give workers with
longer life expectancies sufficient incentives to remain in the labor force.
8One theoretical solution to this, problem would be to stop paying pensions after twenty years of retirement.
Indeed, sonic plans allow the workers to take the Pension's actuarial value in a lump sum payment. If
this were required rather than an option, workers with longer lifespans would have less incentive to take
advantage of early retirement provisions.

9This problem is coml)licated if, as is common, the pension plan gives a su1iving spouse a substantial
fraction of the worker's benefits. The problem will he mitigated if variability in expecled benefits arc less
variable once spounse' benefits are included. We do not consider survivors' benefits in this analysis, leaving
for the future such interesting questions as the conelation among hId expectancies of worker and his spouse
tic., do young women seek as husbands older workers with high pensions o1firing survivor clauses?) or the
extent to which workers take into account when making retirement decisions the welfare of their spouse
after their own death.


                                                                 18
       The typical defined benefit pension plan has payments proportional to a function of wages'°multiplicd
  by years of service with a multiplicative linear penalty for early retirement. A worker entering at age Y0 and
  retiring at R receives an annual pension



                                           àF(W)[R—Y0][1+(R---R)p] Y<J
       P(R) =



                                           aF(W)ER—YO]                                        Y>i                (2.24)

 When a firm can choose the fraction of wages, , normal retirement date, R, and the early retirement penalty,

 ,@, then the pension payment for retirement before age R can be written as a general quadratic function of R,



                                                 P(R) =A[R2+BR+C}                                                (2.25)
 where A = —FxP(W)f3;            B = [1 — /3(] + Y0)]//3; C = Y0(3 — 1)/13.
 The pension payment for retirement after age R is a linear function of. as seen in equation (2.24). There

 is some loss in generality when wages are not also a function of retirement age and seniority. However, at
 least for pattern plans, F(W) is a constant and this effect is unimportant. At present, we are concerned with
 demonstrating the effect of life span on retirement decisions and the actuarial value of pensions, and hence

 assume that wages and productivity are constant over the life span. Wages are not affected by the retirement
 date. The discount rate is zero and conditional on the labor supply, the marginal utility of consumption is
constant. Thus, retirement decisions will be based solely on expected longevity.

      A worker who knows that his life span will be exactly T years and who faces a pension schedule, P(R),
chooses his retirement age R to maximize his expected lifetime utility,



                              EU = U((1 — a)W,L)[R — Y0] + U(P(R), O)[T —H].                                     (2.26)

'The first-order condition determining the optimal retirement date is



  ___________              P'R)[T T RIU1(P(R), 0) = U(PR), 0) — U((1 — a)W, L.                                   (2.27)
'01n conventional plans this may be some average of final-year wages. In pattern   plans,   the function would
be a constant.


                                                               19
                                                       be solved explicitly for R as a function of]' under the earlier
For retirement prior to age R this equation can

assumption of a quadratic pension plan and constant marginal utility of consumption,

[2AR+ABJ[T—R]U1(0, 0) = A[R2 +BR+C}U1(0, 0) —(1 —a) WU1(0, L) + U(o, 0)— u(o, L) (2.28)

Let-y equal the ratio of the marginal utility of consumption when retired to when employed, =            U1(O,   0)/U1(0, L).
DefineL as the disutility from work measured in wage units, [U(0, 0) — U(0, E)]/U1(0, 0). Then, (2.28) can be
reduced to

                  R(T)= [T_B+                                                                                     (2.29)


      For retirement after age ,         pension benefits rise linearly wtih age. The optimal retirement date as a

 function of life span is

                                  R(T) =         + Y0 + ((1— a)'y —                                               (2.30)


  Usually, there will be some overlap between these solutions; during this period all workers choose to retire at

  age 7. A small difference in the marginal incentives for retirement before versus after R may induce a large
  segment of the work force to retire at .

       To illustrate an example of the optimal retirement decisions, let pension benefits be 1.5 percent of net

  wages for each year of service with a 5 percent reduction for each year of early retirement before age 65:
  =   .015,   =   .05,   F(W) =    (1
                                        - a)W, and   fl =   65.   The disutility from work is .57W. Saving 14 percent of

  wages balances the budget when population life spans are triangularly distributed between ages 59 and 88. 'l'hc

  solution to the optimal retirement decision is graphed below in Figure 2.
                                                       !tirTent qe as a Ftniction
                                                               of Life Span


                              68

                              66

                              64
                          R
                              62

                              60

                              58




                                          59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73 75 77 79 81 83 85 87                      89

                                                                               T
                                                                         20
     Who wins and who k)ses? Ihe value of a pcns!on to a workcr with lifespan 1' is



                              V(T) = P(R(T))[T—R(T)] —aW[fl(T) —              Y0].                       (2.31)

Living Iongcr changes this value by



                                      V'(T) = P(R(T)) — R'(T)(W — L)                                     (2.32)

where P'(R) was substituted in from equation (2.27). Workers who live longer have greater pension benefits

provided that their replacement ratio, P/W, exceeds their incremental time in the labor force, R', times the net
dollar value of working. I — L/w.     In the example presented above, pension value strictly increases with life
span (and hence retirement age) as illustrated below.




                                         Net Actuarial Value as a
                                          Function of Death Date



         5W




 V
         0




       - 5W




                59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73 75 77 79 81 83 85 87 89
                                                         T

                                                 Figure 3
                                                        21
                        III. OPTIMAL PENSIONS Will-I UE1'EROGENEOUS POPULATIONS

      What are the consequences of oulering a single pension plan to a heterogeneous population? Models in

various areas, ranging from insurance markets to health coverage to labor contracting, have shown that impor-

tant problems arise when a single policy is applied to a heterogeneous population. Pensions in some sense
combine elements of all of these models.

      Heterogeneity would pose no difficulty if it could be readily diagnosed and if different policies could
be offered to workers with different characteristics. Such screening is impossible in practice for a variety of

reasons. The differences among workers may be imperceptible to the employer. Moreover, the pension contract
           11__ _I___       1__ tt___                rl_ Ifl'_!,t                                    •1
is generaiiy urawn up tong oerure many ot we wiierenuaurig criaracterisucs manitesi wemseives to anyone,
                                                                                                                 1__

including the worker. It would be a violation of the earlier contract to exclude any worker from a pension
option." Legal restrictions and general labor practices make it exceedingly difficult to afford different treatment

to workers who, despite differences in some present characteristics, have the same employment histories. Unless

pensions are negotiated through collective bargaining, corporations are prohibited from offering different pen-
sions to different classes of workers. Thus, a corporation is not permitted to have different pension plans for
white collar and blue collar workers.



111(A) The Order of Retirement

      The decision to retire is determined by many factors; the following models focus on the role of life expec-

tancy and disutility from work. All other things equal, workers who live longer or who enjoy work more will

choose to retire later. This result is true for any pension plan whose annual payments do not decrease with

retirement age.

      Consider workers of type i = (A,B) who enter the labor force at age Y and retire at age R with pension

P(RZ) and life expectancy T. Utility when employed is U(CZ, i) and when retired is U(P(R), 0). Assume
that it is optimal for A to retire before B, R, <RB. Because A retires earlier, his annual pension payment is

smaller, P(Rn) <P(RB).


"In theory, the corporation could make a contract for the way it treats the work force as a whole. For
example. it could commit itself to have no more than 25% early retirements. An alternative means of
allowing for difl'ercntial treatment, yet proiding adherence to earlier contract,s, is to oiler to pay someone
(not necessarily the worker) an amount that depends on the action that is taken relative to the worker. This
latter case simply creates a mechanism to make the contract self-enforcing.


                                                                 22
 'theorem 2: Under the assumptions stated above, worker B, who retires later, must either have a longer life
 expectancy, a greater utility when employed, or both.



 Proof: The fact that each worker prefers his retirement date implies:




 U(PRA), O)(TA —RA) + U(GA,A)(RA — YA)                          U(PRB), O)(TA —RB) + U(GA,A)(RB               YA), (3.1)



 U(PRB), O)(TB —RB)               U(G,B)RB — YB)                U(PcRB), O)(TB—RA) + U(CThB)RA — YB).              (3.2)

 Adding these inequalities together yields



                 (RA — RB)EU(CB, B) — U(CA, A)J IU(P(RB), 0) — U(P(RA), 0)](TA —
                                                                                 TB).                              (3.3)

 Any contradiction to the theorem would require the worker who retires earlier to have both a longer expected

 life span and greater utility from work, TA > TB and U(CA, A) > U(CB, B). However, this must violate
 equation (3.3).



111(B) The Costs of Postponing Retirement Under Optimal Pensions

      If two groups differ in terms of either length of life or utility from work, one group will always retire before

the other. This no-switching property results more generally when the indifference curves of differentgroups

have a single crossing point (SCP).'2 We assume that this no-switching property applies to retirement decisions,
and assume further that all workers have the same utility function when retired. There is neither reemployment

nor outside income once retired. Moreover, given that retirement is preferable to working, the schedule of

annual pension payments must be increasing with age; otherwise, workers would choose to retire earlier. The

higher annual pension payments to workers who retire later imply that they have a lower marginal utility of
consumption.

      Here we shall seek the optimal pension scheme; it is the benefit schedule that maximizes the sum of the

individuals' utilities subject to a budget constraint. A salient feature of the optimal pension schedule is that it is
12Coopcr (1983) nicely categorizes some general properties of the optimal second-best solutions in problems
with adverse selection or moral hazard when the agents' preferences obey SCP.


                                                               23
 actuarially unfavorable for a specified individual to retire later. The logic supporting this result parallels that in

 the optimal taxation literature: it is desirable to tax those with lower marginal utilities of income (penalize late

retirees in this instance) to redistribute income to those with higher marginal utility of income (early retirees).

At least initially, efficiency loss associated with inappropriately influencing work or retirement are outweighed

by the utility gains from the income transfer. This result is formalized in Theorem 3.



Theorem 3: The SCP property is sufficient to imply that with the optimal pension scheme, the value of pen-

sions plus wages net of productivity must be actuarially larger for a worker who chooses to retire earlier; i.e.,

any particular worker who retires earlier will receive pensions plus total wages (net of productivity) with a
higher actuarial value.

Comment: It is still possible that the type of workers who choose to retire earlier may be the ones with lower

pensions; indeed, as seen in 11(C), current pension plans actuarially favor later retirees. Thus, in the subsequent

discussion it is important to distinguish between the differences in the actuarial value of a particular worker's

pension based on his decision when to retire (individual fairness) and the differences between the actuarial
value of a pension for different types of workers (cohort fairness). It is also important to maintain the assump-

tion that reemployment once retired is not permitted: otherwise, workers would retire if their pension value
began to decline and then seek reemployment.



Proof: In the proof, we take productivity and wages as given; pensions are adjusted to achieve the result. The
firm offers the worker a choice between various retirement dates and their associated pension benefit, (R,P(R)).

The first part of the proof demonstrates that each worker must be indifferent between his retirement date and

the one preceeding his. Given indifference, earlier retirement is shown to cost the firm more. Intuitively the

optimal pension scheme will distribute the largest feasible benefits to workers retiring early since they receive

the lowest payment and thus have the highest marginal utility of income. Because early retirees' pensions are

maximized, late retirees will be pushed to the point of indifference between their chosen retirement date and

retiring earlier. However, if the late retirement benefit had a higher actuarial value, the pension plan could
improve welfare by eliminating the expensive option; the late retiree is indifferent to retiring earlier so that his
utility is the same but the total cost to the firm is smaller.

     Consider the first worker to retire who strictly prefers his retirement date to the one preceding his. This is

                                                           24
 the case with worker C illustrated in Figure 4. Lower his pension and raise the benefits for worker B. Since C

 strictly preferred retiring atRc rather than R13, it is possible to raise PRB) and lower P(Rc) without inducing

 C to retire earlier. Raising P(RB) does not result in A retiring later because A must strictly prefer retiring atRA

 to R. This strict preference follows from the single crossing property and the fact that B is indifferent between

 retiring at RA and B (as C was the first worker to strictly prefer his retirement date over the preceding one).

 By transferring money from worker C to B, social welfare is improved; worker B has a smaller pension and thus

 a higher marginal utility of income. An optimal pension scheme must make workers indifferent between their
 retirement date and the preceding retirement date.

      Since workers are indifferent between their chosen retirement date and the preceding one, it directly fol-

 lows that the later (and chosen) retirement date must have a lower total cost to the firm. If not, simply eliminate

the later retirement date. The worker then takes the earlier retirement; he is indifferent. His utility remains
constant, but the total cost to the pension fund is smaller. The excess profits can be redistributed to make
everyone better off.

     This result holds for a broad range of problems. Workers may have varying life spans, differing disutilities

from work, and unequal productivities. However, in all these problems the marginal utility of income is a
decreasing function of retirement age; workers who retire later receive larger pension payments and thus have

smaller marginal utilities of income. The theorem would be reversed if the marginal utility of income rose as

a function of retirement age; then, the value of pension payments plus wages net of productivity would be
more than actuarially fair for workes who delayed their retirement. This situation might ocur if the primary
differences among individuals is outside income. If those who retire early are the ones with high outside income

and thus low marginal utility of income then the optimal pension scheme (plus wages net of productivity) must
be actuarially advantageous to a worker who chooses to retire later. Theorem 3 has a simple generalization.



Theorem 3':     The SCP property is sufficient to imply that with the optimal pension scheme, the value of
pensions plus wages net of productivity must be acturially larger for a worker who chooses to retire earlier
(later) if marginal utililty of consumption decreases (increases) with retirement age.

     The proof for Theorem 3' needs only one small modification to incorporate the generalization when the

marginal utility of consumption increases with retirement age. Then, workers will all be indifferent between
their retirement date and the fbllowing one. In this case, the earlier retirement date cannot be more expensive as


                                                       25
    otherwise it will be eliminated.

         An illustration of Theorem 3, i.e., when marginal utility of income declines with retirement age, is
 presented in the following section.




                                                                                      //
                                                                                    /
                                                             //              -i /



p
                            R




                                                    R

                                               Figure 4




                                                        26
  111(C) I)isuiility and Optimal Pensitrn Design

       Disutility of work generally increases with age. Given institutional constraints against shortened work

 weeks, eventually the disutility of labor becomes large enough to induce retirement [see, for example, 1-lausman

 and Wise (1983)1. Workers would like to be able to insure themselves against prematurely having a high
 disutility from work. This problem is most severe when the worker is actually disabled and can no longer work.

 A disability is an extreme form of disutility from work. To illustrate an application of Theorem 3, this section

 presents a simplified version of a model initially studied by Diamond and Mirrlees (1978). Pensions are used

 to support disabled workers, an extreme case that simplifies exposition. Qualitatively these results apply to the
 range of situations where the decision to retire is based on the level of disutility from work.

       Pensions, as they were originally conceived, can he viewed as insurance to workers who are disabled
 and forced to retire (or have high disutility and would choose to do so). However, a problem arises when
the disabililty is not observable or verifiable. Healthy workers must have sufficient incentives to remain work-

ing. Consequently, less insurance is provided than in the first-best solution when the disability is observable.

Insurance can still be provided to workers who can prove that they are disabled—witness the separate provisions

for early retirement with certain restricted and verifiable disabilities.

      To highlight the insurance feature of pensions, let the disability affect neither the utility of consumption

nor the worker's life expectancy.13 There may be some exogeneous utility loss but, effectively, the disability
simply forces the worker to retire. It is easiest to imagine that the disutility from labor is initially zero and
becomes infinite if the worker remains in the labor force after he is disabled.

      In a first-best contract, pensions are conditional on the worker becoming disabled and there is no problem

of adverse selection. Disabilities occur stochastically. Pensions should be constant, independent of the retire-
ment date. This is demonstrated below.

      Let utility from income V be U(Y), whether working or not. 'l'he discount rate is zero. 'The disability

takes place at age R with probability distribution h(R) and is verifiable. Workers all have a life expectancy of

exactly T years. The savings and contributions to pensions have previously taken place; there is a fixed amount

of savings, S. available to fund the pension scheme (and no other private savings are allowed). While working,

employees are given their constant marginal product, W. The optimal pension payment, P4(R), is constant and

independent of the retirement date. There is, however, a maximum retirement date, R. liven workers who
'31)isabilitics do shorten litspans. Models of pensions with helerogencous life expectancies are considered
in the I)rcvioUS   SeCtiOn.




                                                                27
are healthy should retire by R in order to receive some benefit from the pension savings. A worker's utility is

maximized subject to the constraint that the expected pension payout equal the pension savings,



  Max
         L=/       {U(W)R — Y0J      + U(P(R))[T
ft,PR)


                        +X S — J P(R)[T — R]h(R)dR — P(R)[T —                     — H(i)].                 (3.5)
                                Yo


The first-order conditions are



                    U'(P(R))[T — R]h(R) —          — R]h(R)    =0—          U'(P(R))   =                   (3.6)



                          [U(W) — U(P(k)] [I — H(f)]        + XP(f?)[1 — H(i)J = 0.                        (3.7)

Together they imply that the pension is constant and



                                    U(P(f)) — U(W) = U'(P(i))P(i).                                         (3.8)

     Depending on the level of savings, S, there are three possible solutions to the firstorder conditions. The
maximum retirement date is chosen to make the constant pension, P(R), affordable. If this is possible, the level

of pensions does not depend on the amount of pension savings. As the savings become larger, the maximum

retirement date is simply shifted forward. It is conceivable that the savings are sufficiently small that P(R) is

never affordable; then, there is no maximum retirement date (i   = T) and the pension payments are just large
enough to exhaust the budget, P = S/(T — R) where R is the expectation of the disability date. At the other
less realistic extreme, when savings arc larger than needed to finance P(k), everyone retires immediately and

the savings arc equally distributed, P = S/[T — Y0}.

    It is impossible to provide the same constant pension scheme when disabilities are not verifiable. All
workers would choose to retire at the earliest possible age. The problem is then to give high pensions to workers

who are disabled at a young age without inducing other healthy workers to retire. The optimal second-best

solution is obtained when the feasible pension for the youngest disabled worker is maximized. As seen in the

                                                       28
 first-best solution, the ideal pension is equal for all workers. When pension payments arc unequal, welfare can

 be improved by transferring pension wealth from workers who receive high payments to workers who receive

 lower payments. The problem of adverse selection results in workers who are disabled young receiving the
 lowest pension. To the extent that it is feasible (in terms of both the budget constraint and the self-selection

 constraint) to raise the payments to young disabled workers, welfare is improved.

       In the constrained optimal solution, a healthy worker must be indifferent between retiring and working (as

 proven in I)iamond and Mirrlees (1978)). 'Ihis holds if pension benefits satisfy the relationship,



                                  U(W) — U(P(R)) + U'(P(R))P'(R)[T — R]                = 0.                         (3.9)

 This differential equation determines the minimum increase in pensions with retirement age necesary to
 prevent healthy workers from pretending that they are disabled. Under this formulation, a worker's retirement
 age is a matter of indifference, and a worker is assumed to continue working until he becomes disabled. Because

 of the indifference to retirement date, utility at the time of retirement when disabled is identical to the utility at
 the minimum retirement date,'4 R0, with pension P(R0),



                 U(W)[R —      Y0]   + U(P(R))[T — R}             U(W)[R0 — Y0] + U(P(R0))[T —R0}.                (3.10)

 Since the utililty is identical for all workers, expected utility is also equal to this representative utility. As can be

seen from Equation (3.10), expected utility increases with P(R0).

      The pension payments are chosen to rise just fast enough to keep workers from retiring until they are
disabled. There is also a maximum retirement age, R*. Because pensions are constant from R* onward, at age

R*, all remaining workers will choose to retire, disabled or not. The budget constraint requires that the cost of

the pensions, B(P(R0), R*), must equal the pension savings, S, where




B(P(R0), R*) = ii(R0)P(R0)[T — R0]           +f       P(R) [T — R]h(R)dR +11— Ii(R)]P(R*)[T — R*]. (3.11)


     The choice of R leads to an R0 which in turn determines expected utility. Recall that P(R) is determined
by the initial conditions and equation (3.9),
14Vorkcrs who are disabled before the minimum retirement date slop working but do not stall collecting
JCl1SiOflS until age Re,.


                                                             29
                                    f 1?

                      P(R0) + J [U(P(z)) — U(W)]/[U'(P(x))(T — x)]dx                         R0 <R <R*
P(R) =



                                           P(J*)                                   R > R*                   (3.12)

Increasing P(R0) increases P(R) for R between R0 and R. Hence, the cost of an increase in P(R0) is unam-

biguously positive,



                                                 OB(P(R0),R*)/oP(R0) > 0.                                   (3.13)

It is possible to increase P(R0) and satisfy the budget constraint only so long as OB(P(R0) ,R)/c9R4         < 0,
where


                               ___________ = El _H(R*)][P(R*)(T_R*) —_P(R)]                                 (3.14)


                                   — [1
                                           —
                                               H(R*)][U(P(R*)) — U(%4/) — P(R*)U/(P(R*))
                                                                                                            (3. 14')
                                                                  U'(P(R))

To maximize P(RO), the optimal choice of R* occurs at the unique solution'5 to8B/OR* = 0,



                                       U(P(R*)) — U(W) — P(R*)UF(P(R*))              = 0.                   (3.15)

      Because pensions rise with retirement age, workers receive less than perfect insurance. Workers who are

disabled later benefit at the expense of those who must retire early. On the other hand, Theorem 3 still applies;

pensions rise more slowly than is actuarially fair.

      At the maximum retirement age, R*, pensions rise exactly at the actuarially fair rate. From equation (3.14),

Pf(R*) = PR*)/[T — Ri]. A comparison of second derivatives16 shows that the actuarially fair curve is
'5For small values of R, ÔB/ôR is negative. To see that there is a unique solution to 013/811*      =
                                                                                                    ()
observe from Fquation (3.1 'I') that at any solution to 81?/OI?  =
                                                                0, the second derivative, t92B/o11*2 =
__(1l(l)V*))P(R*)(T — R)/L7'(P(I?))2, which is positive.
'6'lhc second derivative of the actuarially fair curve is P" = 2P'/(T —11) while the curve that keeps
workers inditThicnt about retirement age has a larger second derivative. 1'"   =
                                                                              21"/(T — I?) —
Since the curves are tangent at Ii', the actuarially fair curve must lie below the indifference curve for
II < 11*.


                                                                 30
stccpcr than P(R) for rctiremcnt bcforefl. Sccond-bst pensions must be as illustrated in Figure 5 hcli.

                                           Pensions   as a Function of
                                                 Petirient Age
                                                                                                     fair
                                                                                       equilibrium

                                                                                       optimal
              p




                                                       B

     As   an example of the second-best solution, consider workers who arrive at age 60 each with 60 units of

pension savings. Life span is known to be exactly 20 years. The probability of disability is uniform between ages
60 and 80. While the individual works, his wages are 2. Utility is logarithmic and there is no disutility from.

work until disabled. The first-best pension plan (when disabilities are verifiable) offers an annual benefit of 5.4

to disabled workers and permits everyone to retire after 13      years . When disabilities are unobservable, the

constrained optimumal pension offers an annual benefit of 3.3 for retirement at age 60 and rises exponentially

to a maximal payment of 5.4 for retirement at age 70. Between ages 60 and 70, only disabled workers retire: at

age 70, all remaining workers retire.

     The problem becomes more complicated if, as might be expected, disutility (perhaps due to illness) is

negatively correlated with life expectancy. The expected cost of offering a pension plan will be greater than

in the case where retirement decisions and life expectancy are unrelated. This phenomenon is referred to as

adverse correlation, The effect of adverse correlation may be of actuarial advantage to late-retiring cohorts.

     An interesting area of speculation concerns the role played by the distribution of disability dajes. In an

optimal plan, the relative rewards to individuals retiring at ages 65 and 70 may depend on the sites of those

two groups. Yet, the sizes of the two groups could hardly have anything to do with actuarial fairness. Workers

who arc disabled early may have relatively lower pensions to counter the problem of adverse selection. If these

early retirees received an actuarially fair pension, large numbers of relatively healthy workers might prefer early

retirement, an outcome which is not feasible. This leads to the hypothesis that the distortion away from the

first-best solution Ls greater for young retirees than fur old retirees: favorable early retirement options create

moral hazard problems for a relatively large number of workers while favorable late retirement options have

little adverse effect on workers who had to retire early.


                                                            31
                       IV. MERGE1) PENSIONS ANt) STRICT PAREtO INFERIORI'FY

      A major theme of informational economics is that inefficiencies arc generated when individuals with

differing characteristics are treated alike. The equal treatment may result from a regulatory requirement or
an inability to distinguish between workers' characteristics. 1)espitc the overall inefficiency, one group usually

benefits at the expense of the other. 1-ugh-risk drivers benefit when they are lumped in the pool with low-

risk drivers. Under ERISA, all companies are charged the same premium for insurance: this helps the poorly

funded pension plan at the expense of the well funded.

      The effects of pooling are of considerable importance in retirement plans. The government is becoming

increasingly involved in legislation in this area. Raising the permissible mandatory retirement age creates a
problem of separating populations that did not previously need to be separated. Presently, there is serious
discussion about eliminating all mandatory retirement ages. Legislation that requires pensions to be constant
across a firm becomes more significant with the growth of conglomerates. When two disparate firms merge,

there is a tendency to integrate towards the more generous pension plan, in part because of contractual obliga-

tion. The issue is perhaps most salient with regard to discussion of altering pension programs, which at present

frequently differ by sex.17 As workers have very different needs, desires, and life expectancies, there is no single

neat solution to the Social Security problem. Thcre will be an inevitable tug-of-war between the white collar

workers who want to work into their later years and the blue collar workers who want to retire as soon as
possible. Interestingly, both groups might be better off ifeach were able to have a plan of its own.

     What is the cost of combining two pension plans? This question cannot be answered in general, for it
depends upon how the workers vary. To simplify, consider a company with two groups of workers, A and B.

One Pareto optimal outcome will have the preferred pension for group A; call it P*(A), and likewise for B and

p*(l3) The constraint is that each of these contracts must be chosen from among those that break even. Assume
for further simplifIcation that there is no variabililty within groups.

     There is no loss in combining the plans if the As prefer P*(A) to P'(B) and the Bs prefer P*(B). Our

experience with insurance models suggests that this may not be the case. If, as U.S. law requires, the two
groups are merged under a common pension offering both plans, the As might choose P*(B). This leads to a

problem since P*(B) is not achievable when used by both A and B type workers. 'ftc general solution under

such circumstances is to alter P*(B), making it less attractive to the As until they just choose their own l)lafl [see
17The United States Supreme Court is presently deciding whether women, although they live longer on the
average, should pay the same insurance premiums and he paid the same pension benefits as men.


                                                             32
    Nichols and Zeckhauser(1978)I. At the same time, the plan for the As need not be self-supporting: there can be

    a cross-subsidy to the plan intended to attract the As. If so, we may get a pair made up of a somewhat distorted

    P(B) that makes money and a subsidized P(A).'8

         The pension problem is considerably more complex than the standard area of application of information

    economics. It leads to qualitatively new phenomena. It is quite possible that the optimal plan for As in isolation

    will be chosen by the Bs and that the preferred plan for the Bs in isolation will be chosen by As. If so,
    both groups may suffer losses from the merger of their pension funds. This is demonstrated below.

         Two companies with different type of employees have each worked out their own optimal pension plan.

    All contributions have already been made and the per capita funds in the two plans are equal at 3/2 per worker.

    There are two periods remaining. The employees of the two firms have the common expected utility function



                                             EU = U(C1) + psU(C2) — D(L)                                        (4.1)

    where

          C = consumption in periods i, i = (1,2),
          PS     the probability of survival in the second period,

          L=    the first-period labor supply, either 0 if retired or 1 if working,

         D'(L) = the disutility of work, D1(0) = 0, i =        (1,2).

   The functional form of the utility function is the same for all employees. It is concave, hence risk averse, and is

   given by



     2                                                 U(C) = —oo C < 1                                         (4.2)
     1
U(c) 1
                                                    U(C)=C
                  I       .L'   2

                      C
                 Figure6                                         3           3
                                                     U(C)= C>
   18Such a subsidy is not posiblc in a competitive market in which the As and ils can he distinguished. A
   firm could make positive profits by oficring only the l'(!3) plan and not hiring any A type workers.


                                                                 33
      The employees of company A have the following characteristics



                             Ps =       D'(1) = 3/5; marginal product = 0.                                      (4.3)

 Since their marginal product is zero, it is optimal for them to retire immediately. With their accumulated

pension savings of 1 units per capita, the optimal plan yields



                                              C=1; C=1                                                          (4.4)



                                    EU4   = U(1) --- U(1) —D(O) =                                               (4.5)

Note that this is also actuarially feasible, since the expected total pension =   C'j + pgC' = 1   ,   which is the

original accumulated pension savings.
     The employees of company B have the characteristics



                           Ps = 1; D'3(1) = 5/4; marginal product = 3/2.                                        (4.6)

Here, the optimal strategy for a B employee is to work in the first period, retire in the second. He receives



                                                = 3/2; C = 3/2                                                  (4.7)



                                 EU'3 = U(3/2) + U(3/2) —D'3(1) =
                                                                  1.                                            (4.8)

     1'his   consumption pattern is also actuarially supportable, since expected total consumption =       C+
psC = 3 = total pension savings + marginal product.
     Now assume that the two pension plans are merged. Who will benefit and who will lose? First, notice that

if offered the opportunity, any A would prefer B's pension plan to his own. That is, he would work in the first
period if by doing so he could earn a consumption stream of 3/2, 3/2. This yields



                               EUt = U(3/2) +
                                                     U(3/2)
                                                               —
                                                                   D'(1) =   1.                                 (4.9)


                                                       34
 And, somewhat surprisingly, 13 would prefer A's plan. B would retire in the first period with a consumption
 stream of 1,1.



                                            EUB = U(1) + U(1) = 2                                         (4.10)

 The comparisons are as follows:

                                                   Expected utility



                                                                AB

                                              A'8 plan 1 2

                                           B's plan 1 1
This paradoxical situation arises only when A's pension program is not supportable if B's comprise the popula-

tion, and B's is not supportable if As comprise the population. The difficulty is that any program that gets the
productive Bs to work will also induce the nonproductive As to work; if the low life-expectancy As retire, the Bs
will also retire.

     The choice for the merged pension plan is to have both groups retire or to have both groups work in
the first period. Given this constraint, there exists no pension plan that breaks-even and offers either group a
situation as favorable as the one with which it started.

     Let there be equal numbers of As and Bs, normalized to 1 for each group. Assume that both retire early.
There is a total of 3 units of pension savings. Given that U(C) = —00 forC < 1, we must have C1 =            =
1. But this consumption program will take 4 units of consumption for A and 2 for B. It is infeasible. Any plan

that induces both individuals to retire in the first period must offer each them a lower expected utility than he
had with his initial plan.

     Consider now plans that induce both A and 13 to work for one period. The total resources available will be

3 of pension savings plus 4 from B's production, which equals 4. The first-best outcome for B is to receive a

consumption stream of 3/2, 3/2, since additional consumption offers no utility. But this consumption stream is

                                                           35
 not supportable for the combined groups, because A would require 3/2 in the first period and his probability of

 survival, 1/2, times 3/2 in the second, totaling 2. Adding to B's requirement of 3, the required resources are
 5, but only 4 is available.
       The best supportable consumption stream for A is 3/2, 1. (Both A and B get 3/2 in the first period. A gets

 an expectation of 1/2 in the second period while B gets 1). But since A's disutility of work is 3/5, he too must
 lose from a merged pension plan where both work.

      The conclusion is that all pension plans for the merged group leave both parties strictly worse off than they

 were in isolation. This demonstration was facilitated by having a utility function with vertical and horizontal

segments, but, the possibility for a counterexarnpie is general and could be created for a utility function with
continuous curvature.

      A policy conclusion emerges from this demonstration. Considerations of risk spreading and equity
have been used as argument for homogenizing pension programs across different types of workers and firms.
Sometimes the restrictions are specific: the pension plans must be the same. Other times regulatory impositions,

such as some of those associated with ERISA, encourage conformity. This example shows that it is important to

ask whether the imposition of "equal treatment" in retirement programs may hurt many or most if not all.'9




'9Ncgative outcomes of this type are particularly likely if other aspects labor packages get adjusted to
take account of retirement packages. If so, there might be a presumption that any attempt to eliminate
distinctions in retirement programs that pronlote inefficiency would work to the detriment of all.


                                                                36
                                               V. CONCLUSIONS

     Labor markets are quite different from the markets studied in introductory textbooks. i'hc products sold

are heterogeneous, substantial uncertainties are compounded by asymmetric information flow, and interdepen-
dencics in "sales" may extend across several periods because of such matters as training and proprietary infor-

mation. Given such complexities, secUre contracting possibilities and flexible reward schedules, i.e., prices that

depend upon outcome, would be particularly desirable. However, rules and standards against indenturing limit
possibilities in the first area. The second is constrained by a variety of institutions that limit wage flexibility, and

by quite considerable risk aversion on the part of sellers in the market, i.e., the workers.

     Pensions are a powerful instrument for compensating labor. They may be able to facilitate labor market

operations. They offer several significant advantages: awarded late in life, pensions can he based on extensive

performance; they are granted in periods to which workers might wish to reallocate resources on their own; and

they offer many degrees of freedom in a reward structure that can depend on such factors as salary, age and
years of service.

     The purpose of this analysis was to provide a framework for examining the effects of pensions on retire-

ment decisions. At least since the 1920s, the advantages of pensions as a mechanism for securing the retirement

of workers whose productivity is falling have been understood, and applied. This feature is likely to become
more important with the passage of time for at least three reasons: (1) individuals are living longer, (2) as

the workplace becomes more technologically sophisticated, the dangers of technological obsolescence of older

workers become more pronounced, and (3) both overtly, as through legislation, and implicitly, society is in-
creasing its "protection" of workers who might not choose to Eetirc. The recent congressional decision to
raise the mandatory retirement age of private sector workers to 70 has now been extended to state and local

government employees. Age discrimination suits associated with layoffs and dismissals have become relatively

commonplace. There is talk, indeed, about abolishing mandatory retirement provisions altogether.

     We have begun by focusing on the factors that induce individuals to retire. 'l'he first model incorporates

the qualitative features of most defined benefit pension plans in the United States and inquires how such plans

cati be employed to induce optimal retirement decisions. Pensions are viewed as a form of fhrced saving
whose purpose is to enable the worker to "commit himself' by making it in his own self-interest to retire at an

appropriate age.

    The remaining models examine the use of pensions in populations that are heterogeneous with respect to

                                                         37
such features as disutility of work or expected life span. Given heterogeneity, a major policy conern is whether

pensions are actuarially fair to different groups, retirement cohorts, etc. An optimal pension plan cannot he
actuarially "more than fair," in the sense that someone who retires later must 1fl1OSC a smaller cost on the

pension pool than he would if he retired earlier. However, people who retire later are likely on average to live

longer. Under most common pension plans, late retirees impose a greater cost on the pension fund than those

retiring earlier.

     In a first-best world, a separate pension plan would be designed for each group of workers. (Conceivably

there would be lump-sum transfers among plans. They need only break even as a whole). However,
                                                                                ...._.:              _l - n———— -
                        1L11'Iuc11L pi uiaui, iciiaiiuii 1c,UJaLI1I j)IIVdL pCIISIUII p1U,1d1Ith, dIJU UR JUICtU

common form of pension programs within single firms arc powerful forces for homogenization. Such homogeniza-

tion is shown to work to the possible detriment of workers as a whole.

     Pensions are a workhorse compensation mechanism, meeting a variety of objectives in labor market opera-

tions, and dealing with a range of imperfections and contracting difficulties. This analysis has focused on the
ideal use of pensions to facilitate appropriate retirement decisions. The challenge both for conceptual work and

for policy is to design pensions that blend the objectives of attracting, sorting, motivating and retaining workers
with the need to induce reasonable retirement choices.




                                                       38
                                                  VI. APPEN[)IX
                                PENSION BENEFITS ANI) RETI REMENT AGE


     A survey of non-contributory pension plans from seventy-five United States companies revealed several
patterns about the general structure of private pensions in this country. These companies, which had businesses
ranging from communications and insurance to manufacturing and mining, all had prescribed minimum re-
quirements for at least the age of retirement and often for the years of service as well. Benefits were calculated
on a monthly basis in each case, the most common formulas multiplying the years of service by a set dollar
figure or by a percentage of salary. While most companies utilized the standard retirement age of sixty-five as
the minimum requirement, several allowed retirement at sixty-two or even sixty. Often, the workers were given
an option of retiring, for instance, at sixty-five with ten years of service or at sixty with thirty years of service. It
thus becomes difficult to classify the retirement ages encouraged by pensions.

     The benefit formulas ranged from the exceedingly simple to the bewilderingly complex. Many companies
offer the employees the option of choosing between several formulas that take into account, among other
things, years of service, average monthly pay over the last five years, and future social security benefits. Other
simply multiplied the years of service the worker had put in with the firm times a set dollar amount. Most of
them, whether simple or complex: incorporate either a set dollar amount or a percentage of salary, multiplied
times the years of service. A typical plan might offer the worker a monthly benefit of his years of service multi-
plied times either $15 or 1.5% of final monthly earnings. Extra percentages were offered by a few companies to
workers with thirty or more years of service. The number of variables in the benefits formula make it difficult to
directly compare benefit payments across companies.
      All of the pension plans incorporate an early retirement option which allows the workers to retire before
the prescribed minimum age, while imposing a penalty if they want payment before they reach the normal
retirement age. These penalties usually deduct a set percentage of the pension for each year that the employee
retired early. Many companies take into account other factors such as years of service; the early retirement
penalty thus varies across workers. Forty-six of the companies surveyed utilized a uniform percentage reduction
system. 'These penalties ranged from 3% - 7% for every year under the prescribed age; most were between 4%
and 5%. If an employee retired at age sixty when the minimum retirement age was sixty-five and a five percent
per year penalty was imposed, that a worker would receive 75% of the benefit he would normally receive.
In a few cases, the penalties are scaled down when early retirement occurs within three years of the normal
retirement age.




                                                         39
                                        131 B1.AOGRAPIIY


Bulow, J., 'Far1y Rctircmcnt Pension Benefits", NBER Working Paper, 1982.


Cooper, R., "Towards a Solution to the General Problem of Self-Selection", Yale University Working
Paper, 1983.


Diamond, P. and J. Mirrless, "A Model of Social Insurance with Variable Retirement", Journal of Public Economics,
I)ecember 1978.


Feldstein, M., "The Optimal Level of Social Security Benefits", NBER Working Paper, 1982.


Greenough and King, Pension Plans and Public Policy, Columbia University Press, New York, 1976.


Hausman, J. and D. Wise, "Retirement and Subsequent Work", this volume.


Haynes, S., A. McMichael and H. Tyroler, "Survival After Early and Normal Retirement", Journal of Gerontology,
1979.


Lazear, E., "Pension Benefit Formulas and Worker Productivity", this volume.


National Industrial Conference Board, Inc., Industrial Pensions in the United States, New York.


Nichols, A. and R. Zeckhauser, "Targeting Transfers Through Restrictions on Recipients", American Economic Review.
May 1982.


Woodbury, "Substitution Between Wage and Non-Wage Benefits", American Economic Review, March
1983.




                                               40
