NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE OVERVALUATION OF RENMINBI UNDERVALUATION
Yin-Wong Cheung
Menzie D. Chinn
Eiji Fujii
Working Paper 12850
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12850

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2007

An earlier version of the paper was circulated under the title "Why the Renminbi Might Be Overvalued
(But Probably Isn't)." We thank the discussant Barry Eichengreen, Michael Klein (whose suggestion
inspired the title), Hoyt Bleakley, Joshua Aizenman, Henning Bohn, Robert Dekle, Mick Devereux,
Michael Dooley, Sebastian Edwards, Michael Frommel, Reuven Glick, Linda Goldberg, Galina Hale,
Koichi Hamada, Randall Henning, Owen Humpage, Gary Jefferson, Michael Klein, Akira Kohsaka,
Inpyo Lee, Jaewoo Lee, Ron McKinnon, Eiji Ogawa, Brian Pinto, Eswar Prasad, Aris Protopapadakis,
Andy Rose, Margot Schuller, Ulrich Volz, Shang-Jin Wei, Tom Willett, and participants at the JIMF-SCCIE
conference, as well as conferences at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Hamburg Institute
of International Economics, the ACEAS and CEANA/ASSA panels at the ASSA 2006 Meetings, the
conference "WTO, China, and the Asian Economy," and the HKEA Biannual Conference for their
helpful comments on the current and earlier versions of this paper. Dickson Tam, Jian Wang and Noriko
Inakura provided excellent assistance in collecting data. Financial support of faculty research funds
of the University of California at Santa Cruz, the University of Wisconsin, the Japan Center for Economic
Research grant, and the Nomura Foundation for Social Science research grant is gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Yin-Wong Cheung, Menzie D. Chinn, and Eiji Fujii. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Overvaluation of Renminbi Undervaluation
Yin-Wong Cheung, Menzie D. Chinn, and Eiji Fujii
NBER Working Paper No. 12850
January 2007
JEL No. F3,F4
ABSTRACT
We evaluate whether the Renminbi (RMB) is misaligned, relying upon conventional statistical methods
of inference. A framework built around the relationship between relative price and relative output
levels is used. We find that, once sampling uncertainty and serial correlation are accounted for, there
is little statistical evidence that the RMB is undervalued. The result is robust to various choices of
country samples and sample periods, as well as to the inclusion of control variables.
Yin-Wong Cheung
Department of Economics
University of California
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
cheung@ucsc.edu
Menzie D. Chinn
Dept. of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
mchinn@lafollette.wisc.edu

Eiji Fujii
Graduate School of Systems
and Information Engineering
University of Tsukuba
Tennodai 1-1-1
Tsukuba, Ibaraki
Japan
efujii@sk.tsukuba.ac.jp

1.

Introduction
China’s currency, the Renminbi (RMB), has occupied a central role in the

ongoing debate over the source of global current account imbalances. In this paper, we
step back from the debates over the merits of one exchange rate regime versus another
and whether a currency realignment is desirable (although our conclusions will
necessarily inform the debate over what the appropriate actions might be). Rather, we
focus the discussion of currency misalignment in terms of economic theory and empirics;
in particular, we focus on the difficulty in measuring the “equilibrium real exchange rate”
and on quantifying the uncertainty surrounding the measurement of the level of the
equilibrium. In so doing, we sharpen our definition of what constitutes currency
misalignment, at the cost of restricting the generality of our conclusions.
Specifically, we exploit a well-known relationship between deviations from
absolute purchasing power parity and real per capita income using panel regression
methods. By placing the RMB in the context of this well-known empirical relationship
exhibited by a large number of developing and developed countries, over a long time
horizon, this approach addresses the question of where China’s real exchange rate stands
relative to the “equilibrium” level. In addition to calculating the numerical magnitude of
the degree of misalignment, we assess the estimates in the context of statistical
uncertainty. In this respect, we extend the standard practice of considering both economic
and statistical significance in coefficient estimates to the prediction aspect.
We also extend the analysis by allowing for heterogeneity across country
groupings and time periods. After conducting various robustness checks, we conclude
that although the point estimates indicate the RMB is undervalued in almost all samples,
in almost no case is the deviation statistically significant, and indeed, when serial
correlation is accounted for, the extent of misalignment is not even statistically
significant at the 50% level. These findings highlight the great degree of uncertainty
surrounding empirical estimates of “equilibrium real exchange rates”, thereby
underscoring the difficulty in accurately assessing the degree of RMB undervaluation.
We further assess the robustness of the results in the presence of several
conditioning variables. These additional factors include demographic variables, measures
of trade openness, policy factors such as the extent of capital controls, and institutional

1

factors. While these conditioning variables exert significant effects, their inclusion does
not change the basic message: the RMB appears to be undervalued, but not by a
statistically significant margin.

2.

Preliminary Discussion

2.1

A Brief Literature Review
At the heart of the debate over the right way of determining the appropriate

exchange rate level are contrasting ideas of what constitutes an equilibrium exchange
rate, what time frame the equilibrium condition pertains to, and, not least, what
econometric method to implement.1 Some short cuts have been used so often that some
forget that they are short cuts.
Most of the extant studies fall into some familiar categories, either relying upon
some form of relative purchasing power parity (PPP) or cost competitiveness calculation,
the modeling of deviations from absolute PPP, a composite model incorporating several
channels of effects (sometimes called behavioral equilibrium exchange rate models), or
flow equilibrium models.2
The relative PPP comparisons are the easiest to make, in terms of numerical
calculation. On the other hand, relative PPP is uninformative about how a country’s
exchange rate stands relative to others.
Bosworth (2004), Frankel (2005), Coudert and Couharde (2005), and Cairns
(2005b) estimate the relationship between the deviation from absolute PPP and relative
per capita income. All obtain similar results regarding the relationship between the two
variables (although Coudert and Couharde fail to detect this link for the RMB in their
time series analysis).
Zhang (2001), Wang (2004), and Funke and Rahn (2005) implement what could
broadly be described as behavioral equilibrium exchange rate (BEER) specifications.3
These models incorporate a variety of channels through which the real exchange rate is
affected. Since each author selects different variables to include, the implied
1

One relevant work is Hinkle and Montiel (1999).
See Table 1 of Cheung, Chinn and Fujii (forthcoming) for a typology of these
different approaches.
3
Also known as BEERs, a composite of exchange rate models.
2

2

misalignments will necessarily vary. In addition, these approaches will fail to identify if a
currency is misaligned relative to another country’s for the same reason that relative PPP
fails to do so – because they typically rely upon price indices but not actual prices.
Other approaches center on flow equilibria, considering savings and investment
behavior and the resulting implied current account. The equilibrium exchange rate is
derived from the implied medium term current account using import and export
elasticities. In the IMF’s “macroeconomic approach”, the “norms” are estimated, in the
spirit of Chinn and Prasad (2003). Wang (2004) discusses the difficulties in using this
approach for China but does not present estimates of misalignment based upon this
framework. Coudert and Couharde (2005) implement a similar approach. Finally, the
external balances approach relies upon assessments of the persistent components of the
balance of payments condition (Goldstein, 2004; Bosworth, 2004). This last set of
approaches is perhaps most useful for conducting short-term analyses. But the wide
dispersion in implied misalignments reflects the difficulties in making judgments about
what constitutes persistent capital flows. For instance, Prasad and Wei (2005), examining
the composition of capital inflows into and out of China, argue that much of the reserve
accumulation that has occurred in recent years is due to speculative inflows; hence, the
degree of misalignment is small.4
In his survey, Cairns (2005a) observes that studies implementing an absolute PPP
methodology result in the greatest degree of estimated undervaluation. Those
implementing either relative PPP or flow equilibrium approaches find smaller estimates
of undervaluation.5
2.2

Bilateral and Effective Exchange Rate Indexes
To highlight the drawbacks of this oft-used relative PPP approach, we examine

briefly what this methodology says about the RMB. Figure 1 depicts the official
exchange rate series from January 1987 to May 2006, deflated by the US and Chinese
4

Moreover, such judgments based upon flow criteria must condition their
conclusions on the existence of effective capital controls. This is an obvious—and widely
acknowledged — point, but one that bears repeating and, indeed, is a point that we will
return to at the end of this paper.
5
Dunaway and Li (2005) made a similar observation.
3

CPI’s. The rate is expressed so higher values mean a stronger Chinese currency (the units
of currency are denoted as CNY, for Chinese Yuan). In line with expectations, in the
years since the East Asian crisis, the RMB has experienced a downward decline in value.
However, as with the case with many economies experiencing transitions from
controlled to partially decontrolled capital accounts and from dual to unified exchange
rate regimes, there is some dispute over what exchange rate measure to use. It turns out
that in the years leading up to 1994, increasingly large amounts of RMB transactions
were taking place at “swap rates” – rather than the official rate – so that the 1994 “megadevaluation” is actually better described as a unification of different rates of exchange
(Fernald, Edison, and Loungani, 1999). The “adjusted” rate in Figure 1 is a weighted
average of the official and the swap rates.
In the early warning system literature that developed in the wake of the financial
crises of the 1990’s, a typical measure of currency misalignment was the deviation from a
deterministic trend. Using the “adjusted” rate, and fitting a linear time trend, one finds a
modest undervaluation in the May of 2006 of 1.3%, contrasting slightly with the 5%
overvaluation implied by the official exchange rate.
In general, trade weighted exchange rates provide better measures of relative
prices. However, using this same methodology on this exchange rate does not necessarily
clarify matters.6 Figure 2 depicts the IMF’s trade weighted effective exchange rate index,
and a fitted linear. One finds that focusing on the deviations from a simple trend indicates
the RMB is 30% overvalued. Of course, a quick glance at the data indicates that a simple
trend is much too simplistic a characterization. Suppose instead that one assumed that the
relevant period was 1987 onward; then a flat trend and zero misalignment would be the
determination. The fact that working with simple straight line extrapolations can lead to
such diverging conclusions suggests that we need to take a closer look at where the
Chinese currency should stand, both over time and across countries.

3.

Absolute Purchasing Power Parity

6

As a matter of principal, trade weighted rates are to be preferred to bilateral rates
since the reliance on the latter can lead to misleading inferences about overall
competitiveness.
4

3.1

The Real Exchange Rate – Income Relationship
As a first cut, we appeal to a simple, and apparently robust, relationship between

the real exchange rate and per capita income. We will then elaborate the analysis by
stratifying the data along other dimensions (level of development, time period), and by
adding in other variables that might alter one’s assessment of the fundamental
equilibrium level of the exchange rate.
First, let us consider the basic framework of analysis. Consider the law of one
price, which states that the price of a single good should be equalized in common
currency terms (expressed in logs):
pi ,t = st + pi*,t

(1)

where st is the log exchange rate, pi ,t is the log price of good i at time t, and the asterisk
denotes the foreign country variable. Summing over all goods, and assuming the weights
associated with each good are the same in both the home country and foreign country
basket, one then obtains the absolute purchasing power parity condition:

pt = st + pt*

(2)

where for simplicity assume p is a arithmetic average of individual log prices. As is well
known, if the weights differ between home and foreign country baskets (let’s say
production bundles), then even if the law of one price holds, absolute purchasing power
parity need not hold.
The “price level” variable in the Penn World Tables (Summers and Heston,
1991), and other purchasing power parity exchange rates, attempt to circumvent this
problem by using prices (not price indices) of goods, and calculating the aggregate price
level using the same weights. Assume for the moment that this can be accomplished, but
that some share of the basket (α) is nontradable (denoted by N subscript), and the
remainder is tradable (denoted by T subscript). Then:

pt = αp N ,t + (1 − α ) pT ,t

(3)

By simple manipulation, one finds that the “real exchange rate” is given by:
qt ≡ st − pt + pt* = ( st − pT ,t + pT* ,t ) − α [ p N ,t − pT ,t ] + α [ p*N ,t − pT* ,t ]

5

(4)

Rewriting, and indicating the first term in (parentheses), the intercountry price of
tradables, as qT ,t and the intercountry relative price of nontradables as ωt ≡
[ pN ,t − pT ,t ] − [ p*N ,t − pT* ,t ] , leads to the following rewriting of (4):

qt = qT ,t − αω t

(4’)

This expression indicates that the real exchange rate can appreciate as changes occur in
the relative price of traded goods between countries, or as the relative price of
nontradables rises in one country, relative to another. In principle, economic factors can
affect one or both.
Most models of the real exchange rate can be categorized according to which
specific relative price serves as the object of focus. If the relative price of nontradables is
key, then the resulting models – in a small country context – have been termed
“dependent economy” (Salter, 1959, and Swan, 1960) or “Scandinavian” model. In the
former case, demand side factors drive shifts in the relative price of nontradables. In the
latter, productivity levels and the nominal exchange rate determine the nominal wage
rate, and hence the price level and the relative price of nontradables. In this latter context,
the real exchange rate is a function of productivity (Krueger, 1983: 157). Consequently,
the two sets of models both focus on the relative nontradables price, but differ in their
focus on the source of shifts in this relative price. Since the home economy is small
relative to the world economy (hence, one is working with a one-country model), the
tradable price is pinned down by the rest-of-the-world supply of traded goods. Hence, the
“real exchange rate” in this case is (pN-pT).
By far dominant in this category are those that center on the relative price of
nontradables. These include the specifications based on the approaches of Balassa (1964)
and Samuelson (1964) that model the relative price of nontradables as a function of
sectoral productivity differentials, including Hsieh (1982), Canzoneri, Cumby and Diba
(1999), and Chinn (2000a). They also include those approaches that include demand side
determinants of the relative price, such as that of DeGregorio and Wolf (1994). They
observe that if consumption preferences are not homothetic and factors are not perfectly
free to move intersectorally, changes in per capita income may result shifts in the relative
price of nontradables.

6

This perspective provides the key rationale for the well-known positive crosssectional relationship between relative price (the inverse of q, i.e., -q) and relative per
capita income levels. We exploit this relationship to determine whether the Chinese
currency is undervalued. Obviously, this approach is not novel; it has been implemented
recently by Coudert and Couharde (2005) and Frankel (2006). However, we will expand
this approach along several dimensions. First, we augment the approach by incorporating
the time series dimension.7 Second, we explicitly characterize the uncertainty
surrounding our determinations of currency misalignment. Third, we examine the
stability of the relative price and relative per capita income relationship using a)
subsamples of certain country groups and time periods, and b) control variables.
Before proceeding further, it is important to be explicit about the type of
equilibrium we are associating with our measure of the “normal” exchange rate level.
Theoretically, the equilibrium exchange rate in the Balassa-Samuelson approach is the
one that is consistent with both internal and external balances. In reality, however,
internal and external balance is not guaranteed. Thus, the estimated exchange rate
measure is properly interpreted as a long-run measure and is ill-suited (on its own) to
analyzing short run phenomena. As a remedy, we include control variables that are
relevant for (short-run) variations in internal and external balances in the subsequent
analyses.8
3.2

The Basic Bivariate Results
We compile a large data set encompassing up to 160 countries over the 1975-

2004 period. Most of the data are drawn from the World Bank’s World Development
Indicators (WDI). Because some data are missing, the panel is unbalanced. Appendix 1
gives a greater detail on the data used in this subsection and elsewhere.

7

Coudert and Couharde (2005) implement the absolute PPP regression on a crosssection, while their panel estimation relies upon estimating the relationship between the
relative price level to relative tradables to nontradables price indices.
8
Frankel (2006) discusses whether one can speak of an “equilibrium exchange
rate” when there is more than one sector to consider.
7

Extending Frankel’s (2006) cross-section approach, we estimate the real exchange
rate-income relationship using a pooled time-series cross-section (OLS) regression,
where all variables are expressed in terms relative to the US;
qit = β 0 + β1 yit + uit ,

(5)

where q is expressed in real terms relative to the US price level, y is real per capita
income also relative to the US.9 The results are reported in the first two columns of Table
1, for cases in which we measure relative per capita income in either USD exchange rates
or PPP-based exchange rates.
One characteristic of estimating a pooled OLS regression is that it forces the
intercept term to be the same across countries, and assumes that the error term is
distributed identically over the entire sample. Because this is something that should be
tested, rather than assumed, we also estimated random effects and fixed effects
regressions. The former assumes that the individual specific error is uncorrelated with the
right hand side variables, while the latter is efficient when this correlation is non-zero.10
Random effects regressions do not yield substantially different results from those
obtained using pooled OLS. Interestingly, when allowing the within and between
coefficients to differ, we do find differing effects. In particular, with US$ based per
capita GDP, the within effect is much stronger than the between. This divergence is
likely picking up short term effects, where output growth is correlated with other
variables pushing up currency values. This pattern, however, is not present in results
derived from the PPP-based output data.
Interestingly, the estimated elasticity of the price level with respect to per capita
income does not appear to be particularly sensitive to measurements of per capita
income. In all cases, the elasticity estimate is always around 0.25-0.39, which compares

9

β0 can take on currency specific values if a fixed effects specification is
implemented. Similarly, the error term is composed of a currency specific and aggregate
error if the pooled OLS specification is dropped.
10
Since the price levels being used are comparable across countries, in principle
there is no need to incorporate country-specific constants as in fixed effects or random
effects regressions. In addition, fixed effects estimates are biased in the presence of serial
correlation, which is documented in the subsequent analysis.
8

favorably with Frankel’s (2006) 1990 and 2000 year cross-section estimates of 0.38 and
0.32, respectively.11
One of the key emphases of our analysis is the central role accorded the
quantification of the uncertainty surrounding the estimates. That is, in addition to
estimating the economic magnitude of the implied misalignments, we also assess whether
the implied misalignments are statistically different from zero. In Figures 3 and 4, we plot
the actual and resulting predicted rates and standard error bands. To simply presentation,
we focus on results derived from the PPP-based data since the results pertaining to US$
based per capita GDP data are qualitatively similar.
It is interesting to consider the path that the RMB has traced out in the graph. It
begins the sample as overvalued, and over the next three decades it moves toward the
predicted equilibrium value and then overshoots, so that, by 2004, it is substantially
undervalued — by 53% in level terms (greater in log terms). It is indeed a puzzle that the
RMB path is different from the one predicted by the Balassa-Samuelson hypothesis. In
comparing the observations at 1975 and 2004, we found that countries including
Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore also experienced an increase in their income but a
decrease in their real exchange rates. On the other hand, Japan – a country typically used
to illustrate the Balassa-Samuelson effect, has a positive real exchange rate – income
relationship. The phenomenon warrants further analysis in a future study.
In this context, we make two observations about these misalignment estimates.
First, the RMB has been persistently undervalued by this criterion since the mid-1980s,
even in 1997 and 1998, when China was lauded for its refusal to devalue its currency
despite the threat to its competitive position.
Second, and perhaps most importantly, in 2004, the RMB was more than one
standard error—but less than two standard errors—away from the predicted value, which
in the present context is interpreted as the “equilibrium” value. In other words, by the
standard statistical criterion that applied economists commonly appeal to, the RMB is not
undervalued (as of 2004) in a statistically significant sense. The wide dispersion of

11

Note that, in addition to differences in the sample, our estimates differ from
Frankel’s in that we measure each country’s (logged) real GDP per capita in terms
relative to the US rather than in absolute terms.
9

observations in the scatter plots should give pause to those who would make strong
statements regarding the exact degree of misalignment.
3.3

Controlling for Serial Correlation
Notice that the deviations from the conditional mean are persistent; that is,

deviations from the real exchange rate - income relationship identified by the regression
are persistent, or exhibit serial correlation. It has an important implication for interpreting
the degree of uncertainty surrounding these measures of misalignment. Frankel (2006)
makes a similar observation, noting that half of the deviation of the RMB from the 1990
conditional mean exists in 2000. We estimate the autoregressive coefficient in our sample
at approximately 0.89 to 0.91 (derived from USD- and PPP-based per capita income
figures, respectively) on an annual basis. A simple, ad hoc adjustment based upon the
latter estimate suggests that the standard error of the regression should be adjusted
upward by a factor equal to [1/(1- ρ̂ 2 )]0.5 ≈ 2.
To provide a temporal dimension of the estimated misalignment, we trace the
evolution of the RMB level over time, its predicted value, and the associated confidence
bands adjusted to account for the serial correlation in Figure 5. The figure shows a
striking feature – after controlling for serial correlation, the actual value of the RMB is
always within one standard error prediction interval surrounding the (predicted)
equilibrium value in the last 20 plus years! Combining this result and the large data
dispersion observed in Figure 4, we have the impression that the data are not informative
for a sharp misalignment inference – not just for the recent period but for the entire
sample period.
While the ad hoc adjustment procedure offers a more accurate assessment of the
degree of uncertainty surrounding the predicted level of misalignment, it gives no
information on the estimated real exchange rate-relative income relationship that is free
of serial correlation effects. In order to obtain estimates that are statistically correct in the
presence of serial correlation, we implemented a panel version of the Prais-Winsten
procedure.12 The results are reported in the third column of Table 1.
12

In essence, the Prais-Winsten method is an efficient procedure that incorporates
serial correlation into the estimation process. We also implemented the Arellano-Bond
10

The pooled OLS estimate using PPP-based per capita income indicates a short
run elasticity of 0.15, which is about one-half of the estimate without the serial
correlation adjustment. The implied rate of adjustment is about 0.93 and the implied
long-run elasticity is an implausibly high value of around 2. Relaxing the assumption that
the errors are the same across time and individual countries (i.e., the random effects
regression), we obtain a smaller short-run and hence long-run elasticity – 0.13 and 1.8,
respectively. Since the Hausman tests rejects the orthogonality of the constant and the
right hand side variable, we also consider the fixed effects regression results. These
indicate the cross-country elasticity as being 0.4 (that is the “between” effect), and the
short run elasticity 0.04 (not significant).
Figure 6 shows the predicted RMB exchange rate based upon the pooled OLS
estimates. Two observations are in order. First, for most of the sample period, the actual
RMB value is within the one standard error prediction band – that is, the currency is
insignificantly different from its predicted equilibrium value. The result is similar to the
one depicted in Figure 5. Second, while the actual RMB value has been slightly below its
predicted value since the 1997 Asian financial crisis year, the two values virtually have
converged by 2004 and there is little indication of undervaluation. In fact, the 2004 actual
value slightly exceeds the predicted one; suggesting an overvaluation of 0.2 percent albeit
statistically insignificant. The surprising result is a consequence of taking serial
correlation seriously – that is dealing with the high degree of persistence in the real
exchange rate over time.
That being said, most of the time, the actual exchange rate is within about one
standard error of the predicted, suggesting that the case for overvaluation is about as
strong (or weak) as the case for undervaluation. In other words, we can have little

approach that introduces lagged dependent variables into the model to account for serial
correlation. The validity of the Arellano-Bond depends on the use of “good” instruments
and the assumption that the number of time series observation is greater than the number
of cross-sectional variables. In the current case, the choice of instruments is a practical
issue and the time series dimension is smaller than the number of economies. In any case,
the Arellano-Bond result is qualitatively similar to the one based on the ad hoc AR1
adjustment – the procedure gives a much larger standard error for a comparable estimate
of undervaluation estimate given in Figure 3. These results are not presented for brevity.

11

certitude about RMB misalignment using this oft-used cross-country relationship
between the real exchange rate and per capita income, once issues of serial correlation
are explicitly accounted for.
It is well-known that serial correlation, if not appropriately corrected for, can lead
to biased estimates and unreliable inferences. In the current exercise (illustrated in
Figures 4 and 5), serial correlation is handled using two different approaches and yet
yield similar inferences regarding RMB misalignment. Despite the apparent RMB
undervaluation, both cases show that adjustment for serial correlation effects results in a
much weaker case for a significantly undervalued RMB. In the next two sections, we
shift our attention to other factors that might mediate the real exchange rate-relative
income relationship.

4.

Analyses of Subsamples

In the current and subsequent sections, we consider several variations of the basic
bivariate structure in order to assess the robustness of our findings. Again, to simplify
presentation and conserve space, we focus on results pertaining to PPP-based output data.
In general, the results are quite robust to the choice of output data. The omitted results are
available upon request.
4.1

Developed/Developing and Income Stratifications
In Table 2, we report the results obtained from developed and developing

countries. Interestingly, we find that the pooled OLS estimate is much larger for the
developed countries than for the developing. This is somewhat surprising, given the
widespread belief that Balassa-Samuelson effects are more pronounced in developing
countries. Furthermore, the F-test indicates that the GDP effects are significantly
different across the two country groups.
We investigate further by estimating random effects models. For developed
countries, the GDP effect under the random effects model is substantially smaller than the
one under the OLS setting; 0.19 versus 0.75. The change in the case of developing
countries is much less dramatic, and the random effects model gives a stronger GDP
effect. Interestingly, the random effects specification reverses the relative size of the GDP

12

effect so that now the slope coefficient is greater in developing countries. Since the
Hausman test fails to reject the exogeneity assumption, we can be relatively confident
that these values are representative.
Using the developing country pooled OLS estimates, we find that the RMB is
51% misaligned as of 2004 (see Figure 7). However, the actual rate is still within two
standard errors of the predicted.
When we break the sample into finer categories – namely into high, middle, and
low income groupings – we find a pattern wherein the pooled OLS estimates are highest
in the highest income group, and declines with income grouping (Table 3). A formal Ftest confirms that the estimated GDP effects are significantly different across these
income groups.
Moving to the random effects specifications, which appear to be appropriate for
the high and middle income groupings, one finds that the elasticities are about the same,
at 0.16 versus 0.14. Table 4 also shows the between effects’ estimate of the exchange
rate-income elasticity of -0.26 for low income countries, while the within effect is about a
half. In other words, for low income countries, there is substantial variation over time due
to income changes.
Using the middle income country estimates, we estimate the extent of RMB
undervaluation as close to 48% at 2004, but still within the two standard error band (See
Figure 8).
4.2

The East Asian Economies
One question that stands out in our view is whether East Asia as a whole is

distinguished from other countries in terms of its experience with real exchange rates. In
addition, we have some a priori idea that Africa at the very least behaves in a different
way than other developing countries. Hence, we also stratify the sample by regional
grouping. The estimation results in Table 4 and the F-test statistics in its Notes section
provide some evidence that there are indeed significant regional differences.
Asia and Latin America do not differ substantially in terms of the pooled OLS
estimates, while Africa’s coefficient is somewhat lower. The random effects specification
is rejected by Hausman tests; looking to the fixed effects regressions, we find the pattern

13

mentioned in the previous section repeated. That is, in the relatively higher income Asia
grouping, the between coefficient is fairly high, while the within is actually negative.13
The Latin America grouping exhibits about equally sized coefficients, while for Africa,
the within coefficient dwarfs the nonsignificant between coefficient. In sum, we conclude
that it is important to differentiate between country groupings.
Using the Asia-specific coefficients, we find a 49% undervaluation for RMB,
once again within the two standard error band (See Figure 9).
4.3

Different Sample Periods
A third dimension along which to split the sample is along the time dimension. In

particular, we use a break point of 1989/90, approximately halfway through the full
sample.
The results reported in Table 5 are quite interesting. According to the OLS results,
the slope coefficient is larger, by about 75%, in the more recent period.14 However, this
result does not stand up to allowing for random effects. Since the Hausman test rejects in
the second subsample, we discuss the fixed effects estimates, which indicate the between
effect has indeed been quite strong over the last fifteen years, while the within effect is
essentially zero. That is important, as we consider the fact that Chinese per capita income
has been rising rapidly over time. These results suggest that the average per capita
income is what is important in assessing under or overvaluation. Using the pooled OLS
estimate results, we find the RMB is undervalued by 67% and, again, the estimated
undervaluation is within the two standard error band (see Figure 10).
Although our sample stratification scheme is not exhaustive, the results so far
inspire two general observations. One is that the GDP effect in the real exchange raterelative income regression varies across country groups and across historical periods.
Second, the results from these subsamples do not change the basic message developed in
the last section – that is, the case for RMB undervaluation is not that strong once
13

See Devereux (1999) for an early observation of this pattern.
The slope coefficient estimates from year-by-year regressions show a similar
upward trend. The slope coefficient starts with a low of 0.14 at 1975 and moves up
gradually to the high of 0.39 at 1995. Then it stays quite steady around the level of 0.36
for the rest of the sample.

14

14

sampling uncertainty is taken into consideration. Further, when we accounted for serial
correlation in the estimation process, the magnitude of undervaluation is substantially
reduced.

5.

Beyond the Bivariate Framework

5.1

Demographics, Policy, and Financial Development
One remarkable feature of the previous results is the finding that the RMB is

almost always undervalued by close to 50% in log terms – regardless of the sample used
to make the assessment; moreover the null of no undervaluation cannot typically be
rejected. These findings could be driven by the fact that the bivariate framework does not
explicitly consider (short-run) internal and external imbalances which might be
associated with certain variables. In this context, the serial correlation in the error term
could signify the omission of serially correlated explanatory variables. Even though we
can econometrically fix the serial correlation problem (see Section 3.3), it might be
preferable to identify the relevant variables, in order to resolve the problem in economic
terms. These points suggest that one might want to broaden the set of determinants.
Once one moves away from a simple world where the per capita income
differential is a proxy for Balassa-Samuelson effects, a whole universe of additional
determinants suggest themselves. In particular, if the income variable proxies not only for
productivity differentials, but also non-homotheticity of preferences, savings
propensities, or impediments to the free flow of capital, then one would wish to include
variables that pertain to these factors. Hence we augment the relative per capita income
with demographics – under 14 and over 65 dependency ratios – and with an index of
capital account openness developed by Chinn and Ito (2006). We include a government
deficit variable because Chinn and Prasad (2003) find that it explains part of current
account balances over the medium term. Finally, financial deepening is proxied by an
M2/GDP ratio.
The results are reported in the first column of Table 6. Interestingly, the elasticity
of the price level with respect to relative income is not drastically altered, relative to the
original full-sample bivariate regression estimates (Table 1). Moreover, the additional

15

variables enter in with statistical significance (with the exception of the government
deficit variable).
Overall, the results suggest that capital account openness increases the
equilibrium value of the currency. Financial deepening also has a positive effect. This
result does not appear to be the consequence of a spurious “credit boom” effect, since the
“between” coefficient is more important than the “within” (or over time) coefficient.
In Figure 11, we plot the time profile of the implied RMB undervaluation using
the pooled OLS specification. The graphs show that a nominal undervaluation greater
than one standard error starting 1994, the year China moved from a dual to a unified
exchange rate arrangement. Nonetheless, the estimated degree of undervaluation is
usually within the two standard error prediction band and is only slight outside the band
in 2004. The actual RMB value is just outside the two standard prediction error bands at
the very end of the sample period; in this instance the undervaluation is 76%. Apparently,
the inclusion of these additional explanatory variables tends to indicate greater
misalignment.15
5.2

Capital Account Openness and Institutions
One oft-heard argument is that the Chinese economy is special – namely it is one

that is characterized by extreme corruption, as well as an extensive capital control
regime. We investigate whether these two particular aspects are of measurable
importance in the determination of exchange rates and, if so, whether our conclusions
regarding RMB misalignment are altered as a consequence.
We augment the basic real exchange rate-relative income relationship with the
aforementioned Chinn-Ito capital account openness index. In addition we use the
International Country Risk Guide’s (ICRG) Corruption Index as our measure of
institutional development (where higher values of the index denote less corruption).
The results are reported in the second column of Table 6. Since the corruption
index is very slow moving, with a small time-varying component, it does not make too
much sense to look at the fixed effects and random effects estimates. Focusing on the
15

Although the use of a fixed effects model yields a much smaller misalignment in
this, and the subsequent, case. These results are available upon request.
16

pooled estimates from PPP-based output data, one observes that the per capita income
coefficient is largely in line with the previous estimates. Similarly, capital account
openness enters in positively, but not significantly. On the other hand, the (lack of)
corruption enters in positively only when income is measured in PPP terms: The less
corruption, the stronger the local currency.
We include an interaction term to allow for varying effects of capital openness in
the presence of corruption. The estimates indicate that when capital account openness
increases in absence of corruption, then the currency appreciates. This finding implies
that when the capital account openness increases in the presence of relatively high levels
of corruption, the equilibrium value of the currency is weaker.
When we examine the time profile of the implied RMB undervaluation under the
current model specification, we find that the standard error bands are wider, and the
estimated degree of undervaluation commensurately smaller (see Figure 12). In log
terms, the undervaluation in 2004 is somewhat smaller than in the previous case, 72%. In
other words, to the extent that lack of transparency is given at an instant, the RMB is still
not undervalued at conventional levels of statistical significance.
In sum, these control variables help explain a small portion of the estimated
undervaluation reported in the previous section. However, when sampling uncertainty is
taken into consideration, we still end up with the same inference: there is no strong and
consistent statistical evidence of RMB misalignment in the recent sample period. Rather,
the actual RMB value is in almost every case within the corresponding prediction
interval.
It is also noted that, despite the added variables, serial correlation is again found
in specifications considered in Section 5.1 and 5.2. Further, results from the PraisWinsten procedure that controls for serial correlation give a much smaller estimate of
RMB undervaluation. To illustrate the point, we plot the results based on the PraisWinsten procedure in Figures 13 and 14. Indeed, the decline in the estimated degree of
undervaluation is quite substantial. The Prais-Winsten procedure yielded an estimated
4.2 % undervaluation compared with 76% in Figure 11 and an estimated 8.7 %
undervaluation compared with 72% in Figure 12. Both serial correlation adjusted
estimates are well within the one standard error band.

17

6.

Discussions

In the current debate regarding RMB valuation, some consider the large current
account surplus a clear evidence of substantial RMB undervaluation. We recognize the
contentious nature of the debate on the causes of, say, the US current account deficits
with China and the related implications for exchange rate valuation. In Section 5, we
included government deficit, financial deepening, and demographic variables in the list of
explanatory variables to account for the effects of current account balances on exchange
rates indirectly.16
As a robustness check, we also considered the direct effect of a current account
balance variable. Specifically, the lagged value of the current account to GDP ratio
relative to that of the US was added to all specifications presented thus far. To save space,
we only report results pertaining to the two specifications considered in Section 5 to
illustrate the point (see Table 7). The plots derived for the two specifications with the
lagged current account variables are presented in Figures 15 and 16. In general, the
current account balance variable is statistically significant but does not noticeably alter
other coefficient estimates. One puzzling observation is that its sign changes across
model specifications.17 Comparing Figures 13 and 14 with Figures 15 and 16, we find
that the inclusion of the current account balance variable does not change the inference of
the degree of RMB undervaluation.
In passing, we would like to mention that China’s rapid international reserve
accumulation is another oft-cited evidence of RMB undervaluation. That particular
argument, however, may require additional analysis. Prasad and Wei (2005), for example,
show that changes in the capital account, rather than the current account, contributed to
China’s recent reserve buildup and, thus, the buildup may be self-fulfilling.

16

The indirect approach avoids the technical issue of endogeneity. See, for example,
Chinn and Prasad (2003) for determinants of current account balances.
17

Apparently, the association between the current account and the real exchange rate is an
unsettled issue. For example, Rogoff (1996, p. 663) points out that “from a theoretical

perspective, virtually any correlation between the current account and the real exchange
rate can be easily rationalized.”
18

While the empirical results thus far point to the difficulty in establishing the claim
that RMB is significantly undervalued, it is imperative to recognize that these results do
not constitute evidence of no undervaluation. Indeed, the statistical evidence is so “weak”
that we cannot reject a wide range of hypotheses. For instance, we could not reject the
null hypothesis that the RMB is 20% undervalued. In other words, the empirical
relationship is very imprecisely estimated. That is, the empirical models and data are not
sharp enough to allow a definite statistical conclusion. A corollary is that it is hard to
formulate an adjustable-peg policy because it is hard to statistically establish evidence
against a misaligned peg.
Our bivariate estimation results identify 83 significant overvaluation cases and 78
significant undervaluation cases. Most of these instances correspond to extreme political
and economic conditions. Perhaps a reflection of the imprecision of the estimats, real
exchange rates of Thailand in 1997 and Argentina in 2001 are not identified to be
significantly misaligned.18
This imprecision appears not to be unique to the current exercise, even though it
is often overlooked. Dunaway, Leigh, and Li (2006) make a similar observation from a
different perspective. These authors, using the RMB as an example, show that
equilibrium real exchange rate estimates obtained from the various approaches and
models commonly used in the literature exhibit substantial variations in response to small
perturbations in model specifications, explanatory variable definitions, and time periods.
That is, inferences regarding misalignment are very sensitive to small changes in the way
the equilibrium exchange rate is estimated.
Data reliability makes the situation even murkier. The quality of data from, say,
emerging markets is always a concern. Given its growing significance in the world
economy, the reliability of China’s official data is a subject of intense debate. At the end
of 2005, China revised its GDP figures after a year long nationwide economic census.

18

The bivariate estimation results indicate that a) the Thai baht was undervalued by
13.1% in 1996, and b) the Argentine peso was undervalued by 2.9% in 2001. On the
other hand, results from the extended models considered in Section 5 show that the
Argentine peso was overvalued by 12.1 % in 2001 while the Thai baht was undervalued.
The finding of small deviations for the Thai baht is not atypical; see e.g. Chinn (2000b).
19

Specifically, the 2004 figure was revised upward by 17%.19 Thus, one has to interpret
estimates of misalignment, including the ones reported in the current exercise, with great
caution.
7.

Summary and Some Concluding Thoughts

In the current exercise, we undertake an objective evaluation of the thesis of RMB
undervaluation using conventional empirical methods of inference. Anticipating the
problems associated with using standard exchange rate models – including the
FEER/BEER models commonplace in the practitioner literature – to explain exchange
rate behavior of developing and transition economies, we opt to rely upon the more
straightforward and robust relative price and relative output framework.
We extend the existing literature along several dimensions. First, we analyze
relative price and relative output relationship in a panel time-series cross-section
framework in order to improve power, and so as to be able to trace out the time profile of
misalignment measures. Second, we base our inferences on the property of misalignment
estimates. In particular, we explicitly account for the effects of sampling uncertainty and
serially correlated errors on our inferences regarding the extent of currency misalignment.
Third, we examine the stability of the relative price and relative output relationship and
the corresponding implications for the analysis of misalignments.
Under the basic specification and some of its variants, the RMB is found to be
undervalued – a result that is consistent with the conventional wisdom. The result,
however, does not survive a close scrutiny of the empirical evidence.
One general observation is that, when one implements the standard operating
procedure of accounting for sampling uncertainty in making inferences, there is no
evidence supporting the claim that RMB is substantially undervalued, using conventional
significance levels. Depending on the specification under examination, the actual RMB
value is usually within one or two standard errors of its predicted level. Our inability to
establish a convincing statistically significant result applies to most, if not all, the models
and time periods under consideration. We also believe that our results accounting for
serial correlation are extremely important, and bear upon the interpretation of the extant
19

The World Bank data used here do not incorporate this round of data revision.
20

literature. With technical procedures controlling for serial correlation effects, the
evidence for RMB undervaluation is substantially weakened.
A by-product of our exercise is the finding that the relative price and relative
output relationship is neither constant over time nor across country groups. The wide
diversity of estimated output effects implies variously higher or lower misalignment
estimates, but it does not alter the basic result that the RMB is not significantly different
from its predicted equilibrium value.
It is also important to make it clear that we do not claim that the relative price and
relative output relationship is the most appropriate framework for studying the RMB
exchange rate behavior. Even though the framework we have adopted has certain
advantages over some standard exchange rate models in cross-country analysis that
involves transitional and developing economies, more effort has to be made to capture the
special features of these economies. The addition of several control variables suggested
by the literature might be a good first (empirical) step in the right direction. However, we
admit that a more elaborate theoretical framework would be very helpful in guiding
future work.
For instance, the finding that capital account openness and (the lack of) corruption
matters for the level of the exchange rate suggests that our understanding of when a
currency is misaligned is highly circumscribed. Other factors that warrant attention
include the large buildup of nonperforming loans and the structural weakness of the
financial sector. These factors, combined with corporate governance and labor market
rigidity, are likely to have significant implications for the equilibrium value of RMB
which are not fully captured in the current exercise.
It is worth repeating that our results highlight the difficulty of delivering a clear
statistical evidence of RMB undervaluation, which is in accordance with the well-known
result that it is quite difficult to model exchange rates in general. But these results do not
necessarily mean that there is no undervaluation.
In a broader perspective, the finding of a highly uncertain equilibrium real
exchange rate buttresses the case for a prudent, cautious exchange rate policy that avoids
abrupt changes in the Chinese economy. Given its limited financial market capacity and
structural rigidity, an abrupt change in the Chinese exchange rate policy could lead to

21

some significant challenges to economic growth and stability. China’s measured
approach to exchange rate regime liberalization, coupled with increasing imports
and domestic consumption, might facilitate a resolution of global imbalances.
However, in our view, this goal will only be achieved if combined with appropriate
policy changes in other countries (e.g. the US).

22

References

Balassa, Bela, 1964, “The Purchasing Power Parity Doctrine: A Reappraisal,” Journal of
Political Economy 72: 584-596.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüc-Kunt, and Ross Levine, 2000, “A new database on
financial development and structure,” Policy Research Paper No. 2147
(Washington, D.C.: World Bank).
Bosworth, Barry, 2004, “Valuing the Renminbi,” paper presented at the Tokyo Club
Research Meeting, February 9-10.
Cairns, John, 2005, “China: How Undervalued is the CNY?” IDEAglobal Economic
Research (June 27).
Canzoneri, Matthew, Robert Cumby and Behzad Diba, 1996, "Relative Labor
Productivity and the Real Exchange Rate in the Long Run: Evidence for a Panel
of OECD Countries," Journal of International Economics 47(2): 245-66.
Cheung, Yin-Wong, Menzie Chinn and Eiji Fujii, forthcoming, “The Illusion of Precision
and the Role of the Renminbi in Regional Integration,” in Koichi Hamada, Beate
Reszat and Ulrich Volz (editors), Prospects for Monetary and Financial
Integration in East Asia: Dreams and Dilemmas.
Chinn, Menzie, 2000a, “The Usual Suspects? Productivity and Demand Shocks and AsiaPacific Real Exchange Rates,” Review of International Economics 8(1)
(February): 20-43.
Chinn, M.D., 2000b, Three Measures of East Asian Currency Overvaluation,
Contemporary Economic Policy 18 (2), 205-214.
Chinn, Menzie and Hiro Ito, 2006, “What Matters for Financial Development? Capital
Controls, Institutions and Interactions,” Journal of Development Economics
61(1): 163-192.
Chinn, Menzie and Eswar Prasad, 2003, “Medium-Term Determinants of Current
Accounts in Industrial and Developing Countries: An Empirical Exploration,”
Journal of International Economics 59(1) (January): 47-76.
Coudert, Virginie and Cécile Couharde, 2005, "Real Equilibrium Exchange Rate in
China," CEPII Working Paper 2005-01 (Paris, January).

23

DeGregorio, Jose and Holger Wolf, 1994, "Terms of Trade, Productivity, and the Real
Exchange Rate," NBER Working Paper #4807 (July).
Devereux, Michael B., 1999, “Real Exchange Rates and Growth: A Model of East Asia,”
Review of International Economics 7: 509-521.
Dunaway, Steven, Lamin Leigh and Xiangming Li, 2006, “How Robust are Estimates of
Equilibrium Real Exchange Rates: The Case of China,” IMF Working Paper.
Dunaway, Steven and Xiangming Li, 2005, “Estimating China’s Equilibrium Real
Exchange Rate,” IMF Working Paper .
Fernald, John, Hali Edison, and Prakash Loungani, 1999, “Was China the First Domino?
Assessing Links between China and Other Asian Economies,” Journal of
International Money and Finance 18 (4): 515-535.
Frankel, Jeffrey, 2006, “On the Yuan: The Choice between Adjustment under a Fixed
Exchange Rate and Adjustment under a Flexible Rate,” CESifo Economic Studies
52(2): 246-75.
Funke, Michael and Jörg Rahn, 2005, “Just how undervalued is the Chinese renminbi?”
World Economy 28: 465-89.
Goldstein, Morris, 2004, “China and the Renminbi Exchange Rate,” in C. Fred Bergsten
and John Williamson (editors), Dollar Adjustment: How Far? Against What?
Special Report No. 17 (Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics,
November).
Government Accountability Office, 2005, International Trade: Treasury Assessments
Have Not Found Currency Manipulation, but Concerns about Exchange Rates
Continue,” Report to Congressional Committees GAO-05-351 (Washington,
D.C.: Government Accountability Office, April).
Hinkle, Lawrence E. and Peter J. Montiel, 1999, Exchange Rate Misalignment (Oxford
University Press/World Bank, New York).
Hsieh, David, 1982, "The Determination of the Real Exchange Rate: The Productivity
Approach," Journal of International Economics 12(2): 355-362.
Krueger, Anne O., 1983, Exchange-Rate Determination (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press).

24

Rogoff, K., 1996, The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle, Journal of Economic Literature
34 (June), 647-668.
Prasad, Eswar and Shang-Jin Wei, 2005, “The Chinese Approach to Capital Inflows:
Patterns and Possible Explanations,” NBER Working Paper No. 11306 (April).
Salter, Wilfred A., 1959, “Internal and External Balance: The Role of Price and
Expenditure Effects,” Economic Record 35: 226-38.
Samuelson, Paul, 1964, "Theoretical Notes on Trade Problems," Review of Economics
and Statistics 46: 145-154.
Summers, Robert and Alan Heston, 1991, “The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An
Expanded Set of International Comparisons,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
106: 327-68.
Swan, Trevor, 1960, “Economic Control in a Dependent Economy,” Economic Record
36: 51-66.
Wang, Tao, 2004, “Exchange Rate Dynamics,” in Eswar Prasad (editor), China’s Growth
and Integration into the World Economy, Occasional Paper No. 232 (Washington,
D.C.: IMF), pp. 21-28.
Zhang, Zhichao, 2001, “Real Exchange Rate Misalignment in China: An Empirical
Investigation,” Journal of Comparative Economics 29, 80–94.

25

Appendix 1: Data and Sources

For Section 2:
The nominal Renminbi exchange rate is the bilateral period average, expressed against
the US$ (in $/f.c.u.), obtained from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics, and
from Hali Edison, for the “adjusted” exchange rates (Fernald et al., 1999). The CPI’s are
drawn from the CEIC database, extrapolated for 2004 and 2005 by using the CPI growth
rates reported in IFS. The CPI deflated trade weighted exchange rate is drawn from IFS.
For Section 3:
The data for macroeconomic aggregates are drawn mostly from the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators. These include demographic variables, per capita income and
government deficits. Financial development indicators, including lending, stock and bond
market capitalization, are drawn from the Beck et al. (2000). The capital controls index is
from Chinn and Ito (2006). The (inverse) corruption index is drawn from the
International Country Risk Guide. Data for Taiwan are drawn from the Central Bank of
China, International Centre for the Study of East Asian Development, and Asian
Development Bank, Key Indicators of Developing Asian and Pacific Countries. For some
variables, 2004 data are drawn from the IMF, World Economic Outlook (April) database.

26

Table 1: The panel estimation results of the real exchange rate – income relationship

GDP per
capita
Constant

USD-based GDP
Pooled Between Fixed
OLS
effects
(Within)
0.249** 0.254** 0.391**
(0.003) (0.015)
(0.029)
-.016** -.036
(0.008) (0.050)
0.496
0.617
0.763
29.468**

Adjusted R2
F-test
statistic
Hausman
test statistic
Number of
4018
observations

Random
effects
0.297**
(0.012)
0.084
(0.042)
0.496

PPP-based GDP
Pooled Between Fixed
OLS
effects
(Within)
0.299** 0.300** 0.273**
(0.006) (0.028)
(0.031)
-.134** -.177**
(0.011) (0.061)
0.349
0.413
0.754
42.647**

11.873**

PPP-based GDP (Prais-Winsten)
Random Pooled Between Fixed
Random
effects
OLS
effects
effects
(Within)
0.284** 0.147** 0.396** 0.036
0.132**
(0.017) (0.021) (0.028)
(0.025)
(0.021)
-.204** -.026** 0.001
-.027**
(0.043) (0.002) (0.004)
(0.003)
0.349
0.012
0.389
0.021
0.012
1.218*
0.167

4018

39.384**
3958

Notes: The data covers 160 countries over the maximum of a thirty-years period from 1975 to 2004. The panel is unbalanced due to some missing
observations. ** and * indicate 1% and 5% levels of significance, respectively. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are given in parentheses
underneath coefficient estimates. For the fixed effects models, the F-test statistics are reported for the null hypothesis of the equality of the
constants across all countries in the sample. For the random effects models, the Hausman test statistics test for the independence between the timeinvariant country-specific effects and the regressor.
The third column labeled (Prais-Winsten) gives estimates from data with serial correlation removed using the Prais-Winsten method. The
AR1 coefficient estimate for the Prais-Winsten transformation is 0.951.

27

Table 2: The panel estimation results for developed versus developing country samples

Developed countries
Pooled
Between
OLS
GDP per capita
Constant
Adjusted R2
F-test
statistic
Hausman
test statistic
Number of
observations

0.749**
(0.049)
0.209**
(0.016)
0.330

0.898**
(0.144)
0.257**
(0.053)
0.665

Fixed
effects
(Within)
-.019
(0.073)
0.569
18.536**

Random
effects

Developing countries
Pooled
Between
OLS

0.187*
(0.076)
0.031
(0.038)
0.330

0.233**
(0.008)
-.298**
(0.018)
0.192

0.000
600

0.238**
(0.035)
-.314**
(0.083)
0.266

Fixed
effects
(Within)
0.294**
(0.032)
0.670
39.097**

Random
effects
0.276**
(0.019)
-.229**
(0.052)
0.192
0.453

3229

Notes: The PPP-based real per capita income is used. The data covers 20 developed and 124 developing countries over
the maximum of a thirty-years period from 1975 to 2004. The panel is unbalanced due to some missing observations. **
and * indicate 1% and 5% levels of significance, respectively. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are given in
parentheses underneath coefficient estimates. For the fixed effects models, the F-test statistics are reported for the null
hypothesis of the equality of the constants across all countries in the sample. For the random effects models, the Hausman
test statistics test for the independence between the time-invariant country-specific effects and the regressor. The F-test for
the equality of the slope coefficients between the two samples gives a test statistic of 119.931, which rejects the null
hypothesis of equality.

28

Table 3: The panel estimation results by income level stratifications

GDP per
capita
Constant
Adjusted R2
F-test
statistic
Hausman
test statistic
Number of
observations

High income countries
Between Fixed
Pooled
OLS
effects
(within)
0.519** 0.650** 0.097
(0.028) (0.103) (0.031)
0.127** 0.178**
(0.013) (0.050)
0.312
0.564
0.636
26.981**

Random
effects

0.156*
(0.036)
-.026
(0.032)
0.312

Middle income countries
Between Fixed
Pooled
OLS
effects
(within)
0.249** 0.243** 0.122**
(0.019) (0.077) (0.044)
-.384** -.384**
(0.137) (0.137)
0.096
0.106
0.650
40.087**

0.000
875

Low income countries
Random Pooled
Between
effects
OLS
0.137**
(0.026)
-.562**
(0.057)
0.096

-.087**
(0.031)
-1.297**
(0.100)
0.005

0.168
1799

-.261*
(0.122)
-1.889**
(0.384)
0.062

Fixed
effects
(within)
0.504**
(0.045)
0.564
33.207**

Random
effects
0.414**
(0.042)
0.207
(0.143)
0.005
34.445**

1330

Notes: The PPP-based real per capita income is used. The data covers 31 high income countries, 74 middle income countries, and 54 low income
countries over the maximum of a thirty year period from 1975 to 2004. The panel is unbalanced due to some missing observations. ** and * indicate
1% and 5% levels of significance, respectively. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are given in parentheses underneath coefficient estimates.
For the fixed effects models, the F-test statistics are reported for the null hypothesis of the equality of the constants across all countries in the sample.
For the random effects models, the Hausman test statistics test for the independence between the time-invariant country-specific effects and the
regressor. The F-test for the equality of the slope coefficients between the samples based on the pooled OLS estimates gives test statistics of 98.483 for
high income countries versus middle income countries, 147.143 for high income countries versus low income countries, and 58.053 for middle income
countries versus low income countries. In all cases, the null hypothesis of equal slope coefficients is rejected at the conventional level of significance.

29

Table 4: The panel estimation results by geographical stratifications

GDP per
capita
Constant

Asia
Pooled
OLS

Between

0.437**
(0.018)
0.031
(0.027)
0.537

0.489**
(0.065)
0.092
(0.132)
0.724

Adjusted R2
F-test
statistic
Hausman
test statistic
Number of
563
observations

Fixed
effects
(within)
-.227**
(0.065)
0.824
44.594**

Random
effects

Latin America
Pooled
Between
OLS

0.009
(0.039)
-.764**
(0.096)
0.537

0.392**
(0.023)
-.027
(0.038)
0.206

0.412**
(0.122)
0.007
(0.213)
0.255

Fixed
effects
(within)
0.288**
(0.045)
0.705
50.684**

Random
effects

Africa
Pooled
OLS

Between

0.303**
(0.040)
-.176*
(0.087)
0.206

0.085**
(0.018)
-.653**
(0.053)
0.015

0.053
(0.070)
-.766**
(0.210)
-.010

884

0.546
32.909**

Random
effects
0.389**
(0.035)
0.209#
(0.118)
0.015
3.384#

0.512

20.704**

Fixed
effects
(within)
0.487**
(0.064)
-

1147

Notes: The PPP-based real per capita income is used. The data covers 22 Asian countries, 31 Latin American countries, and 43 African countries over
the maximum of a thirty year period from 1975 to 2004. The panels are unbalanced due to some missing observations. (The country classifications are
as defined by the WDI. Asia does not include “South Asia”, and Africa does not include “Middle East and North Africa”.) ** and * indicate 1% and
5% levels of significance, respectively. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are given in parentheses underneath coefficient estimates. For the
fixed effects models, the F-test statistics are reported for the null hypothesis of the equality of the constants across all countries in the sample. For the
random effects models, the Hausman test statistics test for the independence between the time-invariant country-specific effects and the regressor. The
F-test for the equality of the slope coefficients between the samples based on the pooled OLS estimates gives test statistics of 1.351 for Asia versus
Latin America, 37.500 for Latin America versus Africa, and 89.698 for Asia versus Africa. In only the latter case, the null hypothesis of equal slope
coefficients is rejected at the conventional level of significance.

30

Table 5: The panel estimation results for the 1975-1989 and 1990-2004 sub-samples

1975-1989
Pooled
Between
OLS
GDP per
capita
Constant

0.207**
(0.009)
-.181**
(0.017)
0.209

Adjusted R2
F-test
statistic
Hausman
test statistic
Number of
1757
observations

0.214**
(0.032)
-.190**
(0.068)
0.251

Fixed
effects
(Within)
0.283**
(0.046)
0.781
36.279**

Random
effects

1990-2004
Pooled
Between
OLS

0.238**
(0.024)
-.143*
(0.055)
0.209

0.353**
(0.008)
-.118**
(0.016)
0. 459

1.266

0.359**
(0.026)
-.118#
(0.059)
0.529

Fixed
effects
(Within)
-.004
(0.056)
0.865
43.766**

Random
effects
0.230**
(0.021)
-.369**
(0.051)
0.459
20.287**

2261

Notes: The PPP-based real per capita income is used. The data covers 131 countries over the 1975-1989
period, and 159 countries over the 1990-2004 period. The panels are unbalanced due to some missing
observations. **, * and # indicate 1%, 5% and 10% levels of significance, respectively.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are given in parentheses underneath coefficient estimates. For
the fixed effects models, the F-test statistics are reported for the null hypothesis of the equality of the
constants across all countries in the sample. For the random effects models, the Hausman test statistics
test for the independence between the time-invariant country-specific effects and the regressor. The F-test
for the equality of the slope coefficients between the two sub-samples gives a test statistic of 183.677,
which rejects the null hypothesis of equality.

31

Table 6: Estimation with control variables

GDP per
capita
Popuation
under 14
Population
over 65
Capital acct.
openness
Government
deficit
M2/GDP

demographics, policy, and financial
development
Pooled
Between Fixed
Random
OLS
effects
effects
(Within)
0.257** 0.236** 0.286** 0.264**
(0.013)
(0.045)
(0.034)
(0.022)
0.302** 0.373** 0.035
0.123**
(0.036)
(0.116)
(0.056)
(0.050)
0.340** 0.289*
0.422** 0.283**
(0.035)
(0.140)
(0.083)
(0.079)
0.127** 0.112
0.042** 0.059**
(0.013)
(0.069)
(0.015)
(0.014)
0.000
0.000*
0.000
0.000
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
0.360** 0.615** 0.244** 0.246**
(0.028)
(0.143)
(0.036)
(0.038)

Corruption
Interaction
term
Constant
Adjusted R2
F-test
statistic
Hausman
test statistic
Number of
observation
s

-.995**
(0.070)
0.520

-1.234**
(0.241)
0.604

0.790

-.654**
(0.120)
0.509

capital account openness and corruption
Pooled
OLS

Between

Random
effects

0.222**
(0.042)

Fixed
effects
(Within)
0.185**
(0.042)

0.254**
(0.011)

0.040
(0.037)

0.058
(0.209)

0.050
(0.033)

0.048**
(0.032)

0.214**
(0.042)
0.174**
(0.047)
-.419**
(0.040)
0.517

0.273
(0.202)
0.275#
(0.261)
-.553**
(0.189)
0.605

0.107**
(0.029)
0.007
(0.046)

0.131**
(0.031)
0.025
(0.043)
-.334**
(0.057)
0.505

26.697**

0.834

0.268**
(0.022)

37.878**
15.561**

2626

18.213**

2111

Notes: Under the heading “demographics, policy, and financial development” the sample covers 132
countries with data available between 1975 and 2004. Under the heading “capital account openness and
corruption,” the sample covers 111 countries with data available between 1975 and 2004. The panel is
unbalanced due to some missing observations. ** and * indicate 1% and 5% levels of significance,
respectively. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are given in parentheses underneath coefficient
estimates. For the fixed effects models, the F-test statistics are reported for the null hypothesis of the
equality of the constants across all countries in the sample. For the random effects models, the Hausman
test statistics test for the independence between the time-invariant country-specific effects and the
regressors.

32

Table 7: Estimation with control variables and a current account balance variable

GDP per
capita
Popuation
under 14
Population
over 65
Capital
acct.
openness
Governmen
t
deficit
M2/GDP

Demographics, policy, and financial
development
Pooled
Between Fixed
Random
OLS
effects
effects
(Within)
0.258** 0.246** 0.270** 0.275**
(0.014) (0.048)
(0.039)
(0.024)
0.387** 0.412** 0.166** 0.227**
(0.041) (0.117)
(0.060)
(0.054)
0.364** 0.314*
0.275** 0.234**
(0.040) (0.146)
(0.104)
(0.087)

Capital account openness and corruption

0.147**
(0.014)

0.096
(0.068)

0.106**
(0.016)

0.114**
(0.016)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000*
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

0.379**
(0.034)

0.570**
(0.158)

0.200**
(0.045)

0.231**
(0.045)

0.215**
(0.047)

Fixed
effects
(Within)
0.076#
(0.046)

0.240**
(0.023)

-0.014
(0.039)

0.042
(0.218)

0.037
(0.034)

0.034
(0.033)

-0.002**
(0.000)

0.239**
(0.042)
0.227**
(0.048)
0.001
(0.001)

0.300
(0.203)
0.264
(0.268)
0.001
(0.005)

0.057#
(0.030)
0.039
(0.047)
-0.004**
(0.001)

0.102**
(0.032)
0.060
(0.043)
-0.003**
(0.000)

-0.768**
(0.132)

-0.449**
(0.041)

-0.569**
(0.197)

0.497

0.514

0.582

Corruption
Interaction
term
Lagged
current acct.
Constant
Adjusted R2
F-test
statistic
Hausman
test statistic
Number of
observation
s

0.003**
(0.001)

0.003
(0.005)

-1.139**
(0.087)

-1.262**
(0.252)

0.512

0.579

-0.003**
(0.001)
0.782

Pooled
OLS

Betwee
n

0.245**
(0.011)

23.232**

Random
effects

-0.360**
(0.058)

0.836

0.498

36.907**
11.596*

2244

114.62**
1987

Notes: Under the heading “demographics, policy, and financial development” the sample covers 132
countries with data available between 1975 and 2004. Under the heading “capital account openness and
corruption,” the sample covers 111 countries with data available between 1975 and 2004. The panel is
unbalanced due to some missing observations. **, *, and # indicate 1%, 5%, and 10% levels of
significance, respectively. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are given in parentheses underneath
coefficient estimates. For the fixed effects models, the F-test statistics are reported for the null hypothesis
of the equality of the constants across all countries in the sample. For the random effects models, the
Hausman test statistics test for the independence between the time-invariant country-specific effects and
the regressors. The “Lagged current acct.” is the current account to GDP ratio lagged by one period.

33

-2.2

Official real
exchange rate
(USD/CNY)

-2.3
-2.4
-2.5
-2.6

Trend
\

-2.7

/
Official trend

-2.8
-2.9
-3.0

"Adjusted" real
exchange rate

-3.1
88

90

92

94

96

98

00

02

04

Figure 1: Real Chinese exchange rate, in logs (Official and “Adjusted”) and trends

6.0

5.6

Trade Weighted
Value of RMB

5.2

4.8

Trend

4.4

4.0
80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06
Figure 2: Real trade weighted value of RMB, in logs, and trend.

34

Relative price level
1.5
1
0.5
China 1975
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5
-2

China 2004

-2.5
-3
-3.5
-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

Relative per capita income in USD terms

Figure 3: The rate of RMB misalignment based on the pooled OLS estimates with the USDbased per capita income

35

Relative price level
1.5
1
0.5

China 1975

0
-0.5
-1
-1.5

China 2004

-2
-2.5
-3
-3.5

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

Relative per capita income in PPP terms

Figure 4: The rate of RMB misalignment based on the pooled OLS estimates with the PPPbased per capita income

36

2.00
1.00
0.00
-1.00
-2.00
-3.00

Actual

Predicted

+2 std.

+1 std.

-1 std.

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

1979

1978

1977

1976

-4.00

-2 std.

Figure 5: PPP-based real income, pooled OLS estimates with ad-hoc AR1 adjustment

0.50

0.00

-0.50

-1.00

-1.50

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004

-2.00

Actual

Predicted

+2 std.

+1 std.

Figure 6: PPP-based real income, the Prais-Winsten estimates

37

-1 std.

-2 std.

0.50
0.00
-0.50
-1.00
-1.50
-2.00

Actual

Predicted

+2 std.

+1 std.

-1 std.

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

1979

1978

1977

1976

1975

-2.50

-2 std.

Figure 7: PPP-based real income, pooled OLS estimates with the less developed country
sample

0.00

-0.50

-1.00

-1.50

-2.00

Actual

Predicted

+2 std.

+1 std.

-1 std.

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

1979

1978

1977

1976

1975

-2.50

-2 std.

Figure 8: PPP-based real income, pooled OLS estimates with the middle income country
sample

38

0.00

-0.50

-1.00

-1.50

-2.00

Actual

Predicted

+2 std.

+1 std.

-1 std.

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

1979

1978

1977

1976

1975

-2.50

-2 std.

Figure 9: PPP-based real income, pooled OLS estimates with the East Asian country
sample

0.50
0.00
-0.50
-1.00
-1.50
-2.00
-2.50
1990

1991

1992

Actual

1993

1994

1995

Predicted

1996

1997

+2 std.

1998

1999

+1 std.

2000

2001

-1 std.

2002

2003

2004

-2 std.

Figure 10: PPP-based real income, pooled OLS estimates with the 1990-2004 sample

39

0.00
-0.20
-0.40
-0.60
-0.80
-1.00
-1.20
-1.40
-1.60
-1.80
-2.00
1987

1988

1989

1990

Actual

1991

1992

Predicted

1993

1994

1995

+2 std.

1996

1997

+1 std.

1998

1999

2000

-1 std.

2001

2002

2003

-2 std.

Figure 11: PPP-based real income, pooled OLS estimates with the demographics, policy
and financial development as controls

0.50
0.00
-0.50
-1.00
-1.50
-2.00
-2.50
1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004

Actual

Predicted

+2 std.

+1 std.

-1 std.

-2 std.

Figure 12: PPP-based real income, pooled OLS estimates with the capital account
openness and institutions as controls

40

0.00
-0.20
-0.40
-0.60
-0.80
-1.00
-1.20
-1.40
-1.60
-1.80
-2.00
1988

1989

1990

1991

Actual

1992

1993

Predicted

1994

1995

+2 std.

1996

1997

1998

+1 std.

1999

2000

2001

-1 std.

2002

2003

-2 std.

Figure 13: PPP-based real income, pooled OLS estimates with the demographics, policy
and financial development as controls, Prais-Winsten estimates

0.00
-0.20
-0.40
-0.60
-0.80
-1.00
-1.20
-1.40
-1.60
-1.80
-2.00
1985 1986 1987

1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994

Actual

Predicted

+2 std.

1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001

+1 std.

-1 std.

2002 2003 2004

-2 std.

Figure 14: PPP-based real income, pooled OLS estimates with the capital account
openness and institutions as controls, Prais-Winsten estimates

41

0.00
-0.20
-0.40
-0.60
-0.80
-1.00
-1.20
-1.40
-1.60
-1.80
-2.00
1987

1988

1989 1990

1991 1992

Actual

1993 1994

Predicted

1995 1996 1997

+2 std.

1998 1999

+1 std.

2000

2001 2002

-1 std.

2003

-2 std.

Figure 15: The actual and predicted RMB values by pooled OLS estimates with the
demographics, policy, financial development, and lagged current account as controls

0.50

0.00

-0.50

-1.00

-1.50

-2.00
1984

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

Actual

1990

1991

Predicted

1992

1993

1994

+2 std.

1995

1996

+1 std.

1997

1998

-1 std.

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

-2 std.

Figure16: The actual and predicted RMB values by pooled OLS estimates with the
capital account openness, institutions, and lagged current account as controls

42

2004

