                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE FARM, THE CITY, AND THE EMERGENCE OF SOCIAL SECURITY

                                       Elizabeth M. Caucutt
                                        Thomas F. Cooley
                                           Nezih Guner

                                       Working Paper 12854
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12854


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2007




We thank Dirk Krueger, Per Krusell, Stephane Pallage, and seminar and conference participants at
University of Rochester, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, 2006 CEPR Annual Public Policy Symposium
in Kiel and 2006 Canadian Macro Study Group Meetings in Montreal for comments. We thank the
National Science Foundation for Support under grant SES 0111518. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2007 by Elizabeth M. Caucutt, Thomas F. Cooley, and Nezih Guner. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Farm, the City, and the Emergence of Social Security
Elizabeth M. Caucutt, Thomas F. Cooley, and Nezih Guner
NBER Working Paper No. 12854
January 2007
JEL No. E61,H2,H55

                                              ABSTRACT

During the period from 1880 to 1950, publicly managed retirement security programs became an important
part of the social fabric in most advanced economies. In this paper we study the social, demographic
and economic origins of social security. We describe a model economy in which demographics, technology,
and social security are linked together. We study an economy with two locations (sectors), the farm
(agricultural) and the city (industrial). The decision to migrate from rural to urban locations is endogenous
and linked to productivity differences between the two locations and survival probabilities. Furthermore,
the level of social security is determined by majority voting. We show that a calibrated version of
this economy is consistent with the historical transformation in the United States. Initially a majority
of voters live on the farm and do not want to implement social security. Once a majority of the voters
move to the city, the median voter prefers a positive social security tax, and social security emerges.

Elizabeth M. Caucutt                                  Nezih Guner
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
Social Science Center                                 Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
The Univeristy of Western Ontario                     Calle Madrid 126
London, ON N6A 5C2, Canada                            Getafe 28903
ecaucutt@uwo.ca                                       Spain
                                                      and CEPR
Thomas F. Cooley                                      nguner@eco.uc3m.es
Department of Economics
Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street, Room 7-88
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
tcooley@stern.nyu.edu
1         Introduction
Social security systems - structures that build some version of old-age pension support into
the social fabric - are comparatively recent inventions. They emerged between 1880 and 1950
spreading from Scandinavia and Germany to Canada and the United States.1                      The notion
that economic security in old-age had to be addressed by public policy is an assumption that
transformed both the economic and social fabric of the countries involved. It is clearly not
accidental that the need for publicly managed, rather than individually managed, economic
security in old age arose in this set of countries during this period. As we show later in this
paper, this need arose from the convergence of three important elements: an increase in the
life expectancy of older generations, the shift from rural to urban social structures, and the
productivity increases associated with industrialization.
        In this paper we study the social, economic, and demographic origins of social security.
We look to the past, to the impetus for the creation of the social security consensus as a
means of understanding the shared challenges that these very countries, initiators of social
security systems, are now facing as demographic trends place ever increasing pressure on
pay-as-you-go (PAYG) pension systems.
        In the United States social security was introduced in 1935 and the size of the program
was expanded signi…cantly in the 1940’s and 1960’s. There is a signi…cant literature on the
political economy of social security systems (Cooley and Soares 1996 and 1998, Conesa and
Krueger 1999, Galasso 1999, Boldrin and Rustichini 2000, and Gonzales-Eiras and Niepelt
2005 e.g.) that analyses the political sustainability of PAYG social security systems.2 The
conclusion of most of this literature is that support for social security in democratic societies
depends on the age of the median voter. As a population ages, the median voter is older
and more likely to sustain social security. This literature, unfortunately, has nothing to say

    1
        See Lindert (1994) for the historical rise in public spending in pensions.
    2
     There also exists a large literature that analyzes macroeconomic and distributional implications of the
current social security system without political economy considerations (e.g. Imrohoroglu, Imrohoroglu and
Joines 1985).



                                                         1
about the set of demographic, social, and economic conditions that led to the introduction
of publicly managed old-age security.
       One important background factor in the rise of social security is the change in the struc-
ture of economies over this period (see Scheiber and Shoven 1999). The implementation of so-
cial security was coincident with the change from primarily agricultural and rural economies
to primarily urban and industrial economies. Figure 1 shows the change in rural/urban
population mix for the U.S. from 1800 to 1940.3                 In the beginning of the 19th century
almost everyone was living in rural areas, and nonfarm employment was almost non exis-
tent. The share of population living in rural areas declined to 43.5% by 1940, while the farm
populations was only 23% of the total US population. We argue that this major structural
shift is important for thinking about the rise of social security because the rural/urban shift
has implications for the provision of income for those who survive to old age.4                    As people
migrated from the farm to the city, they could no longer rely on land as a source of old-age
security, and political support for social security increased.
       What were the economic and demographic forces that led to this shift from rural to
urban population? Among the candidate answers to this question is the increase in the city
wage relative to the farm wage that arose from greater technical change in the city relative
to the farm. GDP per person employed increased by a factor of 3.5 in the U.S. between
1870 and 1940 (Madison 2001). While productivity in both the agriculture and the non-
agricultural sectors grew rapidly during this period, the growth in non-agricultural sectors
was faster than the growth in agriculture, leading to the transformation of the U.S. economy
(see Hansen and Prescott 2002 and Greenwood and Uysal 2005). Figure 2 shows the change
in total factor productivity (TFP) in agricultural and non-agricultural sectors in the U.S.5

   3
       Source: Hernandez (1996), Figure 5.
   4
     Although the Great Depression is often considered as a major force behind the social security legislation
in the U.S., its e¤ects are far from clear. Miron and Weil (1998) conclude their study on the origins of social
security by stating that: “Regarding the lasting impact of the Great Depression, our conclusion is that there
were surprisingly little.” (page 321).




                                                      2
 Between 1800 and 1940, TFP grew by a factor of 1.92 in agriculture, while it grew by a
factor of 4.21 in manufacturing.
       Another impetus for rural-urban migration was the increase in life expectancy. As life
expectancy increased, two important changes occurred in the agricultural sector. First,
the amount of farm labor relative to farm land rose, causing farm wages to fall. Second,
as farmers lived longer, the transfer of land ownership via inheritance was delayed. Both
events increased the relative attractiveness of living in the city for farmers, and encouraged
rural-urban migration. Of crucial importance for this story is not that life expectancy at
birth increased, but that life expectancy conditional on reaching or getting near retirement
age increased. Figure 3 shows the changes in conditional survival probabilities from age 60
to 65, from 65 to 70, from 70 to 75, and from 75 to 80. Survival probabilities increased
by about 5 percentage points between 1850 and 1900, and by another 2 percentage points
between 1900 and 1940.6
       One cannot understand the emergence of social security without understanding how social
changes, demographics, and technology are linked together. In this paper we describe a model
economy that illustrates how social security can arise in this context. As in Hansen and
Prescott (2002), we study an overlapping generations economy with two locations (sectors),
agricultural and industrial.7       Farm production requires capital, labor and land. Land is a
…xed factor, so there are decreasing returns to labor. City production on the other hand
requires capital and labor and exhibits constant returns to scale.8 Agents in this economy
live up to three periods, as young, middle aged and old. They face an exogenous probability

   5
       Source: Greenwood and Uysal (2005), Figure 9.
   6
       Source: U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare (1964), and Haines (1998).
   7
     There is a large literature on structural transformation and the declining role of agriculture in the
development process, see among others Greenwood and Seshadri (2002) and Gollin, Parente and Rogerson
(2002).
   8
     Hansen and Prescott (2002) model the industrial revolution as a switch from a (Malthus) production
technology with a …xed factor of production, land, to a (Solow) production technology, with no …xed factors.
Parente and Prescott (2005) use a similar framework to study the evolution of international income levels
since 1750.



                                                       3
of dying at the end of second period of their lives. Land is passed from one generation to
another by inheritance. Each period young agents make a once and for all decision about
where to live.9 There is also a social security system that taxes the young and the middle
aged and pays transfers to the old. The level of social security taxes is determined by majority
voting.10     In the initial steady state of this economy the relative productivity of the farm
sector is high and survival probabilities are low. As a result, farm incomes are high relative
to city incomes. All agents live on the farm, and land is an important source of income for
the old. The median voter is a middle-aged farmer who prefers a zero social security tax.
When the city becomes more productive, people start migrating, and the importance of land
diminishes. Eventually, the median voter becomes a middle-aged city worker who prefers a
positive social security tax.
       In the next section we describe the economic environment. In Section 3 we discuss the
economic equilibrium, given an exogenous political process. In Section 4 we describe how
taxes are determined. We provide some analytical results for a simpli…ed version of the
model in Section 5. In Section 6 we describe the results of our simulations. We conclude in
Section 7.


2        Environment
Consider the following one-good, two-sector overlapping generations model. In the …rst
sector (or location), which we will call the farm, labor, capital and land are combined to
produce output. In the second sector (or location), which we call the city, the same good is
produced using only labor and capital.
       Agents live a maximum of 3 periods, which we refer to as young, middle-aged and old,

   9
     Among recent models with an explicit location decision see Vandenbroucke (2003), Hassler et al (2005),
and Klein and Ventura (2006).
  10
     The current paper follows the recent literature on dynamic models of political economy; see among others
Krusell, Quadrini, and Rios-Rull (1997), Krusell and Rios-Rull (1999), and Hassler et al (2003). Graziella
(2006) studies long run changes in bequest tax within a two-sector (agriculture and manufacturing) dynamic
political economy model.



                                                     4
and face a probability, ; of surviving from the second to the last period. The objective of
a young person is to maximize

                                                                        2
                                U (cy ; cm ; co ) = u(cy ) + u(cm ) +       u(co );                           (1)

where ci ; i 2 fy; m; og ; denotes age-i consumption, and u is continuous, strictly increasing
and strictly concave.
       Each period every middle-aged person has a child who is born into the same location.
When an agent is born on the farm, he makes a once-and-for-all decision to stay there or
move to the city. Those who are born in the city are not allowed to move to the farm.
The middle-aged and old agents can’t change their locations.11                   Let the fraction of young,
middle-aged and old agents who live on the farm be denoted by                    y;   m   and   o;   respectively.
       In both locations young, middle-aged and old all inelastically supply one unit of labor.12
  Each agent is born without any assets (capital or land) and is endowed with location
dependent e¢ ciency units "ji ; j 2 ff; cg and i 2 fy; m; og : Since only a fraction                            of
middle-aged people survive to old age, the total labor supply on the farm is given by N f =
    f          f        f
 y "y   +   m "m +   o "o   and the total labor supply in the city by N c = (1                 c
                                                                                           y )"y +(1
                                                                                                              c
                                                                                                          m )"m +
             c
(1       o )"o   .
       Each period, agents are located either in the city or on the farm and can only work in
that sector. There is a competitive labor market in each location. Let wj denote the wages
in sector j: Then, the labor income of an age-i agent in location j is wj "ji for i 2 fy; m; og
and j 2 ff; cg.
       People are not allowed to borrow, but can accumulate capital and rent it to …rms in
either sector at a competitive rate, . Capital moves costlessly between the farm and the
city, so let r =            be the common rate of return to capital, where            2 [0; 1] is the common
rate of capital depreciation. There is no market in which agents can buy and sell land. This

  11
     The vast majority of migration from the farm to the city consisted of young workers. (Schieber and
Shoven (1999), p. 18, and U.S. Bureau of the Census (1975), pp. 139, 465)
  12
     We therefore abstract from the rise in retirement (i.e. decline in the labor force participation of
old) since 1850s. See Kopecky (2005) for a model with endogenous retirement that links this rise to the
technological progress in the production of leisure goods.

                                                       5
assumption is discussed in detail below. On the farm, when an agent dies (at the end of the
second or third period), his land is inherited by the oldest surviving descendant. Therefore,
a fraction of the land is owned by the                   o   surviving old, and the remainder is owned by the
(1     )   m   middle-aged who inherited land early. We normalize the total amount of land to
                                                 1
1, so each landholding farmer has            o +(1           )   m
                                                                     units of land. Farmers rent their land to …rms
at a competitive rate q:
     In a similar fashion, in both locations some middle-aged agents receive accidental capital
bequests from their parents. As a result, middle-aged agents di¤er in their asset and land
holdings on the farm, while they only di¤er by their asset levels in the city. If a young farmer
chooses to move to the city, he gives up all claims on his parent’s land, and that land, upon
his parent’s death, is divided equally among the remaining land owners. However, he still
receives any accidental bequest his parent might leave, as we assume capital can freely move
between the farm and the city.
     Each sector is populated by a large number of production units which have access to
constant returns to scale production functions represented by

                                      Yf =           f
                                                         F f (K f ; N f ; L);                                      (2)

and
                                         Yc =            c
                                                             F c (K c ; N c );                                     (3)

where variables Y j ; K j ; N j and L, j 2 ff; cg; refer to output, capital, and labor employed
                                                                                                      j
in each sector, and land used in the farm sector, respectively. The parameter                             ; j 2 ff; cg;
is the total factor productivity (TFP) in sector j. Land is a …xed factor and used only in
the farm sector. We normalize the stock of land to one, L = 1:
     Given the wage rate in sector j; wj ; the rental rate for capital,                     and the rental rate for
land, q; the problem of a representative …rm in the farm sector is given by

                                 max         Yf              wf N f        Kf     qL ;
                               N f ;K f ;L

subject to (2), and in the city sector by

                                      max fY c                   wc N c      K cg ;
                                      N c ;K c


                                                                     6
subject to (3).
   Finally, there is an economy-wide social security system that collects a lump-sum tax, ;
from the young and the middle-aged and provides each old with an amount 2 = : The level
of social security taxes are determined by majority voting in a way we detail below.


Discussion The assumption that land is passed from generation to generation is an im-
portant building block of our theory. First, there is evidence that inheritance was a major,
perhaps the determining, factor of wealth inequality in the U.S. during the 19th century.
According to Soltow (1982), in order to explain the relationship between age and wealth in
the U.S. in 1870, inheritance was a much more signi…cant factor than savings and capital
accumulation over the life-cycle. Second, land was the most important component of inher-
itance in the 19th century. In his study of Butler County (Ohio), Newell (1986) documents
that for 1803-1865 period, inheritance almost exclusively consisted of real property. Finally,
according to Greven (1970) and Newell (1986), inheritance was the main way to acquire land
in the settled areas.
   Therefore, the picture that emerges is one in which people waited until their parents’
death to obtain land and in which land provided an important source of wealth and income
for the elderly. Available evidence, although limited, indicates that towards the end of 18th
century, people 46 years or older held about 30% more wealth than the average in New
England colonies (see Williamson and Lindert 1980, Table 1.2). More detailed data for the
19th century indicates a similar pattern. In 1850, those 60 years or older had about three
times as much real estate wealth as the 30-39 age group (see Williamson and Lindert 1980,
Table 1.7) and an analogous picture emerges for total wealth in 1870 (see Soltow 1992, Table
3.2). It is therefore not surprising that Scheiber and Shoven (1999) conclude that the over-65
age cohort controlled more wealth than any other group in the early 19th century.




                                              7
3          Economic Equilibrium
At any point in time, the aggregate state in this economy consists of the distribution of capital
across agents, the distribution of agents across the city and the farm, a social security tax,
and an indicator variable of whether or not a social security system has operated in the past.
The role of this indicator function will become clear once we de…ne the political equilibrium
below. In this section, we assume that agents take the political state as given.
      Since agents are born without any capital, capital is owned by the middle-aged and the
old. Furthermore, because they make di¤erent decisions, it is convenient to di¤erentiate
between the asset distribution of landed- and landless-middle-aged farmers. We represent
                                                                                       c         f
the distribution of capital across old city and farm residents by                      o   and   o;   and middle-aged
                                         c            f
city residents and farmers by            m   and      m    with      = 1; 0 indicating whether a middle-aged
                                                                                                 c     c    f1   f0   f
farmer is landed,        = 1; or landless,      = 0: In what follows we use                 =(   m;    o;   m;   m;   o)

to represent the set of distributions. We represent the distribution of agents between the
two locations, city and farm, by             = ( y;       m;   o)   where   j   is the fraction of age-j agents who
live on the farm. Finally, we use S = ( ; ; ; h) to represent the aggregate state; where h
is an indicator of whether or not a social security system ever operated in the past. If h = 1
there was a system sometime in the past, if h = 0, there wasn’t.
      We represent the evolution of the aggregate state by three separate functions. First, we
       0
let        = G(S) represent next period’s asset distribution given the current state S: Second
             0
we let           = H(S) represent next period’s distribution of agents across locations. In this
section we describe the recursive competitive equilibrium given an exogenous policy rule
that determines the law of motion for                 and h. In particular, we assume that next period’s
                               0
social security tax level,         ; and history indicator h0 , are given by ( 0 ; h0 ) = P ( ; ; ; h); and
agents take the policy rule P as given when making their economic decisions. Once we de…ne
a recursive competitive equilibrium for a given P and show how G and H are determined,
we describe how P is determined by the political process.




                                                               8
3.1      City Problem

We start by describing the economic problem of agents in the city. We approach agents’
problems recursively, starting from the problem of an old agent, whose state consists of the
aggregate state, S = ( ; ; ; h); and his individual asset level a. An old agent in the city
has three sources of income: labor income wc "co ; asset income (1 + r)a; and social security
         2
income       : Let Voc (a; S) denote the value of being an old person with asset level of a: Since
the old will simply consume their total resources, this is given by

                                                                       2
                                  Voc (a; S) = u(wc "co + (1 + r)a +        );                        (4)

where for expositional clarity we suppress the dependence of wc and r on aggregate state S:
   Next, we look at the decision of middle-aged agents. Unlike the old, the middle-aged
agents do not receive any social security payments, and they have to pay social security
taxes. They also have to decide how much to save for their old age. Their decisions are
determined by



               Vmc (a; S) = max
                             0
                                fu(wc "cm + (1 + r)a               a0 ) +        Voc (a0 ; S 0 )g ;   (5)
                                 a

                 s:t: S 0 = (G(S); H(S); P (S));

                                                0
where next period’s asset distribution,             ; and next period’s distribution of agents between
                        0
the two locations,          ; are determined by transition functions G(S) and H(S); while next
period’s policy, ( 0 ; h0 ); is determined via P (S): Let acm (a; S) denote the savings decision of
a middle-aged-city person with individual asset level a that results from problem (5).
   Finally, we consider the decisions of the young agents who are born in the city. They are
born with no assets. They might, however, get an (accidental) bequest next period if their
parent does not survive to old-age. Let b(a; S) denote the bequest a young agent expects to
get if his middle-aged parent has assets, a; and dies before reaching old age. The problem
of a young agent is then given by


                                                       9
                       Vyc (b(a; S); S) = max
                                           0
                                             fu(wc "cy               a0 ) +       Vmc (a0 ; S 0 )            (6)
                                                 a

                                               + (1      )Vmc (a0 + b(a; S); S 0 )g;

                                s:t: S 0 = (G(S); H(S); P (S)):

Note that a young agent will get b only if his parent dies and that happens with probability
1     : Note also that the asset level of middle-aged agents provides enough information to
determine next period’s assets since it determines both the middle-aged as well as the young
agents’ savings decision. Let acy (b(a; S); S) be the savings decisions of a young agent who
expects to get b(a; S) as a bequest next period.

3.2     Farm Problem

The problem of an old agent on the farm is similar to the old agent’s problem in the city,
except the old farmer earns land income. His problem is given by

                                                                     q                    2
                   Vof (a; S) = u wf "fo + (1 + r)a +                                 +             ;        (7)
                                                                o + (1        )   m
             1
where    o +(1     )   m
                           is the per capita amount of land on the farm, and as in equation (4), we
suppress the dependence of prices, including q; on S:
    The problem of middle-aged agents on the farm is more complicated than that of those
in the city, since in contrast to the city the middle-aged agents on the farm di¤er in land-
holding status. They are either landed or landless. The middle-aged farmer’s problem can
be written, for        = 0; 1; as


                                                                          q
         Vmf (a; S) = maxfu wf "fm + (1 + r)a +                                                         a0   (8)
                                                                     o + (1           )
                       0         a                                                        m
                                +    Vof (a0 ; S 0 )g;

                 s:t: S 0 = (G(S); H(S); P (S)):

Let afm (a; S) be the decision rule for middle-aged farmers.

                                                         10
   When considering the young farmer’s saving decision, we need to do so jointly with his
location decision. Some young farmers may stay on the farm, and some young farmers may
move to the city. Their savings decisions will depend on where they choose to live. First
consider a young farmer who stays on the farm. He might get a capital bequest of b (a; S)
as well as a land bequest from his parent, and he solves



              Vyf s (b (a; S); S) = max
                                     0
                                       fu(wf "fy              a0 ) +    Vmf 0 (a0 ; S 0 ) +    (9)
                                        a

                                        (1     )Vmf 1 (a0 + b (a; S); S 0 )g;

                         s:t: S 0 = (G(S); H(S); P (S)):

Let his decision be represented by a0 = afy s (b (a; S); S): Next consider a young farmer who
goes to the city. He can only get a capital bequest of b (a; S) from his parent and solves



              Vyf g (b (a; S); S) = max
                                     0
                                       fu(wc "cy              a0 ) +     Vmc (a0 ; S 0 ) +    (10)
                                        a

                                        (1     )Vmc (a0 + b (a; S); S 0 )g;

                          s:t: S 0 = (G(S); H(S); P (S)):

Let his decision be given by a0 = afy kg (b (a; S); S):
   Finally, let L(b (a; S); S) be an indicator of whether the farmer is a goer or a stayer,
which is simply determined by comparing his expected lifetime utility in each location, i.e.
                              8
                              < 1; if V f kg (b (a; S); S) V f s (b (a; S); S)
                                       y                      y
             L(b (a; S); S) =                                                  :       (11)
                              :                   0; otherwise

3.3    Updating and Aggregation

When individuals solve their problems, they take the transition functions G; H; and P as
given. While we treat P as an exogenous function in this section, the other two transition
functions, G and H; must be consistent with individual decisions in equilibrium. In this


                                                 11
section we analyze how the savings and location decisions of agents determine the evolution
of aggregate assets and the fraction of agents living in each location.
     We begin with the evolution of aggregate assets in the economy. In this economy, assets
                                                                                               c               c
are owned either by the old or by middle-aged agents. Hence, given                             m (a)     and   o (a);   the
current level of aggregate assets in the city, Ac , is simply
                                     Z                        Z
                       c                    c                                       c
                     A = (1      m)    ad m (a) + (1       o)   ad                  o (a):                             (12)

Similarly, the aggregate asset level on the farm, Af , is
                              Z                   Z                                   Z
               f
             A = (1      ) m ad m (a) + m ad fm0 (a) +
                                     f1
                                                                                  o       ad    f
                                                                                                o (a):                 (13)

     Given the particular demographic structure we have imposed, in order to determine the
aggregate assets next period, all we need to know is the asset distribution of the middle-
aged agents. To see this, note that next period’s aggregate assets are determined by the
savings decisions of young and middle-aged agents. Since the savings decisions of the young
depend on the bequests they expect and these bequests are determined by the savings of
                                                                                                          0    c
the middle-aged agents, in order to …nd next period’s aggregate asset level Ac ;                               m (a)    and
 f
 m   (a) provide su¢ cient information: In particular, next period’s aggregate asset level in the
city is given by
                                             Z
                       c0                                                                 c
                   A        = (1        m)       acy (acm (a; S); S) + acm (a; S) d       m (a)                        (14)
                                        Z
                                                                                          f0
                              +    m[       L(afm0 (a; S); S)ayf 0g (afm0 (a; S); S)d     m (a)
                                   Z
                                                                                      f1
                              +        L(afm1 (a; S); S))afy 1g (afm1 (a; S); S)d     m (a)]:


   The …rst line in this equation is the portion of next period’s assets that is determined
                                                          R
by the savings decisions of the agents in the city. Here acm (a; S)d cm (a) gives the total
savings of the middle-aged agents. These savings are either carried to their old age, or
left as accidental bequests and constitute part of the assets owned by middle-aged agents
                         R
next period. The term acy (acm (a; S); S)d cm (a) is the other part of the assets owned by


                                                          12
middle-aged agents next period. It captures the savings done by the young, who in equi-
librium anticipate correctly that they will receive acm (a; S) as bequests. The next two lines
capture the part of aggregate assets in the city that come from young agents who just
moved to the city. The savings decisions of these newcomers depend on their parent’s asset
and land holding status, and are di¤erent from those of the young agents who are born
in the city. Hence, if a young farmer whose parent has a units of assets and no land de-
cides to go to the city, then L(afm0 (a; S); S) = 1 and he saves afy 0g (afm0 (a; S); S): The term
R
  L(afm0 (a; S); S)afy 0g (afm0 (a; S); S)d fm0 (a) is the aggregation of such assets.
   In a similar fashion, next period’s aggregate asset level on the farm is also determined
by the asset distribution of landed- and landless-middle-aged agents and by the location
decisions of the young. It is given by
                     Z
           0
       A f
             = m [ [(1 L(afm0 (a; S); S))afy 0s (afm0 (a; S); S) + afm0 (a; S)]d fm0 (a) +                    (15)
                 Z
                   [(1 L(afm1 (a; S); S))afy 1s (afm1 (a; S); S) + afm1 (a; S)]d fm1 (a)]

                                    R                  f0
                                                                     R                  f1
Like equation (14), the terms           afm0 (a; S)d   m (a)   and       afm1 (a; S)d   m (a)   represent the to-
tal savings of the middle-aged landless and landed agents, respectively, while the terms
R f 0s f 0                      R
  ay (am (a; S); S)d fm0 (a) and afy 1s (afm1 (a; S); S)d fm1 (a) are the savings done by the young
who choose to stay on the farm.
                                                                                          c         c        f1
   Next, we describe how G is determined. This entails updating                           m (a);    o (a);   m (a),
 f0            f
 m (a)   and   o (a)   in a manner that is consistent with the savings behavior of individuals. To
this end, let Q = [0; a] be the set of possible asset holdings for an individual in this economy.
First, consider next period’s asset distribution among the old in the city. This distribution
will be determined by the savings of the current middle-aged agents in the city who survive
to the next period. Then, it must be the case that for all e
                                                           a 2 Q;
                             0
                                    Z
                           c
                           o (ea) =                   agd cm (a);
                                       Ifacm (a; S) = e                                                       (16)
                                             Q

where I(:) = 1 if acm (a; S) = e
                               a ; and 0, otherwise. Similarly, the asset distribution of the old



                                                       13
on the farm is
               0
                             Z                                       Z
           f                                             f0                                      f1
           o       (e
                    a) =         Ifafm0 (a; S)   =e
                                                  agd    m (a)   +        Ifafm1 (a; S) = e
                                                                                          agd    m (a);     (17)
                             Q                                        Q

where, with some abuse of notation, we use I as the appropriate indicator function.
   Next period’s asset distribution among the middle-aged agents in the city is determined
by the location and savings decisions of young agents. One complication is that not all young
agents make the same savings decisions. While some of them are born in the city, others
move to the city this period. Furthermore, some of those movers had landless parents and
some had landed parents. The following equation lists each of these cases:
     0
           Z
   c                                                                                                      c
   m (ea) = [ Ifacy (acm (a; S); S) = e
                                      ag + (1 )Ifacy (acm (a; S); S) + acm (a; S) = e
                                                                                    ag]d                  m (a)
                   Q


                                             Z
                       +L(afm0 (a; S); S)         [ I 0 fafy 0g (afm0 (a; S); S) = e
                                                                                   ag                       (18)
                                               Q
                                                                                         f0
                       +(1       )I10      f 0g f 0
                                         fay (am (a; S); S)    + afm0 (a; S) = e
                                                                               ag]d      m (a)


                                              Z
                        +L(afm1 (a; S); S)        [ I 1 fafy 1g (afm1 (a; S); S) = e
                                                                                   ag
                                               Q
                                                                                          f1
                       +(1        )I11     f 1g f 1
                                         fay (am (a; S); S)      + afm1 (a; S) = e
                                                                                 ag]d     m (a):


   The …rst line represents the total assets held by next period’s middle-aged agents, who
are young this period and were also born in the city. Their savings decisions are given by
acy (acm (a; S); S): If they do not receive any bequest, which happens with probability , these
are all the assets they have. There is however a 1                        chance that they receive a bequest.
In this case, their total assets consist of their own savings and their parent’s assets, and are
given by acy (acm (a; S); S) + acm (a; S): The next two lines consider the same cases for young
agents who go to the city and have landless parents, while the last two rows do the same for
those who go to the city and have landed parents.
   Finally, next period’s asset distribution for middle-aged agents on the farm is given by
the savings decisions of the young who choose to stay there. For the landless-middle-aged


                                                            14
farmers we have,
                 0
                                                                    Z
            f0                                                                                                            f0
            m        (e
                      a) = [(1        L(afm0 (a; S); S))                    I 0 fafy 0s (afm0 (a; S); S) = e
                                                                                                           agd            m (a)               (19)
                                                                        Q
                                                           Z
                                                                                                                   f1
                      +(1     L(afm1 (a; S); S))                I 1 fafy 1s (afm1 (a; S); S) = e
                                                                                               agd                 m (a)]:
                                                            Q

And, for the landed-middle-aged farmers we have,
    0
                                     Z
 f1                                                                                                                                        f0
 m (e a) = (1   )[(1 L(am (a; S); S)) I10 fafy 0s (afm0 (a; S); S) + afm0 (a; S) = e
                          f0
                                                                                   agd                                                     m (a)
                                                                Q

                                              Z                                                                                               (20)
                                                                                                                              f1
         +(1          L(afm1 (a; S); S))              I11 fafy 1s (afm1 (a; S); S) + afm1 (a; S) = e
                                                                                                   agd                        m (a)]:
                                                  Q

   Next, in order to determine H; we consider how the location decisions are updated.
Suppose the current location decisions of agents are given by                                              = ( y;             m;   o ):   Since all
                                                                                                           0
young agents survive to middle age, it must be the case that                                               m   =         y:   Similarly, since
                                                                                              0
the survival probability, ; is identical in both locations,                                   o   =    m:      The fraction of young
agents who will be on the farm, however, depends on the location decisions of those agents
who are born on the farm. A fraction                                y   will be born on the farm next period. Yet,
according to equation (11), some of them will move to the city. Hence, for any S 0 ; the
total fraction who stay, among those whose parent does not have any land, is given by
R                                 0
  (1 L(afm0 (a; S 0 ); S 0 ))d fm0 (a): The same expression for those whose parent has land is
         R                                0
given by (1 L(afm1 (a; S 0 ); S 0 ))d fm1 (a). Putting these pieces together implies the following
                                      0
consistency condition for
                                                       Z
                                  0                                                               f 00
                                      =       y            (1       L(afm0 (a; S 0 ); S 0 ))d     m (a)

                                          Z
                                                                                        f 10
                            +(1       )       (1       L(afm1 (a; S 0 ); S 0 ))d        m (a)     ;   y;       m     :                        (21)


3.4    Economic Equilibrium

Given a policy function P (S); a recursive competitive equilibrium for this economy consists
of a set of value functions, Vyc (b(a; S); S); Vmc (a; S); and Voc (a; S); for agents who live in the


                                                                        15
city and Vyf s (a; S); Vyf g (a; S); Vmf (b (a; S); S)         = 0; 1; and Vof (a; S) for agents who live
on the farm; a set of decision rules acy (bc (a; S); S) and acm (a; S) for agents who live in the
city, and afy s (b (a; S); S); afy g (b (a; S); S) and afm (a; S);              = 0; 1; for agents who live on
the farm; a location rule for young farmers, L(b (a; S); S);                 = 0; 1; a set of pricing functions
r(S); wc (S); wf (S); and q(S); and a set of aggregate laws of motion H(S) and G(S) such
that:

        Given the transition functions P (S); H(S); and G(S); and pricing functions r(S);
        wc (S); wf (S); and q(S); the value functions and corresponding decision rules solve the
        appropriate household problems in equations (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (9), (10), and (11),
        with b(a; S) = acm (a; S) and b (a; S) = afm (a; S);             = 0; 1:

        The pricing functions, r(S); wc (S); wf (S); and q(S); are determined by pro…t maxi-
        mization of the representative …rm in each sector together with a no arbitrage condition
        for capital, i.e. r(S); wc (S); wf (S); and q(S) satisfy

                                           wc (S) = F2c (K c ; N c );

                                         wf (S) = F2f (K f ; N f ; L);

                                          q(S) = F3f (K f ; N f ; L);

        and
                                r(S) + = F1c (K c ; N c ) = F1f (K f ; N f ; L);

        with aggregate labor and capital in each sector given by

                                        Nf =          f
                                                   y "y   +      f
                                                              m "m   +   o   "fo ;

                             N c = (1          c
                                           y )"y   + (1            c
                                                               m )"m     + (1        o)   "co ;

        and
                                        K = K c + K f = Ac + Af ;

        where Ac and Af are given by equations (12) and (13), and K c and K f are determined
        by the no arbitrage condition.

                                                      16
         Aggregate transition functions are consistent with individual decisions: (i) The tran-
         sition function G is consistent with individual savings decisions and is determined by
         equations (16), (17 ), (18), (19), and (20). (ii) The transition function H is consistent
         with individual location decisions and is determined by (21).


4        Political Equilibrium
So far we have taken the function P as given. We now focus on the social security taxes
that are determined by equilibrium voting of successive generations.               We assume sincere
voting, i.e. that each agent votes for his most preferred alternative in each period. It is not
obvious whether an equilibrium with social security can be supported as a political outcome
in a democratic voting process. The current young and middle-aged do not bene…t from the
system, yet their support is critical. Indeed, the current young and middle-aged will always
choose to pay nothing in the current period, as long as they believe that the system will be
there for them in the future. To induce these agents to vote for social security we introduce
the following reputational mechanism: if a majority of voters deviate from the current level
of social security, then the system collapses.13        This way, young and middle-aged workers
balance the bene…t of not paying into the system against the cost of not receiving anything
from it in the future.

De…nition 1 For any          > 0; we will say that a policy function P (S) is sustainable in state
S = ( ; ; ; h); if
                                  V M ( ; ; ; h; P )      V M ( ; );
where V M is the remaining lifetime utility of the median voter in an economy with current
aggregate state S = ( ; ; ; h) and policy function P; and V M is the remaining lifetime
utility of the median voter if social security is eliminated forever.

       The value V M ( ; ) only depends on      and ; i.e. the aggregate state (aggregate physical
capital and distribution of agents between the city and the farm) in which the social security
tax is eliminated. In other words, P is sustainable in S if a majority of voters vote “yes”for

  13
    Two early papers that emphasized the political sustainability of social security were Browning (1975)
and Sjoblom (1985).

                                                   17
keeping it today, instead of moving to an economy with no social security. Let the indicator
function M ( ; ; ; h; P ) denote the yes/no decision of the median voter, i.e.
                                 8
                                 < 1; if V M ( ; ; ; h; P ) V M ( ; ; 0; 1)
             M ( ; ; ; h; P ) =                                               :
                                 :               0; otherwise

     Obviously there can be many policy rules that are sustainable. In this paper we consider
a variant of constant social security taxes: (i) if a social security system has never been
in place, it may start at any point, (ii) once a system is operating, if it continues, the tax
remains constant, (iii) if a system is dismantled, it cannot start up again, and the tax remains
zero forever.
     To de…ne the policy function P , we begin by noting that the history, h, of the social
security system is important for its future evolution. Speci…cally, if the current tax level is
zero, it is either because no median voter has voted for social security, and a system is still
a possibility, or a system existed in the past, was dismantled, and no possibility exists of a
positive tax in the future.
     If   = 0, and h = 1, then a social security system collapsed in the past, and cannot be
restarted. Therefore,
                                     P ( ; ; 0; 1) = (0; 1)                                (22)

If   = 0, and h = 0, then a social security system has never been operative. It may, or may
not begin next period, depending on the preferences of tomorrow’s median voter. Therefore,

                        P ( ; ; 0; 0) = (arg max V M ( 0 ;    0
                                                                  ; ; 0; P ); 0):          (23)

If the tax is strictly positive today, then either today or sometime in the past a median
voter instituted his most preferred tax, call it      > 0: In this case, next period the system
either continues at the same tax level or is dismantled. Regardless of the value of h, h0 = 1;
because next period there will have been a social security system in the past. Hence,
                                 8
                                 < ( ; 1); if M ( 0 ; 0 ; ; 1; P ) = 1
                P ( ; ; ; h) =                                          :             (24)
                                 : (0; 1); if M ( 0 ; 0 ; ; 1; P ) = 0


                                                18
       A political equilibrium is then a recursive competitive equilibrium with the policy function
P de…ned by equations (22), (23), and (24). Once a median voter sets                                  > 0; then future
generations of median voters simply decide whether to sustain the system or not, knowing
that once the system is dismantled, it is gone forever.14                              Obviously, the median voter who
chooses        > 0; takes into account the reputational mechanism that is in e¤ect. Finally, if
h = 0, and the median voter prefers a zero tax, he considers the possibility that sometime
in the future a social security system might be implemented.
       At a general level, not much can be said analytically about this model. In the following
sections we choose functional forms, assign parameter values, and perform numerical eval-
uations. Some valuable analytical insight can be gained, however, by focusing on a steady
state economy without capital. This is what we turn to next.


5        Steady State Economy without Capital
                                                                                                       0           0
Consider a steady state version of the economy outlined above, i.e. let                                    =   ;       =   ;
h0 = h; and       0
                      = . In the steady state there will be a constant fraction                            of population
that lives on the farm, i.e.      y   =   m   =   o   = : Suppose the farm sector uses only labor and
land, while labor is the only factor of production in the city sector. In particular, let the
production function in the farm sector be

                                          Yf =        f
                                                          (N f ) (L)1              :

Hence, with L = 1; the rental rates are given by

                                              wf =         f
                                                               (N f )      1
                                                                               ;                                       (25)

and
                                                                   f
                                          q = (1               )       (N f ) :                                        (26)

Since we are in a steady state, the aggregate labor on the farm is N f = ("fy +"fm + "fo ) : Note
that since land is a …xed factor of production, there are decreasing returns to labor. As a

  14
    Once a median voter sets       > 0; the way we have de…ned a political equilibrium is similar to Cooley
and Soares (1999).

                                                           19
result, when people live longer and the farm sector gets more crowded, i.e. when          increases,
wf declines and q increases. It is also the case that as people move out of agriculture the
pressure on farm wages is reduced, since as              declines, wf rises and q declines. Let the
production function in the city be
                                            Yc =     c
                                                         N c;                                  (27)

which implies wc =    c
                          . Finally, let

                                           u(c) = log(c):                                      (28)

Furthermore, suppose agents have access to a storage technology that transfers resources
from current to future periods. In particular, suppose a unit of goods not consumed today
becomes 1 + r units of goods tomorrow.
   We focus here on how taxes are determined and characterize the behavior of middle-aged
agents, who are most likely to be median voters in equilibrium. It turns out that the amount
a middle-aged person chooses to store depends critically on the social security tax. For each
middle-aged agent there exists a threshold tax level. This threshold depends on his wealth,
and if the existing social security tax is greater than this threshold, then he stores nothing,
while if it is strictly less than this threshold, he stores a positive amount. Intuitively, a
person’s threshold tax level re‡ects how much of his resources he would like to transfer from
today to tomorrow. If the actual tax level is lower than what he prefers, then he stores.
Hence, the closer the actual tax level is to his threshold (or ideal) tax level, the less he
needs to store in order to make up the di¤erence. Furthermore, if a person saves, his savings
decision is decreasing in the social security tax, increasing in his wealth, and increasing in
the survival probability.
   These results are formalized in the next proposition. All proofs are in the Appendix. To
streamline the presentation it is helpful to de…ne middle-age and old-age income variables.
     j
Let Im ; j 2 fc; f 0; f 1g; be pre-tax total labor and land incomes of the middle-aged. So,
 c
Im = "cm wc ; Im
               f0
                  = "fm wf ; and Im
                                  f1
                                     = "fm wf + q= : Let Ioj ; j 2 fc; f 0; f 1g be total labor and
land incomes of the old-age. So, Ioc = "co wc ; Iof = "fo wf + q= ;      2 f0; 1g: Note that all old

                                                20
farmers have the same labor and land incomes, regardless of their middle-age land status.
However, it is easier in terms of exposition to separate them.

Proposition 1 Let p = (r; wc ; wf ; q): Given p and ; for any middle-aged person of type j 2
fc; f 0; f 1g; there exits a threshold tax level ^jm (a; p; ) 0 such that: (i) If ^jm (a; p; )       ,
                                                                              j          j
                                  j                                   (1+r)(I   +a  ) (I   +2 = )
then ajm (a; p; ) = 0. (ii) If ^m (a; p; ) > , then ajm (a; p; ) =           m
                                                                            (1+r)(1+ )
                                                                                        o
                                                                                                  > 0;
       @ajm (a;p; )          @ajm (a;p; )              @ajm (a;p, )
and        @
                      < 0,       @a
                                            > 0; and       @
                                                                      > 0:

    The next proposition provides a characterization of the threshold tax level ^: This thresh-
old is increasing in the middle-aged agent’s wealth, since an agent with higher wealth has
more incentive to transfer his resources to old age. On the other hand, if the non-social secu-
rity income of the old is su¢ ciently high relative to the pre-tax income of the middle-aged,
then the reservation tax is zero. Agents who have enough resources when they are old do
not want to transfer resources to their old age.

Proposition 2 Given p and ; for any middle-aged person of type j 2 fc; f 0; f 1g: (i)
                              j     j                                     j
^jm (a; p; ) = maxf0; (1+r)(Im +a) Io
                      2= + (1+r)
                                      g; (ii) If ^jm (a; p; ) > 0; then @^m@a
                                                                            (a;p; )
                                                                                    > 0:

    Next, we consider the decision of the middle-aged median voter. Suppose the return to
social security, 2= , is less than the return to storage, 1 + r . Then, the median voter chooses
a zero tax, and any agent who wants to save, saves entirely through storage. If, 2= > 1 + r,
then if the median voter wants to save, he chooses a positive tax, saves entirely via social
security, and stores nothing. Middle-aged agents who have higher wealth than the median
voter, store positive amounts, since they want to save more than the median voter. What
is key in both cases is whether or not middle-aged agents want to save. If they do not,
then neither social security, nor storage will be operative in equilibrium. These results are
outlined in the following proposition.

Proposition 3 Given p; let a be the stored assets of the median voter, let ajm be the storage
decision of the middle-aged median voter of type j 2 fc; f 0; f 1g; and let        denote his
                                                                                     j    j
preferred tax rate. (i) If < (1+r); then = 0; and am (a; p; ) = maxf0; (1+r)(1++a)) Io g:
                          2                           j                       (1+r)(Im

                                                            j
                                                              +a) Ioj
(ii) If   2
              > (1 + r); then               = maxf0; 2    (Im
                                                         2( +1= )
                                                                      g; and ajm (a; p;     ) = 0. (iii) If   2
                                                                                                                  = (1 + r);
                                                                             j      j
then                  j
              2 [0; ^ ]; and ajm (a; p;         )2   [0; maxf0; (1+r)(I      m +a) Io
                                                                       (1+r)(1+ )
                                                                                      g].


                                                                 21
5.1       Discussion

Land plays an important role in this framework for two reasons. First, it is a …xed factor
on the farm, so increasing survival probabilities reduces farm wages. This crowding of land
encourages young farmers to migrate to the city. Second, land provides insurance for farmers.
The promise of land upon survival to old age for middle-aged-landless farmers creates a steep
age-income pro…le that discourages saving. For reasonable parameters, this implies that as
long as most people are on the farm, and the middle-aged-landless farmer is the median
voter, there will be no social security. It is important for this result that there is no market
                                                                                                         15
for land, it is the inherited nature of land that creates this wedge in age-income pro…les.
       The political economy aspect of the environment is simple, yet critical. Middle-aged
agents only pay into the system one period, while their bene…ts are based on two periods of
payments. This encourages support for social security, even when age-income pro…les are ‡at.
Land is not available for city workers as old age security. They earn only labor income when
middle-aged and old. Therefore, they have age-income pro…les that are relatively ‡atter than
that of farmers, and thus are more likely to support social security. An important feature of
this framework is that as the fraction of people living on the farm falls, the identity of the
median voter shifts from the farm to the city and support for social security can emerge. As
was highlighted in the last section, in order for social security to arise at all, the returns to
the middle-aged voter, 2= ; must be greater than the returns to saving, 1 + r.


6        Economy with Capital
We are now ready to carry out our quantitative exercise and evaluate if a calibrated version
of our model is consistent with the historical experience of the U.S. economy. Consider
the general setup from Section 2 and assume that young and middle-aged agents save in
the forms of risk-free, productive capital. Although the basic intuition from the analytical
results of the previous section remains valid, there are now general equilibrium e¤ects at

  15
     This result also depends on the return to land relative to the return to farm labor. With a higher share
to farm labor, land plays a smaller role, causing the age-income pro…le of the landless farmer to ‡atten.

                                                     22
play as well. As a result, changes in relative productivity levels and survival probabilities
will not only determine farm wages and land returns via migration, but will also a¤ect all
prices via changes in individual capital accumulation decisions. In their decisions about the
social security system, agents still compare the return to capital with the return to social
security, but the return to capital is now an endogenous variable.
   In this section we show that a calibrated version of this economy can generate an initial
steady state in which a majority of the population lives on the farm and the median voter
chooses not to introduce a social security system, and a transition to a new steady state along
which the median voter chooses a positive and sustainable social security tax. We interpret
the initial steady as the U.S. economy in 1800 and the …nal one as the U.S. economy in 1940.
Computing the transition is non-trivial. Not only do the capital stock and location choices
(and hence prices) have to be consistent with individual asset accumulation and migration
decisions, but the sequence of tax levels that individuals expect must be those that the
median voter in each generation chooses. In order to develop quantitative implications of
this model economy, we …rst choose functional forms for utility and production functions
and assign parameter values.
   As in the previous section, let the utility function be u(c) = log(c): Since the production
side of our model economy closely follows Hansen and Prescott (2002), we borrow both func-
tional forms and parameter values from them. In particular, we assume that the production
function on the farm sector is given by

                               Yf =   f
                                           Nf       Kf        [L]1       ;

and in the city sector it is
                                    Yc =    c
                                                [N c ]1   [K c ] :

   These choices imply that

                                 wc = (1        ) c (N c ) (K c ) ;                       (29)

                                  wf =      f
                                                (N f )    1
                                                              (K f ) ;                    (30)

                                                  23
                                                                  f
                                         q = (1              )        (N f ) (K f ) ;                                  (31)

and
                 r = rc =        c
                                     (N c )1 (K c )   1
                                                                 =        f
                                                                              (N f ) (K f )   1
                                                                                                  = rf :               (32)

The parameter values we use are                = 0:6;        = 0:1; and              = 0:4:16 We set the length of a
model period to 20 years. We also assume that capital depreciates completely, i.e.                                     = 1,
which is not critical for any of the results, but simpli…es the computational burden.
       Next we select the values for relative TFP levels and survival probabilities. We borrow
                                                                                                                     f
TFP numbers from Greenwood and Uysal (2005). For the 1800 economy we set                                             1800   =
 c
 1800   = 1: Since the relative TFP values are the key determinants of migration decisions in
                          f                           c
the model, we keep        1940   = 1 and set          1940   = 2:19: These choices imply that the relative
TFP growth is as reported by Greenwood and Uysal (2005) and reproduced in Figure 2.
Historical estimates for age-speci…c-mortality rates and life tables do not go back further
than 1850 (see Haines 1988). In 1850, a 60 year-old man had about a 47% chance of living
to his 80th birthday. Since available evidence does not indicate any signi…cant improvement
in mortality between 1800 and 1850, we set                1800        = 0:47:17 In 1940 the chances that a 60 year
old man saw his 80th birthday increased to about 56%. Therefore, we select                                 1940   = 0:56:18
       Finally, we assume that agents have ‡at age-earning pro…les both on the farm and in
the city, i.e. "ji = 1 for j 2 ff; cg and i 2 fy; m; og: Age-earning pro…les in the 19th
century did indeed di¤er from the usual hump-shaped pattern. According to Kaelble and
Thomas (1991), incomes of working class household heads increased slightly between ages

  16
     The value for capital share in the city (industrial) technology, = 0:4; is the standard value for the
postwar U.S. economy. The labor share is assumed to be the same for both sectors, = 1         = 0:6: Finally,
  = 0:1 is picked to be consistent with historical evidence on agricultural incomes. See Hansen and Prescott
(2002) for details.
  17
     According to Haines (1988), the crude death rate in New York City was as high in 1850 as it was in 1804
(see Figure 1, page 150). In many New England towns there was not much improvement in life expectancy
at age 20 either (see Table 1, page 151).
  18
     The data for 1850 are from Haines (1988) and for 1950 are taken from the U.S. Department of Health,
Education and Welfare (1964). They are the average of the conditional survival probabilities from age 60 to
65, from 65 to 70, from 70 to 75 and 75 to 80 in 1850 and 1950, respectively. The 1850 numbers are for
white males only and are based on West Model.


                                                             24
20 and 40, but were pretty much ‡at after age 40. These ‡at pro…les were a common feature
of agricultural workers as well as low skilled non-agricultural workers.19                  We make the
strong assumption that age-earning pro…les were also ‡at in the city. We consider this as a
conservative assumption for our results, since a hump-shaped pro…le for city workers would
simply increase the incentives of middle aged workers to shift resources to their old age and
increase the political support for social security even further.
       Note that we …x all these parameter values prior to running our simulations. We are left
with only one more parameter to pick, : We set                    = 0:818 (a yearly value of 0.99). This
value implies that the yearly return to capital in the 1940 steady state is about 5.8%.20
Table I summarizes our parameter choices.


                                     Table I — Parameter Values
                                               f           c        f      c
                                               1800        1800     1940   1940   1800   1940

               0.818 0.6 0.1 0.4 1             1           1        1      2.19   0.47   0.56




6.1       Results

Table II shows the results for the two steady states, 1800 and 1940. First consider the
economy in 1800. In our 1800 economy everyone lives on the farm,                   = 1. This is consistent
with the U.S. experience. At that time, about 94% of population lived in rural areas, and
the fraction of population working on the farm was possibly even higher (see Figure 1).
In the 1800 steady state, the median voter is a landless-middle-aged farmer, who does not
want social security, so the equilibrium value of                 is zero. Notice that this happens even

  19
    Doepke and Zilibotti (2005) contrast relatively ‡at wage pro…les of agricultural workers and land owners
with steep wage pro…les of entrepreneurs in the 19th century. They model the emergence of capitalism
within a model of structural transformation in which entrepreneurs in‡uence their children’s preferences in
an attempt to make them more patient.
  20
     Hansen and Prescott (2002) target a 4-4.5 percent rate of return on capital for post-war period. Cooley
and Prescot (1995) report a higher value, 6.9 percent. The value for the return on capital in our new steady
state is right between these two values. See Gomme and Rupert (2005) for a recent discussion.


                                                      25
though 2= (about 4.25) is larger than 1 + r, so the return to social security is greater than
the return to capital. However, the middle-aged-landless farmer prefers to save nothing due
to his steep age-income pro…le. Next, consider the 1940 economy. Now about 16% of the
population lives on the farm, a value close to the 23% observed in the U.S. at that time (see
Figure 1). This is quite remarkable since nothing in our parameter choices targets directly
the fraction of agents living on the farm.
       Consistent with historical experience, the return on capital is much higher in the new
steady state, despite a more than fourfold increase in aggregate capital stock. In 1940,
about 16% of the population lives on the farm, but a much smaller (about 4.3%) fraction
of aggregate capital stock is allocated to farm production. Also consistent with historical
evidence, the rental value of land declines signi…cantly. In 1940 it is about one third of its
1800 value.21      Lastly, note that while the returns per unit of land, q, fall, the returns to
land for landholders, q= , actually rise, .40 to .54, which keeps them on the farm despite
rising city wages.

  21
    According to Hansen and Prescott (2002), the value of U.S. farmland relative to GDP declined from
88% in 1870 to 20% in 1950 (see Table 2, page 1209).




                                                 26
                        TABLE II - Initial and Final Steady States

                                        1800                       1940
                                          0                        0.080
                                          1                        0.160
                 1+r                   2.449                       3.072
                  wf                   0.311                       0.551
                  wc                      -                        0.569
                   q                   0.384                       0.114
                 q=                    0.384                       0.710
                  K                    0.052                       0.280
                  Kf                   0.052                       0.012
                  Kc                      -                        0.267
                  Nf                   2.470                       0.413
                  Nc                      -                        2.167
            Median Voter      middle-age-landless farmer   middle-aged city worker



   Table III and Figure 4 illustrate the transitional dynamics resulting from this exercise.
We assume that the economy is at its 1800 steady state initially (period 0) and suddenly and
unexpectedly productivity and life expectancy increase to their 1940 values. In the period
of the change (period 1), the capital stock is …xed at its initial steady state level. However,
due to the higher productivity in the city and the higher survival probability, the city is a
much more attractive location for young farmers and many choose to migrate,          y   = 0:66:
This population shift alters the labor supply on the farm and in the city. Indeed, since a
large fraction of population migrates in the …rst period of the transition, both farm and city
wages rise. Given the rise in productivity levels, the return to capital, which is …xed at its
old steady state value, increases signi…cantly from 2.449 to 5.718. As people start moving
away from the farm, the return to land starts to fall as well.


                                               27
       Because the migration only a¤ects the location of the young, in period 1 the median
voter is still a middle-aged landless farmer, who prefers no social security.22             So, in the
initial period of the change, the tax remains unchanged at 0. However, agents are aware
that the mass migration of young farmers to the city will shift the identity of the median
voter in the next period, and alter support for social security.
       In the second period of the transition, the initial young migrants now become middle-
aged-city workers, who support a positive (sustainable) level of social security,            = :08.23
No further migration occurs this period, or over the remainder of the transition. However,
the new steady state farm population takes three periods to attain, as the initial young
migrants age. As the population reallocates between the two locations and people start
accumulating capital, the return to capital falls to 3.718, and then converges to 3.072 in the
new steady state.
       In the new steady state, even though total labor supply in the city rises due to the
increase in life expectancy and in city population, because of the increase in technological
progress and in the aggregate capital stock, the city wage rises. There is no technological
advance on the farm. But the out migration of farmers causes farm labor supply to fall, and
so farm wages rise. And, while there is a large increase in the aggregate capital stock, the
technological advance in the city, coupled with the increase in labor supply in the city, leads
to an increase in the return to capital.

  22
       We computationally verify that preferences are single peaked.
  23
     Again, we computationally verify that preferences are single peaked in the period of the vote for a
positive tax.




                                                     28
                                   TABLE III - Transition

                      0       1       2         3      4       5      6      7
                      0       0      0.08      0.08   0.08   0.08    0.08   0.08
               y      1     0.660 0.349 0.160 0.160 0.160 0.160 0.160
             1+r    2.449 5.718 3.718 3.443 3.203 3.126 3.088 3.072
              wf    0.311 0.325 0.416 0.544 0.548 0.549 0.550 0.551
              wc       -    0.376 0.501 0.528 0.554 0.563 0.567 0.569
               q    0.384 0.265 0.187 0.112 0.113 0.114 0.114 0.114
              K     0.052 0.052 0.168 0.232 0.262 0.272 0.278 0.280




7     Conclusion
In this paper we o¤er an explanation for the emergence of pay-as-you-go social security
systems. Our story ties this development to the population shift from rural to urban areas,
a migration that has its roots in increased life expectancy conditional on reaching age 60,
and on technological progress in the city that outpaced that on the farm. This story …ts
the experience of the United States very well. We show that there is an initial steady state
consistent with United States in the 1800s, with most people living on the farm and no social
security system. Changes in life expectancy and technological progress in the city that are
in line with those observed in the data initiate a transition to a new steady state. Along this
transition path, a generation votes a social security system into place, which is supported
throughout the transition and in the new steady state.
    It is worth noting that the demographic changes alone would not lead to the rural-urban
transition that the U.S. experienced.       When we only change survival probabilities, social
security does not emerge. Indeed, everybody remains on the farm. The key e¤ect of this
change is an increase in the capital stock because people save more anticipating a longer life.



                                                29
   When we only TFP changes social security does emerge but the rural/urban migration is
not nearly as pronounced. Roughly 33% continue to live on the farm (in the data it is 23%
and in our economy with changes in both survival probabilities and the TFP we get 16%).
Furthermore, the social security tax is considerably higher than in the economy with both
factors at work. This underscores the conclusion that the interaction between technology
and demographics is a powerful impetus for social change.




                                           30
8     Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1: The problem of a middle-aged agent is

                                                                                      2
                  max
                   0
                      log(Im + a                a0 ) +       log(Io + (1 + r)a0 +         ) :
                   a


The …rst order condition for a0 is given by

                                     1                      (1 + r)
                                                +                       2        0:
                          Im + a           a0       Io + (1 + r)a0 +

Solving for an interior a0 yields

                                     (1 + r)[Im + a     ]         (Io + 2 = )
                          a0 =                                                ;
                                             (1 + r)(1 +          )

which is positive if
                            (1 + r)[Im + a               ]   (Io + 2 = )    0:                             (33)

Since the right hand side of this inequality is decreasing in , there exists a threshold tax
level below which saving decision is positive and above which saving decision is zero. Finally,
if a0 > 0; then
                                    @a0    ( (1 + r) + 2 )
                                        =                  < 0;
                                    @     (1 + r)(1 + )
                                         @a0
                                             =                 > 0;
                                         @a    1+
and
         @a0   (1 + r)2 [Im + a          ] + (1 + r)(1 +          ) 2 2 + (1 + r)(Io +      2
                                                                                                )
             =                                                                                      > 0:
         @                                 (1 + r)2 (1 +         )2



    Proof of Proposition 2: In order to compute the threshold tax level at which the
savings decision becomes strictly positive, we solve for              in Equation (33). This yields

                                                  (1 + r)[Im + a] Io
                            ^ = max 0;                                       :
                                                  2= + (1 + r)

                                                     31
If the threshold tax level is strictly positive, i.e. if ^ > 0, then

                                             @            (1 + r)
                                                =                      2   > 0:
                                             @a         (1 + r) +



         Proof of Proposition 3: Consider now the problem of the middle-aged median voter.
His optimal tax problem is given by

                                                                                                        2
                   max log(Im + a                a0 ( )) +       log(Io + (1 + r)a0 ( ) +                   ) :

The …rst order condition for            is
                                         @a0                                  0
                                 (1 +    @
                                             )           [(1 + r) @a
                                                                  @
                                                                     + 2]
                                                   +                       = 0:                                              (34)
                            Im + a           a0 ( ) Io + (1 + r)a0 ( ) + 2
                                                                                                       (1+r)[Im +a] Io
Remember that for any agent the threshold tax level was given by ^ =                                   2= + (1+r)
                                                                                                                       :   Hence,
we would like to …nd parameter restrictions under which the optimal tax rate implied by
Equation (34) is greater than, equal to and less than ^:
         Case 1: Suppose the optimal tax rate of the median voter is greater than ^ and as a
result his savings decision is zero, i.e., a0 = 0: Then Equation (34) implies that the optimal
tax rate is given by
                                                     2 [Im + a]     Io
                                                 =                                e:
                                                         2 +2
                   2                                         2
Note that if           > 1 + r; then indeed e > ^: If             1 + r, however, then                      = ^.
                                                                                           (1+r)[Im +a ] (Io + 2 )          @a0
         Case 2: Consider now the other case, i.e. let a0 =                                    (1+r)(1+ )
                                                                                                                     and    @
                                                                                                                                  =
  ( (1+r)+ 2 )
 (1+r)(1+ )
               :   Then, the right hand side of Equation (34) becomes

                                            (1 +         )[ 2 (1 + r)]
                                                                                  2        :
                                        [Im + a         ](1 + r) + [Io +               ]
     2                                                                                     2
If       > 1 + r, this expression is always positive and                   = ^. If             < 1 + r, it is always negative
                               2
and         = 0. Finally, if       = 1 + r, this expression is always zero and                          2 [0; ^]. The saving
                                                                   2
                                             (1+r)[Im +a ] (Io +       )
choice is given by a0 = maxf0;                   (1+r)(1+ )
                                                                           g: We summarize these case in Table
A1.

                                                          32
                                                TABLE A1

                                       Case 1 Case 2
                        2
                            <1+r          =^          =0
                                                                      (1+r)[Im +a] Io
                                       a0 = 0     a0 = maxf0;         (1+r)(1+ )
                                                                                      g
                        2
                            >1+r          =e          =^
                                       a0 = 0     a0 = 0
                        2
                            =1+r          =^          =2 [0; ^]
                                                                         (1+r)[Im +a] Io
                                       a0 = 0     a0 2 [0; maxf0;        (1+r)(1+ )
                                                                                         g]
   We next determine whether the median voter has higher utility in the …rst or the second
                2
case. Suppose       < 1 + r. The utility of a middle-aged agent in each is given by
                                                                                2
                                Ucase1 = log(Im + a      ^) +       log(Io +        ^);

and
                            Ucase2 = log(Im + a       a0 ) +     log(Io + (1 + r)a0 ):

Note that in in the …rst case ^ is a corner solution. In the second case, the asset choice is an in-
                                                                (1+r)(Im +a) Io                   (1+r)(Im +a) Io
terior solution over the interval, [0; a
                                       ^], where a
                                                 ^=            (1+r)+ (1+r)
                                                                                :   Since ^ =       2
                                                                                                      + (1+r)
                                                                                                                    >
                                                                                    a > 2 ^:
^; consumption in the middle age is lower under ^. It also easy to show that (1 + r)^
a
Hence, consumption while old is also lower under ^. Therefore, Ucase2                         Ucase1 :
                    2
   Suppose now          > 1 + r. Again the utility of a middle-aged agent in each case is
                                                                                2
                                Ucase1 = log(Im + a      e) +       log(Io +        e);

and
                                                                                2
                                Ucase2 = log(Im + a      ^) +       log(Io +        ^):

In the second case, the tax level is ^: This choice of tax level is also possible in the …rst case.
Therefore, it must be that Ucase1          Ucase2 :
                            2
   Finally, suppose             = 1 + r. Then, the …rst case is a subset of the second one. We
summarize Proposition 1 in Table A2.

                                                       33
                TABLE A2

    Returns               Decisions
2
    <1+r                        =0
                                (1+r)[Im +a] Io
               a0 = maxf0;      (1+r)(1+ )
                                                g
2
    >1+r            = maxf0; 2    [Im +a] Io
                                    2 +2
                                             g
                           a0 = 0
2                                  (1+r)[Im +a] Io
    =1+r       =2 [0; maxf0;       2= + (1+r)
                                                   g]
                                 (1+r)[Im +a] Io
              a0 2 [0; maxf0;    (1+r)(1+ )
                                                 g]




                     34
References
   Browning, Edgar K. “Why the Social Insurance Budget is Too Large in a Democracy.”
   Economic Inquiry 13 (September 1975): 378-88.

   Boldrin, Michele, and Rustichini, Aldo. “Political Equilibria with Social Security.”
   Review of Economic Dynamics 3 (January 2000): 41-78.

   Conesa, Juan C., and Kreuger, Dirk. “Social Security Reform with Heterogeneous
   Agents.”Review of Economic Dynamics 2 (October 1999): 757-795.

   Cooley, Thomas F., and Soares, Jorge. “Will Social Security Survive the Baby Boom?”
   Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 45 (1996): 89-121.

   Cooley, Thomas F., and Soares, Jorge. “A Positive Theory of Social Security Based on
   Reputation.”Journal of Political Economy 107 (February 1999): 135-160.

   Doepke, Matthias and Zilibotti, Fabrizio. “Patience Capital, Occupational Choice, and
   the Spirit of Capitalism.”mimeo, UCLA, 2005.

   Galasso, Vincenzo. “The U.S. Social Security System: What Does Political Sustain-
   ability Imply?” Review of Economic Dynamics 2 (April 1999): 698-730.

   Gollin, Douglas, Parente, Stephen, and Rogerson, Richard. “The Role of Agriculture in
   Development.”American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings) 92 (May 2002):
   160-164.

   Gomme, Paul and Rupert, Peter. "Theory, Measurement and Calibration of Macro-
   economic Models.”Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

   Gonzalez-Eiras, Martin and Niepelt, Dirk. “Sustaining Social Security.”CESifo Work-
   ing Paper No. 1494. July 2005.

   Greenwood, Jeremy and Seshadri, Ananth. “The U.S. Demographic Transition.”Amer-
   ican Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings) 92 (May 2002): 153-159.

   Greenwood, Jeremy and Uysal, Gokce. “New Goods and the Transition to a New
   Economy.”Journal of Economic Growth 10 (June 2005): 99-134.

   Greven, Philip. Four Generations: Population, Land and Family in Colonial Endover,
   Massachusetts. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1970.

   Graziella, Bertocchi. “The Vanishing Bequest Tax.” mimeo. Universita di Modena e
   Reggio Emilia. 2006.

   Haines Michael R. “Estimated Life Tables for the United States, 1850-1910.”Historical
   Methods, vol. 31 (Fall 1998): 149-169.

                                         35
Hansen, Gary D., and Prescott, Edward C. “Malthus to Solow.” American Economic
Review 92 (September 2002): 1205–1217.
Hernandez, Donald J. Population Change and the Family Environment of Children.
Part 2 of Trends in The Well-Being of America’s Children and Youth: 1996. U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Washington, D.C. 1996.
Hassler, John, Rodríguez-Mora, José V., Storesletten, Kjetil and Zilibotti, Fabrizio.
“Survival of the Welfare State.” American Economic Review 93 (March 2003): 87-
112..
Hassler, John, Rodríguez-Mora, José V., Storesletten, Kjetil and Zilibotti, Fabrizio.
“A Positive Theory of Geographical Mobility and Social Insurance.” International
Economic Review 46 (2005): 263-303.
Imrohoroglu, Ayse, Imrohoroglu, Selo, and Joines, Douglas. “A Life Cycle Analysis of
Social Security.”Economic Theory 6, 1985 83-114.
Kaelble, Hartmut and Thomas, Mark. “Introduction” In Income Distribution in His-
torical Perspective edited by Y. S. Brenner, Hartmut Kaelble, and mark Thomas.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press 1991.
Klein, Paul and Ventura, Gustavo. "Productivity Di¤erences and the Dynamic E¤ects
of Labor Movements." Manuscript. Pennsylvania: Pennsylvania State University, June
2006.
Kopecky, Karen A. "The Trend in Retirement." Manuscript. NY: University of
Rochester, July 2005.
Krusell, Per, Vincenzo Quadrini, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull. “Politico-Equilibrium and
Economic Growth.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 21 (January 1997):
243-72.
Krusell, Per and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull. “On the Size of U.S. Government: Political
Economy n the Neoclassical growth Model.”American Economic Review 89 (December
1999): 1156-1181.
Lindert, Peter. “The Rise of Social Spending 1880-1930." Explorations in Economic
History, 31 (January 1994): 1-37.
Madison, Angus. The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective. Paris: OECD Pub-
lications, 2001.
Miron, Je¤rey A. and Weil, David N. “The Genesis and Evolution of Social Security.”
In The De…ning Moment: The Great Depression and The American Economy in the
Twentieth Century, edited by Michael D. Bordo, Claudia Goldin and Eugene N. White.
Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press, 1998.

                                      36
Newell, William H. “Inheritance on the Maturing Frontier: Butler County, Ohio, 1803-
1865.” In Long-Term Factors in American Economic Growth, edited by Stanley L.
Engerman and Robert E. Gallman. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press, 1986.

Parente, Stephen and Prescott, Edward. “A Uni…ed Theory of the Evolution of In-
ternational Income Levels.” In Handbook of Development, P. Aghion and S. Durlauf
(editors). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 2005.

Rosenzweig, Mark R. and Wolpin, Kenneth I. “Speci…c Experience, Household Struc-
ture, and Intergenerational Transfers.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 100 (1085):
961-987.

Scheider, Sylvester J., and Shoven John. The Real Deal: The History and Future of
Social Security. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1999.

Sjoblom, Kriss. “Voting for Social Security.”Public Choice 45 (1985): 225-240.

Soltow, Lee. “Male Inheritance Expectations in the United States in 1870.”The Review
of Economics and Statistics 64 (1982): 252-260.

Soltow, Lee. “Inequalities in the Standard of Living in the United States.”In American
Economic Growth and Standards of Living Before the Civil War, edited by Robert E.
Gallman and John Joseph Wallis. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press, 1992.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. Historical Statistics of the United States: Colonial Times
to 1970. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1975.

U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare. US Life Tables 1959-61. Public
Health Service Publication 1252, vol. 1, no.1. Washington, D.C. 1964.

Vandenbroucke, Guillaume. "The U.S. Westward Expansion." Economie D’avant
Garde, Research Report No. 4, June 2003.

Williamson, Je¤rey G. and Lindert, Peter H. “Long-Term Trends in American Wealth
Inequality.” In Modeling Distribution and Intergenerational Transmission of Wealth,
James D. Smith (editor). Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press, 1980.




                                      37
                                      Figure 1 --- Population in Rural and Urban Areas


    100


    90


    80


    70


    60

                                                                                                                     Urban
                                                                                                                     Rural
%




    50
                                                                                                                     Farm

    40


    30


    20


    10


     0
          1800   1810   1820   1830   1840   1850   1860   1870   1880   1890   1900     1910   1920   1930   1940
                       Figure 2 --- TFP in Agriculture and Non Agriculture

4.5000



4.0000



3.5000



3.0000



2.5000
                                                                                       Agriculture
                                                                                       Manufacturing
2.0000



1.5000



1.0000



0.5000



0.0000
         1800   1820   1840        1860         1880        1900         1920   1940
                      Figure 3 --- Conditional Survival Probabilities

0.9



0.8



0.7



0.6

                                                                                        1850
0.5                                                                                     1900
                                                                                        1940

0.4



0.3



0.2



0.1
      from 60 to 65   from 65 to 70                 from 70 to 75       from 75 to 80
                                      Ages Groups
                                          Figure 4a --- Transitional Dynamics

1.2




 1




0.8



                                                                                           Capital Stock
0.6
                                                                                           Farm Population (%)

0.4




0.2




 0
          0           1       2             3                 4       5       6       7
                                                    Periods




                                          Figure 4b --- Transitional Dynamics

      6


5.5


      5


4.5                                                                                                        1+r

      4


3.5


      3
              0           1           2                 3         4       5           6    7




                                          Figure 4c -- Transitional Dynamics

 0.6
0.55
 0.5
0.45
 0.4                                                                                      City Wages
0.35                                                                                      Farm Wages
                                                                                          Rental Rate for Land
 0.3
0.25
 0.2
0.15
 0.1
                  0       1       2             3             4       5   6       7
