                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE INS AND OUTS OF CYCLICAL UNEMPLOYMENT

                                        Michael W. Elsby
                                         Ryan Michaels
                                          Gary Solon

                                       Working Paper 12853
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12853


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2007




The authors are grateful for comments from seminar participants at an NBER Monetary Economics
conference, the University of Michigan, York University, and the CEPR European Summer Symposium
in Labor Economics. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Michael W. Elsby, Ryan Michaels, and Gary Solon. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Ins and Outs of Cyclical Unemployment
Michael W. Elsby, Ryan Michaels, and Gary Solon
NBER Working Paper No. 12853
January 2007
JEL No. E24,E32,J63,J64

                                            ABSTRACT

One of the strongest trends in recent macroeconomic modeling of labor market fluctuations is to treat
unemployment inflows as acyclical. This trend stems in large part from an influential paper by Shimer
on "Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment," i.e., the extent to which increased unemployment
during a recession arises from an increase in the number of unemployment spells versus an increase
in their duration. After broadly reviewing the previous literature, we replicate and extend Shimer's
main analysis. Like Shimer, we find an important role for increased duration. But contrary to Shimer's
conclusions, we find that even his own methods and data, when viewed in an appropriate metric, reveal
an important role for increased inflows to unemployment as well. This finding is further strengthened
by our refinements of Shimer's methods of correcting for data problems and by our detailed examination
of particular components of the inflow to unemployment. We conclude that a complete understanding
of cyclical unemployment requires an explanation of countercyclical inflow rates as well as procyclical
outflow rates.

Michael W. Elsby                                   Gary Solon
University of Michigan                             Department of Economics
Department of Economics                            University of Michigan
238 Lorch Hall                                     Ann Arbor, MI 48109
611 Tappan Street                                  and NBER
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220                           gsolon@umich.edu
and NBER
elsby@umich.edu

Ryan Michaels
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
rmikes@umich.edu
                     The Ins and Outs of Cyclical Unemployment



                                      1. Introduction

       In principle, the increased unemployment during a recession could arise from an

increase in the number of unemployment spells, an increase in the duration of

unemployment spells, or both. Equivalently, one can decompose the cyclical variation in

unemployment into changes in the rates of inflow to and outflow from unemployment.

The title of a 1986 paper by Darby, Haltiwanger, and Plant dubbed this subject “The Ins

and Outs of Unemployment.” Because Darby et al. claimed that cyclical unemployment

variation in the United States stems almost entirely from cyclical variation in the inflow,

their paper’s subtitle was “The Ins Win.”

       Contrary to that conclusion, one of the strongest trends in recent macroeconomic

modeling of the labor market is to treat the inflow to unemployment as acyclical. In

some instances, acyclicality of the inflow is assumed; in others, the model is designed to

explain the supposed acyclicality of the inflow. Examples include Hall (2005a, 2005b),

Gertler and Trigari (2006), Menzio and Moen (2006), Rotemberg (2006), and Blanchard

and Gali (2006). Several of these authors motivate their treatment of the inflow as

acyclical by referring to a pair of papers by Shimer (2005a, 2005b), which reach a

conclusion diametrically opposite to that of Darby et al. For example, the introductory

passage in the first of these, entitled “Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment,”

declares, “Using United States data from 1948 to 2004, I find that there are substantial

fluctuations in unemployed workers’ job finding probability at business cycle




                                             1
frequencies, while employed workers’ separation probability is comparatively acyclic.”1

Similar statements appear in Shimer (2005b and 2005c).2

         Viewed in the context of a longer history of unemployment studies, the opposite

conclusions of Darby et al. and Shimer both seem surprising. Darby et al.’s finding that

“The Ins Win” and the outs lose appears to be contradicted by a large body of

accumulated evidence suggesting that unemployment duration is substantially

countercyclical:

    •    Regularly published statistics on the cross-sectional distribution of unemployment

         duration from the monthly Current Population Survey (CPS) show a pronounced

         shift towards longer unemployment spells during recessions. Similarly,

         sophisticated econometric analyses that have used repeated CPS cross-sectional

         data on unemployment duration to impute month-to-month hazard rates for

         exiting unemployment have found these outflow rates to be substantially

         procyclical (Sider, 1985; Baker, 19923).

    •    Numerous studies have estimated inflow and outflow rates with the so-called

         gross flows data, which are based on the 2/3 or so of the CPS sample that can be

         longitudinally matched from one month to the next.4 Without exception, these


1
  Shimer uses the term “separation probability” to mean the probability of entering unemployment. We do
not use this terminology for two reasons. First, we wish to avoid confusion with the more commonly used
meaning of “separation” as a quit or layoff from a particular employer, which often involves no
unemployment at all (especially in the case of quits). Second, as we will emphasize in section 2.D of this
paper, many spells of unemployment begin with entry into the labor force, not a separation from
employment.
2
  Similarly, the abstract of Hall’s Review of Economics and Statistics Lecture (2005b) says, “In the modern
U.S. economy, recessions do not begin with a burst of layoffs. Unemployment rises because jobs are hard
to find, not because an unusual number of people are thrown into unemployment.”
3
  Baker’s study, which disaggregated unemployment by reason for unemployment and demographic
characteristics, directly refuted the conjecture by Darby et al. that the apparent cyclicality of unemployment
duration could be explained mostly by cyclical changes in the composition of the unemployed.
4
  While the gross flows data are useful, they are not necessarily the data source of choice because they are
plagued by numerous deficiencies, including the systematic exclusion of individuals who change residence


                                                      2
        studies have found that the monthly hazard rate for outflow from unemployment

        is procyclical (Perry, 1972; Marston, 1976; Blanchard and Diamond, 1990;

        Bleakley, Ferris, and Fuhrer, 1999; Fujita and Ramey, 2006; Yashiv, 2006).

    •   Regularly published statistics on unemployment insurance (UI) claims show that,

        during recessions, UI claims tend to be of considerably longer duration, and the

        fraction of claimants that exhaust their entitlement to benefits is considerably

        higher (Nicholson, 1981; Kennan, 2006). These facts, of course, are precisely

        why the federal government usually adopts extended-benefit programs during

        recessions.



        Shimer’s opposite conclusion that the outs win and the ins lose also appears to be

contradicted by a great deal of evidence:

    •   The regularly published CPS statistics on unemployment duration show that the

        number unemployed less than five weeks (who therefore became unemployed

        since the previous month’s CPS) tends to be substantially higher during

        recessions.

    •   The same studies of CPS gross flows data that have found procyclical flows out of

        unemployment also have found substantially countercyclical flows into

        unemployment.5




and the many spurious transitions generated by misclassification in either of the months used in the
longitudinal match. See National Commission on Employment and Unemployment Statistics (1979, pp.
214-17) and Barkume and Horvath (1995).
5
  The familiar finding of substantial cyclicality in both directions of gross flows between employment and
unemployment is replicated in section 3 of Shimer (2005a). In our paper, instead of reanalyzing the gross
flows data still again, we concentrate on replicating, extending, and interpreting the main analysis in
Shimer’s section 2, which his first page describes as the basis of his “preferred measures.”


                                                     3
    •    Regularly published statistics on initial UI claims show that dramatically more UI

         claims are initiated during recessions, especially early in recessions (Kennan,

         2006). This, of course, is why the Conference Board uses initial UI claims as one

         of its “leading indicators.”

    •    All these indications of countercyclical inflows into unemployment dovetail with

         well-established facts about labor turnover, including the recent employer-based

         evidence on countercyclical job destruction as well as a long history of evidence

         that layoffs are strongly countercyclical (Barth, 1971; Davis, Faberman, and

         Haltiwanger, 2006).6



         Reacting to the apparent discrepancy between these patterns and Shimer’s

influential conclusion, in this paper we reassess Shimer’s reassessment. Shimer’s

preferred analysis uses an ingenious methodology to infer the unemployment inflow and

outflow rates from only three published monthly time series from the CPS: the number

employed, the number unemployed, and the number unemployed less than five weeks.

As Shimer rightly emphasizes, one of the virtues of his approach is “making it easy for

others to verify my results, extend them as more data become available, and examine

their consistency both within the United States and across countries.” Thanks to the

public availability of the data and the transparency of Shimer’s method, we can indeed

replicate and extend his analysis.




6
  As noted by Hall (2006), the countercyclicality of layoffs is no greater than the procyclicality of quits.
This point was previously documented by Slichter (1919), Woytinsky (1942), Akerlof, Rose, and Yellen
(1988), Anderson and Meyer (1994), and others. Davis (2006) clearly explains why distinguishing layoffs
from quits is important for understanding cyclical fluctuations in the labor market.


                                                     4
       We confirm his finding that the majority of cyclical unemployment variation can

be attributed to cyclicality in the outflow hazard, but we also find that, when viewed in an

appropriate metric, Shimer’s own results indicate that increased inflows also are

important in most recessions, especially the most severe ones. We then propose and

implement modifications of Shimer’s methods for treating the 1994 CPS redesign, time

aggregation bias, and heterogeneity in flow rates across job losers, job leavers, and labor

force entrants. All our refinements of Shimer’s analysis continue to find substantial

cyclicality in both inflows and outflows.

       In light of that finding, we caution against the recent tendency of macroeconomic

theorists to overlook the cyclicality of unemployment inflows. A complete understanding

of cyclical unemployment requires an explanation of countercyclical unemployment

inflow rates as well as procyclical outflow rates. We also discuss more generally what

can be learned about the business cycle from performing mechanical decompositions of

cyclical unemployment variation into inflow and outflow components. We explain why

some of the cyclical variation in the outflow hazard may be caused by cyclical changes in

the size and composition of the inflow, and we suggest that cyclical changes in both

inflows and outflows stem from the same source – whatever it is that shifts the derived

demand for labor leftward during a recession.



       2. Replication, Reinterpretation, and Extension of Shimer’s Main Analysis

A.     Some Useful Identities

       Shimer starts with the following description of the evolution over time of the

number unemployed:




                                             5
                         du
                         dt
                                                                    (
                            = st ( lt − ut ) − ft ut = − ( st + f t ) ut − ut *   )          (1)


where lt and ut are the labor force and unemployment stocks respectively, ut* is steady

state unemployment, and st and ft are the unemployment inflow and outflow hazard rates.

It should be mentioned at the outset that equation (1) accurately describes the evolution

of unemployment only if all inflows into unemployment originate from employment. In

fact, however, around 40% of the stock of unemployed workers report that their

unemployment originated from non-participation in the labor force. We will address this

issue in detail in section 2.D, but for now we maintain Shimer’s simplifying assumption.

       The focus of interest, then, is on the two flow rates st and ft. As many previous

studies have shown, and as we will confirm, since (st + ft) is typically close to 0.5 on a

monthly basis, the half life of a deviation from steady state unemployment is close to one

month. In other words, the evolution of the actual unemployment rate, which we denote

u% , is closely approximated by the steady state unemployment rate:

                                                      *
                                      %u t ≡ ut ≈ ut = st                                    (2)
                                             lt    lt   st + f t

       In what follows, a recurring theme will be the decomposition of changes in the

observed unemployment rate into a contribution due to changes in the inflow rate and a

contribution due to changes in the outflow rate. It turns out that equation (2) provides us

with a remarkably simple decomposition. In particular, log differentiation of (2) yields

                                          (       )
                             d log u% t ≈ 1 − u% t [ d log st − d log f t ]                  (3)

Equivalently, multiplying (3) through by u%t yields


                                         (       )
                              du% t ≈ u%t 1 − u% t [ d log st − d log ft ]                   (4)



                                                      6
         Expressed in either way, the equation provides a decomposition in which the

contributions of the inflow and outflow rates are separable and may be compared on an

equal footing with respect to their impact on the unemployment rate.7 To obtain a

transparent view of the relative contributions of the inflow and outflow rates, all one need

do is compare the log variation in the two flows. In what follows, we will emphasize the

formulation in (3) because, with 1 − u%t close to 1, the log changes in st and ft translate

almost one-to-one into proportional changes in the unemployment rate.



B.       Replication and Reinterpretation of Shimer’s Original Analysis

         As noted by Shimer, a significant virtue of his methodology is the ease of its

replication. In this spirit, we use the same, publicly available, seasonally adjusted CPS

data on the number employed, the number unemployed, and the number unemployed less

than five weeks (henceforth “short-term unemployment”) for each month from 1948

through 2004.8

         Shimer’s analysis involves two corrections to these time series. First, as

discussed by Polivka and Miller (1998) and Abraham and Shimer (2001), the 1994

redesign of the CPS changed the way the survey measures unemployment duration for all

of the survey’s eight “rotation groups” except the first and fifth.9 The resulting reduction


7
 In contrast, it is more difficult to interpret the “counterfactual” analysis performed in Shimer’s paper. In
particular, to assess the importance of the outflow rate in explaining changes in unemployment, he
calculates the unemployment rate that would have prevailed if the inflow rate were always at its temporal
          (      )
mean, s / s + f t . Clearly, however, a different answer would obtain if the inflow rate were held constant
at a different value.
8
  These data are readily obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics website, www.bls.gov.
9
  In the CPS sample design, an address selected into the sample remains in the sample for four consecutive
months, is temporarily rotated out of the sample for eight months, and then is rotated back in for four more
months before being permanently retired from the sample. The first and fifth rotation groups are
respectively the addresses in the survey for the first time and those reentering after the eight-month hiatus.


                                                      7
in the number counted as short-term unemployed induced a discontinuity in the series.

Shimer’s main method of correcting for the discontinuity is, in each month from 1994 on,

to inflate the official count of short-term unemployment by that month’s ratio of the

short-term share of unemployment in the first and fifth rotation groups (obtained from the

CPS microdata) to the short-term share for the full sample. Equivalently, he multiplies

the official count of all unemployment by the short-term share in only the first and fifth

rotation groups. This treats the discontinuity because, even since 1994, the first and fifth

rotation groups’ unemployment duration has been measured in the same way as the full

sample’s was before 1994. In this section’s replication, we use Shimer’s correction

method, but in section 2.C we will implement a variation of the method that we believe is

even better.

        Second, instead of just using the monthly time series to calculate monthly

transition rates, Shimer devises an ingenious way of inferring continuous-time inflow and

outflow hazard rates, st and ft. Inferring the outflow hazard rate is relatively

straightforward. First calculate the probability that a typical unemployed worker leaves

unemployment in the month between consecutive CPS surveys, Ft, using the identity

                                         Δut +1 = uts+1 − Ft ut                                    (5)

where Δut+1 is the monthly change in the number unemployed between month t and

month t + 1, and ut+1s is the number unemployed less than five weeks in month t + 1.




The crucial change in the 1994 redesign was that, in all rotation groups except the first and fifth,
unemployed individuals who also were unemployed as of the previous month’s interview were no longer
asked about their unemployment duration. Instead, their unemployment duration was measured as the
previous month’s value incremented by the number of weeks between the two monthly interviews.


                                                   8
                                                           ut +1 − uts+1
Thus, the monthly outflow probability is given by Ft = 1 −               . This can then be
                                                                ut

mapped into the outflow hazard, ft = − log (1 − Ft ) .

        Inferring the inflow hazard is more difficult. The reason is that some workers

who flow into the unemployment pool after one month’s CPS also exit unemployment

before the next month’s survey. As a result, the measured stock of short-term

unemployed workers in any CPS is in fact an underestimate of the number of workers

who flowed into the unemployment pool over the course of the preceding month. The

latter is what Shimer refers to as time aggregation bias.10

        To correct for time aggregation bias, Shimer solves (1), the differential equation

for the evolution of the unemployment rate, forward one month under the assumptions

that the flows, st and ft, and the labor force, lt, are constant between surveys:

                                             (         )
                               ut +1 = ut* + ut − ut* exp ⎡⎣ − ( st + f t ) ⎤⎦                     (6)

Since we obtain a measure of the outflow rate ft from the method above, and since we

observe ut and ut+1, the unemployment rates at the beginning and end of the month, we

can solve (6) for the inflow hazard st.

        Following Shimer’s method provides us with measures of the inflow and outflow

rates for each month from 1948 through 2004. As a final step, to obtain what Shimer

refers to as his preferred measures of unemployment inflow and outflow rates, we take

quarterly averages of these monthly series to obtain smoother series.




10
  Note that there is no analogous time aggregation problem in the measurement of unemployment outflows
due to unemployed workers leaving unemployment and re-entering between CPS surveys. The reason is
that the CPS in theory picks up all such workers, as they will be measured as unemployed less than five
weeks.


                                                     9
        In our figure 1 we replicate Shimer’s figure 1 and display the quarterly time series

of the probabilities of flowing in or out of unemployment over the course of a month

based on Shimer’s methodology. To the untrained eye, figure 1 might give the

impression that the cyclical variation in the inflow to unemployment is dwarfed by the

variation in the outflow from unemployment. However, a key lesson from equation (3) in

our section 2.A is that a more apt comparison is between the variation in the logarithms

of the inflow and outflow hazard rates. Figure 2 displays these log flows. Note that,

since the range of the vertical axes measuring these two log flows is the same, equal-

sized variation in either plot will have an equal-sized impact on the log unemployment

rate.

        Inspection of figure 2 reveals substantial variation in log inflow rates in all

recessions except the two most recent (the relatively mild 1990 and 2001 recessions).

Thus it is by no means clear that the inflow rate into unemployment is, in Shimer’s

words, “comparatively acyclic” relative to the outflow rate, except in these recent

recessions.

        A natural question at this point is what fraction of the increase in unemployment

during a recession is due to increases in the inflow rate into unemployment, and what

fraction is due to declines in the outflow rate? Thanks to the decomposition presented in

section 2.A, such a question is straightforward to answer. We first identified start and

end dates for the unemployment ramp-up in each recession from 1948 on.11 We then



11
  In practice, the start dates were determined by the most recent minimum quarterly unemployment rate
preceding each NBER recession start date, and the end dates by the highest quarterly unemployment rate
following each NBER recession end date. The NBER recession dates were not used as their focus is not on
recessionary unemployment, but rather principally on GDP growth, and they thereby miss a large portion of
the cyclical ramp-up in unemployment. Figure 0 displays these dates along with the time series for the
unemployment rate.


                                                   10
calculated the difference in the log inflow rate and log outflow rate relative to their start-

of-recession values for each recession in turn. Figure 3 plots the change in the log inflow

rate and the negative of the change in the log outflow rate (in accordance with equation

(3)) for each quarter of each recession since 1948 using our replication of Shimer’s

preferred data.

        Figure 3 reveals a number of insights. First, consistent with Shimer’s results, we

observe that the outflow rate from unemployment fell in most recessions by about 30 to

50 log points. Thus, variation in the outflow rate from unemployment is a crucial aspect

of cyclical unemployment. And it is true that the outflow rate explains the majority of

the cumulative peak-to-trough rise in unemployment over the cycle, with a greater

relative impact later on in a recession.

        However, figure 3 confirms that inflow rates also have played a substantial role in

generating cyclical unemployment historically. In particular, we observe that the inflow

into unemployment typically rose by around 20 to 40 log points from peak to trough,

except in the last two recessions.12 We also observe that the effects of inflows tend to be

strongest at the start of recessions, in contrast to the effects of the outflow rate. Thus,

graphed in an appropriate metric, Shimer’s own data show that, until the two recent

recessions, there was something like a 35:65 inflow/outflow split of the overall increase

in unemployment, with relatively more weight on inflows earlier on and outflows later on

in a recession. Thus, Shimer’s claim that the inflow rate is “nearly acyclical” is an

overstatement at best.




12
  For both outflows and inflows, the changes in log points appear small in the major recession period of the
early 1980s because we break the period into two separate recessions.


                                                    11
       Figure 3 also highlights the difference in unemployment patterns between the last

two recessions and the many prior recessions. In the last two recessions, especially the

one of the early 1990s, aggregate inflows into unemployment moved comparatively little.

Thus, weak aggregate inflow effects, as measured in Shimer’s preferred analysis, appear

to be a feature of these last two recessions rather than a stylized fact of recessionary

unemployment as a whole. In any case, in the next two sections, we shall see reasons to

question figure 3’s depiction of the most recent recessions. In section 2.C, we shall see

that the apparent weakness of inflow effects in the 2000/01 recession varies with the

method of correcting for the CPS redesign. And our disaggregate analysis in section 2.D

will reveal that the aggregate picture presented in figure 3 masks some important

heterogeneity in the effects of different inflow rates for different sub-groups of the

unemployed. In the end, the inflow effects in the last recession will not look so different

from those in prior recessions.



C.     Modifications of Shimer’s Correction Methods

       Shimer’s analysis is based on publicly available data from the CPS, but it also

depends on the particular corrections he makes for the CPS redesign and time

aggregation bias. We agree that corrections are called for and that Shimer’s correction

methods are reasonable first steps, but we also think the methods can be improved on. In

this section, we propose refinements of the correction methods and present the results

from applying them.

       As mentioned above, to treat the discontinuity in the short-term unemployment

series induced by the 1994 CPS redesign, Shimer multiplies the official unemployment




                                             12
count in each month from 1994 on by the month’s short-term share of unemployment for

only the first and fifth rotation groups, whose unemployment duration measurement was

unaffected by the redesign. As Shimer acknowledges in his appendix, a drawback of this

approach is that it bases each month’s estimated short-term share on only about one-

quarter of the unemployed in the CPS sample and therefore multiplies the sampling

variance of the estimate by about four. The resulting noise in the corrected series can

make it more difficult to discern the true cyclical variation in unemployment flows since

1994. This noise from sampling error would get worse still in our section 2.D, when we

disaggregate the unemployed into job losers, job leavers, and labor force entrants.

        An alternative approach that can yield a more stable corrected series for short-

term unemployment over the post-redesign era is to multiply the official short-term

unemployment series by the era’s average of the ratio of the short-term share for the first

and fifth rotation groups to the full sample’s short-term share. Indeed, in footnote 27 of

his appendix, Shimer’s mentions an alternative analysis in which he multiplied the post-

redesign short-term unemployment by a constant correction factor of 1.10, but he does

not explain his choice of 1.10. Statistics he reports in his appendix seem to indicate that

44.2/37.9 = 1.166 would be a more appropriate choice. Our own analysis of CPS

microdata from February 1994 (the first month that unemployment duration was

measured in the new way for all rotation groups except the first and fifth) through

January 2005 finds an average ratio of 1.1549.13 We therefore produce a less noisy post-

redesign series by simply multiplying the official short-term unemployment by 1.1549 in

each month from February 1994 on.


13
  Based on different information from the CPS “parallel survey,” Polivka and Miller (1998) suggest an
even higher correction factor of 1/.830 = 1.205.


                                                   13
       To get a sense of the practical difference between Shimer’s and our methods of

correcting for the CPS redesign, Figure 4 plots the month-by-month scaling factor used

by Shimer, together with our scaling factor. It can be seen that the month-by-month

correction factor displays considerable volatility and little obvious systematic trend

around our correction factor of 1.1549.

       Figure 5 displays the effects of our alternative redesign correction on the

decomposition of cyclical unemployment in the last recession, along with the previous

five recessions by way of comparison. It can be seen that our less noisy correction for the

1994 redesign reveals a substantially more pronounced effect of the inflow rate in the

2001 recession. In particular, the inflow contribution in the last recession no longer looks

so different from the inflow contributions in some of the earlier recessions.

       Shimer’s other correction seeks to avoid the time aggregation bias that would

result from missing unemployment spells that begin after one month’s CPS and end

before the next month’s survey. As explained in our section 2.B, Shimer’s approach is to

impute continuous-time hazard rates for the unemployment inflow. The trouble with this

approach is that it is at odds with the discrete weekly nature of the CPS labor force

definitions. Each month’s CPS interviews take place during the week containing the 19th

of the month, and the labor force questions pertain to the “reference week” containing the

12th. Someone who works at any time during the reference week is counted as employed.

In contrast, a continuous-time perspective views someone who quits one job effective

5:00 pm. on Friday and starts a new job at 9:00 a.m. the following Monday as

unemployed every instant between those two times. That definition of an unemployment




                                             14
spell is debatable and, in any case, is inconsistent with the official labor force definitions

underlying the employment and unemployment series that we and Shimer are analyzing.

         We therefore propose a discrete weekly analog to Shimer’s correction method,

which deals with time aggregation bias in a way that coheres with the official labor force

definitions. The details are in our appendix. Similarly to Shimer’s correction, ours boils

down to the solution to a non-linear equation in the weekly inflow probability stw, and the

weekly outflow probability, ftw:

                                                  (          )(              )
                                                                                 4
                                   ut +1 = utw* + ut − utw* 1 − stw − ft w                                      (7)

where utw* is the steady-state weekly unemployment stock.

         Figure 6 illustrates both the discrete-time and continuous-time (Shimer) corrected

log inflow hazard rates, along with the uncorrected inflow rate for comparison.14 As

expected, both aggregation bias corrections raise the level of estimated inflow rates, since

they seek to add back on inflows that subsequently exited unemployment between survey

dates. In particular, the continuous-time correction increases the level of the measured

inflow rate by about 30 log points, while the discrete-time correction does so by around

23 log points. Thus, Shimer’s continuous-time correction arguably over-corrects for time

aggregation bias in the sense that it imputes short unemployment spells that the official

statistics would not recognize as unemployment spells even if the CPS took place every

single week.

         In addition, figure 6 reveals that, since the aggregation bias corrections raise the

level of estimated inflow rates, they reduce the log change in the inflow rate over the



14
   To isolate the effects of the alternative corrections for time aggregation bias, all the series plotted in
figure 6 use our correction for the 1994 redesign.


                                                        15
cycle.15 Simple least squares regressions of corrected log inflow rates on the uncorrected

log inflow rate reveal coefficients of 0.78 for Shimer’s continuous-time correction and

0.85 for the discrete-time correction, consistent with the notion that correcting for

aggregation bias limits the capacity for inflows to explain cyclical unemployment. The

latter also reveals that, because the weekly correction affects the inflow level to a lesser

extent than the continuous-time correction, it also preserves more of the log variation in

inflow rates over time, and thereby in theory affords greater potential for inflows to

explain cyclical unemployment.

         Figure 7 compares the inflow contributions implied by the two alternative

corrections for aggregation bias, as well as the contributions based on no correction at

all.16 The starkest finding is that failing to correct for time aggregation bias does indeed

apportion a greater role to the inflow rate, and therefore correcting for that bias is

important. It is also true that the weekly correction places marginally greater emphasis

on inflows than the continuous-time correction, but quantitatively the effects are small.

Thus, the results based on the refined aggregation correction methods are broadly similar

to those obtained in the aggregate analysis of section 2.B.




15
   Strictly speaking, this occurs for a slightly different reason from that highlighted by Shimer, who argues
that “ignoring time aggregation will bias a researcher towards finding a countercyclical separation
probability, because when the job finding probability falls, a worker who loses her job is more likely to
experience a measured spell of unemployment.” In fact, we find that the aggregation bias corrections have
little effect on the countercyclicality of the level of the inflow rate. But, by raising the overall level of the
inflow rate, they reduce the countercyclicality of the log inflow rate, which is what matters for the
statistical decomposition of cyclical variation in unemployment.
16
   For all three of these approaches to time aggregation bias, this figure’s contributions for the most recent
recession are based on our correction for the 1994 CPS redesign.


                                                       16
D.       Disaggregation by Reason for Unemployment

         Until now, we have been concentrating on aggregate unemployment flows based

on Shimer’s preferred analysis. As noted at the beginning of section 2.A, however,

Shimer’s analysis ignores that almost half of unemployment comes from non-

participation in the labor force, not employment. In this section, we extend the analysis

to incorporate flows from non-participation. At the same time, we also distinguish

employment-to-unemployment flows stemming from job loss and from job leaving, as

these two flows have very different cyclical properties.

         The disaggregated analysis in this section uses data on the number unemployed by

reason, the number unemployed for less than five weeks by reason, and aggregate series

for employment and non-participation. Our disaggregation of unemployment by reason

uses three categories: job losers, job leavers, and labor force entrants.17 The complete

requisite series for short-term unemployment by reason are not available on the BLS

website, so we have based this section’s analysis on data from the monthly BLS

Employment and Earnings publications. Even those data for short-term unemployment

by reason extend back only to May 1968 and are not seasonally adjusted. For internal

consistency, we start with the seasonally unadjusted Employment and Earnings data for

all the series used in this section. As in section 2.C, we treat the 1994 discontinuity in the

short-term unemployment series by multiplying each published short-term unemployment

number from February 1994 on by an average ratio of the short-term share of



17
  We do not further disaggregate job losers into temporary layoffs and permanent job losers for two
reasons. First, the temporary layoff information is available only back to 1976. Second, as explained in
Polivka and Miller (1998), the 1994 CPS redesign caused a discontinuity in the way the two types of job
losers are distinguished. Similarly, we do not disaggregate labor force entrants into new entrants and re-
entrants because the 1994 redesign instituted a major change in the way the two types of entrants are
distinguished.


                                                     17
unemployment in the first and fifth rotation groups to the corresponding short-term share

for the full sample. In particular, based on the CPS microdata from February 1994

through January 2005, we calculate correction factors of 1.0958 for job losers, 1.1644 for

job leavers, and 1.2272 for labor force entrants. Finally, we seasonally adjust all the

series with Eviews’ implementation of the Census Bureau’s X-12 procedure.

        Given the resulting data, it is again straightforward to calculate monthly outflow

probabilities for each reason for unemployment. Specifically, for each reason we can

                      ur ,t +1 − urs,t +1
calculate Frt = 1 −                       , where a subscript r denotes reason. And, as in the
                              urt

aggregate case, we can calculate the associated outflow hazards by reason,

f rt = − log (1 − Frt ) . As detailed in our appendix, we treat time aggregation bias with an

extension of our discrete-time correction, which produces a corrected inflow hazard srt

for each type of unemployment.

        Figure 8 displays the time series for each of these inflow rates. It reveals stark

heterogeneity in the cyclical properties of the three inflow hazards. The job loser inflow

is clearly countercyclical, displaying prominent upward spikes in all recessions. By

contrast, the job leaver inflow rate is prominently procyclical (which is not so surprising

given the procyclicality of quit rates noted above in footnote 6). Finally, the inflow from

non-participation is comparatively acyclical.

        The latter three observations might come as no surprise to a reader of the past

literature on labor flows, or indeed to any non-economist for that matter. However, it has

an important implication with respect to Shimer’s analysis. Concentrating on the

aggregate inflow rate conflates loser and leaver inflows that move in opposite directions




                                                   18
over the cycle, and in addition it averages them with a broadly acyclical inflow of

entrants. Looking only at an aggregate inflow has the effect of masking the individual

contributions of each of these inflow rates that move in different cyclical directions.

        Figure 9 displays the analogous results for outflow rates by type. This figure

exhibits two types of heterogeneity. First, job losers show considerably lower outflow

rates (and hence longer unemployment spells) than do leavers and entrants. This fact

combined with the countercyclicality of losers’ share of the inflow constitutes the kernel

of truth in the argument by Darby, Haltiwanger, and Plant (1986): One reason the

aggregate outflow rate declines in a recession is the increased inflow share of job losers,

whose outflow rates are relatively low. As shown by Baker (1992) (and reaffirmed in

Shimer’s section 4), however, this composition effect is not nearly strong enough to

justify Darby, Haltiwanger, and Plant’s conclusion that “The Ins Win.” Interpreted in the

framework of our equation (3), the estimates in Baker’s tables 1 and 3 indicate that

adjusting for this composition effect decreases the share of cyclical unemployment due to

cyclicality in outflow rates from 57 percent to 49 percent. Thus, Baker’s results are

altogether consistent with our conclusion that both the ins and outs of unemployment are

empirically important.

       Second, figure 9 shows that the outflow rate is especially procyclical for job

losers. Because the outflow rate also is quite procyclical for the other two types of

unemployed, though, aggregating the various outflow rates is much less problematic than

aggregation of the inflows.

       To get a sense of the individual contributions of each of the inflow and outflow

rates by reason, we again seek to decompose the change in the log unemployment rate




                                             19
into components due to each of the flows. To this end, note first that we can split the

aggregate unemployment rate into the sum of the unemployment rates for each reason,

u% = u% λ + u% q + u% e , where subscripts λ, q, and e refer to job losers, job leavers (quits), and

labor force entrants respectively. Log differentiation of the latter reveals that the change

in the log unemployment rate is equal to the share-weighted sum of the log changes in the

constituent sub unemployment rates:

                            d log u% = ωλ d log u% λ + ωq d log u% q + ωe d log u% e                      (8)

where ωr is the unemployment share of reason r. In steady state, the three sub

unemployment rates are given by

                   u% λ = sλ e / f λ    ⇒ d log u% λ = d log sλ − d log f λ + d log e
                    u% q = sq e / f q   ⇒ d log u% q = d log sq − d log f q + d log e                     (9)
                     u% e = s i / f
                            e      e    ⇒ d log u% e = d log s − d log f + d log i
                                                                  e            e


where e and i denote employment and non-participation as a fraction of the labor force.

It turns out that the log variation in both e and i over time is minuscule relative to the

cyclical variation in log unemployment (see figure 10). Thus, a very good approximation

over the few quarters represented by a recessionary ramp-up in unemployment is that

d log e ≈ 0 ≈ d log i . This yields the following very simple approximate decomposition:

     d log u% ≈ ωλ [ d log sλ − d log f λ ] + ωq ⎡⎣ d log sq − d log f q ⎤⎦ + ωe [ d log se − d log f e ] (10)

        Figure 11 displays the results of this decomposition. Specifically, it plots the

contribution of each unemployment flow, for each reason, for each recession since 1969.

The contribution of each flow is measured, in accordance with equation (10), by

multiplying the difference in the log flow relative to its start of recession value by the

initial share in unemployment of that flow at the start of the recession.



                                                      20
        The results of this exercise reveal that there is a great deal of richer detail

underlying the aggregate analyses performed by Shimer and ourselves. First and

foremost, the decomposition indicates that the most important flow in all but the last two

recessions was the job loser inflow rate. In addition, the job loser inflow contributed to a

non-trivial degree in the 1990 recession, and was very prominent in the first five quarters

of the 2001 unemployment ramp-up.18 Thus, recent claims such as “In the modern U.S.

economy, recessions do not begin with a burst of layoffs” (Hall, 2005b) are not supported

by the CPS data.19

        Moreover, figure 11 confirms that the aggregate picture presented in figure 3

masks important heterogeneity in the cyclical effects of each individual inflow rate.

Specifically, it can be seen that the contribution to recession unemployment due to job

leavers is systematically negative because the leaver inflow rate is procyclical. This

serves to offset part of the increase in unemployment due to increased job loss.

        Figure 11 also provides some insight into why the aggregate inflow rate performs

relatively poorly in explaining the increase in unemployment in recent recessions. The

contribution of the inflow rate from non-participation declined from a positive effect in

the 1969, 1973, and 1979 recessions, to mildly positive in the 1981 and 1990 recessions,

to negative in the 2001 recession. This is important to emphasize as, from a theoretical

perspective, macroeconomists are typically most interested in unemployment inflows that




18
   Note that our choice to weight by pre-recession unemployment shares errs on the side of understating the
importance of the job loser inflow.
19
   Hall’s conclusion is based partly on the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS). Because
JOLTS began in December 2000, it missed part of the ramp-up to the most recent recession. Furthermore,
the JOLTS data for that recession seem to be at odds with information from other surveys, including our
evidence from the CPS. A careful comparison of what multiple sources of labor market data have to say
about the last recession would be a very worthwhile research project.


                                                    21
originate from employment rather than non-participation. Indeed, Shimer’s practice of

referring to the unemployment inflow rate as the “separation rate” reflects this focus.

       Turning to outflows, we can see from figure 11 that the reason aggregate outflows

explain so much of the variation in unemployment is because all of the constituent

outflows by reason cause unemployment to move in the same direction – that is, up in a

recession. In addition, we see that the most important outflow is the outflow rate for job

losers. This is to be expected, as job losers represent a substantial fraction of the

unemployment pool. That aside, however, the losers outflow rate is conspicuously

dominant in the 1990 recession, again suggesting that this recession was especially

different from the others in the sample period.

       A question that arises at this point is the extent to which the disaggregated

analysis is important. Surely, one might argue, it nevertheless aggregates to the same

story mentioned in section 2.B? Our view, however, is that the disaggregated analysis

culminating in figure 11 affords a more nuanced and illuminating view of unemployment

flows, especially with regard to the inflows. It is not clear what economic hypothesis is

being assessed when one observes the cyclicality of the aggregate inflow rate, which is a

weighted average of a number of sub-inflow rates. However, the economics becomes

clearer, and very intuitive, when one looks at inflows by reason. The job leaver inflow

into unemployment falls in all recessions for the same reason that the quit rate does –

presumably because workers find it harder then to find attractive new jobs. The job loser

inflow rate rises in all recessions for the same reason that the layoff rate does – because

firms want to employ fewer workers in a recession; they are unable (especially in the

more severe recessions) to achieve the intended employment reductions merely by




                                              22
allowing workers to quit; and they therefore lay off more workers, many of whom then

experience unemployment.



                               3. Summary and Discussion

       Our effort to replicate and extend Shimer’s “Reassessing the Ins and Outs of

Unemployment” has confirmed that procyclicality of the hazard rate for exiting

unemployment plays an important role in cyclical unemployment. Contrary to Shimer’s

conclusions, however, we have shown that even his own methods and data also indicate

an important role for countercyclical inflows into unemployment. This finding is further

strengthened by our refinements of Shimer’s methods of correcting the official Current

Population Survey labor force series for the 1994 redesign of the CPS and for time

aggregation bias. In addition, we have conducted a disaggregated analysis that

recognizes the large unemployment inflows from non-participation in the labor force and

also distinguishes employment-to-unemployment inflows stemming from job losing and

job leaving. The disaggregated results highlight the particularly important role of job loss

inflows to unemployment in accounting for increased unemployment in most recessions.

Thus, in contrast to both Darby et al.’s (1986) pronouncement that “The Ins Win” and

Shimer’s opposite conclusion that the outs win, we find that everyone’s a winner.

       At a basic level, then, our paper suggests that a complete understanding of

cyclical unemployment requires an explanation of countercyclical unemployment inflow

rates as well as procyclical outflow rates. Accordingly, the many recent analyses cited in

our second paragraph that overlook cyclical inflows may be ill-advised. By the same




                                            23
token, earlier efforts to explain why unemployment inflows rise in a recession (e.g.,

Mortensen and Pissarides, 1994; Cole and Rogerson, 1999) remain potentially relevant.

          In the remainder of this section, however, we want to emphasize that the precise

economic interpretation of statistical decompositions such as equation (3) is not as clear

as it might seem. Up until now, we have followed the literature in interpreting the

decompositions as answering the question “how much of the increase in unemployment

in a recession is due to changes in inflows and outflows.” In what follows, we show that

such an interpretation is not the only possible reading of decompositions based on (3),

and that different models of the labor market imply different interpretations.

          We motivate this point with the following metaphor. Imagine a traffic

intersection at which a queue of automobiles awaits a green light. The light stays green

long enough in each cycle to allow an outflow of five cars to leave the queue before the

light turns red again. Ordinarily, only a moderate number of cars is backed up at the

light. But suppose some event – say, construction on an alternate route – ramps up the

inflow of cars to this intersection. If nothing happens to keep the green light on longer,

then the queue gets longer, and each car’s wait to get through the intersection becomes

longer.

          Now just for the moment, think of the queue of backed-up cars as unemployment,

and think of the five cars going through each green light as the outflow from

unemployment. When the inflow increased, the stock of unemployment increased, and

so did the average duration of unemployment. If an analysis such as ours or Shimer’s

were applied here, it would attribute much of the increased unemployment to a decreased

exit rate even though nothing actually changed in the outflow process. The proximate




                                              24
cause of both the increased unemployment level and the increased duration was the

increased inflow.20

         Thus, the traffic metaphor illustrates a possibility worth considering when

reacting to statistical decompositions of the ins and outs of unemployment. Although

analyses like ours and Shimer’s attempt to separate the contributions of inflows and

outflows, the inflows and outflows may be inherently inseparable. It could be, for

example, that congestion from increased inflows causes outflow hazard rates to become

lower.21

         This latter possibility has received little attention in the previous literature on

unemployment flows, perhaps because of the literature’s focus on search and matching

models of the aggregate labor market (Pissarides, 1985; Mortensen and Pissarides, 1994).

In these models, the number flowing out of unemployment is increasing in the number of

unemployed workers, as well as in the number of job vacancies. The matching function

that describes this relationship is meant to capture frictions that prevent firms and

workers from quickly finding (suitable) partners for an employment relationship. Under

the typical specification of this matching function, a greater number of unemployed

workers (the denominator of the outflow hazard) will raise the number flowing out of

unemployment (the numerator of the outflow hazard) so that the outflow rate will not

itself depend on the number unemployed. Put in the language of the traffic metaphor, the

green light stays on longer when more cars are waiting at the intersection. According to


20
   Note also that, just as the wait until going through the green light would increase for all cars regardless of
whether they had arrived from the usual route or from the obstructed alternate route, unemployment
duration would increase for all the unemployed – job losers, job leavers, and labor force entrants – just as
found in the analyses by Baker (1992), Shimer, and ourselves.
21
   Another example of interaction between inflows and outflows, discussed above in section 2.D, is that
cyclical changes in the composition of the inflow to unemployment (especially the increased share of
permanent job losers) cause a modest reduction in the outflow rate.


                                                       25
these models, then, changes in the outflow hazard will be driven only by exogenous

variables, notably labor productivity.22 In this theoretical framework, the mechanism

encapsulated in the traffic metaphor does not arise.

        That particular theoretical perspective, however, is not the only conceivable

economic interpretation of cyclical flows in the labor market. Consider, for example, an

alternative model in which firms face no friction in hiring unemployed workers; that is,

firms may hire as many unemployed workers as they wish without incurring important

search costs.23 Then, given labor productivity, firms will choose directly the number of

workers to hire out of the unemployment pool. In the language of the traffic metaphor,

how long the green light stays on is not determined by the number of cars waiting at the

intersection. Then, as in the traffic metaphor, increased unemployment due to increased

inflows can mechanically reduce outflow hazard rates during recessions.

        Viewed through this lens, a more appropriate decomposition of unemployment

flows might focus on changes in the level of the outflow, since these are independent of

the number unemployed in the latter model. It turns out that simple algebraic

manipulation of equation (3), our framework for decomposing cyclical unemployment

variation into inflows and outflows, provides such a decomposition:

                                            1 − u%t
                               d log u% t ≈         ⎡ d log st − d log( ft u% t ) ⎤                   (11)
                                              u%t ⎣                               ⎦

This re-expression of equation (3) decomposes cyclical variation in log unemployment

into an inflow component plus an outflow component involving the log change in the



22
   Indeed, Shimer (2005a, p. 23) makes this point to justify his emphasis on flow hazard rates, rather than
the levels of the unemployment flows.
23
   Such an assumption may not be an entirely ludicrous approximation, as the average duration of a vacancy
is consistently less than one month in the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ JOLTS dataset.


                                                       26
number flowing out of unemployment, f t u~t (instead of the hazard rate for the outflow,

ft). The monthly version of the latter is plotted in figure 12, which illustrates a fact that

may surprise some readers who have not encountered it before: Even though the hazard

rate for exiting unemployment goes down in recessions, the number exiting

unemployment goes up. This fact, acknowledged by Shimer (2005a, p. 22), was

previously documented in the gross flows data analysis by Blanchard and Diamond

(1990, p. 118): “While the flow from unemployment to employment increases in a

recession, the hazard rate decreases as the pool of unemployed increases proportionately

more than the flow.”

       Given the countercyclicality of the number exiting unemployment, if one viewed

unemployment flows solely in terms of the model motivating equation (10), one would

conclude that more than the entirety of the cyclical variation in unemployment is

accounted for by countercyclical inflows. That is, one would declare that “The Ins Win”

after all. Our point, however, is not to deny the importance of reduced outflow hazard

rates in recessions. Our point is that, in order to assess the roles of inflows and outflows

in cyclical unemployment, one must understand the economic determinants of both the

ins and the outs.

       We believe the challenge to future theoretical work is to develop coherent and

plausible models that can account for the full range of relevant empirical evidence. In

terms of the particular facts we hope to have clarified in this paper, theoretical analyses

should explain why job-loss-induced inflows to unemployment increase at the beginning

of a recession and why outflows do not increase enough to keep unemployment duration




                                              27
from rising.24 Our hunch is that cyclical movements in both the number of

unemployment spells and their duration stem largely from shared causes. Like Hall

(1988), we think of the relatively low employment (and real wages) during a recession as

reflecting a leftward shift in the derived demand for labor along a positively sloped

effective labor supply curve. Whatever it is that induces the leftward shift in labor

demand motivates some firms to effect employment reductions through layoffs (many of

which lead to unemployment) and also deters other firms from hiring enough to prevent a

rise in the stock and duration of unemployment. If the effective short-run labor supply

curve were perfectly inelastic, then wages would drop enough either to prevent the burst

of layoffs or to induce some firms quickly to hire up the laid-off workers. Recognizing

that real wage variation is not procyclical enough to prevent cyclical variation in

employment and unemployment is another way of saying that the effective short-run

labor supply curve is positively sloped rather than inelastic.

         The key questions then become: (1) What causes labor demand to shift leftward

during a recession, and (2) why is the effective short-run labor supply curve positively

sloped? We suspect that the answers to these questions also will deliver straightforward

answers to why cyclical unemployment variation divvies up as it does between changes

in inflow and outflow rates.




24
  Of course, theoretical work also should endeavor to explain the cyclical features of other salient variables
such as employment, hours of work, wage rates, vacancies, productivity, capital utilization, etc.


                                                     28
                                                   Appendix

Discrete-Time Correction for Time Aggregation Bias in Aggregate Inflows

       We use an analogous method to Shimer's in discrete time. That is, we essentially
use one difference equation, that for the total stock of unemployment:

                                  ut +τ +1/ 4 = ut +τ + stw et +τ − f t wut +τ                    (A.1)

where stw and ftw are the weekly inflow and outflow probabilities and are assumed
                                                      ⎧ 1 1 3⎫
constant between interview dates, and where τ ∈ ⎨0, , , ⎬ indexes the intervening
                                                      ⎩ 4 2 4⎭
weeks. Like Shimer, we then make the further assumption that the labor force,
lt ≡ et + ut , is also constant within the interval. This implies that we can rewrite (A.1) as:

                                                          (
                                ut +τ +1/ 4 = stwlt + 1 − stw − f t w ut +τ   )                   (A.2)

Solving this equation forward four weeks yields the following non-linear equation:

                                       3
                                             (
                        ut +1 = stwlt ∑ 1 − stw − ft w         ) + (1 − s           − ft w ) ut
                                                                 n                         4
                                                                                w
                                                                               t                  (A.3)
                                      n =0


Noting that the steady-state weekly unemployment stock in this model is given by
         stw
ut = w
  w*
                yields equation (7) in the main text.
      st + ft w


Discrete-Time Correction for Time Aggregation Bias in Inflows by Reason

        The correction for inflows by reason is a simple extension to the above. Now
there are three difference equations to solve out – one for unemployment by each reason:

                              uλ ,t +τ +1/ 4 = uλ ,t +τ + sλw,t et +τ − f λw,t uλ ,t +τ
                              uq ,t +τ +1/ 4 = uq ,t +τ + sqw,t et +τ − f qw,t uq ,t +τ           (A.4)
                              ue,t +τ +1/ 4 = ue ,t +τ + sew,t it +τ − f ew,t ue ,t +τ

where i is the stock of non-participation. We then again assume, like Shimer, that the
labor force is constant in the month between CPS interviews. It should be noted that this
has the implication that the non-participation stock is also constant between months.
Since the unemployment system implicit in the above is a closed one (all flows among
unemployment, employment, and non-participation originate from one of these three



                                                         29
categories), the population (the sum of unemployment, employment, and non-
participation) is implicitly constant.

      Given this, equation (A.4) is just a non-linear system, which can be solved using
conventional programs such as MatLab.




                                           30
       Figure 0: Unemployment Rate and Recessionary Unemployment Dates Used

0.12



 0.1



0.08



0.06



0.04



0.02



  0
       1948
       1950
       1952
       1954
       1956
       1958
       1960
       1962
       1964
       1966
       1968
       1970
       1972
       1974
       1976
       1978
       1980
       1982
       1984
       1986
       1988
       1990
       1992
       1994
       1996
       1998
       2000
       2002
       2004
       2006
                         Recession Dates   Unemployment Rate




                                      31
                              Outflow Probability (F)




                0
                    0.1
                           0.2
                                       0.3
                                               0.4
                                                           0.5
                                                                  0.6
                                                                         0.7

         1948
         1950
         1952
         1954
         1956
         1958
         1960
         1962
         1964
         1966
         1968
         1970
         1972
         1974




     F
         1976




32
         1978




     S
         1980
         1982
         1984
         1986
         1988
         1990
         1992
                                                                                Figure 1: Replication of Shimer’s Figure 1




         1994
         1996
         1998
         2000
         2002
         2004
                0
                    0.01
                           0.02
                                       0.03
                                               0.04
                                                           0.05
                                                                  0.06
                                                                         0.07




                                  Inflow Probability (S)
                                   Log Outflow Rate (log f)




                    -1.2
                           -1
                                  -0.8
                                           -0.6
                                                   -0.4
                                                           -0.2
                                                                  0
                                                                         0.2

             1948
             1950
             1952
             1954
             1956
             1958
             1960
             1962
             1964
             1966
             1968
             1970
             1972
             1974




     log f
             1976




33
             1978
             1980




     log s
             1982
             1984
             1986
             1988
             1990
             1992
             1994
             1996
             1998
             2000
             2002
             2004
                    -4
                                                           -3




                           -3.8
                                  -3.6
                                           -3.4
                                                   -3.2
                                                                  -2.8
                                                                         -2.6
                                                                                Figure 2: Log Inflow and Outflow Hazard Rates Using Replication of Shimer’s Data




                                     Log Inflow Rate (log s)
                                            Change in Log Flow                                                               Change in Log Flow




                          -0.2
                                 -0.1
                                        0
                                            0.1
                                                  0.2
                                                        0.3
                                                              0.4
                                                                    0.5
                                                                          0.6
                                                                                0.7
                                                                                                           -0.2
                                                                                                                  -0.1
                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                             0.1
                                                                                                                                   0.2
                                                                                                                                         0.3
                                                                                                                                               0.4
                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                           0.6
                                                                                                                                                                 0.7

                1969 Q4                                                                          1948 Q2
                1970 Q2                                                                               Q3
                     Q4                                                                               Q4
                1971 Q2                                                                          1949 Q1
                                                                                                      Q2
                                                                                                      Q3
                1973 Q4                                                                               Q4
                1974 Q2
                     Q4
                1975 Q2
                                                                                                 1953 Q2
                                                                                                      Q3
                1979 Q3
                                                                                                      Q4
                1980 Q1
                                                                                                 1954 Q1
                     Q3                                                                               Q2
                                                                                                      Q3




34
     - dlog f
                                                                                      - dlog f
                1981 Q3
                1982 Q1
                     Q3
                                                                                                 1957 Q1




     dlog s
                                                                                      dlog s
                                                                                                      Q2
                1990 Q2                                                                               Q3
                     Q4                                                                               Q4
                1991 Q2                                                                          1958 Q1
                     Q4                                                                               Q2
                1992 Q2


                2000 Q4
                2001 Q2                                                                          1960 Q1
                     Q4                                                                               Q2
                2002 Q2                                                                               Q3
                     Q4                                                                               Q4
                                                                                                 1961 Q1
                2003 Q2
                                                                                                      Q2
                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 3: Decomposition of Increases in Log Unemployment by Recession, 1948–2004
Figure 4: Month-by-Month Ratio of Short-Term Share of Unemployment in Incoming

                                                                Rotation Groups to Full Sample




1.35

                                                                                         Mean post Feb 1994
 1.3
                                                                                             = 1.1549

1.25


 1.2


1.15


 1.1


1.05


  1
                 Jul-94


                                   Jul-95


                                                     Jul-96


                                                                       Jul-97


                                                                                         Jul-98


                                                                                                           Jul-99


                                                                                                                             Jul-00


                                                                                                                                               Jul-01


                                                                                                                                                                 Jul-02


                                                                                                                                                                                   Jul-03


                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jul-04
       Jan-94


                          Jan-95


                                            Jan-96


                                                              Jan-97


                                                                                Jan-98


                                                                                                  Jan-99


                                                                                                                    Jan-00


                                                                                                                                      Jan-01


                                                                                                                                                        Jan-02


                                                                                                                                                                          Jan-03


                                                                                                                                                                                            Jan-04
                Redesign                    IRG/Full Sample Short Term Share of Unemployment                                                                     Mean post Feb 1994




                                                                                                    35
Figure 5: Effect of Our Alternative Redesign Correction on the 2000-2001 Recession

                     0.7

                     0.6

                     0.5
Change in Log Flow




                     0.4

                     0.3

                     0.2

                     0.1

                       0

                     -0.1

                     -0.2
                            1969 Q4
                            1970 Q2
                                 Q4
                            1971 Q2


                                          1973 Q4
                                          1974 Q2
                                               Q4
                                          1975 Q2


                                                          1979 Q3
                                                          1980 Q1
                                                               Q3


                                                                         1981 Q3
                                                                         1982 Q1
                                                                              Q3


                                                                                        1990 Q2
                                                                                             Q4
                                                                                        1991 Q2
                                                                                             Q4
                                                                                        1992 Q2


                                                                                                        2000 Q4
                                                                                                        2001 Q2
                                                                                                             Q4
                                                                                                        2002 Q2
                                                                                                             Q4
                                                                                                        2003 Q2
                                      - dlog f   dlog s     our redesign adj - dlog f     our redesign adj dlog s




                                                                    36
Figure 6: Effects of Different Aggregation Bias Corrections on Measured Log Inflow

                                                                                                  Rates

-2.9


-3.1


-3.3


-3.5


-3.7


-3.9


-4.1


-4.3
       1948
              1950
                     1952
                            1954
                                   1956
                                          1958
                                                 1960
                                                        1962
                                                               1964
                                                                      1966
                                                                             1968
                                                                                    1970
                                                                                           1972
                                                                                                  1974
                                                                                                         1976
                                                                                                                1978
                                                                                                                       1980
                                                                                                                              1982
                                                                                                                                     1984
                                                                                                                                            1986
                                                                                                                                                   1988
                                                                                                                                                          1990
                                                                                                                                                                 1992
                                                                                                                                                                        1994
                                                                                                                                                                               1996
                                                                                                                                                                                      1998
                                                                                                                                                                                             2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                           2004
                                                               Log Inflow Rate (No Time Agg Correction)
                                                               Log Inflow Rate (Discrete Time Agg Correction)
                                                               Log Inflow Rate (Continuous Time Agg Correction)




                                                                                                    37
                             Figure 7: Effects of Aggregation Bias Corrections on Decomposition

                     0.7

                     0.6

                     0.5
Change in Log Flow




                     0.4

                     0.3

                     0.2

                     0.1

                       0

                     -0.1

                     -0.2
                             1948 Q2
                                  Q3
                                  Q4
                             1949 Q1
                                  Q2
                                  Q3
                                  Q4




                                                       1953 Q2
                                                            Q3
                                                            Q4
                                                       1954 Q1
                                                            Q2
                                                            Q3




                                                                                    1957 Q1
                                                                                         Q2
                                                                                         Q3
                                                                                         Q4
                                                                                    1958 Q1
                                                                                         Q2




                                                                                                               1960 Q1
                                                                                                                    Q2
                                                                                                                    Q3
                                                                                                                    Q4
                                                                                                               1961 Q1
                                      Continuous Time Correction dlog s          -dlog f
                                      Discrete Time Correction dlog s            Uncorrected dlog s



                     0.7

                     0.6

                     0.5
Change in Log Flow




                     0.4

                     0.3

                     0.2

                     0.1

                       0

                     -0.1

                     -0.2
                            1969 Q4
                            1970 Q2
                                 Q4
                            1971 Q2


                                         1973 Q4
                                         1974 Q2
                                              Q4
                                         1975 Q2


                                                        1979 Q3
                                                        1980 Q1
                                                             Q3


                                                                       1981 Q3
                                                                       1982 Q1
                                                                            Q3


                                                                                      1990 Q2
                                                                                           Q4
                                                                                      1991 Q2
                                                                                           Q4
                                                                                      1992 Q2


                                                                                                             2000 Q4
                                                                                                             2001 Q2
                                                                                                                  Q4
                                                                                                             2002 Q2
                                                                                                                  Q4
                                                                                                             2003 Q2




                                      Continuous Time Correction dlog s          Our redesign adj - dlog f
                                      Discrete Time Correction dlog s            Uncorrected dlog s




                                                                  38
                         Figure 8: Log Inflow Rates by Reason for Unemployment

 -3



-3.5



 -4



-4.5



 -5



-5.5



 -6
       1968

              1970

                       1972

                              1974

                                     1976

                                            1978

                                                   1980

                                                          1982

                                                                 1984

                                                                         1986

                                                                                1988

                                                                                       1990

                                                                                              1992

                                                                                                     1994

                                                                                                              1996

                                                                                                                     1998

                                                                                                                            2000

                                                                                                                                   2002

                                                                                                                                          2004
                     Log Job Loser Inflow Rate               Log Job Leaver Inflow Rate                     Log Entrant Inflow Rate




                                                                        39
                       Figure 9: Log Outflow Rates by Reason for Unemployment

0.2


  0


-0.2


-0.4


-0.6


-0.8


 -1


-1.2


-1.4
       1968

               1970

                      1972

                             1974

                                    1976

                                           1978

                                                  1980

                                                         1982

                                                                1984

                                                                        1986

                                                                               1988

                                                                                      1990

                                                                                             1992

                                                                                                    1994

                                                                                                           1996

                                                                                                                  1998

                                                                                                                         2000

                                                                                                                                2002

                                                                                                                                       2004
              Log Job Loser Outflow Rate                 Log Job Leaver Outflow Rate                  Log Entrant Outflow Rate




                                                                       40
Figure 10: Logs of Employment, Non-Participation, and Unemployment as Fractions of

                                                                                  the Labor Force

                         0.4                                                                                                                                         -2


                         0.2                                                                                                                                         -2.2


                           0                                                                                                                                         -2.4
 log (E/L), log (NP/L)




                         -0.2                                                                                                                                        -2.6




                                                                                                                                                                            log (U/L)
                         -0.4                                                                                                                                        -2.8


                         -0.6                                                                                                                                        -3


                         -0.8                                                                                                                                        -3.2


                          -1                                                                                                                                         -3.4
                                1968

                                       1970

                                              1972

                                                     1974

                                                            1976

                                                                   1978

                                                                          1980

                                                                                 1982

                                                                                        1984

                                                                                               1986

                                                                                                      1988

                                                                                                             1990

                                                                                                                    1992

                                                                                                                           1994

                                                                                                                                  1996

                                                                                                                                         1998

                                                                                                                                                2000

                                                                                                                                                       2002

                                                                                                                                                              2004
                                              Log Employment/Labor Force                                 Log Non-Participation/Labor Force
                                              Log Unemployment/Labor Force




                                                                                               41
   Figure 11: Decomposition of Increase in Unemployment into Effects of Flows by Reason for Unemployment


 0.3

0.25

 0.2

0.15

 0.1

0.05

   0

-0.05

 -0.1
        1969 Q4
        1970 Q2

        1971 Q2


                      1973 Q4
                      1974 Q2

                      1975 Q2


                                        1979 Q3
                                        1980 Q1



                                                      1981 Q3
                                                      1982 Q1



                                                                    1990 Q2

                                                                    1991 Q2

                                                                    1992 Q2


                                                                                         2000 Q4
                                                                                         2001 Q2

                                                                                         2002 Q2

                                                                                         2003 Q2
             Q4




                           Q4




                                             Q3




                                                           Q3



                                                                         Q4

                                                                         Q4




                                                                                              Q4

                                                                                              Q4
             Job Loser Inflow Effect         Job Leaver Inflow Effect       Entrant Inflow Effect
             Job Loser Outflow Effect        Job Leaver Outflow Effect      Entrant Outflow Effect




                                                    42
   Figure 12: Level of Monthly Outflow from Unemployment (Quarterly Average)




 0.04



0.035



 0.03



0.025



 0.02



0.015



 0.01
        1948
        1950
        1952
        1954
        1956
        1958
        1960
        1962
        1964
        1966
        1968
        1970
        1972
        1974
        1976
        1978
        1980
        1982
        1984
        1986
        1988
        1990
        1992
        1994
        1996
        1998
        2000
        2002
        2004
        2006
        Recession Dates   Quarterly Average of Monthly Outflow Level as a Fraction of Labor Force




                                              43
                                      References

Abraham, Katharine G. and Robert Shimer, “Changes in Unemployment Duration and
Labor-Force Attachment,” in Alan B. Krueger and Robert M. Solow, eds., The Roaring
Nineties: Can Full Employment Be Sustained? New York: Russell Sage Foundation and
Century Foundation Press, 2001: 367-420.

Akerlof, George A., Andrew K. Rose, and Janet L. Yellen, “Job Switching and Job
Satisfaction in the U.S. Labor Market,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1988(2):
495-582.

Anderson, Patricia M. and Bruce D. Meyer, “The Extent and Consequences of Job
Turnover,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 1994: 177-236.

Baker, Michael, “Unemployment Duration: Compositional Effects and Cyclical
Variability,” American Economic Review, March 1992, 82(1): 313-21.

Barkume, Anthony J. and Francis W. Horvath, “Using Gross Flows to Explore
Movements in the Labor Force,” Monthly Labor Review, April 1995, 118(4): 28-35.

Barth, Peter S., “A Time Series Analysis of Layoff Rates,” Journal of Human Resources,
Fall 1971, 6(4): 448-65.

Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Peter Diamond, “The Cyclical Behavior of the Gross Flows
of U.S. Workers,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1990(2): 85-143.

Blanchard, Olivier and Jordi Gali, “A New Keynesian Model with Unemployment,”
mimeo, MIT and CREI, 2006.

Bleakley, Hoyt, Ann E. Ferris, and Jeffrey C. Fuhrer, “New Data on Worker Flows
during Business Cycles,” New England Economic Review, July-August 1999: 49-76.

Cole, Harold L. and Richard Rogerson, “Can the Mortensen-Pissarides Matching Model
Match the Business-Cycle Facts?” International Economic Review, November 1999,
40(4): 933-59.

Darby, Michael R., John C. Haltiwanger, and Mark W. Plant, “The Ins and Outs of
Unemployment: The Ins Win,” Working Paper No. 1997, National Bureau of Economic
Research, 1986.

Davis, Steven J., “Job Loss, Job Finding, and Unemployment in the U.S. Economy over
the Past Fifty Years: Comment,” in Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2005, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006: 139-57




                                          44
Davis, Steven J., R. Jason Faberman, and John Haltiwanger, “The Flow Approach to
Labor Markets: New Data Sources and Micro-Macro Links,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Summer 2006, 20(3): 3-26.

Fujita, Shigeru and Garey Ramey, “The Cyclicality of Job Loss and Hiring,” mimeo,
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia and University of California at San Diego, 2006.

Gertler, Mark and Antonella Trigari, “Unemployment Fluctuations with Staggered Nash
Wage Bargaining,” Working Paper No. 12498, National Bureau of Economic Research,
2006.

Hall, Robert E., “Examining Alternative Macroeconomic Theories: Comment,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1988(1): 261-64.

Hall, Robert E., “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness,”
American Economic Review, March 2005a, 95(1): 50-65.

Hall, Robert E., “Employment Efficiency and Sticky Wages: Evidence from Flows in the
Labor Market,” Review of Economics and Statistics, August 2005b, 87(3): 397-407.

Hall, Robert E., “Job Loss, Job Finding, and Unemployment in the U.S. Economy over
the Past Fifty Years,” in Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 2005, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006: 101-37.

Kennan, John, “Job Loss, Job Finding, and Unemployment in the U.S. Economy over the
Past Fifty Years: Comment,” in Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2005, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006: 159-64.

Marston, Stephen T., “Employment Instability and High Unemployment Rates,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1976(1): 169-203.

Menzio, Guido and Espen R. Moen, “Incomplete Self-Enforcing Labor Contracts,”
mimeo, University of Pennsylvania and Norwegian School of Management, 2006.

Mortensen, Dale T. and Christopher A. Pissarides, “Job Creation and Job Destruction in
the Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, July 1994, 61(3): 397-415.

National Commission on Employment and Unemployment Statistics, Counting the Labor
Force, Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1979.

Nicholson, Walter, “A Statistical Model of Exhaustion of Unemployment Insurance
Benefits,” Journal of Human Resources, Winter 1981, 16(1): 117-28.

Perry, George L., “Unemployment Flows in the U.S. Labor Market,” Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, 1972(2): 245-78.




                                          45
Pissarides, Christopher A., “Short-Run Equilibrium Dynamics of Unemployment,
Vacancies, and Real Wages,” American Economic Review, September 1985, 75(4): 676-
90.

Polivka, Anne E. and Stephen M. Miller, “The CPS after the Redesign: Refocusing the
Economic Lens,” in John Haltiwanger, Marilyn E. Manser, and Robert Topel, eds., Labor
Statistics Measurement Issues, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998: 249-86.

Rotemberg, Julio J., “Cyclical Wages in a Search-and-Bargaining Model with Large
Firms,” Working Paper No. 12415, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2006.

Shimer, Robert, “Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment,” mimeo, University of
Chicago, 2005a.

Shimer, Robert, “The Cyclicality of Hires, Separations, and Job-to-Job Transitions,”
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, July-August 2005b, 87(4): 493-507.

Shimer, Robert, “Discussion of Robert E. Hall's REStat Lecture ‘Employment Efficiency
and Sticky Wages: Evidence from Flows in the Labor Market,’” Review of Economics
and Statistics, August 2005c, 87(3): 408-10.

Sider, Hal, “Unemployment Duration and Incidence: 1968-82,” American Economic
Review, June 1985, 75(3): 461-72.

Slichter, Sumner H., The Turnover of Factory Labor, New York: D. Appleton and
Company, 1919.

Woytinsky, W. S., Three Aspects of Labor Dynamics, Washington, DC: Social Science
Research Council, 1942.

Yashiv, Eran, “U.S. Labor Market Dynamics Revisited,” mimeo, Tel Aviv University,
2006.




                                           46
