                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  CAPITAL CONTROLS, CAPITAL FLOW CONTRACTIONS, AND MACROECONOMIC
                            VULNERABILITY

                                         Sebastian Edwards

                                        Working Paper 12852
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12852


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2007




I have benefited from discussions with Ed Leamer. I thank Roberto Alvarez for his comments and
Alberto Naudon for his excellent assistance. I am particularly grateful to Michael Hutchison for his
very perceptive comments and suggestions. I also thank participants at the UCSC-JIMF Conference
and at seminars at Fedesarrollo and the Bank of Spain for very useful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2007 by Sebastian Edwards. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Capital Controls, Capital Flow Contractions, and Macroeconomic Vulnerability
Sebastian Edwards
NBER Working Paper No. 12852
January 2007
JEL No. F3,F32,F34

                                             ABSTRACT

In this paper I analyze whether restrictions to capital mobility reduce vulnerability to external shocks.
More specifically, I ask if countries that restrict the free flow of international capital have a lower
probability of experiencing a large contraction in net capital flows. I use three new indexes on the
degree of international financial integration and a large multi-country data set for 1970-2004 to estimate
a series of random-effect probit equations. I find that the marginal effect of higher capital mobility
on the probability of a capital flow contraction is positive and statistically significant, but very small.
Having a flexible exchange rate greatly reduces the probability of experiencing a capital flow contraction.
The benefits of flexible rates increase as the degree of capital mobility increases. A higher current
account deficit increases the probability of a capital flow contraction, while a higher ratio of FDI to
GDP reduces that probability.

Sebastian Edwards
UCLA Anderson Graduate School of Business
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C508
Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
sebastian.edwards@anderson.ucla.edu
                                                   1


I.      Introduction
        The East Asian currency crises of 1997-1998 were extremely traumatic.
Countries that for years had been praised as examples of how to conduct economic policy
were subject to abrupt stops of capital inflows and had to devalue their currencies. As the
crisis deepened, contagion spread to other emerging nations, affecting countries as far as
Latin America. In many ways, the East Asian crises marked the end of an era; in the
years that followed, macroeconomic policies in most emerging countries went through
profound changes. Perhaps the most important of these changes is that most countries
gave up pegged exchange rate regimes and adopted some form of flexible exchange rates.
Indeed, very few countries have rigid exchange rates; at the time of this writing China
continues to be the most important cases of exchange rate inflexibility.
        It is not an exaggeration to say that the East Asian and subsequent crises -- Brazil,
Turkey, Argentina, Uruguay, the Dominican Republic – resulted in the emergence of a
new (and more prudent) approach towards macroeconomic policy in emerging and
transition nations. The overall objective of this new approach is to reduce vulnerability
to external shocks and to lower the likelihood of external crises, including sudden stops
and major devaluations. This new view on macro policy has also recognized the need of
maintaining the public and external debts at prudent levels. In addition, the accumulation
of international reserves has been used as a self insurance mechanism, and current
account deficits have generally been kept in check.1
        In spite of the emergence of a new view on macroeconomic policy, there are still
some areas of disagreement. The most important one refers to the appropriate degree of
capital mobility in emerging and transition countries. Some authors argue that limiting
the extent of international financial integration reduces speculation and helps countries
withstand external shocks without suffering massive crises. According to this view,
countries that control and limit capital mobility are less likely to suffer contagion from
abroad. In his criticism of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Stiglitz (2002) argues
that the fundamental reason why India and China were spared from substantial currency
crises -- and were not subject to contagion from the East Asian or other crises of the

1
 The evolution of this new approach to macro policy in emerging nations may be traced through the
writings of a number of authors. See, for example, Summers (2000), Fischer (2003), Dornbusch (2002),
Aizenman and Lee (2005), and Rogoff, Reinhart and Savastanno (2003). See also Rogoff (2006).
                                               2


1990s and early 2000s -- is that they did not allow free capital mobility. Stiglitz goes as
far as arguing that the easing of controls on capital mobility was at the center of most
modern currency crises in the emerging markets -- Mexico 1994, East Asia 1997, Russia
1998, Brazil 1999, Turkey 2001, and Argentina 2002. According to other authors,
however, restrictions to capital mobility are ineffective -- the private sector always finds
way of circumventing them --, introduce costly microeconomic distortions and encourage
corruption.2 What makes the debate on capital controls particularly interesting is that
some of the critics of free capital mobility in the emerging countries are authors that have
been staunch supporters of free trade in goods: according to them there are fundamental
differences between markets for goods and markets for securities (Bhagwati, 1998,
1999).
          The purpose of this paper is to analyze whether restrictions on capital mobility
reduce a country’s vulnerability to major external shocks. More specifically, I ask if
countries that restrict the free flow of international capital are less likely to experiencing
an abrupt reduction in net capital inflows. I use three new indexes on the degree of
international financial integration and a large multi-country data set for 1970-2004 to
estimate a series of random-effect probit equations. I use these estimates to compute
marginal effects of different indicators on the likelihood of a country facing a severe
contraction in net capital flows. I also analyze the role played by other variables in
determining the probability of experiencing a capital inflow contraction. In particular, I
focus on: (a) large current account deficits; (b) the exchange rate regime – fixed or
flexible; (c) holdings of international reserves; (d) fiscal imbalances; (e) world interest
rates; and (f) the composition of capital inflows, among others. Throughout the analysis I
focus on nonlinearities, and on the interaction between the degree of financial integration
and other determinants of macroeconomic vulnerability.
          The analysis concentrates on what I have called “capital flow contractions” (CFC)
episodes. A CFC is defined as an abrupt decline -- at least 3% of GDP – in net capital
inflows during a one year period. CFCs differ from the more traditional concept of
“sudden stop” (SS) in an important respect. Sudden stops are large contractions in flows
to countries that, until that moment, were receiving large positive (net) flows; CFCs, in

2
    Forbes (2006 a,b).
                                                   3


contrast, are defined for all countries, independently of whether they initially had positive
or negative net flows. That is, it is possible for a CFC to take place in a country that was
originally experiencing net capital outflows. In that regard, then, CFCs also capture
surges in what is sometimes referred to as “capital flight.” The reason for concentrating
on CFCs is that any abrupt contraction of the capital account – independently of whether
the country is initially subject to net inflows or outflows – will require a major current
account adjustment and, thus, is likely to be costly. 3 It follows from the definition of
CFC and SS that the incidence of the former will be larger than that of the latter.
        Before proceeding, it is important to emphasize that the analysis presented in this
paper only deals with one aspect of the effects of capital controls: their impact on the
probability of experiencing a large decline in net capital inflows. A complete policy
evaluation of the effects of capital controls would also analyze their costs in the form of
distortions, misallocated investment and others. However, dealing with the (potential)
costs of capital account restrictions, is beyond the scope of this paper.4
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In section II I describe the three
indexes on capital account restrictions used in this paper, and I compare them to
alternative measures used in the literature. In Section III I define capital flow
contractions (CFCs) and I briefly discuss their incidence across different regions during
the 1970-2004 period. I also provide a brief comparison of CFCs with the more
traditional measure of sudden stops. In Section IV I report results on the determinants of
the probability of experiencing a CFC. The analysis concentrates on nonlinearities, and
investigates the way in which capital mobility affects the role of other determinants of
CFCs. In Section V I investigate the relationship between capital mobility, contagion,
large current account imbalances and exchange rate regimes. In this Section I also deal
with extensions and robustness, and I discuss in greater detail interactive effects between
capital mobility and other determinants of the probability of CFCs. In Section VI I deal
with the potential endogeneity of the capital mobility indexes, and I present results



3
  On sudden stops, see Calvo(2003), Calvo et al (2004), Caballero And Krishnamurthy (2002, 2003),
Frankel and Cavallo (2004), Edwards (2004a,b), Hutchinson and Noy (2005). See also the discussion in
Rothenberg and Warnock (2006).
4
  See the papers by Forbes mentioned above. See also Desai et al (2004).
                                                       4


obtained when an instrumental variables version of probit regressions is used. Finally, in
Section VII I provide some concluding remarks. The paper also has a data appendix.
II.      Measuring Capital Mobility
         Literature Review: Most early attempts to measure the extent of international
financial integration used information provided by the International Monetary Fund. The
standard approach has been to use line E.2 of the annual summary published in the
Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions. Alesina, Grilli and
Milesi-Ferreti (1994) and Rodrik (1998) constructed a dummy variable index of capital
controls, which took a value of one when capital controls were in place and zero otherwise.
Klein and Olivei (1999) used the IMF’s data to construct an index as the number of years in
the period 1986 and 1995 during which each country had an open capital account. 5
Leblang (1997), Razin and Rose (1994), Chinn and Ito (2002), Glick and Hutchinson
(2005), and Glick, Guo and Hutchinson (2005) also used indicators based on the IMF to
construct zero-one classifications of openness.
         A limitation of these IMF-based binary indexes is that they do not distinguish
between de jure and de facto controls, and do not differentiate according to different
intensities of capital restrictions, or type of flow being restricted. Montiel and Reinhart
(1999) and Chinn and Ito (2002) addressed this issue by combining IMF and country-
specific information to construct indexes on the intensity of capital controls in a number of
countries.
         In an effort to deal with some of these measurement problems, Quinn (1997)
constructed a comprehensive set of cross country indicators on the degree of capital
mobility that ranged from 0 through 4. These indexes covered several years, allowing
researchers to investigate how changes in capital controls affected key macroeconomic
variables. Edwards (1999, 2002) used Quinn’s index to analyze whether restricted capital
controls affected growth. He found that there was a threshold effect: higher capital
mobility benefit countries only after they have reached a certain level of economic
development. Edison et al (2004) compared Quinn’s (1997) index with an index based
on the number of years that, according to the Exchange Arrangements and Exchange


5
  A limitation with this indicator is that it does not say if the index’s number (i.e. the percentage of years
with restrictions) refers to most recent or most distant years in the time window being considered.
                                                       5


Restrictions, a country has had a closed capital account, and found out that for most (but
not all) countries and periods there was a correspondence between the two indicators.
More recently Quinn et al (2003) and Quinn (2003) developed a new index that provides
greater detail on the intensity of controls. Mody and Murshid (2002) also used IMF data
as the bases for an index of financial integration that covers 150 countries for 1966-2000,
and is tabulated from a value of zero to four.
         A number of authors have used stock market data to construct indexes on
international financial integration. Early attempts were made by Bekaert (1995), Bekaert
and Harvey (1995, 2000), and Bekaert et al (2005). According to these authors it is
important to distinguish between “official” or “legislative” dates of stock market
liberalization. Edison and Warnock (2003) used data on stock markets compiled by the
International Finance Corporation to construct a new index of restrictions on ownership
of stock by foreigners. This index – which is available for 29 countries – has a high
degree of correlation with the index by Bekaert et al (2005).6 Shatz (2000) built an index
on capital account restrictions based on restrictions on foreign direct investment in 57
countries. Desai et al (2004) used this index in a study on the way in which multinational
firms deal with capital controls.
          These difficulties in measuring capital mobility and financial integration
accurately have resulted in empirical results that have often been tentative, and not very
robust. It is not an exaggeration to say that for some time now macroeconomists have
tried to obtain better and more detailed indexes of capital account restrictions and
financial integration.
         Three New Indexes: In this paper I use three new indexes on the degree of
international financial integration.
             •    I constructed the first index – which I call Capital Mobility or CM -- by
                  combining information from Quinn (2003) and Mody and Murshid (2002),
                  with information from country-specific sources. In creating this new
                  index I followed a three steps procedure: First, the scales of the Quinn
                  and Mody and Murshid indexes were made compatible. The new index


6
 See Edison et. al (2004) for a survey of studies on the effect of capital account restrictions on stock
markets.
                                                      6


                  has a scale from 0 to 100, where higher numbers denote a higher degree
                  of capital mobility; a score of 100 denotes absolutely free capital mobility.
                  Second, I use Stata’s “impute” procedure to deal with missing
                  observations in the new index. In order to impute preliminary values to
                  the missing observations I use data on the two original indexes (Quinn and
                  Mody and Murshid), their lagged values, openness as measured by import
                  tariffs collections over imports, the extent of trade openness measured as
                  imports plus exports over GDP, a measure of openness obtained from the
                  fitted values of a gravity model of trade and GDP per capita.7 In the third
                  step, I use country-specific data to revise and refine the preliminary data
                  created using the “impute” procedure discussed above. The new index
                  covers the period 1970-2004, and has data for 163 countries (although not
                  every country has data for every year).8
             •    The second index is constructed from data on international assets positions
                  compiled by Lane and Milesi Ferreti (2006) for 147 countries for 1970 to
                  2004. This index is computed as the sum of total external assets plus total
                  external liabilities as a proportion of GDP. A higher value of this index –
                  which I call LMF – denotes that the country is more integrated to world
                  financial markets. In some ways this index is a financial or capital
                  markets counterpart of the traditional index on trade openness calculated
                  as the ratio of imports plus exports to GDP.
             •    The third index was constructed by Miniane (2004) for 34 countries. It is
                  based on detailed country-specific data compiled by the IMF since 1996,
                  and considers 13 types of capital controls and restrictions, including
                  restrictions on that affect inflows and outflows of stocks, money market
                  instruments, mutual funds, derivatives, commercial credits, warrants,
                  letters of credit, direct investment, profit repatriation, and real estate

7
  See Aizenman and Noy (2004) on the relationship between trade account openness and capital account
openness.
8
   It is important to note that although this new index represents an improvement over alternative indexes, it
still has some shortcomings, including the fact that it does not distinguish very sharply between restrictions
on capital inflows and restrictions on capital outflows. See the discussion in the preceding section for an
analysis of the shortcomings of different indexes. See also Eichengreen (2001) and Edwards (1999).
                                                        7


                    transactions. Miniane (2004) used country-specific primary data to
                    recalculate this index all the way back to 1983. This index – which I call
                    Miniane or simply MI – ranges from zero to 100, and is calculated at the
                    three-decimal level.9 A higher value of this index denotes a higher level
                    of capital account restrictions.


           There are some important differences across these indexes. First, while the
Capital Mobility and Miniane indexes are based on an analysis of de jure restrictions, the
LMF index relies on de facto market integration. A second difference refers to coverage.
The Capital Mobility and LMF indexes cover a longer period of time and larger number
of countries than the Miniane index; in that regard, the CM and LMF indexes are
preferred to the MI index. A third difference is that while in the Capital Controls and
LMF indexes a higher value denotes a higher degree of capital mobility, in Miniane a
higher value of the index refers to stricter capital controls. An important question is
whether, in overall terms, these three indexes tell a similar story. I address this issue by
computing Spearman rank coefficients of correlation. The null hypotheses that the
indexes are independent were rejected at conventional levels. The Spearman coefficient
between Capital Mobility and Miniane it is -0.880 ; between LMF and MI it is -0.660;
and between the CM and LMF indexes is 0.430. Given their more general coverage, in
the rest of this paper I concentrate on the CM and LF indexes.
III.       Capital Flow Contractions: Definition and Incidence
           In this paper I have defined a “capital flow contraction” (CFC) episode as an
abrupt contraction in a country’s capital account in a given year. More specifically, in
order for an episode to classify as a CFC, net capital flows have to decline in a year by at
least 3% of GDP. A country could face a CFC independently of whether it was initially a
net importer or a net exporter of capital. The more traditional concept of sudden stop, on
the other hand, is restricted to abrupt declines in capital inflows to countries that were
previously receiving large inflows of capital. As pointed out above, the reason for
concentrating on CFCs is that any abrupt contraction of the capital account –
independently of whether the country is initially subject to net inflows or outflows – will

9
    The original index went from zero to one; I rescaled it.
                                              8


require a major current account adjustment and, thus, is likely to be costly. In Section V
of this paper I show that the main results are similar if the more traditional definition of
sudden stops is used in the analysis.
       The first two columns of Table 1 provide summary data on the incidence of CFCs
for six groups of countries. As may be seen, the overall incidence of CFCs is 0.18; the
Middle East and Eastern Europe have the highest incidence, while the advanced nations
have the lowest incidence. The χ 2 test is for the null hypothesis that the distribution of
“CFCs” and “no CFCs” is independent across group of countries; this null hypothesis is
rejected at conventional levels. In the last two columns of Table 1, and for comparison
purposes, I present data on the incidence of sudden stops for the same six groups of
countries. I have defined a “sudden stop” episode as an abrupt and major reduction in
capital inflows to a country that, up to that time, had been receiving large volumes of
foreign capital. More specifically, I imposed the following requirements for an episode
to qualify as a “sudden stop”: (1) the country must have received an inflow of capital
(relative to GDP) larger than its region’s third quartile during the two years prior to the
“sudden stop.” And (2), net capital inflows must have declined by at least 3% of GDP in
one year. As may be seen, the overall incidence is 0.087, less than half of that of CFCs.
The Middle East and Latin America have the highest occurrences of SS, while the
advanced nations have the lowest.
        In the extensions reported in Section IV I discuss alternative definitions of capital
flows disruptions, including definitions that consider more severe reductions in flows,
definitions that spread the decline in capital flows over two years, as well as a definition
that focuses on sudden stops proper.
IV.     An Empirical Analysis of Capital Controls and Capital Flow Contractions
       In this Section I investigate whether the degree of international financial
integration affects the probability of a capital flow contraction (CFC). I am particularly
interested in analyzing the way in which capital mobility affects the role played by other
variables – including contagion, the degree of flexibility of the nominal exchange rate,
and external imbalances – in determining the probability of a CFC.
                                                         9


IV.1    The Empirical Model
        The point of departure of the analysis is a variance component probit model given
by equations (1) and (2):


                                   1,            if y tj* > 0,

(1)               y tj     =

                                   0,            otherwise.




(2)               y tj*    =    αω tj + ε tj .


Variable y tj is a dummy variable that takes a value of one if country j in period t

experienced a CFC (as defined above), and zero if the country in question did not
experience a CFC. 10 According to equation (1), whether the country experiences a
capital flow contraction is assumed to be the result of an unobserved latent variable y tj* .

y tj* , in turn, is assumed to depend linearly on vector ω tj . The error term ε tj is given by a

variance component model: ε tj = ν j + µ tj . ν j is iid with zero mean and variance σ ν2 ;

µ tj is normally distributed with zero mean and variance σ µ2 = 1 . In addition to the
random effects model, I also estimated fixed effects and basic probit versions of the
probit model in equations (1) and (2).11
        One of the advantages of probit models is that they are highly non-linear; the
marginal effect of any independent variable on the probability is conditional on the
values of all covariates. This means that if the value of one of the independent variables
changes, the marginal effect of all of them will also change. Denoting the (normal)
cumulative probability distribution by Φ , then the probit model is defined by:




10
    Glick and Hutchinson (2005) investigated whether capital controls isolated countries from currency
crises. There measure of controls is a zero-one indicator, however.
11
   In the “basic probit” estimation, the error term is assumed to have the standard characteristics.
                                                      10


(3)              Pr( y jt ≠ 0 | ω jt ) = Φ (αω jt )


The marginal effect of a particular variable z1 on the probability may be calculated as the
slope of the probability function, evaluated at a specific set of values of the covariates
ω jt s . Assume that the estimated probit coefficient of z1 is α 1 , and that we want to

evaluate the marginal effect of z1 at a point where covariates have values captured by
vector ω~ . In this case, the marginal effect of z1 (evaluated at ω~ ) is given by:


                  ∂Φ
(4)                   = Φ'(αω~)α 1 .
                  ∂z1


Equation (4) may be used to evaluate how a change in particular variable – a “large”
current account deficit, say – affects the probability of a CFC, under alternative degrees
of capital mobility (captured by different values of ω~ ). In this paper I calculate the
marginal effects of the different covariates for alternative degrees of capital mobility--
high, intermediate and low – and different levels of current account imbalances.
IV.2    Specification
        In determining the specification of this probit model I followed the literature on
external crises, devaluations, sudden stops, and current account reversals.12 In the base-
case specification I included the following covariates, all of which are available for a
large number of countries and years:13
        •    The capital mobility index(es) described above, lagged one period. As
             pointed out, the sign (and magnitude) of this coefficient is at the center of
             current policy debates on the effects of capital mobility. If, as some authors
             such as Stiglitz (2002) have argued, restricting capital mobility reduces the
             likelihood of a crisis, the sign of the capital mobility index would be positive
             for the CM and LMF indexes; for the MI index the coefficient should be
             negative.

12
   See, for example, Calvo et al (2004), Glick and Hutchison (2005), Edwards (2004a, 2004b), and Frankel
and Cavallo (2004). See also Eichengreen et al (2006).
13
   See, for example, Frankel and Rose (1996), Milesi-Ferreti and Razin (2000) and Edwards (2002).
                                                     11


         •   The ratio of the current account deficit to GDP, lagged one period.
         •   The lagged ratio of the country’s fiscal deficit relative to GDP.
         •   The lagged value of an index that measures the (potential) effect of
             “contagion.” This contagion index is defined as the relative occurrence of
             CFCs in each country’s “reference group.” The reference group, in turn, is
             defined for most countries as their region. There are five geographical
             regions: Latin America, Asia, North Africa and the Middle East, Africa and
             Eastern and Central Europe. The advanced countries belong to a group of
             their own. The contagion variable is calculated, for each year, as the
             percentage of countries, in the relevant group, that experienced a CFC. In this
             calculation data for the country in question are excluded. The coefficient of
             this “contagion” variable in the probit equation is expected to be positive,
             reflecting the fact that when a similar country experiences a capital flow
             contraction, capital flows to the country in question will tend to decline,
             increasing the likelihood of a CFC.14 A particularly interesting question – and
             one that I address in some detail in this paper – is how different degrees of
             capital mobility affect a country’s vulnerability to contagion.
         •   Percentage change in the terms of trade (defined as the ratio of export prices
             to import prices), with a one year lag. Improved terms of trade are expected
             to lower the probability of a crisis; its coefficient should be negative.
         •   Lagged international real interest rates, proxied by real U.S. 10 year
             Treasuries. As Eichengreen (2001) has argued, a decline in world liquidity –
             captured by higher international real interest rates – will tend to increase the
             probability of an external crisis. If this is indeed the case, the coefficient of
             this variable will be positive.
         •   A dummy variable that takes the value of one if the country is an “advanced
             country,” and zero otherwise. In some of the regressions I included dummy
             variables for each region.


14
  There are six groups. Five of them are strictly regional – Latin America, Asia, Middle East and North
Africa, Eastern and Central Europe, and Africa --, while the sixth refers to “advanced” nations and, thus,
covers more than a region.
                                               12


        •   A dummy variable that takes the value of one if that particular country has a
            flexible exchange rate regime, and zero otherwise. The classification of
            exchange rate regimes is based on de facto information, as compiled by Levy-
            Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2003).
        •   Foreign direct investment (FDI) relative to GDP. This variable measures the
            composition of capital inflows. To the extent that FDI represents a longer
            term commitment than portfolio capital flows, it is expected that its coefficient
            will be negative.
        •   International reserves as a proportion of the country’s total external liabilities.
            This indicator was constructed from data provided by Lane and Milesi-Ferreti
            (2006). To the extent that a high level of international reserves is seen as an
            insurance policy, the coefficient of this variable is expected to be negative in
            the estimation of the probit equations.


        In addition to the base estimates with the covariates discussed above, I also
estimated a number of regressions that include an index that measures the extent to which
the country is dollarized. If countries subject to “original sin” – that is, countries that are
unable to borrow in their own currency are more prone to experience an abrupt decline in
capital inflows, its coefficient should be positive. The data for this index were taken
from Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano (2003).
        Previous work that has analyzed the effects of financial openness on sudden stops
has found inconclusive results. Edwards (2004, 2005), for instance, found an
insignificant coefficient in the estimation of the probit component of treatment
regressions. However, his measures of capital flows declines were different from those
used in this paper; also, he used a smaller sample, and a different index of capital
mobility from the ones used in this paper. Frankel and Cavallo (2004) found a negative
relationship between openness and the probability of a sudden stop. Calvo et al (2004),
on the other hand, report a positive effect.
IV.3 Basic Results
        The basic results are in Tables 2-4; each table contains the estimates for a
different index of capital mobility. As may be seen, most estimated coefficients are
                                                    13


significant at conventional levels. The capital mobility indexes are statistically
significant in all the equations, and their signs indicate that, with other things given, an
increase in the degree of international financial integration increases the probability of a
CFC. The fact that these results hold for three very different indexes of capital mobility
indicate an important degree of robustness. However, as is discussed in great detail in
Sub-Section IV.4, the quantitative impact of changes in capital mobility on the estimated
probabilities of a CFC is very small small, almost negligible. An important question is
whether different degrees of capital mobility affect the way in which other covariates,
such as contagion, the exchange rate regime and external imbalances, affect the
probability of a CFC.
         The results in Tables 2-4 indicate that a higher current account deficit increases
the probability of a CFC. The results confirm the presence of a “contagion” effect, and
indicate that an improvement in the terms of trade reduces the probability of a CFC.15 As
is discussed below, the actual magnitude of the contagion effect changes with the degree
of capital mobility. The results in Tables 2-4 also show that countries with a flexible
exchange rate regime have a lower probability of experiencing a CFC, as do advanced
nations. More stringent global liquidity – captured by higher international real interest
rates – increases the probability of a CFC. The results in Tables 2-4 also indicate that the
composition of capital flows matter: higher FDI (as a proportion of GDP) reduces the
probability of a CFC. Interestingly, a higher stock of international reserves does not
reduce the likelihood of experiencing a large contraction in net capital inflows.
         In equations (2.6), (3.6), (4.6) the coefficient of the fiscal deficit is significantly
positive, indicating that a higher fiscal imbalance increases the likelihood of a capital
flow contraction. However, when the fiscal variable is introduced jointly with the current
account deficit – equation (2.3), (3.3) and (4.3) --, its coefficient is not significant. As
may be seen, in this case the coefficient of the current account deficit continues to be
positive and significant. This result is rather intuitive: higher fiscal imbalances that are
not associated with a deterioration of the external accounts, do not affect in a significant
way the probability of an abrupt contraction in net capital inflows.

15
  The contagion results contrasts with the findings from Glick and Hutchinson (2005) for currency crises.
Notice, however, that their measure of contagion differs from the one used in this paper. In their case the
contagion indicator is binary.
                                                     14


         Finally, when other covariates, such as the degree of dollarization were
introduced in the probit regression, their coefficients were not significant.16 Since the
coverage of the Miniane index is narrower – both in terms of countries and time period –
than the two other measures of mobility, in the rest of the paper I will concentrate on the
CM and LMF indexes.
IV.4 Evaluating the Marginal Effect of Capital Mobility on the Probability of CFC
         In order to gain further insights into the way in which the different covariates
affect the probability of a CFC, in this Section I report marginal effects computed using
the procedure sketched in equations (3) and (4). I discuss the marginal effects for only
one of the equations reported above -- equation 2.2.17
         As a point of departure for the analysis I evaluated the marginal effects for three
different degrees of capital mobility: low, intermediate, and high. The marginal effects
for “low capital mobility” were evaluated at a value of the Capital Mobility index
corresponding to 12.5; all other independent variables were taken at their mean values.
The results for “intermediate capital mobility” were calculated when all covariates,
including the CM index, were at their mean values; and the marginal effects for “high
capital mobility” were calculated at a value of the CM index of 100, which corresponds to
the 95th percentile of its distribution; as before, all other independent variables were
maintained at their mean values.
         These three sets of marginal effects are reported in Table 5; the bottom row
includes the estimated probability of experiencing a CFC. Several results stand out from
this Table:
     •   According to the probit estimate, a “typical” country – that is a country with
         covariate values equal to the sample mean – has an estimated probability of
         experiencing a CFC of 16.5% (the actual historical incidence of CFC episodes is
         18.8%). This estimated probability increases to 21.6% in a country with a “high”

16
   Detailed results are not reported here due to space considerations. However, they are available on
request.
17
   When alternative equations were used, the results on the marginal effects were similar. This equation
was chosen for calculating the marginal effects because it has the preferred specification and covers a large
number of countries. When the probit regressions with the LMF index were used to evaluate the marginal
effects, the results were also similar. The marginal effects obtained from the probits with the MI index
were somewhat different. This is not surprising, as the MI index is available for a shorter period and a
limited sample of countries.
                                          15


    degree of capital mobility, and declines to 12.3% for a country with a “low”
    degree of capital mobility.
•   The point estimates of the marginal effects for the Capital Mobility indexes are
    very low: according to Column (5.1), when the initial condition is a low degree of
    financial integration, a marginal increase in the CM index raises the probability of
    a CFC by a mere 0.1%. The marginal effect of the CM index barely changes
    when it is evaluated at higher levels of capital mobility. This means that,
    although capital mobility has a statistically significant effect on the probability of
    a CFC, the magnitude of this effect is so small, that it is almost of no practical or
    policy consequence. A potentially more interesting question, and one that I
    discuss below, is whether the marginal effects of other covariates changes for
    different values of the CM index.
•   The effect of moving from a pegged to a flexible exchange rate regime is
    negative, large, and statistically significant. Countries that adopt a flexible
    exchange rate regime reduce the probability of experiencing a CFC between 5.7%
    and 8.4%. What is particularly interesting is that this marginal effect becomes
    more negative with higher degrees of capital mobility. That is, the advantage of
    having a flexible exchange rate increases significantly in countries with a higher
    degree of capital mobility.
•   “Contagion” has a significantly positive marginal effect on the probability of a
    CFC. Point estimates, however, are very small. For a typical country, a one
    percentage point increase in the contagion index, results in an increase in the
    probability of a CFC of only 0.28%. Notice, however, that in spite of its low
    point estimate, the marginal effect of “contagion” increases as the degree of
    financial integration goes up: it is 0.23% for low capital mobility, and 0.33% for
    high mobility. Figure 1 presents the point estimates, as well as one standard
    deviation bands, for the “contagion” marginal effect coefficient corresponding to
    different values of the Capital Mobility index.
•   The marginal effects of current account deficits are significantly positive, but
    small. Moreover, and in contrast with the cases of exchange rate regime and
                                              16


         contagion, the marginal effect of current account deficits don’t experience a
         significant change when the degree of capital mobility increases.
     •   Improvements in the terms of trade reduce the probability of a CFC. At the
         margin, however, the effects are not very large; the marginal effects are very
         similar across different degrees of capital mobility. The p-values are slightly
         higher than the conventional 0.10 level.
     •   A marginal decline in world liquidity – captured by an increase in real world
         interest rates – has a small positive effect on the probability of a CFC. The
         marginal effect is never higher than 1%.
     •   Being an advanced nation reduces the probability of a CFC between 2.5% and
         3.5%.


         To summarize, the results in Table 5 indicate that, although statistically
significant, the direct marginal effect of capital mobility on the probability of a CFC is
very small – almost negligible. This is true for every level of capital mobility. However,
the degree of capital mobility has an important indirect effect on the probability of a
CFC, since it affects the importance of other determinants of this probability. In
particular, the advantage of a flexible exchange rate is higher in countries with a high
degree of capital mobility than in countries with low mobility. The marginal effect of
contagion increases as the degree of capital mobility goes up.
V.       Capital Controls and Macroeconomic Vulnerability
         The results discussed in the previous Section were obtained by evaluating the
marginal effects at the mean values of all covariates, except the Capital Mobility index.
In that regard, these results refer to a “typical country” with different degrees of financial
integration. From a policy perspective, however, a more relevant question is whether
controls on capital mobility reduce the probability of a CFC in vulnerable countries. In
this Section I expand the analysis in order to address this issue. In Sub-Section V.1 I
analyze the relationship between the degree of capital mobility and CFC in countries with
large current account deficits and fixed exchange rates. In V.2 I analyze in greater detail
the role of contagion, and I ask whether the relevant concept of contagion is “regional” or
“global.” In Section V.3 I discuss some extensions, I consider alternative definitions of
                                                     17


capital account disturbances, and I deal with robustness. Finally, in Sub-Section V.4 I
deal with issues related to the specification of the probit equation, and I discuss the
possible role of terms that interact two covariates. Issues related to the possible
endogeneity of the capital mobility indexes are taken up in Section VI.
V.1      Large Current Account Deficits, Capital Mobility, CFCs, Exchange Rate
Regimes and Contagion
         Most emerging countries that suffered major crises during the 1990s and 2000s
had run large current account imbalances. Consider the following cases: In Mexico, the
current account deficit averaged 7% of GDP during 1992-1994; deficits averaged 8.5% in
Thailand during 1995-1996; and in Malaysia they averaged 7% in 1995-1996. The recent
surge in current account deficits in some advanced countries, such as the U.S. and New
Zealand, has generated an interest in analyzing the role of large external imbalances in
episodes of abrupt contractions in capital flows. In order to address this issue I follow a
two-part strategy: First, I evaluate the estimated probability functions reported in Tables
2-4 under two cases of current account imbalances: “Moderate Deficits” (2.0% of GDP)
and “Large Deficits” (9.0% of GDP). This allows me to investigate the way – and
channels – through which large deficits affect the probability of a CFC. In the second
stage I analyze whether these estimates for “Moderate” and “Large” current account
deficits change for two alternative degrees of capital mobility: Low, and High.18
         Table 6 presents the marginal effects and estimated probabilities of a CFC for
countries with Moderate and Large current account deficits.19 As may be seen, the
estimated probability of a CFC increases from 14.3% in the Moderate Deficit case to
21.9% under Large Deficits. Notice that the benefits of a flexible exchange rate regime –
captured by a negative marginal effect – are higher in countries with large current
account deficits. The marginal contribution of the current account deficit itself continues
to be rather small, and it barely increases when moving from the Moderate to the Large
deficits cases (it goes from 1.0% to 1.2%). Contagion continues to play a significantly

18
   I define Low and High mobility as above. I don’t report the results for intermediate mobility in order not
to clutter the analysis with an excessive number of combinations of deficits and capital mobility. On the
effects of large deficits see, for example, Freund and Warnock (2005).
19
   As before these marginal effects were computed using the estimated coefficients from equation (2.2) in
Table 2. “Typical” in this context means that these marginal effects and estimated probabilities have been
evaluated at the mean values of all other covariates.
                                                    18


positive effect. Moreover, its marginal effect increases from 0.25% in the moderate
deficits case, to 0.33% in the large deficits case.
        The results reported in Table 6 are for a “typical” country with an average degree
of capital mobility – the CM index is 56.7. From the perspective of this paper, a
particularly important question is whether the effects of large current account deficits are
different under different degrees of capital mobility. I address this issue by evaluating
the probability function for four cases that combine the level of the current account
deficit (Moderate and Large) with the degree of capital mobility (Low and High).20 The
results obtained are reported in Table 7. As before, the largest marginal effects
correspond to the exchange rate regime variable. Its point estimate reaches the highest
absolute value (9.7%) for the combination “large deficit-high capital mobility.” Its
lowest absolute value (5.4%) is for “moderate deficit-low capital mobility.” Interestingly,
the marginal effects of the capital mobility index don’t change under the different
scenarios; they are 0.1% under all four estimates. On the other hand, the marginal effects
for both contagion and current account imbalances are highest under the “large deficit-
high capital mobility” estimate.
V.2     Contagion: Regional or Global?
        In the results discussed above, “contagion” has a significantly positive effect on
the probability of a CFC. The contagion indicator used in these regressions was
constructed as the proportion of countries in that specific region that had suffered a CFC;
in that regard this is a measure of “regional contagion.” An important question, however,
is whether crises stemming from more distant regions also affect the probability of a
CFC. In order to address this issue I included in the regressions a second contagion
variable as the incidence in CFCs (in that particular year) in other regions; I call this
variable “Contagion Other.” If contagion from distant places is an important determinant
of the probability of a CFC, its estimated coefficient would be significantly positive. The
results obtained when this variable is added to the analysis are reported in Table 8, and
indicate that once the incidence of “regional contagion” is taken into account, other crises



20
  As before low capital mobility is defined as a value of the CM index of 12.5; High capital mobility
corresponds to a value of the CM index at the 95th percentile (100).
                                                    19


– or non-regional contagion -- play no role in determining the probability of CFC. This
suggests that contagion is a regional phenomenon.
V.3     Robustness and Extensions
        I performed standard robustness tests. These included estimating the equations
for alternative time periods, and alternative data sets. I also considered alternative
specifications, and included additional variables that (potentially) capture the extent of
external imbalances. Instrumental variables estimates are discussed in Section VI. In the
rest of this Sub-Section I discuss in detail some of the robustness tests performed.
        (A) Alternative Samples: As an illustration of the degree of robustness of these
results, in Table 9 I report variance component probit estimates for two sub-samples:
emerging countries and “large” countries.21 As may be seen, the results support the main
conclusions that emerge from the analysis presented above.
        (B) Net International Investment Position: The results discussed above were
obtained with a specification that considers the current account deficit as the fundamental
measure of external imbalances; these results don’t control for the country’s initial net
international investment position (NIIP). When the value of the initial NIIP to GDP ratio
was included as an additional regressor its coefficient was negative, as expected,
indicating that a more positive NIIP would tend to reduce the probability of a CFC.
However, the coefficient for this variable was statistically insignificant; see column 1 in
Table 10. Moreover, its inclusion did not affect in any way the analysis on marginal
effects on probabilities.
        (C) CFCs with Windows: In this paper a capital flow contraction episode takes
place if net capital flows decline by more than 3% of GD in a particular year. In
constructing the CFC variable I did not use “windows” with no observations around each
CFC; if capital flows declined by more than 3% of GDP for two years in a row, two
successive CFCs were recorded. As a way of further testing the robustness of the results,
I re-estimated the variance component probit model using a CFC index constructed with
a one year window. The results obtained are reports in column 2 of Table 10. As may be
seen, the results support the main conclusions of the previous analysis.


21
 Large countries are defined as those countries that in 1995 had a GDP in the top 25 percent of the global
GDP distribution.
                                                    20


        (D) CFCs with Alternative Thresholds: As an additional robustness test I also
considered alternative definitions of CFC. In particular, I re-estimated the probits when a
CFC was defined as being a 4% or 5% reduction in capital inflows in one year. The
results obtained – available on request – are similar to those reported here.
        (E) Sudden Stops as the Dependent Variable: Throughout this paper the variable
of interest has been capital flow contractions (CFCs), a very broad measure of capital
changes in the capital account. An interesting question is how the results look like when
the more traditional concept of “sudden stops” is used as the dependent variable. The
results obtained when the definition of sudden stops given in Section II of this paper was
used, are reported in the third column of Table 10.22 As may be seen, the most important
findings from the previous analysis still hold: the coefficients of the vast majority of
covariates – including the capital mobility index, the current account deficit, contagion,
the exchange rate regime and the foreign direct investment ratio – have the expected sign
and are statistically significant.
V.4     Alternative Specification of the Probit Equation: Multiplicative Covariates
        In the probit specification used in the preceding Sections all covariates entered on
their own. Alternatively, some of the covariates could enter interactively. This
specification would provide information on the cross effect of one of the covariates on the
probability of a CFC. Consider the following simple case where y is a dummy variable
and the x i are covariates:


(5)               y = β 1 x1 + β 2 x 2 + β 3 x1 x 2 + ε tj .


The cross effect, which measures how a small change in x 2 affects the marginal effect of
x1 on the probability of y , is given by:




22
  Sudden Stops are defined as an abrupt reduction of capital inflows in a country previously receiving
massive amount of capital. In this paper the capital inflows reduction has to exceed 3% of GDP to classify
as a SS. Other papers, such as Edwards (2005), define SS as a reduction in capital flows in excess of 5% of
GDP.
                                                          21



                     ∂ 2 Φ(⋅)
(6)                           = β 3 Φ '(⋅) + ( β 1 + β 3 x 2 )( β 2 + β 3 x1 )Φ''(⋅).
                     ∂x1 x 2


Where, as in equation (3), Φ is the normal cumulative distribution; Φ'and Φ''are the
first and second derivatives of Φ , evaluated at given values of the covariates. Several
interesting results emerge from this expression. First, the cross marginal effect is not the
same as the marginal effect of the interactive term. Indeed, the marginal effect of
                            (⋅) , which is only the first term in (6).23 Second, even if the
( x1 x 2 ) is given by β 3Φ '

coefficient of the interactive variable β 3 is equal to zero, the cross effect in equation (4)
will be different from zero. Third, the actual magnitude of the cross effect will depend on
                                                                                            ∂ 2Φ (⋅)
the values of the x1 and x 2 covariates. Fourth, the sign of the cross effect                        may be
                                                                                             ∂x1 x2

different from the sign of the regression coefficient for the interactive term ( x1 x 2 ) .
           From the inspection of equation (5) it is easy to see that, in the presence of an
interactive term, the marginal effect of x1 will be different than in the more standard case
when there are no interactive terms (This, of course, is also the case for the marginal
effect of x 2 ). When there is an interactive effect, we have:


                     ∂Φ
(7)                      = Φ '(⋅)( β 1 + β 3 x 2 ) .
                     ∂x1


           I estimated a number of fixed effects probit equations that included terms that
interacted capital mobility and other covariates. The results obtained confirmed those
reported above: the marginal effects of all the covariates have the expected signs and the
vast majority are statistically significant. As an illustration, in Table 11 I present the
marginal and cross effects from equations where I interacted the CM capital mobility
index and the contagion variable. In addition to CM and contagion I included the
following covariates: current account deficit, exchange rate regime, changes in the terms
of trade, world real interest rates, the FDI to GDP ratio, and regional dummies (the results

23
     See Ali and Norton (2003) for a discussion on the role of interactive terms in probit analyses.
                                                    22


presented in Table 11, however, are restricted to the variables of interest). The marginal
and cross effects were evaluated for three sets of values for the capital mobility index:
Low mobility (CM=12.5), Intermediate mobility (CM=56), High mobility (CM=100).
All other covariates were set at their median values. As may be seen, the results confirm
that the direct marginal effects of capital mobility and contagion are positive, statistically
significant and small. In addition, the direct effect of contagion increases as the capital
                                                                                          ∂ 2Φ (⋅)
account becomes more open. These results also show that the cross effect                           is
                                                                                           ∂x1 x2
positive and very small, suggesting that a marginal increase in capital mobility increases
the marginal effect of contagion by a very small amount. Although z-statistics are
greater than one, their p-values are higher than the customary .90 threshold.
VI.      Instrumental Variable Estimates
         As a number of authors have documented, international financial integration has
increased significantly during the last decade and a half. However, these changes in the
extent of capital mobility have not been linear. Indeed, there is evidence that, beyond the
general trend towards liberalization, countries tend to alter the severity of capital controls
for a number of political and economic reasons.24 More specifically, countries that face
external payments difficulties have tended to introduce restrictions on capital mobility.
This means that it is possible that the capital mobility indexes used in this paper are
endogenous, and jointly determined with (future) capital flow contractions.25 In order to
address this potential endogeneity issue I estimated the probit equation using maximum
likelihood instrumental variables procedure suggested by Amemiya (1978).26
         In determining the instruments I relied on several findings from the empirical
literature on capital controls: (1) Capital mobility and trade openness are highly
correlated. This suggests that an exogenous measure of trade openness is a good




24
   See, for example, the discussion in Alessina and Milesi-Ferreti (1994) for an early discussion on this
subject.
25
   Although lagged capital mobility is a pre-determined variable, it may still be jointly determined with
sudden stops if the error term ε in equation (2) is autoregressive.
26
   The identifying restrictions is that the number of instruments excluded from the main equation is equal
or greater than the number of endogenous variables.
                                                    23


instrument for capital mobility.27 (2) Political considerations also play an important role
in determining the extent of capital restrictions. (3) More advanced countries tend to rely
less on capital controls. (4) Some countries respond to exogenous external shocks – such
as changes in the terms of trade or in world (real) interest rates – by adjusting the degree
of capital mobility. Based on these considerations, in the instrumental variables
estimation the following instruments were used: a measure of trade openness, obtained as
the fitted value from a gravity model of bilateral trade; the lagged contagion indicator in
other regions; a measure of civil liberties, as a proxy for political instability; lagged
change in the terms of trade; twice lagged current account balance; lagged (real) world
interest rates; the log of GDP per capita in 1970; and regional dummies. The results
obtained from the instrumental variables probit estimates are reported in Table 13. The
estimations reported are both for the complete sample as well as for an emerging
countries only sample (where the z-tests were computed with robust standard errors).
         As may be seen from Table 12, the results obtained are similar to those reported
in Tables 2 and 3. Coefficients continue to have the same signs and are most are
statistically significant. Moreover, the estimated marginal effects support the conclusions
reached above: increased capital results in a very small and significant increase in the
probability of a CFC. Countries that adopt a flexible exchange rate see a significant
reduction in their probability of experiencing a CFC. Contagion has a positive and
significant effect on the probability of CFC.
VII.     Concluding Remarks
         Previous works on restrictions on capital mobility and sudden declines in capital
flows have been inconclusive: while some studies have found that higher mobility
increases the probability of an abrupt decline in capital flows, others have failed to detect
a significant connection between these two variables. In contrast, the results presented in
this paper indicate that higher capital mobility has a positive, statistically significant and
small direct effect on the probability of a country experiencing an abrupt contraction of
net capital inflows. Two factors explain these differences in results: first, in this paper I
have focused on rather broad definitions of capital account contractions, while previous

27
   As Aizenman and Noy (2004) have shown, there is a strong empirical connection between trade
openness and the degree of capital mobility. The use of gravity trade equations to generate instruments in
panel estimation has been pioneered by Jeff Frankel. See, for example, Frankel and Cavallo (2004).
                                              24


papers have tended to focus on more stringent (and thus less frequent) situations of
sudden stops. Second, in this paper I use more general and complete indexes of capital
mobility. In principle these indexes capture better the granularity and texture of capital
account restrictions across countries.
       It is important, however, not to exaggerate the implications of the findings
reported in this paper. Indeed, although the direct effects of capital mobility on the
probability of capital account contractions are significantly positive, they are
quantitatively very small. The point estimate of the marginal effects of capital mobility
on the probability of a CFC is approximately 0.1%, and very stable for different values of
the vector of covariates.
       Although the direct effect of capital mobility on the probability of CFCs is small,
there is a fairly important indirect effect. This is particularly the case for the exchange
rate regime. The marginal effect a adopting a flexible rate regime on the probability of a
CFC is more negative – and always significant -- for higher degrees of capital mobility.
The marginal effect of contagion is significantly negative, and increases with the degree
of capital mobility. The point estimates are rather small, however.
       The results reported in this paper also indicate that a higher current account deficit
results in a higher probability of a capital flow contraction, while a higher ratio of FDI to
GDP reduces that probability. Lower worldwide liquidity increases the probability, and
being an advanced country reduces that probability.
       Finally, it is important to reiterate that the results reported here only cover one
aspect of the debate on capital mobility and financial integration – whether controls affect
the probability of facing a CFC, and the channels through which these effects take place.
A complete analysis of the welfare implications of restricting capital mobility would also
focus on other consequences and costs of these policies, including its effect on
investment, productivity growth, governance, transparency and microeconomic
distortions. Such a study is beyond the scope of this paper.
                                                25


                                          Appendix
                                    Description of the Data

Variable               Definition                                Source
Indexes of capital     Indexes                                   Author’s construction based on
mobility                                                         indexes of capital restrictions
                                                                 computed by Quinn (2003) and
                                                                 Mody and Murshid (2002), and
                                                                 on country specific data, Lane
                                                                 and Milesi-Ferreti (2006) and
                                                                 Miniane (2004)

Capital flow           Reduction in net capital flows of at      Author’s construction based on
contractions (CFC)     least 3% of GDP in one year. Initial      data of current account deficit
                       condition could be one of positive or     (World Development Indicators)
                       negative net flows.

Sudden Stop            Reduction of net capital inflows of at    Author’s construction based on
                       least 3% of GDP in one year. The          data of financial account (World
                       country in question must have             Development Indicators)
                       received an inflow of capital larger to
                       its region’s third quartile during the
                       previous two years prior to the
                       “sudden stop.”

Change in terms of     Change in terms of trade-exports as       World Development Indicators
trade                  capacity to import (constant LCU)

Reserves to            Net international reserves over total     Constructed from data in Lane
Liabilities            external liabilities                      and Milesi-Ferreti (2006)

Exchange Rate          Takes a value of one if the de facto      Levy-Yeyati and Stuzenegger
Regime                 regime is flexible                        (2003)

Contagion              Incidence of CFCs in the country’s        Constructed by author.
                       region or reference group

FDI to GDP             Ratio of FDI to GDP                       World Development Indicators

World interest rates   Real US Treasury notes rates              Computed from data obtained
                                                                 from the IFS

Current account to     Measured as a deficit                     World Development Indicators
GDP
                                              26




       FIGURE 1: MARGINAL EFFECT OF CONTAGION COEFFICIENT
       FOR DIFFERENT VALUES OF THE CAPITAL MOBILITY INDEX



0.45

 0.4

0.35


 0.3

0.25

 0.2

0.15


 0.1
         0      10      20    30        40         50     60       70        80     90     100

             "-One Std Dev"        "Contagion" Marginal Effect Coefficient        "+One Std Dev"
                                                 27


                                                Table 1
                             Title: Incidence of Sudden Stops, 1970-2004


                                         CAPITAL FLOW                          SUDDEN STOPS
                                        CONTRACTIONS
                                     No CFC         CFC                    No Sudden   Sudden Stops
                                                                             Stops

Industrial Countries                 0.8852             0.1148              0.9438       0.0562
Latin American and Caribbean         0.7801             0.2199              0.8883       0.1117
Asia                                 0.8634             0.1366              0.9317       0.0683
Africa                               0.8003             0.1997              0.9198       0.0802
Middle East                          0.7426             0.2574              0.8713       0.1287
Eastern Europe                       0.7561             0.2439              0.8943

Total                                0.8118             0.1882              0.9128       0.0872

Observations                          2030                                                2030
Pearson
              Uncorrected χ2(5)      27.9304                                             13.3663
        Design-based F(5,18210)       5.5833                                             2.61719
                        p-value       0.0000                                              0.0203
                                                       28


                                              Table 2
               Random Effect Probit Estimates for Capital flow contractions, 1970-2004:
                 Capital Mobility (CM) Index of International Financial Integration


                                Eq.(2.1)      Eq.(2.2)       Eq.(2.3)     Eq.(2.4)    Eq.(2.5)      Eq.(2.6)

CAD to GDP                        0.036         0.042           0.043        0.051       0.043         --
                                (9.4) ***   (9.12) ***      (7.23) ***    (9.28)***   (7.18)***
Contagion                         0.008         0.011           0.011        .0011       0.014        0.009
                                (2.53) **   (3.04) ***      (2.61) ***    (2.92)***   (3.36)***    (2.37) **
Terms of Trade Change            -0.003        -0.003          -0.003       -0.003      -0.003       -0.005
                                (-1.69) *      (-1.58)        (-1.06)      (-1.29)     (-1.34)     (-2.16) **
Advanced                         -0.225        -0.122          -0.126       -0.159      -0.092       -0.318
                                (-1.94) *      (-0.95)          (-0.9)     (-1.14)     (-0.65)     (-2.27) **
Capital Mobility                  0.005         0.004           0.004        0.006       0.005        0.004
                               (3.07) ***    (2.41) **       (2.24) **    (2.96)***   (2.42)***     (2.05) **
World Interest Rate               0.033         0.035           0.040        0.035       0.024        0.032
                                (2.29) **     (1.89) *       (1.98) **     (1.85)*     (1.91)*        (1.61)
Flexible                            --         -0.304          -0.283       -0.296      -0.338       -0.301
                                            (-3.37) ***     (-2.95) ***   (-3.2)***   (-3.5)***   (-3.17) ***
Fiscal Deficit to GDP              --             --            0.008          --          --         0.021
                                                               (1.03)                             (2.86) ***
FDI to GDP                         --            --               --        -0.032        --            --
                                                                          (-3.5)***
Reserves to Liabilities            --            --             --             --      0.001           --
                                                                                       (0.19)

Log – Likelihood               -1389.30       -895.82        -726.59      -855.229    -745.048      -754.69
σν                               0.315         0.225          0.262         0.283       0.278        0.279
ρ                                0.090         0.048          0.064         0.074       0.072        0.072
Likelihood-ratio test of ρ
=0                               0.000         0.008          0.003        0.000        0.001        0.001
(p - value)

Number of Observations           3009           2030           1671         1974        1179         1671
Number of Countries               150            136            121          130         115          121

     Absolute value of z statistics is reported in parentheses. All regressors are one period lagged.
     Constant term is included, but not reported. *** significant at 1%; ** significant at 5%; * significant
     at 10%. ρ is σ2ν /( σ2ν + 1).
                                                       29


                                              Table 3
               Random Effect Probit Estimates for Capital flow contractions, 1970-2004:
                         LMF Index of International Financial Integration


                                Eq.(3.1)       Eq.(3.2)      Eq.(3.3)     Eq.(3.4)     Eq.(3.5)     Eq.(3.6)

CAD to GDP                        0.033         0.041           0.046       0.049        0.042         --
                               (6.82) ***    (7.05) ***      (6.2) ***   (7.33)***    (7.05)***
Contagion                         0.009         0.013           1.268       0.013        0.013         0.012
                               (2.72) ***     (3.3) ***     (2.97) ***   (3.04)***    (3.32)***    (2.87) ***
Terms of Trade Change            -0.002        -0.003          -0.001      -0.002       -0.002        -0.003
                                 (-0.89)       (-1.23)        (-0.37)     (-0.89)      (-1.22)       (-1.19)
Advanced                         -0.126         0.035           0.052       0.008        0.041        -0.125
                                 (-1.07)        (0.27)         (0.38)      (0.06)       (0.32)       (-0.95)
LMF                               0.061         0.043           0.047       0.002        0.001         0.041
                               (3.42) ***     (2.12) **      (2.23) **   (2.87)***    (2.17)***     (2.05) **
World Interest Rate               0.028         0.018           0.028       0.017        0.019         0.021
                                 (1.8) *         (0.9)         (1.28)      (0.80)       (0.96)        (1.00)
Flexible                            --         -0.332          -0.311       0.319        0.331        -0.313
                                             (-3.4) ***      (-3.1)***   (-3.3)***    (-3.4)***     (-3.1)***
Fiscal Deficit to GDP               --             --           0.005         --           --          0.019
                                                               (0.54)                               (2.09) **
FDI to GDP                         --             --              --       -0.029         --             --
                                                                         (-2.8)***
Reserves to Liabilities             --            --            --            --        0.001          --
                                                                                        (0.47)


Log – Likelihood                -1155.83       -745.92       -640.02      -722.296    -745.814      -661.23
σν                                0.343         0.267         0.297         0.307       0.265        0.286
ρ                                 0.105         0.066         0.081         0.086       0.086        0.065
Likelihood-ratio test of ρ
=0                                0.000         0.002         0.001        0.001        0.001        0.001
(p - value)

Number of Observations            2620          1769          1528          1743        1769          1528
Number of Countries                126           115           105           111         115           105

     Absolute value of z statistics is reported in parentheses. All regressors are one period lagged.
     Constant term is included, but not reported. *** significant at 1%; ** significant at 5%; * significant
     at 10%. ρ is σ2ν /( σ2ν + 1).
                                                        30


                                              Table 4
               Random Effect Probit Estimates for Capital flow contractions, 1970-2004:
                          MI Index of International Financial Integration


                                 Eq.(4.1)     Eq.(4.2)       Eq.(4.3)      Eq.(4.3)     Eq.(4.3)     Eq.(4.6)

CAD to GDP                         0.043         0.051          0.050        0.052       0.060          --
                                 (1.94) *     (2.00) **       (1.95) *     (2. 5) **   (2. 4) **
Contagion                          0.011         0.017          0.016        0.017       0.018        0.014
                                   (1.2)         (1.64)        (1.59)       (1.67)*     (1.75)*       (1.36)
Terms of Trade Change              0.017         0.009          0.008        0.006       0.006        0.005
                                 (1.77) *        (0.79)        (0.72)        (0.77)      (0.57)       (0.45)
Advanced                          -0.650        -0.592         -0.596        -0.585     -0.565       -0.674
                                 (-1.84) *     (-1.65) *      (-1.63)*     (-1.77)*    (-1.71)*     (-1.86) *
Miniane Index                     -0.922        -0.961         -0.988        -0.911     -1.331       -0.886
                                (-1.98) **     (-1.89) *      (-1.9) *      (-1.8) *   (-2.6) **    (-1.72) *
World Interest Rate               -0.020        -0.017         -0.015        -0.018      0.057       -0.014
                                   (-0.3)       (-0.24)        (-0.22)      (-0.26)      (0.57)       (-0.2)
Flexible                             --         -0.590         -0.584        -0.590     -0.579       -0.515
                                              (-2.7) ***     (-2.7) ***   (-2.8) ***   (-2.8) **    (-2.4) **
Fiscal Deficit to GDP               --             --          0.0001           --         --        -0.003
                                                                (0.01)                               (-0.14)
FDI to GDP                          --            --              --        0.013          --           --
                                                                            (0.50)
Reserves to Liabilities             --            --             --           --         0.046          --
                                                                                        (1.85) *


Log – Likelihood                 181.15        -147.95        -146.35      -147.83      -140.75      -148.30
σν                                0.557         0.471          0.454        0.458        0.342        0.455
ρ                                 0.237         0.182          0.171        0.174        0.105        0.172
Likelihood-ratio test of ρ =0
                                  0.000         0.002          0.006        0.004        0.040        0.005
(p - value)

Number of Observations             516           448            423          448          448          423
Number of Countries                 30            30             28           30           30           28

     Absolute value of z statistics is reported in parentheses. All regressors are one period lagged.
     Constant term is included, but not reported. *** significant at 1%; ** significant at 5%; * significant
     at 10%. ρ is σ2ν / (σ2ν + 1).
                                                31


                                            Table 5
            Marginal Effects and Predicted Probabilities of Capital flow contractions
                        Under Alternative Degrees of Capital Mobility


                                           Low              Intermediate             High
                                      Capital Mobility     Capital Mobility     Capital Mobility

                                           Eq.(5.1)             Eq.(5.2)             Eq.(5.3)

 CAD to GDP                                  0.009                0.010                0.012
                                         (7.00) ***           (9.03) ***           (7.88) ***
 Contagion                                 0.00229              0.00279              0.00329
                                         (2.96) ***           (3.04) ***           (2.97) ***
 Terms of Trade Change                      -0.001               -0.001               -0.001
                                            (-1.57)              (-1.58)              (-1.56)
 Advanced                                   -0.024               -0.029               -0.035
                                            (-1.03)              (-0.99)              (-0.96)
 Capital Mobility                            0.001                0.001                0.001
                                         (3.08) ***            (2.42) **            (2.11) **
 World Interest Rate                         0.007                0.009                 0.01
                                           (1.87) *             (1.89) *             (1.88) *
 Flexible                                   -0.057                -0.07               -0.084
                                         (-3.40) ***          (-3.63) ***          (-3.54) ***


 Predicted Probability                      0.123                0.165                0.216

For details on the computations in each column, see the text. Absolute value of z statistics are
reported in parentheses. Sample means are: 4.3 for current account deficit to GDP, 0.196 for
contagion, 4.3 for changes in terms of trade, 0.21 for advance, 2.06 for world interest rate and 0.263
for flex. Capital mobility is set at 12.5, 56 and 100 in Eq.(5.1), Eq.(5.2) and Eq.(5.3) respectively.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                                32



                                          Table 6
          Marginal Effects and Predicted Probabilities of Capital flow contractions
                 Under Alternative levels of the Current Account Deficit


                                                        Moderate        Large
                                                        Deficits       Deficits

                                                        Eq.(6.1)       Eq.(6.2)

                 CAD to GDP                                 0.009         0.012
                                                        (9.86) ***    (7.97) ***
                 Contagion                                0.00253       0.00331
                                                        (3.04) ***    (3.04) ***
                 Terms of Trade Change                    -0.001*       -0.001*
                                                           (-1.57)       (-1.58)
                 Advanced                                  -0.027        -0.035
                                                           (-0.99)       (-0.99)
                 Capital Mobility                           0.001         0.001
                                                         (2.41) **     (2.41) **
                 World Interest Rate                        0.008         0.010
                                                          (1.89) *      (1.89) *
                 Flexible                                  -0.063        -0.085
                                                       (-3.63) ***   (-3.61) ***


                 Predicted Probability                    0.143         0.219

For details on the computations in each column, see the text. Absolute value of z statistics are
reported in parentheses. Sample means are: 0.196 for contagion, 4.3 for changes in terms of trade,
0.21 for advance, 56.7 for capital mobility, 2.06 for world interest rate and 0.263 for flex. Current
account deficit to GDP is set at 2.0 in Eq.(6.1) and 9.0 in Eq.(6.2). * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                                  33


                                         Table 7
         Marginal Effects and Predicted Probabilities of Capital flow contractions
       Under Alternative Degrees of Capital Mobility and of Current Account Deficits


                                                   Moderate                         Large
                                                   Deficits                        Deficits

                                             Low            High           Low            High
                                            Capital        Capital        Capital        Capital
                                            Mobility       Mobility       Mobility       Mobility

                                            Eq.(7.1)       Eq.(7.2)       Eq.(7.3)        Eq.(7.4)
                      `
   CAD to GDP                                  0.008          0.011         0.011           0.014
                                           (8.25) ***     (8.08) ***     (7.3) ***      (7.63) ***
   Contagion                                 0.00217        0.00303       0.00295         0.00376
                                           (3.00) ***     (2.96) ***    (3.02) ***      (2.99) ***
   Terms of Trade Change                      -0.001         -0.001        -0.001          -0.001
                                              (-1.57)        (-1.56)       (-1.58)         (-1.57)
   Advanced                                   -0.023         -0.032        -0.031           -0.04
                                              (-1.02)        (-0.96)       (-1.01)         (-0.96)
   Capital Mobility                            0.001          0.001         0.001           0.001
                                            (2.88) ***     (2.08) **    (2.74) ***       (2.17) **
   World Interest Rate                         0.007          0.009         0.009           0.012
                                             (1.88) *       (1.87) *      (1.89) *        (1.88) *
   Flexible                                   -0.054         -0.077        -0.075          -0.097
                                           (-3.48) ***    (-3.53) ***   (-3.54) ***     (-3.54) ***


   Predicted Probability                      0.114          0.188         0.181              0.278

For details on the computations in each column, see the text. Absolute value of z statistics are
reported in parentheses. Sample means are: 0.196 for contagion, 4.3 for changes in terms of trade,
0.21 for advance, 2.06 for world interest rate and 0.263 for flex. Current account deficit to GDP is
set at 2.0 in Eq.(7.1) and Eq.(7.2), and at 9.0 in Eq.(7.3) and Eq.(7.4). Capital Mobility is set at 25 in
Eq.(7.1) and Eq.(7.3), and at 100 in Eq.(7.2) and Eq.(7.4). * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
*** significant at 1%
                                                  34


                                         Table 8
          Random Effect Probit Estimates for Capital flow contractions, 1970-2004,
           Under Two Alternative Definitions of Contagion (Regional and Other)



                                                         Eq.(8.1)       Eq.(8.2)

                  CAD to GDP                                0.042        0.0414
                                                        (9.11) ***    (7.05) ***
                  Contagion Regional                       0.0117        0.0136
                                                        (3.15) ***    (3.34) ***
                  Contagion Other                         -0.8235       -0.4102
                                                           (-1.23)       (-0.58)
                  Terms of Trade Change                    -0.003       -0.0025
                                                           (-1.59)       (-1.23)
                  Advanced                                -0.0999        0.0469
                                                           (-0.77)        (0.36)
                  World Interest Rate                      0.0431        0.0221
                                                         (2.19) **        (1.04)
                  Flexible                                -0.3055       -0.3323
                                                        (-3.38) ***   (-3.44) ***
                  Capital Mobility                         0.0044           --
                                                         (2.45) **
                  LMF                                         --        0.0429
                                                                       (2.14) **

                  Log – Likelihood                      -895.0618      -745.7535
                  σν                                      0.227          0.267
                  ρ                                       0.049          0.067
                  Likelihood-ratio test of ρ =0
                  (p - value)                              0.007         0.002

                  Number of Observations                   2030          1769
                  Number of Countries                       136           115

Absolute value of z statistics is reported in parentheses. All regressors are one period lagged.
Constant term is included, but not reported. *** significant at 1%; ** significant at 5%; * significant
at 10%. ρ is σ2ν / (σ2ν + 1).
                                                 35


                                        Table 9
         Random Effect Probit Estimates for Capital flow contractions, 1970-2004,
    For Alternative Samples: Emerging (and Transition) Countries and Large Countries


                                            Emerging Countries             Large Countries

                                           Eq.(9.1)      Eq. (9.2)      Eq. (9.3)     Eq. (9.4)

   CAD to GDP                                 0.043        0.043          0.046          0.05
                                          (9.20) ***    (7.10) ***     (2.92) ***    (3.16) ***
   Contagion                                 0.0119       0.0142         0.0139        0.0152
                                          (3.13) ***    (3.37) ***      (2.21) **     (2.39) **
   Terms of Trade Change                     -0.004       -0.003          0.001         0.001
                                           (-1.86) *      (-1.49)         (0.19)        (0.17)
   World Interest Rate                        0.036        0.016          0.043         0.033
                                            (1.75) *       (0.72)         (1.37)        (1.03)
   Flexible                                  -0.236       -0.274         -0.332        -0.326
                                          (-2.35) **    (-2.49) **     (-2.36) **    (-2.33) **
   Advanced                                     --           --          -0.281        -0.152
                                                                         (-1.39)       (-0.91)
   Capital Mobility                         0.005            --           0.005           --
                                          (2.60) ***                      (1.54)
   LMF                                        --           0.036            --          0.132
                                                          (1.70) *                    (2.32) **

   Log – Likelihood                        -746.69        -598.62       -300.37        -294.57
   σν                                       0.190          0.254         0.299          0.257
   ρ                                        0.035          0.061         0.082          0.062
   Likelihood-ratio test of ρ =0
   (p - value)                              0.051          0.010         0.020          0.072

   Number of Observations                   1603           1342           789            783
   Number of Countries                       115            94             43             42

Absolute value of z statistics is reported in parentheses. All regressors are one period lagged.
Constant term is included, but not reported. *** significant at 1%; ** significant at 5%; * significant
at 10%. ρ is σ2ν /(σ2ν + 1).
                                                 36


                                         Table 10
Random Effect Probit Estimates for Capital flow contractions and Sudden Stops, 1970-2004:
                    Alternative Definitions of Capital Flows Declines



                                                          Dependent Variable:
                                               CFC             CFC
                                                            w/windows Sudden Stops
                                                  Eq.(10.1)   Eq.(10.2)    Eq.(10.3)


         CAD to GDP                             0.051             0.052           0.071
                                             (6.89)***        (8.23) ***      (10.04) ***
         Contagion Regional                     0.013            0.0116          0.0105
                                             (3.24)***        (2.77) ***       (2.15) **
         Terms of Trade Change                  -0.002           -0.003         -0.0025
                                               (-1.01)           (-1.00)         (-1.01)
         Advanced                                -0.92          -0.0835           0.195
                                               (-0.61)           (-0.55)          (1.11)
         World Interest Rate                    0.022            0.0238          0.0221
                                               (1.70)*          (1.88) *          (1.04)
         Flexible                               -0.323          -0.3161         -0.3323
                                             (-3.31)***       (-3.08) ***     (-3.44) ***
         Capital Mobility                        0.006             0.0053           0.005
                                              (2.86)***         (2.47) ***        (2.00)**
         NIIP                                   -0.001                --              --
                                               (-0.97)
         FDI to GDP                                --             -0.306         -0.002
                                                                (-3.23)***     (-2.73)***

         Log – Likelihood                    -721.785           -716.252        -484.350
         σν                                    0.327              0.315           0.334
         ρ                                     0.097              0.090           0.100
         Likelihood-ratio test of ρ =0
         (p - value)                           0.000              0.000           0.002

         Number of Observations                 1743              1663            1974
         Number of Countries                     111               130             130

Absolute value of z statistics is reported in parentheses. All regressors are one period lagged.
Constant term is included, but not reported. *** significant at 1%; ** significant at 5%; * significant
at 10%. ρ is σ2ν / (σ2ν + 1).
                                                37


                                          Table 11
             Marginal and Cross Effects of Capital flow contractions Equations
             with Interactive Covariates: Alternative Degrees of Capital Mobility


                                           Low              Intermediate             High
                                      Capital Mobility     Capital Mobility     Capital Mobility

                                          Eq.(11.1)            Eq.(11.2)            Eq.(11.3)

 Capital Mobility                            0.001               0.001                0.001
                                          (3.17) ***           (2.51) **            (2.24) **
 Contagion                                   0.001              0.0025                0.0054
                                           (2.73) **           (2.39) **             (2.52) *
 Cross Effect                              0.000041             0.00004              0.00006
                                             (1.61)              (1.09)               (1.56)


 Predicted Probability                      0.125                0.164                0.208

For details on the computations in each column, see the text. Absolute value of z statistics are
reported in parentheses. Sample means are: 4.3 for current account deficit to GDP, 0.196 for
contagion, 4.3 for changes in terms of trade, 0.21 for advance, 2.06 for world interest rate and 0.263
for flex. Capital mobility is set at 12.5, 56 and 100 in Eq.(5.1), Eq.(5.2) and Eq.(5.3) respectively.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                                 38


                                        Table 12
          Random Effect Probit Estimates for Capital flow contractions, 1970-2004,
                     Results from Instrumental Variables (IVPROB)

                                               All Countries              Emerging Countries

                                          Eq.(12.1)     Eq.( 12.2)     Eq.( 12.3)     Eq.( 12.4)

  CA to GDP                                 0.048          0.049           0.045         0.048
                                         (8.57) ***     (8.34) ***     (6.50) ***     (6.33) ***
  Contagion                                0.0131         0.0129         0.0125         0.0145
                                         (3.31) ***     (3.17) ***     (3.36) ***     (3.37) ***
  World Interest Rate                       0.027          0.027           0.004         0.005
                                            (1.45)         (1.25)          (0.2)         (0.23)
  Terms of Trade Change                     -0.004        -0.005          -0.003        -0.004
                                           (-1.62)      (-2.13) **       (-1.04)        (-1.45)
  Flexible                                  -0.362        -0.236          -0.306        -0.239
                                         (-3.99) ***    (-2.21) **     (-3.28) ***    (-2.15) **
  Capital Mobility                          0.006          0.012             --            --
                                          (2.24) **      (2.16) **
  LMF                                          --            --          0.173          0.132
                                                                       (3.78) ***     (2.97) ***



  Number of Observations                    1735           1308           1590           1163

Absolute value of z statistics is reported in parentheses. All regressors are one period lagged.
Constant term is included, but not reported. *** significant at 1%; ** significant at 5%; * significant
at 10%. For the list of instruments, see the text.
                                           39


                                    REFERENCES
Aizenman, Joshua and Ilan Noy. 2004. “On the Two Way Feedback Between Financial
   and Trade Openness,” NBER Working Paper No. 10496.
Aizenman, Joshua and Jaewoo Lee, 2005. "International Reserves: Precautionary versus
   Mercantilist Views, Theory and Evidence," NBER Working Papers No. 11366
   (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research)
Alesina, Alberto; Vittorio Grilli and Gian-Maria Milesi, 1994. “ The Political Economy
   of Capital Controls,” in L. Leiderman and A. Razin, (eds.): Capital Mobility: The
   Impact on Consumption, Investment and Growth.. Cambridge, New York and
   Melbourne: Cambridge University Press, 289-321
Ai, Chunrong and Edward C. Norton. 2003. “Interaction Terms in logit and probit
   models,” Economics Letters, 80, 123-129.
Amemiya, Takeshi, 1978. “The Estimation of a Simultaneous Equation Generalized
   Probit Model,” Econometrica, Vol. 46(5), pp. 1193-1205.
Bekaert, Geert and Campbell R. Harvey, 1995. "Time-Varying World Integration,"
   Journal of Finance, 50(2), pp: 403- 444.
Bekaert, Geert and Campbell R. Harvey, 2000. "Capital Flows and the Behavior of
   Emerging Equity Market Returns," S. Edwards (ed.): Capital Flows and the Emerging
   Economies: Theory, Evidence and Controversies. Chicago: The University of
   Chicago Press: pp: 159-194.
Bekaert, GeerT, Campbell R Harvey and Christian Lundblad, 2005. "Does financial
   liberalization spur growth?," Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 77(1), pp. 3-55.
Bekaert, Geert. 1995. "Market Integration and Investment Barriers in Emerging Equity
   Markets," World Bank Economic Review, 9(1) pp.75-107
Bhagwati, Jagdish N, 1998. “The Capital Myth: The Difference between Trade in
   Widgets and Dollars,” Foreign Affairs, May/June
Bhagwati, Jagdish, 1999. “Globalization: The Question of ‘Appropriate Governance’"
   Lecture given at Taegu, Korea on October 7th 1999.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2004. ” Smoothing sudden stops,”
   Journal of Economic Theory Vol. 119 (1) ,pp: 104-127
                                            40


Calvo, Guillermo A, 2003 . “Explaining Sudden Stops, Growth Collapse and BOP Crises:
   The case of distortionary output taxes”, IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 50 Special Issue pp:1
   -20.
Calvo, Guillermo A., Alejandro Izquierdo and Luis-Fernando Mejia, 2004. "On the
   Empirics of Sudden Stops: The Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects," NBER Working
   Paper No. W10520.
Calvo, Guillermo. A., Izquierdo, A. and L. F. Mejia. 2004. “On the Empirics of Sudden
   Stops: The Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects,” NBER Working Paper No. 10520,
   May.
Chinn, Menzie and Hiro Ito 2002. “Capital Account Liberalization, Institutional and
   Financial Development,” NBER Working Paper No. 8967. (Cambridge,
   Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).
Desai, Mihir A., Fritz Foley and Kristin J. Forbes. 2004. “Financial Constraints and
   Growth: Multinational and Local Firm Responses to Currency Crises,”, NBER
   Working Paper No. 10545. (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of
   Economic Research)
Dornbusch, Rudi. 2002. “Malaysia: Was it Different?.” In S. Edwards and J. Frankel
   (Eds.): Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets. pp:441 – 454. The
   University of Chicago Press.
Edison, Hali J and Francis E. Warnock, 2003. "A simple measure of the intensity of
   capital controls," Journal of Empirical Finance, vol. 10(1-2), pp 81-103
Edison, Hali J., Michael W. Klein, Luca Antonio Ricci and Torsten Sløk, 2004."Capital
   Account Liberalization and Economic Performance: Survey and Synthesis," IMF
   Staff Papers, International Monetary Fund, vol. 51(2), pp 220 - 256.
Edwards, Sebastian, 1999. “How Effective are Capital Controls”. Journal of Economic
   Perspectives. 13 (4): 65-84
Edwards, Sebastian, 2002. “Does the Current Account Matter?” in Preventing Currency
   Crises in Emerging Markets, S. Edwards and J. A. Frankel (editors), The University
   of Chicago Press. 21-69.
                                            41


Edwards, Sebastian, 2004a. "Thirty Years of Current Account Imbalances, Current
   Account Reversals and Sudden Stops,” IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 61, Special Issue: 1-
   49. International Monetary Fund.
Edwards, Sebastian, 2004b. “Financial Openness, Sudden Stops and Current Account
   Reversals,” American Economic Review, 94(2): 59-64.
Edwards, Sebastian, 2005. “Capital Controls, Sudden Stops and Current Account
   Reversals,” NBER Working Paper No. 11170, March.
Eichengreen, Barry J. 2001, “Capital Account liberalization: What do Cross Country
   Studies Tell us?” The World Bank Economic Review, 15(3), pp: 341-365
Eichengreen, Barry, Poonam Gupta and Ashoka Mody, 2006. "Sudden Stops and IMF-
   Supported Programs," NBER Working Papers 12235, National Bureau of Economic
   Research, Inc.
Fisher, Stanley, 2003. "Financial Crises and Reform of the International Financial
   System", Review of World Economics, Vol. 139(1), pp:1-37.
Forbes, Kristin, forthcoming 2006a .”One Cost of the Chilean Capital Controls: Increased
   Financial Constraints for Smaller Traded Firms” forthcoming Journal of
   International Economics.
Forbes, Kristin,forthcoming 2006b “The Microeconomic Evidence on Capital Controls:
   No Free Lunch”. In Sebastian Edwards, ed. International Capital Flows. National
   Bureau of Economic Research
Frankel, J. A. and E. A. Cavallo. 2004. “Does Openness to Trade Make Countries More
   Vulnerable to Sudden Stops, Or Less? Using Gravity to Establish Causality,” NBER
   Working Paper No. 10957, December.
Frankel, J. A., and A. K. Rose. 1996. “Currency Crashes in Emerging Markets: An
   Empirical Treatment,” Journal of International Economics, 41(3-4): 351-366.
Freund, Caroline and Frank Warnock, 2005. "Current Account Deficits in Industrial
   Countries: The Bigger They are, the Harder They Fall?," NBER Working Papers
   11823, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Glick, Reuven and Michael Hutchison, 2005. “Capital Controls and the Exchange Rate
   Instability in Developing Countries,” Journal of International Money and Finance,
   vol. 24(3), pp: 387-412
                                          42


Glick, Reuven, Xueyan Guo and Michael Hutchison, forthcoming. "Currency Crises,
   Capital Account Liberalization, and Selection Bias," Review of Economics and
   Statistics
Hutchison, Michael and I Noy, 2006. “Sudden Stops and the Mexican Wave: Currency
   Crises, Capital Flow Reversals and Output Loss in Emerging Markets,” Journal of
   Development Economics vol 79(1), pp: 225-248.
IMF Pursue Capital-Account Convertibility, Essay in International Finance No 207. pp.
   55-65
Klein, Michael W. and Giovanni Olivei. 1999. "Capital Account Liberalization, Financial
   Depth and Economic Growth," NBER Working Paper No. 7384. (Cambridge,
   Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).
Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 2006. "The External Wealth of Nations
   Mark II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-
   2004," CEPR Discussion Papers 5644.
Leblang, David A. 1997. “Domestic and Systemic Determinants of Capital Controls in
   the Developed and Developing World,” International Studies Quarterly, 41(3): 435-
   454.
Levy Yeyati, Eduardo and Federico Sturzenegger. 2003. “A De facto Classification of
   Exchange Rate Regimes,” American Economic Review, 93(4): 1623-1645.
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian. Maria. and A. Razin. 2000. “Current Account Reversals and
   Curreency Crises: Empirical Regularities” in P. Krugman (Ed), Currency Crises,
   pp:285 – 323. U. of Chicago Press.
Miniane, Jacques. 2004. “A New Set of Measures on Capital Account Restrictions,” IMF
   Staff Papers, 51(2): 276-308.
Mody, Ahoka and Antu P. Murshid, 2002. “Growing Up with Capital Flows," Journal of
   International Economics, vol 65(1), pp: 249-66.
Montiel, Peter and Carmen Reinhart, 1999. “Do Capital Controls Influence the Volume
   and Composition of Capital Flows? Evidence from the 1990s,” Journal of
   International Money and Finance, Vol. 18(4), pp: 619-635.
Quinn, Dennis P. 1997. “The Correlates of Changes in International Financial
   Regulation,” American Political Science Review 91(3): pp: 531-51.
                                             43


Quinn, Dennis P. 2003. “Capital Account Liberalization and Financial Globalization,
   1890-1999: a Synoptic View,” International Journal of Finance and Economics, 8(3):
   pp: 189-204.
Quinn, Dennis P., Carla Inclan and A. Maria Toyoda (2001), “How and Where Capital
   Account Liberalization Leads to Economic Growth”. Prepared for Presentation at the
   2001 Annual APSA Convention, San Francisco, California)
Razin, Asaaf and Andrew K. Rose. 1994. “Business Cycle Volatility and Openness: An
   Exploratory Cross-Section Análisis,” in L. Leiderman and Assaf Razin (Eds.): Capital
   Mobility: The Impact on Consumption, Investment and Growth, Cambridge
   University Press: 48-75
Reinhart, Carmen M., Rogoff, Keneth S. and Miguel A. Savastano. 2003. “Addicted to
   Dollars,” NBER Working Paper No. 10015. (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National
   Bureau of Economic Research).
Rodrik, Dani, 1998. “Who Needs Capital-Account Convertibility?”, in Should the IMF
   Pursue Capital-Account Convertibility, Essay in International Finance No 207. pp:
   Princeton University.
Rodrik, Dani, 1998. “Who Needs Capital-Account Convertibility?”, in Should the
Rogoff, Kenneth, 2006. “Impact of Globalization on Monetary Policy,” paper prepared
   for a symposium sponsored by Federal Reseve Bank of Kansas City on "The New
   Economic Geography: Effects and Policy Implications," Jackson Hole, August 24-26,
   Wyoming.
Rothenberg, Alex and Francis E.Warnock, 2006. "True Sudden Stops," mimeo Darden
   Business School, University of Virginia
Shatz, Howard J. 2000. “The Location of U.S. Multinational Affiliates”. Cambridge,
   Mass.: Harvard University Doctoral Dissertation
Stiglitz, Joseph. E., 2002. Globalization and Its Discontents. W. W. Norton, New York
Summers, Lawrence H., 2000. “International Financial Crises: Causes, Prevention, and
   Cures,” The American Economic Review Vol. 90(2), pp. 1-16.
