                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     MULTINATIONAL FIRMS, FDI FLOWS AND IMPERFECT CAPITAL MARKETS

                                               Pol Antràs
                                              Mihir A. Desai
                                              C. Fritz Foley

                                          Working Paper 12855
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12855


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2007




The statistical analysis of firm-level data on U.S. multinational companies was conducted at the International
Investment Division, Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce under arrangements
that maintain legal confidentiality requirements. The views expressed are those of the authors and
do not reflect official positions of the U.S. Department of Commerce. The authors thank Gita Gopinath,
James Markusen, Aleh Tsyvinski Bill Zeile and seminar participants at Boston University, Brown
University, Hitotsubashi University, MIT, the NBER ITI program meeting, the New York Fed, Oxford,
UC Berkeley, UC Boulder, Universidad de Vigo, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, and the World Bank for helpful
suggestions. Davin Chor provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Pol Antràs, Mihir A. Desai, and C. Fritz Foley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Multinational Firms, FDI Flows and Imperfect Capital Markets
Pol Antràs, Mihir A. Desai, and C. Fritz Foley
NBER Working Paper No. 12855
January 2007
JEL No. F21,F23,G32,L24

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper examines how costly financial contracting and weak investor protection influence the cross-border
operational, financing and investment decisions of firms. We develop a model in which product developers
have a comparative advantage in monitoring the deployment of their technology abroad. The paper
demonstrates that when firms want to exploit technologies abroad, multinational firm (MNC) activity
and foreign direct investment (FDI) flows arise endogenously when monitoring is nonverifiable and
financial frictions exist. The mechanism generating MNC activity is not the risk of technological expropriation
by local partners but the demands of external funders who require MNC participation to ensure value
maximization by local entrepreneurs. The model demonstrates that weak investor protections limit
the scale of multinational firm activity, increase the reliance on FDI flows and alter the decision to
deploy technology through FDI as opposed to arm's length licensing. Several distinctive predictions
for the impact of weak investor protection on MNC activity and FDI flows are tested and confirmed
using firm-level data.

Pol Antràs                                             C. Fritz Foley
Department of Economics                                Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University                                     Harvard University
1805 Cambridge Street                                  Soldiers Field
Littauer Center 319                                    Boston, MA 02163
Cambridge, MA 02138                                    and NBER
and NBER                                               ffoley@hbs.edu
pantras@fas.harvard.edu

Mihir A. Desai
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mdesai@hbs.edu
1    Introduction
Firms globalizing their operations and the associated capital flows have become major
features of the world economy. These cross-border activities and capital flows span insti-
tutional settings with varying investor protections and levels of capital market develop-
ment. While the importance of institutional heterogeneity in dictating economic outcomes
has been emphasized, existing analyses typically ignore the global firms and the capital
flows that are now commonplace. Investigating how global firms make operational and
financing decisions in a world of heterogenous institutions promises to provide a novel
perspective on observed patterns of flows and firm activity.
    This paper develops and tests a model of the operational and financial decisions of
firms as they exploit their technologies in countries with diﬀering levels of investor pro-
tections. The model demonstrates that multinational firm (MNC) activity and foreign
direct investment (FDI) arise endogenously in settings characterized by financial frictions.
Furthermore, the model generates several predictions regarding the use of arm’s length
licensing to transfer technology, the degree to which multinational firm activity is financed
by capital flows, the extent to which multinationals take ownership in foreign projects,
and the scale of operations abroad. These predictions are tested using firm-level data on
U.S. multinational firms.
    The model considers the problem of a firm (which we interpret as the parent firm
of a multinational corporation) seeking to deploy a proprietary technology abroad with
the help of a local (or host-country) entrepreneur. The central premise of the model
is that the parent firm, as developer of the technology, has a comparative advantage in
monitoring how its technology is exploited and can uniquely identify if local entrepreneurs
are pursuing value maximization. A set of external investors are attractive sources of
finance for the exploitation of the technology abroad because they face a lower opportunity
cost of capital than that faced by the entrepreneur and the parent firm. In order to
convince external funders to supply capital, entrepreneurs need to give financial claims
on the project to parent firms to ensure that they provide monitoring when monitoring is
unverifiable, thus mitigating managerial misbehavior by entrepreneurs. The concern over
managerial misbehavior, and the requirement for parent firm financial participation, is
particularly acute when investor protections are weak.
    The characterization of multinational firms as developers of technologies has long
been central to models explaining multinational firm activity. In contrast to those models
that emphasize the risk of technology expropriation, the model in this paper emphasizes
financial frictions, a cruder form of managerial opportunism and the role of external

                                             1
funders. As such, while technology is central to these other models and the model in
this paper, the mechanism generating multinational firm activity is entirely distinct. Our
emphasis on monitoring builds on the theory presented in Holmstrom and Tirole (1997)
which captures how monitoring is critical to understanding financial intermediation.
    In deriving our theoretical results, we find it useful to first develop a benchmark in
which monitoring is verifiable. In this setting, we show that when the developer of a
technology wants to deploy that technology abroad, the developer chooses to license this
technology to a host country entrepreneur who obtains financing from external investors.
Under these circumstances, the entrepreneur can exploit technology without giving a fi-
nancial claim on the project to the developer, who simply obtains a flat fee for the use
of its proprietary technology. Nevertheless, when monitoring is verifiable, weak investor
protections still limit the scale of projects because these environments require more mon-
itoring and this inflates the marginal cost of production.
    When monitoring is nonverifiable, capital flows and multinational ownership of assets
abroad arise endogenously to align the incentives of the inventors of technology and the
entrepreneurs in host economies. In this setting, we show that an optimal contract calls
for the developer of the technology to own equity in the project and may also call for
the parent firm to provide funds for investment, even though external investors are more
eﬃcient sources of financing.1
    The case of nonverifiable monitoring delivers several novel predictions about the na-
ture of FDI and patterns of multinational firm activity. First, the model predicts that
technology will be exploited through unrelated party licensing rather than through aﬃl-
iate activity in countries where investor protections are stronger. Second, the share of
activity abroad financed by capital flows from the multinational parent will be decreas-
ing in the quality of investor protections in host economies. Third, ownership shares by
multinational parents will also be decreasing in the quality of investor protections in host
economies. These predictions reflect the fact that monitoring by the developer of the
technology is more critical in settings where investor protections are weaker. The model
also predicts that the scale of activity based on multinational technologies in host coun-
tries will be an increasing function of the quality of the institutional environment. Better
investor protections reduce the need for monitoring and therefore allow for a larger scale
of activity.
    We test these predictions using the most comprehensive available data on the activities
   1
    Following Holmstrom and Tirole (1997), in our model contracting is “complete” in the sense that
we solve for the optimal contract subject to explicit information frictions. This is in contrast to a large
incomplete-contracting literature in corporate finance.


                                                    2
of U.S. multinational firms. These data provide details on the world wide operations of
U.S. multinationals and include measures of parental ownership, financing and operational
decisions. These data enable the use of parent-year fixed eﬀects that implicitly control
for a variety of unobserved attributes.
    The analysis indicates that the likelihood of using arm’s length licensing to serve a
foreign market increases with measures of investor protections, as suggested by the model.
The predictions on parent financing and ownership decisions are also confirmed to be a
function of the quality of investor protections and the depth of capital markets. The model
also suggests that these eﬀects should be most pronounced for technologically advanced
firms because these firms are most likely to be able to provide valuable monitoring services.
The empirical evidence indicates a diﬀerential eﬀect for such firms.
    Settings where ownership restrictions are liberalized provide an opportunity to test
the final prediction of the model. The model implies that these liberalizations should
have a particularly large eﬀect on multinational aﬃliate activity in countries with weak
investor protections because, in those countries, ownership restrictions limit multinational
firm activity the most. Our empirical analysis confirms that aﬃliate activity increase by
larger amounts after liberalizations in countries with weaker investor protections.
    This paper extends the large and growing literature on the eﬀects of investor protec-
tion and capital market development on economic outcomes to an open economy setting
where firms make operational and financial decisions across borders. La Porta, Lopez-de-
Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny (1997, 1998) relate investor protections to the concentration
of ownership and the depth of capital markets. A large literature, including King and
Levine (1993), Levine and Zervos (1998) Rajan and Zingales (1998), Wurgler (2000),
and Acemoglu, Johnson and Mitton (2005), has shown that financial market conditions
influence firm investment behavior, economic growth and industrial structure.
    By exclusively emphasizing firms with local investment and financing, this literature
has neglected how cross-border, intrafirm activity responds to institutional variations.
The open economy dimensions of institutional variations have been explored, but only in
the context of arms-length cross-border lending as in Gertler and Rogoﬀ (1990), Boyd and
Smith (1997) and Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002).2 The model in this paper demonstrates
how both multinational activity and capital flows respond to heterogeneity in institu-
   2
    Gertler and Rogoﬀ (1990) show how arms-length lending to entrepreneurs in poor countries is limited
by their inability to pledge large amounts of their own wealth. This insight is embedded into a multi-
national firm’s production decisions in the model presented here. Our setup also relates to Shleifer and
Wolfenzon (2002), who study the interplay between investor protection and equity markets. In contrast,
Kraay et al. (2005) emphasize the role of sovereign risk in shaping the structure of world capital flows.



                                                   3
tional settings. In short, we show that weak financial institutions decrease the scale of
multinational firm activity but simultaneously increase the reliance on capital flows from
the parent. As such, observed patterns of capital flows reflect these two distinct and
contradictory eﬀects. The empirical investigations of micro-data provided in the paper
indicate that both eﬀects are operative.
    By jointly considering the determinants of MNC activities and the flows of capital
that support these activities, the paper also links two literatures—the international trade
literature on multinationals and the macroeconomic literature on capital flows. Industrial
organization and international trade scholars characterize multinationals as having pro-
prietary assets and emphasize the role of market imperfections, such as transport costs
and market power, in determining patterns of multinational activity. Recent work on
multinational firms investigates “horizontal” or “vertical” motivations3 for foreign direct
investment and explores why alternative productive arrangements, such as whole owner-
ship of foreign aﬃliates, joint ventures, exports or arm’s length contracts, are employed.4
    Such analyses of multinational firm activity typically do not consider associated capital
flows.5 Research on capital flows typically abstracts from firm activity and has focused
on the paradox posed by Lucas (1990) of limited capital flows from rich to poor countries
in the face of large presumed rate of return diﬀerentials. While Lucas (1990) emphasizes
human-capital externalities to help explain this paradox, Reinhart and Rogoﬀ (2004)
review subsequent research on aggregate capital flows and conclude that credit market
   3
      The horizontal FDI view represents FDI as the replication of capacity in multiple locations in response
to factors such as trade costs, as in Markusen (1984), Brainard (1997), Markusen and Venables (2000), and
Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple (2004). The vertical FDI view represents FDI as the geographic distribution
of production globally in response to the opportunities aﬀorded by diﬀerent markets, as in Helpman
(1984) and Yeaple (2003). Caves (1996) and Markusen (2002) provide particularly useful overviews of
this literature.
    4
      Antràs (2003, 2005), Antràs and Helpman (2004), Desai, Foley and Hines (2004), Ethier and
Markusen (1996), Feenstra and Hanson (2005), and Grossman and Helpman (2004) analyze the de-
terminants of alternative foreign production arrangements.
    5
      Several studies linking levels of MNC activity and FDI flows are worth noting. First, high frequency
changes in FDI capital flows have been linked to relative wealth levels through real exchange rate move-
ments (as in Froot and Stein (1991) and Blonigen (1997)), broader measures of stock market wealth
(as in Klein and Rosengren (1994) and Baker, Foley and Wurgler (2006)) and to credit market condi-
tions (as in Klein, Peek and Rosengren (2002)). Second, multinational firms have also been shown to
opportunistically employ internal capital markets in weak institutional environments (as in Desai, Fo-
ley and Hines (2004b)) and during currency crises (as in Aguiar and Gopinath (2005) and Desai, Foley
and Forbes (forthcoming)). These papers emphasize how heterogeneity in access to capital can interact
with multinational firm production decisions. Marin and Schnitzer (2004) also study the financing deci-
sions of multinational firms in a model that stresses managerial incentives. Their model however takes
the existence of multinational firms as given and considers an incomplete-contracting setup in contrast
to our complete-contracting setup. The predictions from their model are quite distinct (and typically
contradictory) to the ones we develop here and show to be supported by U.S. data.


                                                     4
conditions and political risk play significant roles. By examining firm behavior in a setting
of heterogenous institutional setting, this paper attempts to unify an investigation of
multinational firm activity and FDI flows.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the model, discusses
the case of fully verifiable monitoring, extends the model to settings of nonverifiable
monitoring and then generates several predictions related to the model. Section 3 provides
details on the data employed in the analysis. Section 4 presents the results of the empirical
analysis and Section 5 concludes.


2       Theoretical Framework
We begin this section by describing a partial equilibrium model of financing that builds on
and extends the work of Holmstrom and Tirole (1997).6 We later illustrate how the model
is able to generate both multinational activity as well as foreign direct investment flows.
Finally, we explore some firm-level empirical predictions that emerge from the model.


2.1     A Model of Financial Contracting
Environment

We consider the problem of an agent — an inventor — who is endowed with an amount
W of financial wealth and the technology or knowledge to produce a diﬀerentiated good.
Consumers in two countries, Home and Foreign, derive utility from consuming this diﬀer-
entiated good.7 The good, however, is prohibitively costly to trade and thus servicing a
particular market requires setting up a production facility in that country. The inventor
is located at Home and cannot fully control production in Foreign. Servicing that market
thus requires contracting with a foreign agent — an entrepreneur — to manage produc-
tion there. We assume that entrepreneurs are endowed with no financial wealth and their
outside option is normalized to 0. There also exists a continuum of infinitessimal external
investors in Foreign that have access to a technology that gives them a gross rate of
return equal to 1 on their wealth. All parties are risk neutral and are protected by limited
liability. There are three periods, a date 0 contracting stage, a date 1 investment stage,
and a date 2 production/consumption stage.
    6
     Our model generalizes the setup in Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) by allowing for diminishing returns
to investment and for variable monitoring levels. The scope of the two papers is also very distinct: they
studied the monitoring role of banks in a closed-economy model, while our focus is on multinational firms.
   7
     In the Appendix, we develop a multi-country version of the model.


                                                    5
Consumer Preferences and Technology

In the main text, we focus on describing production and financing decisions in the Foreign
market. For that purpose, we assume that preferences and technology at Home are such
that at date 2 the inventor obtains a constant gross return β > 1 for each unit of wealth
he invests in production at Home at date 1. We refer to this gross return as the inventor’s
shadow value of cash. In the Appendix, the value of β is endogenously derived in a
multi-country version of the model where consumer preferences, technology and financial
contracting in all countries are fully specified.
    We assume that Foreign preferences are such that cash flows or profits obtained from
the sale of the diﬀerentiated good in Foreign can be expressed as a strictly increasing and
concave function of the quantity produced, i.e, R (q), with R0 (q) > 0 and R00 (q) ≤ 0. We
also assume the standard conditions R (0) = 0, limq→0 R0 (q) = +∞, and limq→∞ R0 (q) =
0. These properties of R (q) can be derived from preferences featuring a constant (and
higher-than-one) elasticity of substitution across (a continuum of) diﬀerentiated goods
produced by diﬀerent firms. In such case, the elasticity of R (q) with respect to q is
constant and given by a parameter α ∈ (0, 1).
    Foreign production is managed by the foreign entrepreneur, who at date 1 can privately
choose to behave and enjoy no private benefits, or misbehave and take private benefits.
When the manager behaves, the project performs with probability pH , in the sense that
when an amount x is invested at date 1, project cash flows at date 2 are equal to R (x) with
probability pH and 0 otherwise.8 When the manager misbehaves, the project performs
with a lower probability pL < pH and expected cash flows are pL R (x). We assume that
the private benefit a manager obtains from misbehaving is proportional to the return of
the project, i.e., BR (x).
    Managerial misbehavior and the associated private benefits can be manifest by choos-
ing to implement the project in a way that generates perquisites for the manager or his
associates, in a way that requires less eﬀort, or in a way that is more fun or glamorous.
As described below, we will relate the ability to engage in such private benefits to the
level of investor protections in Foreign as well as to the extent to which the entrepreneur
is monitored. The idea is that countries with better investor protections tend to enforce
laws that limit the ability of managers to divert funds from the firm or to enjoy private
benefits or perquisites. This interpretation parallels the logic in Tirole (2006, p. 359).
    When investor protections are not perfectly secure, monitoring by third agents is
   8
    This assumes that, when the project succeeds, each unit invested results in a unit of output (q = x),
while when the project fails, output is zero (q = 0).


                                                   6
helpful in reducing the extent to which managers are able to divert funds or enjoy private
benefits. Following Holmstrom and Tirole (1997), we introduce a monitoring technol-
ogy that reduces the private benefit of the foreign entrepreneur when he misbehaves. It is
reasonable to assume that the inventor has a comparative advantage in monitoring the be-
havior of the foreign entrepreneur because the inventor is particularly well informed about
how to manage the production of output using its technology. Intuitively, the developer
of a technology is particularly well situated to determine if project failure is assocated
with managerial actions or bad luck.9 We capture this in a stark way by assuming that
no other agent in the economy can productively monitor the foreign entrepreneur. On the
other hand, when the inventor incurs an eﬀort cost CR (x) in monitoring at date 1, the
private benefit for the local entrepreneur is multiplied by a factor δ (C), with δ 0 (C) < 0,
δ 00 (C) > 0, δ (0) = δ̄, limC→∞ δ (C) = 0, limC→0 δ0 (C) = −∞, and limC→∞ δ 0 (C) = 0.10
      The scope of private benefits is related to the level of investor protection of the host
country by an index γ ∈ (0, 1). In particular, we specify that

                                      B (C; γ) = (1 − γ) δ (C) .                                       (1)

Note that this formulation implies that ∂B (·) /∂γ < 0, ∂B (·) /∂C < 0, and ∂ 2 B (·) /∂C∂γ =
−δ 0 (C) > 0. This formulation captures the intuition that the scope for private benefits
is decreasing in both investor protection and monitoring, and that monitoring has a rela-
tively larger eﬀect on private benefits in countries with poor legal protection of investors.

Contracting

We consider optimal contracting between three sets of agents: the inventor, the foreign
entrepreneur and foreign external investors. At date 0, the inventor and the foreign
entrepreneur negotiate a contract that stipulates the terms under which the entrepreneur
will exploit the technology developed by the inventor. This contract includes a date-0
transfer P from the entrepreneur to the inventor, as well as the agents’ date-2 payoﬀs
   9
      An alternative way to interpret monitoring is as follows. Suppose that the foreign entrepreneur can
produce the good under a variety (a continuum, actually) of potential techniques indexed by z ∈ [0, B].
Technique 0 entails a probability of success equal to pH and a zero private benefit. All techniques with
z > 0 are associated with a probability of success equal to pL and a private benefit equal to z. Clearly,
all techniques with z ∈ (0, B) are dominated from the point of view of the foreign entrepreneur, who
will thus eﬀectively (privately) choose either z = 0 or z = B, as assumed in the main text. Under this
interpretation, we can think of monitoring as simply making certain high-private benefit projects not
available to the entrepreneur, i.e., reducing the upper bound of [0, B].
   10
      These conditions are suﬃcient to ensure that the optimal contract is unique and satisfies the second-
order conditions.


                                                    7
contingent on the return of the project.11 When P > 0, the date-0 payment can be
thought of as the price or royalties paid for the use of the technology, which the inventor
can invest in the Home market at date 1. When P < 0, we can think of the inventor as
cofinancing the project in the Foreign country. The contract between the inventor and
the entrepreneur also stipulates the date-1 scale of investment x, while the managerial
and monitoring eﬀorts of the entrepreneur and inventor, respectively, are unverifiable and
thus cannot be part of the contract. To build intuition, we consider in Section 2.2 the
case in which monitoring is verifiable.
    Also at date 0, the foreign entrepreneur and external investors sign a financial contract
under which the entrepreneur borrows an amount E from the external investors at date
0 in return for a date-2 payment contingent on the return of the project.
    We consider an optimal contract from the point of view of the inventor and allow the
contract between the inventor and the entrepreneur to stipulate the terms of the financial
contract between the entrepreneur and foreign external investors. We rule out “direct”
financial contracts between the inventor and foreign external investors. This is justified
within the model in the Appendix.
    Given the payoﬀ structure of our setup and our assumptions of risk neutrality and
limited liability, it is straightforward to show that an optimal contract is such that all
date-2 payoﬀs can be expressed as shares of the return generated by the project.12 When
an agent’s share of the date-2 return is positive, this agent thus becomes an equity holder
in the entrepreneur’s production facility.13 We define φI and φE as the equity shares
held by the inventor and external investors, respectively, with the remaining share 1 −
φI − φE accruing to the foreign entrepreneur. Notice that when φI is large enough, the
entrepreneur’s production facility becomes a subsidiary of the inventor’s firm.
    Figure 1 provides a visual representation of the main elements of the model.
  11
      For simplicity, we assume that the inventor’s date-1 return in its Home market is not pleadgeable in
Foreign.
   12
      More formally, in our setup the optimal contract is such that all agents obtain a payoﬀ equal to
zero when the project fails (that is when the return is zero), and a nonnegative payoﬀ when the project
succeeds (in which case cash flows are positive).
   13
      We focus on an interpretation of payoﬀs resembling the payoﬀs of an equity contract, but the model
is not rich enough to distinguish our optimal contract from a standard debt contract. Our results would
survive in a model in which agents randomized between using equity and debt contracts. In any case, we
bear this in mind in the empirical section of the paper, where we test the predictions of the model.




                                                    8
   Home Country                                                 Foreign Country

                                                                 External investors

                                                            Invests E             Obtains φE
                                                                                  ownership


                                Payment P (can be + or -)
                                φΙ ownership
       Inventor                                                    Entrepreneur

    Exerts monitoring             Technology                      Employs x inputs
    effort cost CR(x)             Monitoring                      Selects good or
                                                                  bad behavior


                            Figure 1: A Simple Picture of the Model

2.2    Optimal Financial Contract with Verifiable Monitoring
We first consider the case in which monitoring is verifiable and thus can be specified in
the contract.
          n An optimal contract      o     that induces the entrepreneur to behave is given by
the tuple P̃ , φ̃I , x̃, φ̃E , Ẽ, C̃ that solves the following program:

          max           ΠI = φI pH R (x) + (W + P ) β − CR (x)
      P,φI ,x,φE ,E,C
           s.t.         x≤E−P                                                     (i)
                        pH φE R (x) ≥ E                                           (ii)     (P1)
                        pH (1 − φE − φI ) R (x) ≥ 0                               (iii)
                        (pH − pL ) (1 − φE − φI ) R (x) ≥ (1 − γ) δ (C) R (x)     (iv)
                        φI ≥ 0                                                    (v)

   The objective function represents the payoﬀ of the inventor. The first term represents
the inventor’s dividends from the expected cash flows of the foreign production facility.
The second term represents the gross return from investing his wealth W plus the date-0
transfer P in the Home market. The last term represents the monitoring costs.
   The first constraint is a financing constraint. Since the local entrepreneur has no
wealth, his ability to invest at date 1 is limited by whatever is left from the external in-
vestors’ financing E after satisfying the payment P to the inventor. The second inequality


                                                 9
is the participation constraint of external investors, who need to earn at least an expected
gross return on their investments equal to 1. Similarly, the third inequality is the partic-
ipation constraint of the foreign entrepreneur, given his zero outside option. The fourth
inequality is the foreign entrepreneur’s incentive compatibility constraint. This presumes
that it is in the interest of the inventor to design a contract in a way that induces the
foreign entrepreneur to behave.14 The final inequality is a non-negativity constraint on
the share of equity held by the inventor.15
    In the program above, constraint (iii) will never bind. Intuitively, as is standard in
incomplete information problems, the incentive compatibility constraint of the entrepre-
neur demands that this agent obtains some informational rents in equilibrium, and thus
his participation constraint is slack.
    The other four constraints will bind in equilibrium. This is intuitive for the financing
constraint (i), the participation constraint of investors (ii), and the incentive compatibility
constraint (iv). In addition, the fact that constraint (v) binds immediately implies that
the equilibrium equity share of the inventor satisfies

                                               φ̃I = 0,                                      (2)

and thus the overall payoﬀ of the inventor is not contingent on the outcome of the project.
The intuition for this result is that with verifiable monitoring, equity shares are not an
optimal mechanism for transferring utility from the entrepreneur to the inventor. It may
appear that a positive φI is attractive because it reduces the required lump-sum price for
the technology P and thus encourages investment. However, inspection of constraint (iii)
reveals that a larger φI decreases the ability of the entrepreneur to borrow from external
investors, as it reduces his pleadgeable income. Overall, one can show that whether utility
is transferred through an equity share or a date-0 lump-sum payment has no eﬀect on
the scale of the project. In addition, it is clear from the objective function that the
inventor strictly prefers a date-0 lump-sum transfer since he can use these funds to invest
domestically and obtain a gross rate of return β > 1 on them. Hence, φ̃I = 0 is optimal.
    Manipulation of the first-order conditions of the problem also delivers the unique
optimal amount of monitoring, which is implicitly given by:
                                         ³ ´        pH − pL
                                     −δ 0 C̃ =                .                              (3)
                                                  (1 − γ) βpH
 14
      Below we derive conditions under which this choice is optimal.
 15
      We assume throughout that W is large enough to ensure that W + P ≥ 0 in equilibrium.



                                                 10
    Because δ00 (·) > 0, we find that monitoring C̃ is relatively higher when the entre-
preneur resides in a country with a lower level of investor protection (low γ) or when
the inventor has a relatively high shadow value of cash (high β). Both cases correspond
to situations in which the entrepreneur is relatively more constrained, so the marginal
benefit of monitoring is especially high in those cases.
   With the equilibrium value for monitoring, the remaining values for the optimal con-
tract can easily be derived. In particular, straightforward manipulation of the first order
conditions delivers (see Appendix):

                                                     1
                            R0 (x̃) =     µ                               ¶.              (4)
                                                 (1−γ)δ (C̃ )        C̃
                                        pH 1 −     pH −pL
                                                                −   βpH


Making use of equation (3) and the concavity of R (x), one can show (see Appendix) that
x̃ is necessarily increasing in γ, that is, output and cash flows are higher in host countries
with better investor protections. In the limit in which γ → 1, we find that C̃ → 0 and
R0 (x̃) = 1/pH , which corresponds to the first-best level of investment. Similarly, we can
show that output and cash flows are strictly increasing in β, the shadow value of cash of
the inventor. Intuitively, the larger is β, the larger is the incentive to use monitoring to
reduce ineﬃciencies and generate a larger P that can be invested in the domestic economy.
     Using constraints (i), (ii), and (iii), one can obtain the equilibrium values of φ̃E and
Ẽ in terms of C̃ and x̃ :
                                                          ³ ´
                                                 (1 − γ) δ C̃
                                   φ̃E = 1 −                                               (5)
                                                    pH − pL
                                    Ẽ = pH φ̃E R (x̃) .                                   (6)

In addition, straightforward manipulation delivers
                                 µ                ¶
                                      R (x̃)           1
                          P̃ =        0
                                               − 1 x̃ + C̃R (x̃) > 0,                     (7)
                                     R (x̃) x̃         β

where the sign follows from R (x̃) /x̃ > R0 (x̃) > 1 given the concavity of R (x̃) and
R (0) = 0.
    In sum, the optimal contract is such that the inventor does not take a positive stake
in the entrepreneurs’ production facility and simply receives a positive lump-sum fee for
the exploitation of the technology. Finally, we can compute the net payoﬀ of the inventor,



                                                11
which is given by                           µ                 ¶
                                                 R (x̃)
                             Π̃I = βW + β                  − 1 x̃.
                                                R0 (x̃) x̃
   We summarize the main results in this section in the following proposition (see the
Appendix for a formal proof):
                                                                     n                       o
Proposition 1 (Verifiable Monitoring) There exist a unique tuple P̃ , φ̃I , x̃, φ̃E , Ẽ, C̃
that solves program (P1). Furthermore, an optimal contract that induces the entrepreneur
to behave is characterized by equations (2)-(7) and is such that:

  1. The inventor does not take an equity stake in the local entrepreneur’s production
     facility (φ̃I = 0).

  2. The inventor receives a positive lump-sum transfer (P̃ > 0) for the use of the
     technology.

  3. Output and cash flows are increasing in investor protection in Foreign (γ) and in
     the inventor’s shadow value of cash (β).

  4. Monitoring is decreasing in γ and increasing in β.

Proof. See Appendix.

   So far we have ignored the possibility that the inventor does not induce the entre-
preneur to behave. In the Appendix, we show that if the entrepreneur misbehaves, the
inventor would obtain a payoﬀ equal to
                                           Ã       ¡ ¢          !
                                                R x̃L
                           Π̃LI = βW + β                     − 1 x̃L
                                               R0 (x̃L ) x̃L

where x̃L is implicitly defined by
                                        ¡ ¢    1
                                      R0 x̃L = .                                         (8)
                                              pL
It is thus clear that as long as x̃ > x̃L , the contract described in Proposition 1 is the
                                                                               ¡ ¢
optimal contract. Given that when γ → 1, R0 (x̃) → 1/pH < 1/pL = R0 x̃L , good
behavior is necessarily induced whenever γ is suﬃciently high.




                                               12
2.3     Nonverifiable Monitoring and the Emergence of Foreign Di-
        rect Investment
We next consider the case in which monitoring is not verifiable and thus cannot be specified
in the contract. Specifically, we consider the case in which, at date 1, the inventor privately
sets the level of monitoring
                       ³ ´ C̆, after which the entrepreneur observes his private benefit
from misbehaving B C̆ and decides whether to behave or misbehave. In this case, the
contract has to be such that the inventor finds it privately optimal to exert monitoring
eﬀort.
    It is straightforward to see that the contract specified in the previous section does not
accomplish this. In particular, notice that whenever φ̃I = 0, the payoﬀ of the inventor is
independent of the behavior of the entrepreneur, and thus the inventor will not have any
incentive to monitor the entrepreneur at date 1. Hence, given the contract in Proposition
1, the inventor would set C̆ = 0, which would imply that the entrepreneur’s private
benefit from misbehaving is limC→0 B (C) = (1 − γ) δ̄, and for large enough δ̄, his incentive
compatibility is violated. In sum, as long as the inventor’s payoﬀ is not contingent on the
return of the investment, the inventor will not exert a positive monitoring eﬀort, and, for
large enough δ̄, the entrepreneur misbehaves.
    We next show that the inventor may improve upon this outcome by modifying the
previous contract in a way that induces good behavior on the part of the entrepreneur.
This requires the inventor’s equity stake to be positive. It is still the case, however,
that the inventor has an incentive to set the minimum monitoring level C̆ such that
the entrepreneur’s incentive compatibility constraint is satisfied. This implies that this
monitoring cost is implicitly given by:
                                                                 ³ ´
                            (pH − pL ) (1 − φE − φI ) = (1 − γ) δ C̆ .

In order for this positive monitoring eﬀort to be credible, the initial contract needs to
satisfy the following incentive compatibility constraint for the inventor:

                                 φI pH R (x) − C̆R (x) ≥ φI pL R (x) .

This condition corresponds to the intuition that the inventor’s payoﬀ should be higher
when exerting the positive monitoring level C̆ than when not doing so.16
  16
   Our derivation of this IC constraint assumes that if the inventor deviates from C̆, it does so by setting
C = 0, but this is without loss of generality because any other deviation C > 0 is dominated.



                                                    13
   It follows from the above discussion thatnan optimal contract       o that induces the entre-
preneur to behave is now given by the tuple P̂ , φ̂I , x̂, φ̂E , Ê, Ĉ that solves the following
program:

           max           ΠI = φI pH R (x) + (W + P ) β − CR (x)
       P,φI ,x,φE ,E,C
            s.t.         x≤E−P                                                                  (i)
                         pH φE R (x) ≥ E                                                        (ii)    (P2)
                         pH (1 − φE − φI ) R (x) ≥ 0                                            (iii)
                         (pH − pL ) (1 − φE − φI ) R (x) = (1 − γ) δ (C) R (x)                  (iv)
                         (pH − pL ) φI R (x) ≥ CR (x)                                           (v’)

   This program is identical to (P1) except for the inclusion of the new incentive com-
patibility constraint (v’) for the inventor.17 We show in the Appendix that it is again
the case that, except for constraint (iii), the remaining constraints all bind in an optimal
contract. This immediately implies that the solution to (P2) entails the inventor taking a
positive equity stake in the project undertaken by the foreign entrepreneur. In particular,
from constraint (v’), we immediately obtain

                                                        Ĉ
                                             φ̂I =           ,                                           (9)
                                                     pH − pL

which will be positive as long as Ĉ is positive. In addition, the level of monitoring is now
implicitly given by the expression (see Appendix for details)
                                            ³ ´    βpH − pL
                                        −δ 0 Ĉ =             .                                         (10)
                                                  (1 − γ) βpH
                                                     ³ ´        ³ ´
Direct comparison of (3) and (10) reveals that δ 0 Ĉ > δ 0 C̃ and thus Ĉ < C̃. In
words, when monitoring is nonverifiable, it is underprovided. Next, working with the
first-order conditions of program (P2), the level of output is implicitly given by:

                                                               1
                           R0 (x̂) =     µ                         ³             ´         ¶.           (11)
                                                (1−γ)δ (Ĉ )           βpH −pL        Ĉ
                                       pH 1 −     pH −pL
                                                               −        pH −pL       βpH



As in the case with verifiable monitoring, whenever γ → 1, we have that Ĉ → 0 and x̂ is
  17
     To be precise, it diﬀers also in the fact that the private choice of C ensures that (iv) will bind. This
is immaterial since that constraint was binding in program (P1) as well.



                                                     14
set at the first-best level implicitly defined by R0 (x̂) = 1/pH .
    The terms of the financial contract with external investors are now given by:
                                                     ³ ´
                                            (1 − γ) δ Ĉ           Ĉ
                          φ̂E = 1 −                         −                          (12)
                                          pH − pL               pH − pL
                             Ê = pH φ̂E R (x̂) .                                      (13)

Straightforward manipulation delivers an optimal lump-sum date-0 transfer equal to:
                             µ                 ¶
                                  R (x̂)                   pL
                      P̂ =                  − 1  x̂ −              ĈR (x̂) .          (14)
                                 R0 (x̂) x̂           β (pH − pL )

Comparing this initial lump-sum transfer with the result of verifiable monitoring, we note
that, provided that α (x) ≡ R (x) / (R0 (x) x) is nondecreasing in x, it will necessarily be
the case that P̂ < P̃ , and the initial transfer is lower with nonverifiable monitoring. As
mentioned above, when preferences feature a constant elasticity of substitution across a
continuum of diﬀerentiated goods produced by diﬀerent firms, α (x) is in fact independent
of x, and R (x) can be written as R (x) = Axα , where A > 0 and α ∈ (0, 1). In such case,
the initial lump-sum transfer can be written as
                                 µ       ¶
                                     1−α             pL
                         P̂ =              x̂ −              ĈA (x̂)α .
                                      α         β (pH − pL )

Notice that the initial transfer payment is also not necessarily positive in this case. In
particular, given the concavity of R (x), if the optimal level of x̂ is low enough, R (x̂) /x̂
will be large, and P̂ will be negative.
    To summarize, introducing the nonverifiability of monitoring transforms a transaction
that has the properties of a market transaction—the payment of a flat fee for the use of
a technology— into something that has the properties of foreign direct investment. When
monitoring is nonverifiable, it is optimal for the inventor to take an equity stake in the
project and instead of charging a positive price for the use of the technology, the inventor
may now decide instead to cofinance the foreign operations by setting a negative P̂ at
date 0. In sum, we have shown (see the Appendix for formal proofs) that:
                                                                              n                 o
Proposition 2 (Nonverifiable Monitoring) There exist a unique tuple P̂ , φ̂I , x̂, φ̂E , Ê, Ĉ
that solves program (P2). Furthermore, an optimal contract that induces the entrepreneur
to behave is characterized by equations (9)-(14) and is such that:

  1. The inventor takes a positive equity stake in the local entrepreneur’s production

                                                 15
      facility (φ̂I > 0).

  2. Depending on parameter values, the entrepreneur may receive a positive lump-sum
     transfer (P̂ > 0) for the use of the technology or it may instead cofinance the project
     via an initial capital transfer (P̂ < 0).

Proof. See Appendix.

    Before moving to an analysis of the comparative statics, it is important to consider
the possibility that the inventor decides not to implement good behavior on the part of
the foreign entrepreneur. We show in the Appendix that this is never optimal provided
that x̂ > x̃L , where x̃L is defined in equation (8). Because as γ → 1, R0 (x̂) → 1/pH , we
can conclude again that inducing the foreign entrepreneur to behave is optimal whenever
γ is suﬃciently high.


2.4    Comparative Statics: Firm-Level Empirical Predictions
In order to guide the empirical analysis, we outline the predictions that the model gener-
ates concerning patterns of multinational firm activity and financing flows. This subsec-
tion highlights the eﬀects of investor protection γ in Foreign on: (i) the scale of activity;
(ii) the extent of inventor ownership; and (iii) the share of capital provided by the inven-
tor. We also describe the eﬀects of the shadow value of cash β on each of these. Because
our estimation employs parent-firm fixed eﬀects, we do not test these predictions about
β.
     As is clear from equations (9), (11) and (14), in order to understand the eﬀects of γ and
β on the main observable components of the optimal contract, we first have to investigate
the eﬀect of these parameters on the optimal amount of monitoring. Straightforward
diﬀerentiation of equation (10) together with the convexity of the function δ (·) produces
the following result:

Lemma 1 The amount of monitoring Ĉ is decreasing in both investor protection γ in
Foreign and in the inventor’s shadow value of cash β.
Proof. See Appendix.

    The eﬀect of investor protection on monitoring is similar to the eﬀect described in the
case of verifiable monitoring. Given our specification of the private benefit function B (·)
in (1), the marginal benefit from monitoring is larger the less developed is the financial


                                             16
system in Foreign (the lower is γ). Since the marginal cost of monitoring is independent
of γ, in equilibrium C and γ are negatively correlated.
    The eﬀect of the shadow value of cash β on monitoring is quite distinct from the
case with verifiable monitoring, where monitoring is increasing in β. The intuition for
this divergence is that the incentive compatibility constraint of the inventor becomes
tighter as the amount of monitoring in equilibrium increases. In particular, a higher level
of monitoring requires a larger equity share φI . This is costly because for β > 1, the
inventor would like to receive a larger share of the the foreign entrepreneur’s payments
upfront. The larger is β, the higher is the shadow cost of monitoring working through the
incentive compatibility constraint, and the lower is the optimal amount of monitoring.
    Our theory has implications for the share of equity held by the inventor that relate
closely to the implications for monitoring. From equation (9), it is obvious that the share
φI is proportional to the level of monitoring and thus is aﬀected by the parameters γ and
β in the same way as is monitoring. This reflects that equity shares emerge in our model
as incentives for the inventor to monitor the foreign entrepreneur. As a result, we can
establish that:

Proposition 3 The share of equity held by the inventor is decreasing both in investor
protection γ in Foreign and in the inventor’s shadow value of cash β.
Proof. Proof in text.

   An immediate corollary of this result is:

Corollary 1 Suppose that a transaction is recorded as an FDI transaction if φ̂I ≥ φI
and as a licensing transaction if φ̂I < φI . Then, there exist a threshold investor protection
γ ∗ ∈ [0, 1] over which the optimal contract entails licensing and under which the optimal
contract entails FDI.

   With these results at hand, diﬀerentiation of equation (11), which implicitly defines
the equilibrium level of x̂ and R (x̂), yields the conclusion that:

Proposition 4 Output and cash flows in Foreign are increasing in investor protection γ
in Foreign and decreasing in the inventor’s shadow value of cash β.
Proof. See Appendix.

   The intuition for the eﬀect of investor protection is straightforward. Despite the fact
that the inventor’s monitoring reduces financial frictions, both the foreign entrepreneur’s

                                             17
compensation, as dictated by his incentive compatibility constraint (iv), and monitoring
costs are increasing in the scale of operation. In countries with weaker investor protections,
the perceived marginal cost of investment is higher, thus reducing equilibrium levels of
investment.
    Finally, our model also generates predictions for the sources of financing of the foreign
production facility. To see this, focus on the case in which the date-0 payment P̂ is actually
negative and can be interpreted as the inventor cofinancing Foreign activity. Define the
amount of financing provided by the inventor by F ≡ −P . The share of investment
financed by the inventor is then given by
                                                              µ              ¶
                            F̂        pL         R (x̂)           1 − α (x̂)
                               =              Ĉ        −                      ,
                            x̂   β (pH − pL )      x̂               α (x̂)

where α (x̂) ≡ R (x̂) / (R0 (x̂) x̂). Notice that this expression is increasing in Ĉ. Further-
more, provided that α (x̂) does not increase in x̂ too quickly, the ratio F̂ /x̂ is decreasing
in x̂, due to the concavity of R (·). It thus follows from Lemma 1 and Proposition 4 that:

Proposition 5 Provided that α (x̂) does not increase in x̂ too quickly, the share of in-
ventor financing in total financing (F̂ /x̂) is decreasing in investor protection γ.
Proof. Proof in text.

    The intuition behind the result is that monitoring by inventors has a relatively high
marginal product in countries with weak financial institutions. To induce the inventor
to monitor, the optimal contract specifies a relatively steeper payment schedule, with a
relatively higher contribution by the inventor at date 0 (a higher F̂ /x̂) in anticipation of
a higher share of the cash flows generated by the project at date 2 (a higher φI ).
    The eﬀect of the shadow value of cash on the ratio F̂ /x̂ is ambiguous. A larger β is
associated with a lower monitoring level Ĉ (Lemma 1), but also with a lower level of x̂
and thus a higher ratio R (x̂) /x̂ (Proposition 4). In addition, β has an additional direct
negative eﬀect on the ratio. The overall eﬀect is, in general, ambiguous.
    In section 4, we present empirical tests of Propositions 3, 4, and 5, and Corollary 1.
These tests exploit variation in the location of aﬃliates of U.S. multinational firms and
analyze the eﬀect of investor protections on proxies for x̂, φ̂I , and F̂ /x̂.18 We identify
the inventor in the model as being a parent firm and control for other parameters of the
  18
    Although we have developed our model in a two-country setup, we show in the Appendix that
Propositions 3, 4, and 5 continue to apply in a multi-country version of the model in which the statements
not only apply to changes in the parameter γ, but also to cross-sectional variation in investor protections.


                                                    18
model, such as the shadow value of cash β, the concavity of R (x), the monitoring function
δ (C) and the probabilities pH and pL by using fixed eﬀects for each parent in each year
and controlling for a wide range of host-country variables.


3      Data and Descriptive Statistics
The empirical work presented in section 4 is based on the most comprehensive available
data on the activities of American multinational firms. The Bureau of Economic Analysis
(BEA) annual survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad from 1982 through 1999 provides
a panel of data on the financial and operating characteristics of U.S. firms operating
abroad.19 U.S. direct investment abroad is defined as the direct or indirect ownership or
control by a single U.S. legal entity of at least ten percent of the voting securities of an
incorporated foreign business enterprise or the equivalent interest in an unincorporated
foreign business enterprise. A U.S. multinational entity is the combination of a single
U.S. legal entity that has made the direct investment, called the U.S. parent, and at
least one foreign business enterprise, called the foreign aﬃliate. The survey covers all
countries and industries, classifying aﬃliates into industries that are roughly equivalent
to three digit SIC code industries. As a result of confidentiality assurances and penalties
for noncompliance, BEA believes that coverage is close to complete and levels of accuracy
are high.
    The foreign aﬃliate survey forms that U.S. multinational enterprises are required to
complete vary depending on the year, the size of the aﬃliate, and the U.S. parent’s
percentage of ownership of an aﬃliate. The most extensive data for the period examined
in this study are available for 1982, 1989, 1994, and 1999 when BEA conducted Benchmark
Surveys. In non-benchmark years, exemption levels were higher and less information was
collected.20 Accordingly, the analysis is restricted to benchmark years except when the
annual frequency of the data is critical — in the analysis of scale in section 4.3 that uses
the liberalizations of ownership restrictions.
    In order to analyze arm’s length licensing activity, measures of royalty payments and
licensing fees received by U.S. MNC parents from unaﬃliated foreign persons are drawn
from the results of BEA’s annual BE-93 survey. Because these data have been collected
  19
    Coverage and methods of the BEA survey are described in Desai, Foley and Hines (2002).
  20
    For 1982, 1989 and 1994, all aﬃliates with sales, assets or net income in excess of $3 million in
absolute value and their parents were required to file extensive reports; in 1999, the exemption limit
increased to $7 million. From 1983 to 1988, data on aﬃliates with sales, assets, or net income greater
than $10 million were collected, and this cutoﬀ rose to $15 million for 1990-1993 and $20 million for
1995-1999.

                                                 19
since 1986, data used in the analysis of licensing activity cover only 1989, 1994, and
1999. Table I provides descriptive statistics for the variables employed in the analysis and
distinguishes between the variables used in analysis employing the benchmark year data
(Panel A) and analysis employing the full panel (Panel B).
    Implementing empirical tests of the model requires mapping the variables of the model
to reasonable measurements in the data. Corollary 1 addresses the choice of an inventor
to deploy technology through an arm’s length licensing agreement or through an entity in
which it holds a substantial ownership stake. In order to study this choice empirically, the
analysis uses a dummy variable that is defined at the country/year level. This dummy
is equal to one if the parent receives an arm’s length royalty payment, and it is equal
to zero if the parent only serves the country through aﬃliate activity in a particular
year. Proposition 5 makes predictions concerning the share of inventor financing in total
financing (F̂ /x̂). In the data, this variable is defined as the share of aﬃliate assets
financed by the multinational parent. Specifically, this share is the ratio of the sum of
parent provided equity and net borrowing by aﬃliates from the parent to aﬃliate assets.21
Proposition 3 considers the determinants of the share of equity held by the inventor, and
this variable, φI , is measured in the data as the share of aﬃliate equity owned by the
multinational parent. Indicators of the scale of aﬃliate activity are required to test
Proposition 4, and the log of aﬃliate sales is used for this purpose.
    Table I also provides descriptive statistics for a number of other variables. Two mea-
sures of investor protections and capital market development are used in the analysis
below. As the model emphasizes the decisions of local lenders, the first measure is cred-
itor rights. This measure is drawn from Djankov, McLiesh, and Shleifer (forthcoming),
which extends the sample studied in La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny
(1998) to cover a broader sample of countries over the 1982-1999 period on an annual
basis. Creditor rights is an index taking values between 0 and 4 and measures the extent
of legal protections given to creditors. The second measure of the ability to access local
lenders is the annual ratio of private credit provided by deposit money banks and other
financial institutions to GDP, and it is drawn from Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine
(1999).22
  21
      In the model, we have interpreted all sources of financing as equity financing, but as explained in
footnote 13, our setup is not rich enough to distinguish equity financing from debt financing. Hence, our
empirical tests of Proposition 5 include both.
   22
      It is possible to employ a measure of shareholder rights to measure investor protections. Creditor
rights and private credit are used to measure investor protections for several reasons. First, shareholder
rights are only available for a single year near the end of our sample. Second, in our data, there is
very little local ownership of aﬃliate equity, but aﬃliates do make extensive use of debt borrowed from


                                                   20
    Since credit market development may be correlated with other measures of economic
and institutional development, additional controls for other institutional characteristics
are also employed. A number of countries impose restrictions on the extent to which
foreign firms can own local ones. Shatz (2000) documents these restrictions using two
distinct measures that capture restrictions on greenfield FDI and cross-border mergers
and acquisition activity. The FDI ownership restriction dummy used below is equal to
one if either of these measures is below three and zero otherwise. Workforce schooling
measures the average schooling years in the population over 25 years old, and this variable
is provided in Barro and Lee (2000). Data on the log of GDP and the log of GDP per
capita, measures of a country’s size and overall level of development, come from the World
Development Indicators. Corporate tax rates are imputed from the BEA data by taking
the median tax rate paid by aﬃliates in a particular country and year.23 Ginarte and Park
(1997) provide a measure of the strength of patent protections, and the Index of Economic
Freedom provides a measure of more general property rights. The International Country
Risk Guide is the source of two other measures of institutional development. Rule of law
is an assessment of the strength and impartiality of a country’s legal system, and Risk
of Expropriation is an index of the risk of outright confiscation or forced nationalization
faced by foreign investors. For these measures, higher values indicate a stronger rule of
law and lower risks.
    Since the BEA data are a panel of aﬃliate level data, they allow for the inclusion
of parent-year fixed eﬀects. These fixed eﬀects help control for other parameters of the
model that are likely to be specific to particular firms at particular points in time, such
as the shadow value of cash β, the concavity of R (x), the monitoring function δ (C) and
the probabilities pH and pL . The inclusion of these fixed eﬀects imply that the eﬀects
of investor protections are identified oﬀ of within firm variation in the characteristics of
countries in which the firm is active.
    While such an empirical setting does oﬀer a number of advantages, it is worth noting
two shortcomings. First, the sample only includes multinational firms; firms that only
deploy technology abroad through licensing are not in our data. If there are a large number
of these firms that are active in countries with either weak or strong investor protections,
our results would be biased and our approach of identifying eﬀects oﬀ of within firm
local sources. As such, using creditor rights and private credit allows us to capitalize on some time series
variation in investor protections and more closely corresponds empirically to the financing choices of
aﬃliates.
  23
     Aﬃliates with negative net income are excluded for the purposes of calculating country tax rates.




                                                    21
variation would be misleading because of selection bias.24 Second, the model does not
consider cases in which a firm neither invests nor licenses technology in a particular
location. As a consequence, we do not consider these cases empirically although there
could be valuable information in them.


4      Empirical Results
The predictions on the use of licensing as opposed to foreign investment and the financing
and ownership of foreign aﬃliates are considered first by pooling cross-sections from the
benchmark years. These regressions employ a variety of controls for country, parent and
aﬃliate characteristics that test the robustness of the explanatory power of our measures
of the quality of capital markets. Investigating the eﬀect on scale requires an alternative
setup as controlling for the many unobservable characteristics that might determine firm
size is problematic. Fortunately, the model provides a stark prediction with respect to
scale that can be tested by analyzing within-aﬃliate and within-country responses to the
easing of ownership restrictions.


4.1     Licensing and Aﬃliate Activity
The tests presented in Table II examine the prediction that inventors need not take large
ownership stakes in foreign firms exploiting their technology if they operate in countries
with high levels of investor protection. The dependent variable in these tests, the Arm’s
Length Licensing Dummy, is defined for country/year pairs in which a parent has an
aﬃliate or from which a parent receives a royalty payment from an unaﬃliated foreign
person. This dummy is equal to one if the parent receives a royalty payment from an
unaﬃliated foreign person, and it is otherwise equal to zero.
    Several controls are employed in these regressions in order to isolate the eﬀect of the
quality of capital markets on patterns of activity. All specifications presented in the table
include a measure of the existence of foreign ownership restrictions. Measures of credit
market development may simply reflect other factors related to economic development so
specifications include workforce schooling and the log of GDP per capita. Larger markets
may be more likely to attract both foreign investment and licensing activity so the log
of GDP is used to control for market size. Host country tax rates can also influence
the desirability of foreign ownership so host country tax rates are also included in all
  24
   Aggregate 1994 BEA estimates indicate that U.S. multinational parents received 89.8% of royalty
payments and licensing fees received by U.S. firms, so this concern is unlikely to create significant bias.


                                                    22
specifications. Additionally, the inclusion of parent-year fixed eﬀects controls for a variety
of unobservable firm characteristics that might otherwise conflate the analysis. Standard
errors are heteroskedasticity-consistent and are clustered at the country/year level. The
specifications presented in Table II are linear probability models. These are used in order
to incorporate parent/year fixed eﬀects and simultaneously to correct standard errors for
clustering at the country/year level.25
    The coeﬃcient on creditor rights in column 1 is positive and significant, indicating that
multinationals are more likely to serve countries with higher levels of financial development
through licensing as opposed to only through a foreign aﬃliate. This result is consistent
with the prediction in Corollary 1 of the model. The results also indicate that parents
are more likely to engage in arm’s length licensing as opposed to just aﬃliate activity
in countries that have a more educated workforce, that are larger, and that have higher
corporate tax rates.
    The predictions of the model relate to credit market development, but the measure of
creditor rights may be correlated with more general variation in the institutional environ-
ment. The specification presented in column 2 includes additional proxies for the quality
of other host country institutions. Specifically, the analysis includes indices of patent
protctions, property rights, the strength and impartiality of the overall legal system, and
the risk of expropriation as control variables. The coeﬃcient on creditor rights is little
changed by the inclusion of these additional controls, and it implies that capital market
conditions play an economically significant role relative to other host country institutions.
The eﬀect of a one standard deviation change in creditor rights is approximately one and
a half times as large as the eﬀect of a one standard deviation change in patent protections,
which is also positive and significant in explaining the use of arm’s length licensing.
    The specification presented in column 3 provides a more subtle test of the model
and the particular mechanism that gives rise to FDI as opposed to licensing. In the
model described in section 2, MNCs are assumed to have a comparative advantage in
monitoring local entrepreneurs because of their familiarity with their technology. The
relative value of MNC monitoring should be more pronounced for firms that conduct more
research and development (R&D) because these firms are more likely to be deploying novel
  25
     Given the limited time dimension of our dataset, our linear specification avoids the incidental para-
meter problem inherent in the estimation of a large number of fixed eﬀects. As a robustness check, these
specifications have been run as conditional logit specifications. The resulting coeﬃcients on the measures
of financial development and these measures interacted with the log of parent R&D are of the same sign
and statistical significance as those presented in the table, except for the interaction of creditor rights
and the log of parent R&D. The coeﬃcient on this variable is positive, but it is not statistically diﬀerent
from zero at conventional levels.


                                                    23
technologies that require the unique monitoring ability of multinational parents. More
crudely, multinational firms with limited technological capabilities are less likely to be
important to external funders as monitors, and the eﬀects of capital market development
on the choice to serve a country through licensing or aﬃliate activity should be less
pronounced for these kinds of firms.
    To test for this diﬀerential eﬀect, the specification presented in Column 3 uses the log
of parent R&D as a proxy for the degree to which firms are technologically advanced. Since
this specification includes parent-year fixed eﬀects, this variable does not enter on its own,
but it is interacted with creditor rights. The positive coeﬃcient on the interaction term
is consistent with the prediction that the value of creating incentives to monitor through
ownership in countries with weak financial development is highest for technologically
advanced firms.
    The specifications presented in columns 4-6 of Table II repeat those presented in
columns 1-3 replacing creditor rights with private credit as a measure of financial devel-
opment. The positive and significant coeﬃcients on private credit in columns 4 and 5 are
consistent with the findings in columns 1 and 2 and illustrate that countries with higher
levels of financial development are more likely to be served through unaﬃliated party
licensing as opposed to just aﬃliate activity. The positive and significant coeﬃcient on
private credit interacted with the log of parent R&D presented in column 6 indicates that
the eﬀects of capital markets on the licensing decision are most pronounced for firms that
are R&D intensive.


4.2    The Financing and Ownership of Foreign Aﬃliates
The specifications presented in Table III investigate if aﬃliates located in countries with
poorly functioning credit markets are financed more extensively with capital provided by
the parent. Since the ability to monitor is associated with the firm’s use of technology,
this eﬀect of capital market development should be most pronounced for firms that are
R&D intensive. The dependent variable employed is the ratio of the sum of net borrowing
from the parent and parent equity provisions (including both paid-in-capital and retained
earnings) to aﬃliate assets.
    The specification presented in column 1 of Table III includes ownership restrictions to
control for laws that might limit the ability of a parent to provide capital to its aﬃliate
and the corporate tax rate to control for incentives to use debt and to repatriate earnings
created by tax considerations. It also includes the log of GDP, the log of GDP per
capita, and workforce schooling to control for the size of the host country market and

                                             24
some measures of the level of host country economic development. The negative and
significant coeﬃcient on creditor rights in column 1 indicates that the share of aﬃliate
assets financed by the parent is higher in countries that do not provide creditors with
extensive legal protections. This result is consistent with the prediction contained in
Proposition 5.
    The specification in column 2 includes the set of other institutional variables used
in Table II to ensure that proxies for financial development are not proxying for some
other kind of institutional development. In addition, this specification also controls for
aﬃliate characteristics that the corporate finance literature suggests might influence the
availability of external capital. Harris and Raviv (1991) and Rajan and Zingales (1995)
find that larger firms and firms with higher levels of tangible assets are more able to
obtain external debt. Two proxies for aﬃliate size–the log of aﬃliate sales and the log
of aﬃliate employment–and a proxy for the tangibility of aﬃliate assets–the ratio of
aﬃliate net property, plant and equipment to aﬃliate assets–are included.
    In the specification in column 2, the -0.0164 coeﬃcient on creditor rights implies that
the share of aﬃliate assets financed by the aﬃliate’s parent is 0.0327, or 7.9% of its mean
value, higher for aﬃliates in countries in the 25th percentile of creditor rights relative
to the 75th percentile of creditor rights. The negative and significant coeﬃcient on FDI
ownership restrictions is consistent with the hypothesis that such restrictions limit parent
capital provisions, and the negative and significant coeﬃcient on the log of GDP suggests
that aﬃliates located in smaller markets are more reliant on their parents for capital.
When aﬃliates borrow, they primarily borrow from external sources, and Desai, Foley
and Hines (2004b) shows that aﬃliates borrow more in high tax jurisdictions. These
facts could explain the negative coeﬃcient on the corporate tax rate in explaining the
share of assets financed by the parent.26 Previous theoretical work stressing how concerns
over technology expropriation might give rise to multinational activity does not make
clear predictions concerning the share of aﬃliate assets financed by the parent, but it is
worth noting that the indices of patent protection and property rights are negative in the
specification in column 2. None of the unreported coeﬃcients on aﬃliate characteristics
are significant.
    If parent financing creates incentives for monitoring and the eﬀects of monitoring are
strongest for firms with more technology, then the eﬀects documented in column 2 should
be most pronounced for R&D intensive firms. The specification in column 3 tests for
  26
    The model’s predictions relate to overall parent capital provision. As such, these specifications diﬀer
from the analysis in Desai, Foley and Hines (2004b) where only borrowing decisions are analyzed.



                                                    25
a diﬀerential eﬀect of creditor rights on financing by including creditor rights interacted
with the log of parent R&D. The negative and significant coeﬃcient on this interaction
term indicates that more technologically advanced firms finance a higher share of aﬃliate
assets in countries with weak credit markets. This finding is not implied by many other
intuitions for why capital market development might aﬀect parental financing provisions.
    The specifications presented in columns 4-6 of Table III repeat the analysis presented
in columns 1-3 substituting measures of private credit for creditor rights. In columns 4
and 5, the coeﬃcient on private credit is negative, and it is significant in column 4 but
only marginally significant in column 5. In the specification in column 6, the interaction
of private credit and the log of parent R&D is significant. The results obtained when
using private credit are therefore also consistent with the prediction of Proposition 5
and provide further evidence that the eﬀects of credit market conditions are especially
pronounced for technologically advanced firms.
    The model also predicts that multinational parents should hold larger ownership stakes
in aﬃliates located in countries with weak investor protections. Table IV presents results
of using the share of aﬃliate equity owned by the parent as the dependent variable in
specifications that are similar to those presented in Table III. Although parent equity
shares are bounded between 0 and 1, and there is a large grouping of aﬃliates with equity
that is 100% owned by a single parent firm, the specifications presented in Table IV
are ordinary least squares models that include parent/year fixed eﬀects and that allow
standard errors to be clustered at the country/year level.27 In the specifications presented
in columns 1, 2, 4, and 5, the proxy for credit market development is negative and
significant. Parent companies own higher shares of aﬃliate equity when aﬃliates are
located in countries where protections extended to creditors are weaker and private credit
is scarcer, as predicted by the model. In the specifications presented in columns 3 and
6, the negative and significant coeﬃcients on the interaction terms indicate that these
results are also more pronounced for technologically advanced firms.
    The results in Table IV also indicate that equity ownership shares are lower in coun-
tries with ownership restrictions, countries that are bigger, countries that are less well-
developed, and countries with higher corporate tax rates. If equity ownership decisions
placed strong emphasis on the protection of technology and ownership substituted for
weak patent protections, the coeﬃcient on the Patent Protections variable should be neg-
ative and significant. While the estimated coeﬃcient is negative, it is only marginally
  27
    These results are robust to using an alternative estimation technique. Conditional logit specifications
that use a dependent variable that is equal to one for wholly owned aﬃliates and zero for partially owned
aﬃliates yield similar results.


                                                    26
significant in some specifications.
    The results presented in Tables II, III, and IV are robust to a number of concerns.
First, the estimates of coeﬃcients on capital market conditions interacted with the log
of parent R&D may reflect the eﬀect of similar interactions with alternative institutional
variables. Specifically, the results on these interaction terms may reflect an alternative
eﬀect better captured by interacting log of parent R&D with the measure of country
protection of intellectual property. When the log of parent R&D interacted with the
patent protection index is included in the specifications presented in columns 3 and 6 of
the three tables, the interactions featuring proxies for credit market development remain
significant in all of the tests except for the one in column 3 of Table II. It may also be
the case that the share of aﬃliate assets financed by the parent and parent ownership
levels are lower for older aﬃliates and these aﬃliates may be more likely to be located
in countries with well developed credit markets. Including proxies for aﬃliate age in the
specifications presented in the specifications presented in Tables III and IV does not aﬀect
the results of interest.28


4.3     The Scale of Multinational Activity
The model predicts that multinational activity will be greatest in countries with stronger
investor protections. Because there are many theories for the determinants of FDI activity,
using specifications similar to those presented in Tables II, III, and IV to explore scale is
problematic.29 It is diﬃcult to include a set of controls suﬃciently extensive to distinguish
between alternative theories.
    Given this diﬃculty, the analysis below investigates a subtler and more precise pre-
diction of the model by investigating the role of liberalizations of ownership restrictions
on the scale of multinational firm activity. Specifically, the model suggests that the re-
sponse to ownership liberalizations should be larger in host countries with weak investor
protections. The intuition for this prediction is that in countries with weak investor pro-
tections, ownership restrictions are more likely to bind because ownership is most critical
for maximizing the value of the enterprise in these settings. As such, the relaxation of
an ownership constraint should have muted eﬀects for aﬃliates in countries with deep
  28
     The proxies for age are the number of years since an aﬃliate first reported data to BEA and a dummy
equal to one if the aﬃliate first reported in 1982 and zero otherwise.
  29
     Appendix Table I presents the results of such an exercise. Although the coeﬃcients on both the
creditor rights variables and private credit variables are usually positive in explaining the log of aﬃliate
sales in the specifications presented in columns 1, 2, 4, and 5, as Proposition 3 predicts, none of the
coeﬃcients on these variables is significant.


                                                    27
capital markets and more pronounced eﬀects for aﬃliates in countries with weaker capital
markets.
    The specifications presented in Table V investigate if such diﬀerential eﬀects are indeed
present. Liberalizations are defined as the first year in which the FDI ownership restriction
dummy described above changes from 1 to 0.30 The dependent variable in columns 1
and 2 is the log value of aﬃliate sales, and the sample consists of the full panel from
1982 to 1999. Given the limited data requirements of these specifications (relative to
the variables investigated in Tables II, III and IV) and the desire to investigate changes
within aﬃliates, the full panel provides a more appropriate setting for these tests. These
specifications include aﬃliate and year fixed eﬀects and the standard errors are clustered
at the country level. The sample includes all countries so aﬃliate activity in countries that
do not liberalize helps identify the year eﬀects and the coeﬃcients on the income variables,
but the results are robust to using a sample drawn only from reforming countries.
    The specifications in columns 1 and 2 include controls for log GDP, log GDP per
capita and the post-liberalization dummy. The coeﬃcient on log GDP per capita is
positive and significant indicating that rising incomes are associated with larger levels of
aﬃliate activity. The coeﬃcient of interest in column 1 is the coeﬃcient on the interaction
of the post-liberalization dummy and a dummy that is equal to one if the country is at
or below the median value of the creditor rights index in the year of liberalization. The
positive and significant coeﬃcient indicates that aﬃliates in weak creditor rights countries
grow quickly after liberalizations. The coeﬃcient on the post-liberalization dummy on its
own indicates that the eﬀect of liberalizations is negligible and statistically insignificant
for aﬃliates in high creditor rights countries. In column 2, these same results are obtained
when the measure of private credit is used as the proxy for financial development. At the
aﬃliate level, the model’s predictions regarding how the scale of activity relates to capital
market depth are validated using tests that, through the use of aﬃliate fixed eﬀects and
the emphasis on the interaction term, are diﬃcult to reconcile with alternative theories.
    It is possible that the results presented in columns 1 and 2 inaccurately capture the
eﬀects of the liberalizations because they only measure activity on the intensive margin
  30
    The countries experiencing a liberalization are Argentina (1990), Australia (1987), Colombia (1992),
Ecuador (1991), Finland (1990), Honduras (1993), Japan (1993), Malaysia (1987), Mexico (1990), Norway
(1995), Peru (1992), Philippines (1992), Portugal (1987), Sweden (1992), Trinidad and Tobago (1994),
and Venezuela (1990). Since control variables measuring the development of institutions other than
credit markets do not vary much (if at all) through time and are unavailable for six of the sixteen
reforming countries, these controls are not included in the analysis of liberalizations. The aﬃliate fixed
eﬀects implicitly control for time invariant country characteristics so this is unlike to pose a significant
problem.



                                                    28
and fail to capture responses on the extensive margin. For example, entry or exit might
accompany liberalizations and might amplify or dampen these results. In order to consider
this possibility, the specifications provided in columns 3 and 4 employ a dependent variable
that is the log value of the aggregate value of all sales of U.S. multinational aﬃliates within
a country-year cell. These specifications substitute country fixed eﬀects for aﬃliate fixed
eﬀects but are otherwise similar to the regressions provided in columns 1 and 2.
    In column 3, the coeﬃcient on the interaction term including the creditor rights vari-
able is again positive and significant indicating that including activity on the extensive
margin does not appear to contradict the earlier result. In column 4, the coeﬃcient on
the interaction term is again positive and significant. Taken together, the results suggest
that the scale of activity is positively related to the quality of investor protections and
capital market development, and these results persist when incorporating the eﬀects of
entry and exit.


5     Conclusions
Eﬀorts to understand patterns of multinational firm activity have typically emphasized
aspects of technology transfer rather than the constraints imposed by weak investor pro-
tections and shallow capital markets. In the prior literature, multinational firms arise
because of the risk of a partner expropriating a proprietary technology. In the model
presented in this paper, the exploitation of technology is central to understanding multi-
national firm activity but the critical constraint is the nature of capital market develop-
ment and investor protections in host countries. Entrepreneurs must raise capital to fund
projects, and external investors are aware of the possibility that these entrepreneurs might
behave opportunistically. Inventors can alleviate financial frictions because they have a
comparative advantage in monitoring entrepreneurs. Multinational activity and capital
flows arise endogenously to ensure that monitoring occurs. External investors demand
higher levels of multinational parent firm financial participation in countries with weak
investor protections.
    By placing financial frictions at the center of understanding patterns of activity and
flows, the model delivers novel predictions about the use of arm’s length licensing and
about the financial and investment decisions of multinational firms that are validated
in firm-level analysis. The use of arm’s length licensing to deploy technology is more
common in countries with strong investor protections and deep capital markets. Previous
findings that FDI flows to developing countries are limited reflect two opposing forces.


                                              29
Weak investor protections and shallow capital markets limit the eﬃcient scale of enterprise
but also result in greater parent provision of capital and more ownership of the aﬃliate
equity. The eﬀects of the institutional setting are more prounced for R&D intensive firms
as parental monitoring is particularly valuable for the investments of these firms. By
jointly considering operational and financial decisions, the theory and empirics provide
an integrated explanation for patterns of MNC activity and FDI flows that have typically
been considered separately.
    Further consideration of the role of financial frictions on multinational firm activity
along several dimensions may prove fruitful. First, the model presented eﬀectively rules
out exports to unrelated parties as a means of serving foreign markets. Incorporating
the tradeoﬀ between exports and production abroad in a world with financial frictions
may yield additional predictions that would help explain the choice between exporting
and FDI. Second, exploring the implications of financial frictions for intrafirm trade may
help explain how the demands of external funders in weak institutional environments
aﬀect the fragmentation of production processes across borders. Finally, given the central
role of foreign ownership in reducing diversion, it may be interesting to consider how
industrial activity in weaker institutional environments is distributed between local firms
and multinational aﬃliates and how these types of firms compete.




                                            30
A      Appendix
A.1      The Shadow Cost of Cash
In the main text, we have treated the shadow value of cash β as exogenous. In this Ap-
pendix we briefly illustrate how to endogenize it and show how it relates to characteristics
of the Home country and in particular to its level of investor protection.
    For this purpose, we generalize the setup described in section 2.1 and consider the
situation in which there are J − 1 Foreign countries, each associated with a level of
financial development γ j and a cash flow function Rj (xj ).31 The inventor contracts with
each of J − 1 foreign entrepreneurs and, as a result of the optimal contracting described
                                                 P
above, has an amount of cash equal to W + j6=H P̂ j to invest in the Home country.
    Preferences and technology at Home are such that the cash flows obtained from the
sale of the diﬀerentiated good at Home can be expressed as a strictly increasing and
concave function of the quantity produced, RH (q), satisfying the same properties as the
cash flow function in other countries. Home production is managed by the inventor, who
can also privately choose to behave or misbehave, with consequences identical to those
discussed above: if the inventor behaves, the project performs with probability pH , but
if he misbehaves, the project performs with a lower probability pL . In the latter case,
however, the inventor obtains a private benefit equal to a fraction 1 − γ H of cash flows,
where γ H is an index of investor protection at Home.
    The inventor sells domestic cash flow rights to a continuum of external investors at
Home, who can obtain a rate of return equal to one in an alternative investment oppor-
tunity.32 We consider an optimal financial contract between the inventor and external
investors in which the inventor is granted the ability to make take-it-or-leave-it oﬀers,
just as in the main text. The optimal contract specifies the scale of operation xH , the
amount of cash Wx that the inventor invests in the project, the share of equity φH    E sold
                                                     H
to external investors, and the amount of cash E provided by external investors.
    Taking the contracts signed with foreign individuals as given, an optimal financial
contract with
           n external      investors
                                o    at Home that induces the inventor to behave is given by
                        H
the tuple x̂H , Ŵx , φ̂E , Ê H that solves the following program:
  31
     With some abuse of notation we use J to denote both the number of countries as well as the set of
these countries.
  32
     For simplicity, we assume that the inventor cannot pleadge foreign cash flow rights to its external
investors.




                                                  31
                          P        ¡ j         ¢             ¡       ¢ H ¡ H¢    P
       max         ΠI =     j6=H    φI pH − C j Rj (xj ) + pH 1 − φH
                                                                   E R    x + W + j6=H P j − Wx
 xH ,Wx ,φH
          E ,E
               H


       s.t.        xH ≤ E H + Wx
                                P
                   Wx ≤ W + j6=H P j
                             ¡ H¢
                   pH φH
                       ER
                          H
                              x ≥ EH
                              ¡      ¢ H ¡ H¢ ¡      ¢  ¡ ¢
                   (pH − pL ) 1 − φH
                                   E R    x ≥ 1 − γ H RH xH
                                                                                       (P3)
                                                                      H
    It is straightforward to show that provided that γ is low enough (i.e, provided that
financial frictions at Home are large enough), all constraints in program (P3) will bind in
equilibrium, and the profits of the entrepreneur can be expressed
                           X          ¡ j         ¢ j ¡ j¢   ³ X                                    ´
                    ΠI =                        j          b
                                       φI pH − C R x + β W +                               P̂   j
                                                                                                        (15)
                               j6=H                                                 j6=H


where
                                                      1−γ H
                                                    (pH −pL )
                                   β̂ =             ³                      ´ > 1.                       (16)
                                           1−γ H                x̂H
                                          pH −pL
                                                   − 1−     pH RH (x̂H )

Notice that the resulting profit function (15) is closely related to that considered in pro-
gram (P3) in section 2.3, where β̂ now replaces β. There are however two important
diﬀerences between the two profit functions.
    First, the formulation in (15) considers the case in which the inventor obtains cash
flow from the exploitation of the technology in multiple countries. Nevertheless, notice
that for a given β̂, the profit function features separability between these diﬀerent sources
of dividends. As a result, for a given β̂, the optimal contract with the entrepreneur and
external investors in each country j is as described in section 2.3.33 Hence, Propositions
3, 4, and 5 continue to apply and their statements not only apply to changes in the
parameter γ, but also to cross-sectional (cross-country) variation in investor protection.
In this sense, the tests performed in section 4 are well defined.
    The second important diﬀerence between the profit function in (15) and in program
(P3) is that the shadow value of cash β̂ is in fact endogenous, in the sense that it is a
function of the scale of operation at Home xH , which in turn will depend on the optimal
  33
    Notice also that when β̂ > 1, the inventor is financially constrained at Home, in the sense that external
investors at Home are only willing to lend to him a multiple of his pleadgeable income (wealth plus date-
0 payments). If external investors were to lend a larger amount, the inventor’s incentive compatibility
constraint would be violated. The same would of course apply to external investors in foreign countries.
This helps rationalize our assumption in section 2.1 that the inventor does not sign bilateral financial
contracts with external investors in host countries.


                                                       32
contracts in the other J countries through the date-0 transfers P̂ j for j 6= H (as is clear
from program (P3)). Hence, β̂ will in general be a function of the vector of country
                          ¡                    ¢
investor protections γ ≡ γ 1 , ..., γ J−1 , γ H . Notice, however, that for large enough J, the
eﬀect of a particular investor protection level γ j (j 6= H) on the overall shadow value of
cash β̂ will tend to be negligible, and thus the comparative static results in section 2.4
will continue to apply.
    To sum up, this Appendix has illustrated that a higher-than-one shadow value of cash
can easily be rationalized in a simple extension of our initial partial-equilibrium model,
in which not only foreign entrepreneurs, but also the inventor faces financial constraints.
We have seen that endogenizing the shadow value of cash may aﬀect the solution of the
optimal contract in subtle ways, but that if the number of host countries in which the
inventor exploits his technology is large enough, the comparative static results in section
2.4 remain qualitatively valid.


A.2     Proof of Proposition 1
Let us start by writing the Lagrangian corresponding to program (P1). Letting λk de-
note the multiplier corresponding to correspond to constraint k = 1, 2, 4, 5 (remember
constraint (iii) cannot bind), we have

   L = φI pH R (x) + (W + P ) β − CR (x) + λ1 (E − P − x) + λ2 (pH φE R (x) − E)
           +λ4 ((pH − pL ) (1 − φE − φI ) R (x) − (1 − γ) δ (C) R (x)) + λ5 φI .

The first-order conditions of this program (apart from the standard complementarity
slackness conditions) are:

       ∂L
           = β − λ1 = 0
       ∂P
       ∂L
           = pH R (x̃) − λ4 (pH − pL ) R (x̃) + λ5 = 0
       ∂φI
        ∂L
           = φ̃I pH R0 (x̃) − C̃R0 (x̃) − λ1 + λ2 pH φ̃E R0 (x̃)
        ∂x                  h            ³              ´        ³ ´i
                     + λ4 (pH − pL ) 1 − φ̃E − φ̃I − (1 − γ) δ C̃ R0 (x̃) = 0 (A1)
       ∂L
           = λ2 pH R (x̃) − λ4 (pH − pL ) R (x̃) = 0
       ∂φE




                                              33
                                  ∂L
                                     = λ1 − λ2 = 0
                                  ∂E
                                  ∂L                           ³ ´
                                                             0
                                     = −R (x̃) − λ4 (1 − γ) δ C̃ R (x̃) = 0.             (A2)
                                  ∂C

     Straightforward manipulation of these conditions delivers

                                      λ1 = λ2 = β > 0
                                              pH             pH
                                      λ4 =          λ2 =          β>0
                                           pH − pL        pH − pL
                                      λ5 = (β − 1) pH R (x̃) > 0,

from which we conclude that all constraints bind, as claimed in the main text.
   Next plugging the value of λ4 into (A2) delivers
                                                ³ ´          pH − pL
                                            −δ 0 C̃ =                  ,
                                                           (1 − γ) βpH

while plugging the values of λ1 , λ2 , and λ3 into (A1) delivers

                                                               1
                                      R0 (x̃) =     µ                               ¶.
                                                           (1−γ)δ (C̃ )        C̃
                                                  pH 1 −     pH −pL
                                                                          −   βpH


These correspond to equations (3) and (4) in the main text. The comparative statics
related to C̃ follow directly from the convexity of δ (·). As for the comparative statics
related to x̃, it suﬃces to note that:

     µ                            ¶
         (1−γ)δ (C̃ )        C̃
                                           ³ ´        ³ ´                      ³ ´
 d         pH −pL
                        +   βpH            (1 − γ) δ 0 C̃ dC
                                          δ C̃              e         e      δ  C̃
                                                                   1 dC
                          = −            +                    +         =−          < 0;
            dγ                pH − pL         pH − pL      dγ    βpH dγ     pH − pL
   µ                    ¶
     (1−γ)δ (C̃ )    C̃
                                        ³ ´
 d     pH −pL
                  + βpH     (1 − γ) δ 0
                                         C̃ dCe           e
                                                      1 dC      C̃       C̃
                          =                     +           − 2      =− 2    < 0.
            dβ                 pH − pL       dβ    βpH dβ     β pH      β pH

Hence, R0 (x̃) falls in γ and β, and thus x̃ increases in these two parameters.


A.3          Optimal Contract Implementing Bad Behavior
It is clear that in this case the inventor has no incentive to exert monitoring eﬀort. It is
also immediate that even when the entrepreneur does not obtain any share of the cash

                                                        34
                                                                                 L   L
flows, her participation constraint will be satisfied, and thus we have that φ̃I + φ̃E = 1.
The program can then be written as

                       max         ΠI = φI pL R (x) + (W + P ) β
                      P,φI ,x,E
                        s.t.       x≤E−P                                 (i)         (P1L )
                                   pL (1 − φI ) R (x) ≥ E                (ii)
                                   φI ≥ 0                                (iii)
The corresponding Lagrangian is

   L = φI pL R (x) + (W + P ) β + λ1 (E − P − x) + λ2 (pL (1 − φI ) R (x) − E) + λ3 φI .

The first-order conditions are

                ∂L
                       = β − λ1 = 0
                ∂P
                ∂L           ¡ ¢           ¡ ¢
                       = pL R x̃L − λ2 pL R x̃L + λ3 = 0
                ∂φI
                 ∂L        L      ¡ ¢              ³      L
                                                            ´ ¡ ¢
                       = φ̃I pL R0 x̃L − λ1 + λ2 pL 1 − φ̃I R0 x̃L = 0                   (A3)
                 ∂x
                ∂L
                       = λ1 − λ2 = 0
                ∂E

Note that

                                   λ1 = λ2 = β
                                                    ¡ ¢
                                   λ3 = (β − 1) pL R x̃L > 0.

                                                 L
Hence, all constraints bind, which implies φ̃I = 0. Plugging the values of the multipliers,
                    L
as well as C̃ L = φ̃I = 0 in (A3) we obtain:
                                               ¡ ¢
                                          pL R0 x̃L = 1,

which corresponds to equation (8) in the main text. Note also that plugging the con-
straints in the objective function delivers:
                                                 Ã     ¡ ¢          !
                                                     R x̃L
                                  Π̃L = βW + β                 − x̃L ,
                                                     R0 (x̃L )

as claimed in the main text.

                                                 35
   Note that from the definition of ΠI in the main text, ΠI > Π̃L if and only if
                                               ¡ ¢
                                R (x̃)       R x̃L
                                 0
                                       − x̃ > 0 L − x̃L .
                                R (x̃)       R (x̃ )

But since RR(x)                                             00
            0 (x) − x is strictly increasing in x whenever R (x) < 0, we can conclude that

good behavior will be implemented whenever

                                          x̃ > x̃L .

Note also that x̃ is increasing in γ, while x̃L is independent of γ. Furthermore, when
γ → 1, it is necessarily the case that x̃ > x̃L . Hence, there exists a threshold γ over which
it is optimal to implement good behavior.


A.4     Proof of Proposition 2
Let us start by writing the Lagrangian corresponding to program (P2). Letting λk de-
note the multiplier corresponding to correspond to constraint k = 1, 2, 4, 5 (remember
constraint (iii) cannot bind), we can write this as:

L = φI pH R (x) + (W + P ) β − CR (x) + λ1 (E − P − x) + λ2 (pH φE R (x) − E)
                                                                    µ                ¶
                                                                              C
    +λ4 ((pH − pL ) (1 − φE − φI ) R (x) − (1 − γ) δ (C) R (x)) + λ5 φI −              .
                                                                          (pH − pL )

It is then straightforward to see that the same first-order conditions as in program (P1)
apply, except for the partial ∂L/∂C, which is now given by

                 ∂L                           ³ ´           λ5
                                            0
                    = −R (x̂) − λ4 (1 − γ) δ Ĉ R (x̂) −            = 0.                 (A4)
                 ∂C                                      (pH − pL )

Straightforward manipulation again delivers from which we conclude that all constraints
bind, as claimed in the main text. Furthermore, we find again that

                            λ1 = λ2 = β > 0
                                    pH             pH
                            λ4 =          λ2 =          β>0
                                 pH − pL        pH − pL
                            λ5 = (β − 1) pH R (x̂) > 0.




                                             36
Moreover, constraint (v’) now implies that φ̂I = Ĉ/ (pH − pL ). Plugging the values of the
multipliers in (A4) yields
                                    ³ ´       βpH − pL
                                −δ 0 Ĉ =                ,
                                             (1 − γ) βpH
as claimed in equation (10) in the main text. Next, plugging the multipliers and φ̂I into
(A1) — which applies here as well — yields

                                                          1
                      R0 (x̂) =     µ                         ³             ´         ¶,
                                           (1−γ)δ (Ĉ )           βpH −pL        Ĉ
                                  pH 1 −     pH −pL
                                                          −        pH −pL       βpH


which corresponds to equation (11) in the main text. Setting the constraints to equality,
we can also compute the total payoﬀ obtained by the inventor:
                                                  µ               ¶
                                                      R (x̂)
                                  Π̂I = W β + β               − x̂ .
                                                      R0 (x̂)

This is analogous to the expression obtained in the case of verifiable monitoring, but with
x̂ replacing x̃. Because the constraints in program (P1) are tighter than in program (P2),
we can conclude that Π̂I < Π̃I , which given the monotonicity of RR(x) 0 (x) − x implies that

x̂ < x̃.
     The expression we have derived for Π̂I can be used to analyze when it is optimal
for the inventor to implement good behavior. Notice that the optimal contract that
implements bad behavior is not aﬀected by whether monitoring is verifiable or not. Hence,
implementing good behavior is optimal whenever Π̂I > Π̃LI , or simply x̂ > x̃L . Again, for
suﬃciently high γ, this will necessarily be satisfied.


A.5     Proof of Lemma 1
This follows from the fact that the right-hand side of equation (10) is increasing in γ and
decreasing in β, while the left-hand is decreasing in Ĉ (given the convexity of δ (·)).


A.6     Proof of Proposition 4
Let                                         ³ ´
                 ³               ´ (1 − γ) δ Ĉ   µ          ¶
                                                    βpH − pL   Ĉ
                F γ, β, Ĉ (γ, β) =             +                 .
                                      pH − pL       pH − pL βpH




                                                37
Using equation (10), we can establish that:
                ³ ´                ³ ´                                       ³ ´
               δ Ĉ    (1 − γ) δ 0
                                     Ĉ        µ          ¶                δ  Ĉ
dF (·)                                  dĈ      βpH − pL    1 dĈ
       = −           +                       +                       =−            < 0;
 dγ        pH − pL        p − pL        dγ       pH − pL βpH dγ           pH − pL
                    ³ ´ H
dF (·)   (1 − γ) δ 0 Ĉ dĈ µ βp − p ¶ 1 dĈ                   pL Ĉ               pL Ĉ
                                      H     L
       =                    +                          +              2    =                    > 0.
 dβ         pH − pL      dβ         pH − pL βpH dβ        (pH − pL ) β pH     (pH − pL ) β 2 pH

>From inspection of (11) and the concavity of R (·), it is then clear that x̂ is increasing
in γ and decreasing in β.




                                              38
References
Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S. and Mitton T. (2005), “Determinants of Vertical Integration:
   Finance Contracts and Regulation,” NBER Working Paper No. 11424.

Aguiar, Mark and Gita Gopinath (2005), “Fire-Sale FDI and Liquidity Crises,” Review
    of Economics and Statistics, 87:3, pp. 439-452.

Antràs, Pol (2003), “Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics, 118:4, pp. 1375-1418.

Antràs, Pol (2005), “Incomplete Contracts and the Product Cycle,” American Economic
    Review, 95:4, pp. 1054-1073.

Antràs, Pol and Elhanan Helpman (2004), “Global Sourcing,” Journal of Political Econ-
    omy 112:3, pp. 552-580.

Baker, Malcolm, C. Fritz Foley and Jeﬀrey Wurgler (2006), “Multinationals as Arbi-
    trageurs? The Eﬀects of Stock Market Valuations on Foreign Direct Investment,”
    Working paper, Harvard University.

Barro, Robert J. and Jong-Wha Lee (2000), “International Data on Educational Attain-
    ment: Updates and Implications,” CID Working Paper No. 42.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt and Ross Levine (1999), “A New Database on
    Financial Development and Structure,” Policy Research Working Paper No. 2146,
    Washington DC: World Bank.

Blonigen, Bruce A. (1997), “Firm-Specific Assets and the Link Between Exchange Rates
    and Foreign Direct Investment” American Economic Review, 87:3, pp. 447-465.

Boyd, John H. and Bruce D. Smith (1997), "Capital Market Imperfections, International
    Credit Markets and Nonconvergence," Journal of Economic Theory, 73:2 335-364.

Brainard, S. Lael (1997), “An Empirical Assessment of the Proximity-Concentration
    Trade-oﬀ Between Multinational Sales and Trade,” American Economic Review,
    87:4, pp. 520-544.

Caves, Richard E. (1996), Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis, Second Edi-
    tion, Cambridge University Press.


                                         39
Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley and Kristin J. Forbes (forthcoming), “Financial Con-
    straints and Growth: Multinational and Local Firm Responses to Currency Depre-
    ciations,” Review of Financial Studies.

Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley and James R. Hines Jr. (2002), “Dividend Policy Inside
    the Firm,” NBER Working Paper No. 8698.

Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley and James R. Hines Jr. (2004), “The Costs of Shared
    Ownership: Evidence from International Joint Ventures,” Journal of Financial Eco-
    nomics, 73:2, pp. 323-374.

Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley and James R. Hines Jr. (2004b), “A Multinational
    Perspective on Capital Structure Choice and Internal Capital Markets,” Journal of
    Finance, 59:6, pp. 2451-2488.

Djankov, Simeon, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer (forthcoming), “Private Credit
    in 129 Countries,” Journal of Financial Economics.

Ethier, Wilfred J. and James R. Markusen (1996), “Multinational Firms, Technology
    Diﬀusion and Trade,” Journal of International Economics, 41:1, pp. 1-28.

Feenstra, Robert and Gordon Hanson (2005), “Ownership and Control in Outsourcing
    to China: Estimating the Property-Rights Theory of the Firm,” Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, 120:2, pp. 729-761.

Froot, Kenneth A., and Jeremy C. Stein (1991), “Exchange Rates and Foreign Direct
    Investment: An Imperfect Capital Markets Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics, 106:4, pp. 1191-1217.

Gertler, Mark and Kenneth S. Rogoﬀ (1990), “North-South Lending and Endogenous
    Domestic Capital Market Ineﬃciencies,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 26:2, pp.
    245-266.

Ginarte, Jaun Carlos, and Walter Park (1997), “Determinants of Patent Rights: A
    Cross-National Study,” Research Policy, 26:3, pp. 283-301.

Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman, (2004) “Managerial Incentives and the In-
    ternational Organization of Production,” Journal of International Economics, 63:2,
    pp. 237-262.



                                         40
Harris, Milton and Arthur Raviv (1991), “The Theory of Capital Structure,” Journal of
    Finance, 46:1, pp. 297-355.

Helpman, Elhanan (1984), “A Simple Theory of International Trade with Multinational
    Corporations”, Journal of Political Economy, 92:3, pp. 451-471.

Helpman, Elhanan, Marc J. Melitz, and Stephen R. Yeaple (2004), “Exports versus FDI
    with Heterogeneous Firms,” American Economic Review, 94:1, pp. 300-316.

Holmstrom, Bengt and Jean Tirole (1997), “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds,
    and the Real Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112:3, pp. 663-691.

King, Robert G., Ross Levine (1993), “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might be
    Right,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108:3, pp. 717-738.

Klein, Michael W., Joe Peek, and Eric Rosengren (2002), “Troubled Banks, Impaired
    Foreign Direct Investment: The Role of Relative Access to Credit,” American Eco-
    nomic Review, 92:3, pp. 664-682.

Klein, Michael W., and Eric Rosengren (1994), “The Real Exchange Rate and Foreign
    Direct Investment in the United States,” Journal of International Economics, 36:3-
    4, pp. 373-389.

Kraay, Aart, Norman Loayza, Luis Servén, and Jaume Ventura (2005), “Country Port-
    folios,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 3:4, pp. 914-945.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny
    (1998), “Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 106:6, pp. 1113-1155.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny
    (1997), “Legal Determinants of External Finance,” Journal of Finance, 52:3, pp.
    1131-1150.

Levine, Ross and Sara Zervos (1998), “Stock Markets, Banks and Economic Growth,”
    American Economic Review, 88:3, pp. 537-558.

Lucas, Robert (1990), “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?” Amer-
    ican Economic Review, 80:3, pp.92-96.

Marin, Dalia and Monika Schnitzer (2004), “Global Versus Local: The Financing of
    Foreign Direct Investment,” Working paper, University of Munich.

                                         41
Markusen, James R. (1984), “Multinationals, Multi-Plant Economies, and the Gains
   from Trade,” Journal of International Economics, 16:3-4, pp. 205-226.

Markusen, James R. and Anthony J. Venables (2000), “The Theory of Endowment, Intra-
   industry and Multi-national Trade,” Journal of International Economics, 52:2, pp.
   209-234.

Markusen, James R. (2002), Multinational Firms and the Theory of International Trade,
   Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales (1995), “What Do We Know About Capital
    Structure? Some Evidence from International Data,” Journal of Finance, 50:5, pp.
    1421-1460.

Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales (1998), “Financial Dependence and Growth,”
    American Economic Review 88:3, 559-586.

Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoﬀ (2004), “Serial Default and the “Paradox”
    of Rich to Poor Capital Flows,” American Economic Review, 94:2, pp. 52-58.

Shatz, Howard J. (2000), “The Location of U.S. Multinational Aﬃliates,” Ph.D. disser-
    tation, Harvard University.

Shleifer, Andrei and Daniel Wolfenzon (2002), “Investor Protection and Equity Markets,”
     Journal of Financial Economics, 66:1, pp. 3-27.

Tirole, Jean (2006), The Theory of Corporate Finance, Princeton: Princeton University
    Press.

Wurgler, Jeﬀrey (2000), “Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital,” Journal of
   Financial Economics 58:1-2, 187-214.

Yeaple, Stephen (2003), “The Role of Skill Endowments in the Structure of U.S. Outward
    FDI,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85:3, pp. 726-734.




                                         42
                                                                        Table I
                                                               Descriptive Statistics


                                                                                                     Mean                     Standard Deviation
Panel A: Benchmark Year Data for Tests in Tables II-V
Multinational Firm Variables
Arm's Length Licensing Dummy                                                                        0.1522                           0.3592
Share of Affiliate Assets Financed by Parent                                                        0.4146                           0.3267
Share of Affiliate Equity Owned by Parent                                                           0.8991                           0.2195
Log of Affiliate Sales                                                                              9.9024                           1.7218
Log of Affiliate Employment                                                                         4.7601                           1.6060
Affiliate Net PPE/Assets                                                                            0.2355                           0.2264
Log of Parent R&D Expenditures                                                                      9.0580                           4.3927
Country Variables
Creditor Rights                                                                                     2.1415                           1.2100
Private Credit                                                                                      0.7536                           0.3891
FDI Ownership Restrictions                                                                          0.2247                           0.4174
Workforce Schooling                                                                                 8.1385                           2.1739
Log of GDP                                                                                         26.8002                           1.4252
Log of GDP per Capita                                                                               9.3995                           1.1019
Corporate Tax Rate                                                                                  0.3488                           0.1060
Patent Protections                                                                                  3.2287                           0.8480
Property Rights                                                                                     1.6233                           0.8378
Rule of Law                                                                                         9.3207                           1.4088
Risk of Expropriation                                                                               5.1398                           1.2731
Panel B: Annual Data for Tests in Table IV
Log of Affiliate Sales                                                                             10.1285                           2.1426
Log of Aggregated Affiliate Sales                                                                  15.7572                           1.7018
Notes: Panel A provides descriptive statistics for data drawn from the 1982, 1989, 1994, and 1999 benchmark year survey and used in the analysis
presented in Tables II-V. Arm's Length Licensing Dummy is defined for country/year pairs in which a parent has an affiliate or from which a parent
receives a royalty payment from an unaffiliated foreign person. This dummy is equal to one if the parent receives a royalty payment from an
unaffiliated foreign person, and it is otherwise equal to zero. Share of Affiliate Assets Financed by Parents is the ratio of parent provided equity and ne
parent lending to total affiliate assets. Share of Affiliate Equity Ownership is the equity ownership of the multinational parent. Affiliate Net
PPE/Assets is the ratio of affiliate net property plant and equipment to affiliate assets. Creditor Rights is an index of the strength of creditor rights
developed in Djankov, McLiesh, and Shleifer (2005); higher levels of the measure indicate stronger legal protections. Private Credit is the ratio of
private credit lent by deposit money banks to GDP, as provided in Beck et. al. (1999). FDI Ownership Restrictions is a dummy equal to one if two
measures of restrictions on foreign ownership as measured by Shatz (2000) are above 3 on a scale of 1 to 5 and zero otherwise. Workforce Schooling is
the average schooling years in the population over 25 years old provided in Barro and Lee (2000). Corporate Tax Rate is the median effective tax rate
paid by affiliates in a particular country and year. Patent Protections is an index of the strength of patent rights provided in Ginarte and Park (1997).
Property Rights is an index of the strength of property rights drawn from the 1996 Index of Economic Freedom . Rule of Law is an assessment of the
strength and impartiality of a country's overall legal system drawn from the International Country Risk Guide. Risk of Expropriation is an index of the
risk of outright confiscation or forced nationalization of private enterprise, and it is also drawn from the International Country Risk Guide; higher
values of this index reflect lower risks. Panel B provides descriptive statistics for annual data covering the 1982-1999 period that are used in the
analysis presented in Table IV. Log of Aggregated Affiliate Sales is the log of affiliate sales summed across affiliates in a particular country and year.
                                                                          Table II
                                                        Licensing and Affiliate Activity

        Dependent Variable:                                                    Arm's Length Licensing Dummy
                                                  (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)
Creditor Rights                                     0.0097             0.0148             0.0023
                                                  (0.0026)           (0.0029)           (0.0039)
Creditor Rights*Log of Parent                                                             0.0016
R&D                                                                                     (0.0005)
Private Credit                                                                                              0.0321             0.0342            -0.0606
                                                                                                          (0.0148)           (0.0168)           (0.0133)
Private Credit*Log of Parent                                                                                                                      0.0117
R&D                                                                                                                                             (0.0020)
FDI Ownership Restrictions                          0.0121             0.0080             0.0079            0.0007             0.0028             0.0020
                                                  (0.0100)           (0.0097)           (0.0094)          (0.0105)           (0.0099)           (0.0097)
Workforce Schooling                                 0.0078             0.0138             0.0134            0.0075             0.0110             0.0103
                                                  (0.0022)           (0.0020)           (0.0020)          (0.0029)           (0.0024)           (0.0025)
Log of GDP                                          0.0274             0.0274             0.0268            0.0243             0.0249             0.0242
                                                  (0.0037)           (0.0039)           (0.0038)          (0.0036)           (0.0040)           (0.0039)
Log of GDP per Capita                              -0.0167            -0.0140            -0.0144           -0.0203            -0.0205            -0.0223
                                                  (0.0045)           (0.0068)           (0.0066)          (0.0053)           (0.0077)           (0.0077)
Corporate Tax Rate                                  0.1452             0.1830             0.1777            0.1614             0.1602             0.1588
                                                  (0.0492)           (0.0470)           (0.0453)          (0.0490)           (0.0445)           (0.0438)
Patent Protections                                                     0.0142             0.0127                               0.0176             0.0158
                                                                     (0.0054)           (0.0052)                             (0.0065)           (0.0066)
Property Rights                                                        0.0253             0.0254                               0.0101             0.0086
                                                                     (0.0069)           (0.0067)                             (0.0065)           (0.0066)
Rule of Law                                                           -0.0023            -0.0022                              -0.0037            -0.0040
                                                                     (0.0045)           (0.0043)                             (0.0049)           (0.0046)
Risk of Expropriation                                                 -0.0087            -0.0081                              -0.0092            -0.0080
                                                                     (0.0051)           (0.0049)                             (0.0057)           (0.0055)
Constant                                           -0.5747            -0.6965            -0.6685           -0.4600            -0.4967            -0.4438
                                                  (0.1000)           (0.1062)           (0.1053)          (0.0951)           (0.0998)           (0.0974)

Parent/Year Fixed Effects?                         Y                  Y                  Y                 Y                  Y                  Y
No. of Obs.                                        33,004             31,906             30,954             30,678            30,079             29,238
R-Squared                                           0.5993             0.6006             0.6062             0.5995            0.6024             0.6105
Notes: The dependent variable, the Arm's Length Licensing Dummy, is defined for country/year pairs in which a parent has an affiliate or from which a
parent receives a royalty payment from an unaffiliated foreign person. This dummy is equal to one if the parent receives a royalty payment from an
unaffiliated foreign person, and it is otherwise equal to zero. Creditor Rights is an index of the strength of creditor rights developed in Djankov,
McLiesh, and Shleifer (2005); higher levels of the measure indicate stronger legal protections. Private credit is the ratio of private credit lent by deposit
money banks to GDP, as provided in Beck et. al. (1999). FDI Ownership Restrictions is a dummy equal to one if two measures of restrictions on
foreign ownership as measured by Shatz (2000) are above 3 on a scale of 1 to 5 and zero otherwise. Workforce Schooling is the average schooling
years in the population over 25 years old provided in Barro and Lee (2000). Corporate Tax Rate is the median effective tax rate paid by affiliates in a
particular country and year. Patent Protections is an index of the strength of patent rights provided in Ginarte and Park (1997). Property Rights is an
index of the strength of property rights drawn from the 1996 Index of Economic Freedom. Rule of Law is an assessment of the strength and
impartiality of a country's overall legal system drawn from the International Country Risk Guide. Risk of Expropriation is an index of the risk of
outright confiscation or forced nationalization of private enterprise, and it is also drawn from the International Country Risk Guide; higher values of
this index reflect lower risks. Each specification is an OLS specification that includes parent-year fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard
errors that correct for clustering at the country/year level appear in parentheses.
                                                                       Table III
                                                    Parent Financing of Affiliate Activity

        Dependent Variable:                                           Share of Affiliate Assets Financed by Parent
                                                 (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)
Creditor Rights                                   -0.0166            -0.0164           -0.0079
                                                 (0.0054)           (0.0051)          (0.0055)
Creditor Rights*Log of Parent                                                          -0.0010
R&D                                                                                   (0.0003)
Private Credit                                                                                            -0.0632            -0.0384           -0.0084
                                                                                                         (0.0195)           (0.0215)          (0.0220)
Private Credit*Log of Parent                                                                                                                   -0.0031
R&D                                                                                                                                           (0.0012)
FDI Ownership Restrictions                        -0.0406            -0.0426           -0.0426            -0.0323            -0.0358           -0.0358
                                                 (0.0146)           (0.0154)          (0.0155)           (0.0171)           (0.0160)          (0.0162)
Workforce Schooling                                0.0200             0.0110            0.0115             0.0199             0.0151            0.0157
                                                 (0.0057)           (0.0042)          (0.0043)           (0.0060)           (0.0048)          (0.0049)
Log of GDP                                        -0.0224            -0.0179           -0.0180            -0.0157            -0.0148           -0.0148
                                                 (0.0055)           (0.0070)          (0.0071)           (0.0062)           (0.0084)          (0.0085)
Log of GDP per Capita                             -0.0327            -0.0066           -0.0073            -0.0285             0.0027            0.0030
                                                 (0.0112)           (0.0153)          (0.0154)           (0.0136)           (0.0167)          (0.0169)
Corporate Tax Rate                                -0.1288            -0.2135           -0.2061            -0.1135            -0.1803           -0.1732
                                                 (0.0777)           (0.0763)          (0.0764)           (0.0743)           (0.0742)          (0.0745)
Patent Protections                                                   -0.0392           -0.0388                               -0.0434           -0.0436
                                                                    (0.0113)          (0.0114)                              (0.0119)          (0.0120)
Property Rights                                                      -0.0111           -0.0110                                0.0097            0.0113
                                                                    (0.0113)          (0.0115)                              (0.0103)          (0.0106)
Rule of Law                                                           0.0058            0.0062                                0.0065            0.0068
                                                                    (0.0078)          (0.0079)                              (0.0080)          (0.0080)
Risk of Expropriation                                                 0.0010            0.0007                                0.0009            0.0003
                                                                    (0.0090)          (0.0091)                              (0.0092)          (0.0094)
Constant                                           1.2571             1.0376            1.0386             1.0444             0.7810            0.7653
                                                 (0.1083)           (0.1511)          (0.1527)           (0.1479)           (0.1701)          (0.1735)

Parent/Year Fixed Effects?                        Y                  Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                 Y
Affiliate Controls?                               N                  Y                 Y                  N                  Y                 Y
No. of Obs.                                       51,060             41,232            40,297             48,183             38,911            38,016
R-Squared                                          0.3013             0.3105            0.3071             0.3076             0.3167            0.3134
Notes: The dependent variable is the ratio of parent provided equity and net parent lending to total assets. Creditor Rights is an index of the strength of
creditor rights developed in Djankov, McLiesh, and Shleifer (2005); higher levels of the measure indicate stronger legal protections. Private credit is
the ratio of private credit lent by deposit money banks to GDP, as provided in Beck et. al. (1999). FDI Ownership Restrictions is a dummy equal to one
if two measures of restrictions on foreign ownership as measured by Shatz (2000) are above 3 on a scale of 1 to 5 and zero otherwise. Workforce
Schooling is the average schooling years in the population over 25 years old provided in Barro and Lee (2000). Corporate Tax Rate is the median
effective tax rate paid by affiliates in a particular country and year. Patent Protections is an index of the strength of patent rights provided in Ginarte
and Park (1997). Property Rights is an index of the strength of property rights drawn from the 1996 Index of Economic Freedom . Rule of Law is an
assessment of the strength and impartiality of a country's overall legal system drawn from the International Country Risk Guide. Risk of Expropriation
is an index of the risk of outright confiscation or forced nationalization of private enterprise, and it is also drawn from the International Country Risk
Guide; higher values of this index reflect lower risks. Each specification is an OLS specification that includes parent-year fixed effects. As affiliate
controls, the specifications presented in columns 2, 3, 5, and 6 include the log of affiliate sales, the log of affiliate employment, and affiliate net
PPE/assets. Affiliate Net PPE/Assets is the ratio of affiliate net property plant and equipment to affiliate assets. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard
errors that correct for clustering at the country/year level appear in parentheses.
                                                                       Table IV
                                                    Parent Ownership of Affiliate Equity

        Dependent Variable:                                              Share of Affiliate Equity Owned by Parent
                                                  (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)
Creditor Rights                                    -0.0091           -0.0101            -0.0010
                                                  (0.0028)          (0.0035)           (0.0031)
Creditor Rights*Log of Parent                                                           -0.0010
R&D                                                                                    (0.0003)
Private Credit                                                                                             -0.0506            -0.0481             0.0078
                                                                                                          (0.0135)           (0.0174)           (0.0144)
Private Credit*Log of Parent                                                                                                                     -0.0057
R&D                                                                                                                                             (0.0009)
FDI Ownership Restrictions                         -0.0728           -0.0637            -0.0611            -0.0622            -0.0560            -0.0529
                                                  (0.0126)          (0.0133)           (0.0134)           (0.0117)           (0.0122)           (0.0122)
Workforce Schooling                                 0.0005           -0.0048            -0.0043             0.0007            -0.0030            -0.0026
                                                  (0.0024)          (0.0024)           (0.0025)           (0.0026)           (0.0026)           (0.0026)
Log of GDP                                         -0.0157           -0.0116            -0.0115            -0.0110            -0.0079            -0.0079
                                                  (0.0037)          (0.0046)           (0.0045)           (0.0035)           (0.0046)           (0.0046)
Log of GDP per Capita                               0.0309            0.0358             0.0362             0.0381             0.0402             0.0416
                                                  (0.0064)          (0.0132)           (0.0132)           (0.0078)           (0.0143)           (0.0144)
Corporate Tax Rate                                 -0.2634           -0.3456            -0.3391            -0.2778            -0.3249            -0.3179
                                                  (0.0638)          (0.0712)           (0.0701)           (0.0584)           (0.0582)           (0.0564)
Patent Protections                                                   -0.0142            -0.0137                               -0.0127            -0.0122
                                                                    (0.0073)           (0.0072)                              (0.0078)           (0.0077)
Property Rights                                                      -0.0054            -0.0043                                0.0001             0.0014
                                                                    (0.0072)           (0.0075)                              (0.0071)           (0.0072)
Rule of Law                                                           0.0005             0.0012                                0.0009             0.0017
                                                                    (0.0061)           (0.0061)                              (0.0061)           (0.0060)
Risk of Expropriation                                                 0.0054             0.0050                                0.0069             0.0060
                                                                    (0.0068)           (0.0068)                              (0.0067)           (0.0067)
Constant                                            1.1592            1.1096             1.0932             0.9832             0.9352             0.9072
                                                  (0.1006)          (0.1246)           (0.1224)           (0.0947)           (0.1028)           (0.0991)

Parent/Year Fixed Effects?                         Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                  Y
Affiliate Controls?                                N                 Y                  Y                  N                  Y                  Y
No. of Obs.                                        51,320            41,436             40,498             48,422             39,096             38,198
R-Squared                                           0.3974            0.4250             0.4184             0.3998             0.4275             0.4217
Notes: The dependent variable is the share of affiliate equity owned by the affiliate's parent. Creditor Rights is an index of the strength of creditor
rights developed in Djankov, McLiesh, and Shleifer (2005); higher levels of the measure indicate stronger legal protections. Private credit is the ratio o
private credit lent by deposit money banks to GDP, as provided in Beck et. al. (1999). FDI Ownership Restrictions is a dummy equal to one if two
measures of restrictions on foreign ownership as measured by Shatz (2000) are above 3 on a scale of 1 to 5 and zero otherwise. Workforce Schooling i
the average schooling years in the population over 25 years old provided in Barro and Lee (2000). Corporate Tax Rate is the median effective tax rate
paid by affiliates in a particular country and year. Patent Protections is an index of the strength of patent rights provided in Ginarte and Park (1997).
Property Rights is an index of the strength of property rights drawn from the 1996 Index of Economic Freedom . Rule of Law is an assessment of the
strength and impartiality of a country's overall legal system drawn from theInternational Country Risk Guide. Risk of Expropriation is an index of the
confiscation or forced nationalization of private enterprise, and it is also drawn from the International Country Risk Guide; higher values of this index
reflect lower risks. Each specification is an OLS specification that includes parent-year fixed effects. As affiliate controls, the specifications presented
in columns 2, 3, 5, and 6 include the log of affiliate sales, the log of affiliate employment, and affiliate net PPE/assets. Affiliate Net PPE/Assets is the
ratio of affiliate net property plant and equipment to affiliate assets. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors that correct for clustering at the
country/year level appear in parentheses.
                                                                Table V

                                                    Scale of Affiliate Activity

                                                                                                       Log of Aggregate Affiliate
             Dependent Variable:                              Log of Affiliate Sales
                                                                                                                Sales
                                                                (1)                 (2)                     (3)                 (4)
Post Liberalization Dummy                                          0.0016             -0.0073                -0.0633             -0.1049
                                                                 (0.0684)            (0.0712)               (0.1230)            (0.1262)

Post Liberalization Dummy * Low                                    0.3011                                     0.3682
Creditor Rights Dummy                                            (0.0827)                                   (0.1552)

Post Liberalization Dummy * Low                                                        0.2947                                     0.3812
Private Credit Dummy                                                                 (0.0899)                                   (0.1769)

Log of GDP                                                         0.3886              0.3409                -0.0786             -0.1351
                                                                 (0.3888)            (0.3960)               (0.7833)            (0.7040)

Log of GDP per Capita                                              1.3675              1.4488                 2.6620              2.8376
                                                                 (0.3720)            (0.3867)               (0.5425)            (0.6192)

Constant                                                        -13.5818            -13.0613                 -4.7847             -4.9033
                                                                (9.2414)            (9.2484)               (22.1876)           (20.0397)

Affiliate and Year Fixed Effects?                                Y                   Y                      N                   N
Country and Year Fixed Effects?                                  N                   N                      Y                   Y

No. of Obs.                                                     180,796             181,103                     827                 845
R-Squared                                                         0.8035              0.8040                  0.9243              0.9251
Notes: The dependent variable in the first two columns is the log of affiliate sales, and the dependent variable in the last two columns is
the log of affiliate sales aggregated across affiliates in a particular country. The data are annual data covering the 1982-1999 period.
The Post Liberalization Dummy is equal to one for the sixteen countries that liberalize their ownership restrictions in the year of and
years following liberalization of foreign ownership restrictions. The Low Creditor Rights Dummy is equal to one for observations
related to countries with below median levels of creditor rights among liberalizing countries measured in the year prior to liberalization
and zero otherwise. The Low Private Credit Dummy is equal to one for observations related to countries with below median levels of
private credit among liberalizing countries measured in the year prior to liberalization and zero otherwise. Private credit is the ratio of
private credit lent by deposit money banks to GDP, as provided in Beck et. al. (1999). The first two specifications are OLS
specifications that include affiliate and year fixed effects, and the last two are OLS specifications that include country and
year fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors that correct for clustering at the country level appear in parentheses.
                                                                 Appendix Table I
                                                           Scale of Affiliate Activity

       Dependent Variable:                                                          Log of Affiliate Sales
                                                 (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)               (5)                (6)
Creditor Rights                                    0.0057            0.0163             0.0332
                                                 (0.0235)          (0.0225)           (0.0270)
Creditor Rights*Log of Parent                                                          -0.0020
R&D                                                                                   (0.0015)
Private Credit                                                                                            -0.1040            0.0690             0.0711
                                                                                                         (0.0804)          (0.0837)           (0.1008)
Private Credit*Log of Parent                                                                                                                    0.0003
R&D                                                                                                                                           (0.0056)
FDI Ownership Restrictions                        -0.2030           -0.2874            -0.2837            -0.1850           -0.3054            -0.3039
                                                 (0.0562)          (0.0609)           (0.0612)           (0.0640)          (0.0707)           (0.0708)
Workforce Schooling                                0.0270            0.0500             0.0503             0.0305            0.0472             0.0475
                                                 (0.0211)          (0.0173)           (0.0172)           (0.0193)          (0.0185)           (0.0185)
Log of GDP                                         0.2041            0.3180             0.3198             0.2168            0.3188             0.3207
                                                 (0.0338)          (0.0231)           (0.0233)           (0.0303)          (0.0241)           (0.0242)
Log of GDP per Capita                              0.0764            0.0161             0.0081             0.0937           -0.0010            -0.0082
                                                 (0.0509)          (0.0544)           (0.0533)           (0.0579)          (0.0553)           (0.0542)
Corporate Tax Rate                                 0.5700           -0.5748            -0.5627             0.5923           -0.6251            -0.6222
                                                 (0.4293)          (0.3083)           (0.3117)           (0.4313)          (0.3255)           (0.3283)
Patent Protections                                                  -0.1100            -0.1034                              -0.1077            -0.1030
                                                                   (0.0430)           (0.0430)                             (0.0434)           (0.0434)
Property Rights                                                      0.0170             0.0142                               0.0078             0.0081
                                                                   (0.0517)           (0.0526)                             (0.0492)           (0.0504)
Rule of Law                                                          0.0224             0.0268                               0.0206             0.0250
                                                                   (0.0322)           (0.0320)                             (0.0333)           (0.0332)
Risk of Expropriation                                                0.0221             0.0203                               0.0249             0.0228
                                                                   (0.0349)           (0.0348)                             (0.0361)           (0.0359)
Constant                                           3.3139            1.0997             1.0512             2.8439            1.2578             1.2018
                                                 (0.5632)          (0.6058)           (0.6151)           (0.5503)          (0.5850)           (0.5885)

Parent/Year Fixed Effects?                        Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                 Y                  Y
No. of Obs.                                       51,320             41,465            40,527             48,422            39,123             38,225
R-Squared                                          0.3349             0.3454            0.3400             0.3365            0.3489             0.3436
Notes: The dependent variable is the log of affiliate sales. Creditor Rights is an index of the strength of creditor rights developed in Djankov, McLiesh,
and Shleifer (2005); higher levels of the measure indicate stronger legal protections. Private credit is the ratio of private credit lent by deposit money
banks to GDP, as provided in Beck et. al. (1999). FDI Ownership Restrictions is a dummy equal to one if two measures of restrictions on foreign
ownership as measured by Shatz (2000) are above 3 on a scale of 1 to 5 and zero otherwise. Workforce Schooling is the average schooling years in the
population over 25 years old provided in Barro and Lee (2000). Corporate Tax Rate is the median effective tax rate paid by affiliates in a particular
country and year. Patent Protections is an index of the strength of patent rights provided in Ginarte and Park (1997). Property Rights is an index of the
strength of property rights drawn from the 1996 Index of Economic Freedom . Rule of Law is an assessment of the strength and impartiality of a
country's overall legal system drawn from theInternational Country Risk Guide. Risk of Expropriation is an index of the risk of outright confiscation o
nationalization of private enterprise, and it is also drawn from the International Country Risk Guide; higher values of this index reflect lower risks.
Each specification is an OLS specification that includes parent-year fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors that correct for
clustering at the country/year level appear in parentheses.
