NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

QUASI-EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE ON THE EFFECTS OF UNEMPLOYMENT
INSURANCE FROM NEW YORK STATE
Bruce D. Meyer
Wallace K. C. Mok
Working Paper 12865
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12865

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2007

*Contact Bruce D. Meyer, bdmeyer@uchicago.edu, Harris School of Public Policy Studies, University
of Chicago, 1155 E. 60th Street, Chicago, IL 60637. We would like to thank Joyce Burnette and Uri
Kogan for outstanding research assistance, John Comiskey of the New York State Department of Labor
for supplying the data, and Joseph Altonji, Raj Chetty, John Ham, Robert Fairlie, Paula Worthington
and seminar participants at the Institute for Research on Poverty, Northwestern University, the NBER
Summer Institute, the University of Chicago and the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago for their comments.
We are grateful to the National Science Foundation, the Searle Fund and the Stigler Center for their
support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Bruce D. Meyer and Wallace K. C. Mok. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Quasi-Experimental Evidence on the Effects of Unemployment Insurance from New York
State
Bruce D. Meyer and Wallace K. C. Mok
NBER Working Paper No. 12865
January 2007
JEL No. J64,J65
ABSTRACT
This paper examines unemployment duration and the incidence of claims following a 36 percent increase
in the maximum weekly benefit in New York State. This benefit increase sharply increased benefits
for a large group of claimants, while leaving them unchanged for a large share of claimants who provide
a natural comparison group. The New York benefit increase has the special features that it was unexpected
and applied to in-progress spells. These features allow the effects on duration to be convincingly separated
from effects on incidence. The results show a sharp fall in the hazard of leaving UI that coincides
with the increase in benefits. The evidence is also consistent with a substantial effect of the benefit
level on the incidence of claims and with this change in incidence biasing duration estimates. The
evidence further suggests that, at least in this case, standard methods that identify duration effects
through nonlinearities in the benefit schedule are not badly biased.
Bruce D. Meyer
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
bdmeyer@uchicago.edu
Wallace K. C. Mok
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
w-mok@comcast.net

1. Introduction
Breaking a longstanding deadlock, legislative leaders and Gov. Mario M. Cuomo
agreed today to increase New York State's maximum unemployment benefit by 36
percent, the first raise in five years. Under the plan, which was quickly approved
by both houses of the Legislature, the maximum weekly benefit of $180 will
immediately rise to $245.
New York Times, April 12, 1989, p. B1.

The effect of unemployment insurance (UI) on unemployment is of interest for two main
reasons. First, many authors have argued that UI is a major determinant of differences in
unemployment across countries and over time.1 Second, the magnitude of the effect of UI on
unemployment is a key input into optimal UI benefit calculations.2 A large literature has
examined the effects of UI on unemployment.3 However, the validity of the sources of
identification used in much of the literature has not been carefully examined. Most work on UI
identifies its effects through cross-state variation in benefits or by assuming a linear relationship
between earnings and duration. Thus, the work requires the comparability of different states or
requires strong functional form assumptions. Sometimes changes over time within a state are
used as an additional source of variation.4 This paper continues an approach to identification that
examines data from before and after sharp changes in the generosity of UI payments. This quasiexperiment or natural experiment approach follows the methods begun by Classen (1981), Solon

1

See Layard, Nickell, and Jackman (1991) and Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998), for example.

2

Baily (1977), Gruber (1997), and Chetty (forthcoming) pursue this approach.

3

Detailed surveys can be found in Meyer (2002), Holmlund (1998), Atkinson and
Micklewright (1991), Danziger, Haveman, and Plotnick (1981), Gustman (1983), Hamermesh
(1977), and Welch (1977).
4

See Moffitt (1985), Meyer (1990), and Gritz and MaCurdy (1989) for example.

(1985) and Meyer (1989).5 This paper examines the effects of a 36 percent increase in the
maximum UI benefit in New York State on the incidence and duration of UI claims.
Several aspects of the New York reform make it particularly suitable for examination.
First, the benefit increase was unexpected. A benefit increase had been prevented in the past
because of a procedural deadlock in the Legislature.6 After the announcement of an agreement
between the legislative leaders and the governor, the reform was passed in a few hours and took
effect six days later. Second, because the procedural deadlock had previously prevented a benefit
increase, the increase is unlikely to have been caused by economic conditions in the state. Third,
unlike most UI benefit increases, the higher benefits were available to those who had started their
claims before the increase became effective. Thus, we can examine the effect of the higher
benefits on the durations of a pool of claimants whose decision to file could not have been
influenced by the higher benefits. Finally, unemployment was fairly stable in New York State
during this time period and the state is large enough that we can disaggregate results by industry
and sub-state region.
The difficulty of identifying UI effects occurs in its most extreme form within a single
state at a point in time. The weekly UI benefit is a constant fraction of previous earnings except
when an individual receives the minimum or maximum weekly benefit. Since previous earnings
strongly influence the payoff from returning to work, the economic benefits of returning to work
and the economic gains from receiving benefits are each largely influenced by a common
variable, previous earnings. Regressions of spell length on weekly benefits and previous

5

Subsequent papers using a “natural experiment” or “quasi-experimental” method include
Hunt (1995), Card and Levine (2000), Carling, Holmlund and Vejsiu (2001), and Roed and
Zhang (2003, 2005).
6

The New York Times reported that: “The New York increase, however, was held up because
negotiators in the Legislature had until recently insisted on tying that issue to discussion of
increases in workers compensation benefits. It was only after the two were severed that the way
to a vote was cleared.”
2

earnings consequently cannot easily distinguish between the effect of UI and the highly
correlated influence of previous earnings. Identification is impossible without a functional form
assumption on the relationship between previous earnings and spell length.7
A key idea behind this study is illustrated by Figure 1. Figure 1 displays the schedule
relating the UI weekly benefit amount (WBA) in New York to previous average weekly earnings.
The schedule is typical of those in the other states. The solid line is the schedule prior to the
April 17, 1989 increase in the maximum weekly benefit amount. The dashed line is the revision
to the schedule due to the benefit increase. Between the minimum and the maximum, the weekly
benefit amount is one-half of previous weekly earnings. The UI reform increased the benefits
received by the High Earnings group with previous weekly earnings greater than E3, and
increased the benefits of the Medium Earnings group with earnings between E2 and E3. But, the
Low Earnings group, with earnings between E1 and E2, was unaffected by the change. These
Low Earnings individuals provide a natural comparison group to capture changes over time
common to all individuals in the state. By comparing changes in spell lengths and the number of
claims before and after the benefit increase for these three groups, we estimate the effects of
higher benefits.
The New York benefit increase was unexpected and applicable to all weeks claimed after
April 17, 1989 regardless of when an individual filed for benefits. This unusual aspect of the
change allows us to examine the effect of benefits on those who had filed just prior to the
increase and for whom the increase was unexpected. Thus, we can separate the effect of higher
benefits on duration from its effect on the composition of the pool of claimants who start spells.
There is only a small literature on the effect of benefit generosity on UI take-up, but research
indicates that between one-quarter and one-half of the unemployed eligible for benefits have not

7

This identification problem created by the dependence of program generosity on an
individual's previous earnings is common to many social insurance programs and is emphasized
in Krueger and Meyer (2002). See Meyer, Viscusi and Durbin (1995) for a similar paper on
workers' compensation.
3

filed in recent years.8 Corson and Nicholson (1998) and Blank and Card (1991) estimate the
effect of the weekly benefit amount on UI take-up rate and find elasticities of 0.2 to 0.6 in
aggregate Current Population Survey state by year data. Blank and Card find no significant
effect in Panel Study of Income Dynamics micro data. McCall (1995) finds elasticities that range
from 0.26 to 0.35 in microdata. Anderson and Meyer (1997) using administrative data from the
Comprehensive Wage and Benefit History project and find benefit amount elasticities ranging
from about 0.4 to nearly 1.0.
Since the benefits of filing for UI depend on a person's expected duration of
unemployment, one might expect those who enter the UI pool when benefits rise to be different
from those who currently receive benefits. It is unlikely that available explanatory variables
would be able to account for this tendency, as they explain only a tiny fraction of variation in
durations. No previous study has been able to examine the effect of benefits on the duration of
UI claims without possible bias due to changes in the pool of claimants. One might believe that
endogenous takeup would necessarily lead duration elasticities to be biased downward.
However, as the model below clearly shows, this may not be the case. Intuitively, those who do
not apply for benefits are likely those with shorter expected (and on average actual) durations.
However, those among the pool of initial non-applicants who are most likely to be induced by a
benefit increase to apply are those who would receive the most from the increase, i.e. those who
expect to have a long duration and thus receive that higher benefit for many weeks. Thus, the
bias in the duration elasticity could be upward.
There are drawbacks to examining one state over a two-year period. There may be
important macroeconomic changes during the period. The techniques used in the paper remove
any bias if such changes affect the different earnings groups equally. However, if changes in the
macroeconomy affecting unemployment are peculiar to the High and Medium Earnings groups,
then biases would result. Most macroeconomic shocks are thought of as shocks to particular
8

See Blank and Card (1991) and Vroman (1991).
4

industries or regions. Therefore, we look within industries and regions in New York to see if
similar patterns emerge. Fortunately, New York State is large enough for these sub-state
analyses.

2. The New York State UI Law and the Data

This section describes the main characteristics of New York State's UI law and the data
used in the study. To qualify for UI, an individual had to have worked at least 20 weeks out of
the preceding 52 and have earned an average of at least 80 dollars during those weeks worked.9
The weekly benefit paid after a one week waiting period was 50 percent of average weekly
earnings, so that the minimum weekly benefit was $40. The maximum weekly benefit was
originally $180 and increased to $245 on April 17, 1989. The maximum weekly benefit rose
again on April 16, 1990 to $260. The potential duration of benefits was a uniform 26 weeks
during the period examined.
The individual claim data used in the study come from separate data files for 1988 and
1989 which include all UI recipients who began claims in those years. The number of days of
benefits received is recorded, as well as age, sex, race, education, the 4-digit SIC of the previous
employer, the week the claim was filed, previous earnings and weeks worked, and the 5-digit zip
code of the claimant. Close to one-half million claims are available for each year.
We asked the New York State Department of Labor to delete some classes of
observations from the tapes on which we perform most analyses. Claims from firms with mass
layoffs during the year are dropped, as are claims from firms with extended strikes. These
deletions were made because strikes might unduly influence the results and individual

9

A provision which applied to less than one percent of claims allowed eligibility for those who
worked 15 weeks over the last 52 weeks with a weekly wage of at least $80 and who worked at
least 40 weeks in the last 104 weeks with at least $3,200 in total earnings during those 40 weeks.
5

observations from mass layoffs or strikes cannot be taken as independent in either incidence or
duration calculations. In New York, workers on strike are eligible for UI benefits after eight
weeks. An examination of Current Wage Developments reveals only three work stoppages
involving 1,000 or more workers in New York during the sample period. Observations from
these firms are deleted including 32,000 NYNEX Corporation workers who were on strike from
August 6 to December 4 of 1989. Observations from firms with mass layoffs according to the
BLS definition are also excluded. The BLS defines a mass layoff to be a layoff of at least 31
days duration, involving 50 or more individuals who filed initial claims for UI during a
consecutive 3-week period.10 The exclusion of mass layoff data is based partly on the value of
the dependent variable, so it likely induces a small amount of bias in duration estimates.11 In all,
the strike and mass layoff exclusions reduce the 1988 sample from 476,173 to 454,169 and the
1989 sample from 581,881 to 519,846.

3. A Model of UI Takeup and Biases in Duration Elasticities

This section provides a theoretical model of the takeup decision and discusses some of its
implications.12 In particular, we show how endogenous takeup can bias estimates of the benefit
effect on unemployment duration. We suppose that a potential applicant maximizes expected
utility, which is taken to be a function of income and the stigma or transaction costs of applying
for UI. The worker weighs these costs of applying against the benefits, which are determined

10

See U.S. Department of Labor (1989, 1990) for tabulations of mass layoffs by industry and
time period.
11

The changes in duration and incidence are very similar in the first two quarters if these
exclusions are not made. For the last two quarters, the main change is that 32,000 striking
workers from NYNEX Corporation are deleted.
12

The effects of UI on unemployment duration are well known, so we do not explicitly discuss
them here. See Meyer (2002) for references.
6

primarily by the level and duration of benefits and the distribution of possible spell lengths that
the worker believes she faces. This emphasis on expected spell length is motivated by the large
fraction of nonapplicants who indicate the they do not apply because they expect a short spell.
Table 1 in Anderson and Meyer (1997) reports that 37 percent of those who believe that they are
eligible and do not apply indicate that they do not apply because they expect to get another job
soon or be recalled. The next most common reasons (besides "other" and "don't know") are "too
much work/hassle to apply" at under 7 percent and "too much like charity/welfare" at under 6
percent.
Formally, let the utility of income y be U(y) for a non-applicant and U(y)-c for an
applicant. For simplicity, the period is length one, the length of unemployment is 8, and the
potential duration of benefits is d. The wage is w and the unemployment benefit is b. Assume
that a potential applicant takes the cumulative distribution of unemployment spell lengths that
she could experience to be F(8). Finally, assume that the application cost varies across
individuals so that c=C+,, where , is a continuously distributed random variable, with c.d.f. L.
The expected utility of an individual who does not apply is

(3.1)

while the expected utility of an applicant is

(3.2)

An individual decides to apply if the benefits exceed the costs, i.e. if
(3.3)
7

The implied probability of applying for UI is thus
(3.4)

The effects of changes in the key individual and program characteristics can be
determined by differentiating this probability. Higher UI benefits raise the takeup probability,
while lower application costs increase the probability of application. A marginal increase in the
potential duration of benefits increases the probability, but only if the potential applicant believes
she may be unemployed at least as long as the potential duration. An increase in the wage
decreases the application probability as long as U'' is negative. One can also show that rightward
shifts in the distribution of expected unemployment spell lengths will increase the application
probability.
With a few simplifications, this framework can also be used to determine how a change in
the weekly benefit amount would affect the spell length composition of the pool of applicants.
This derivative is important because it determines the bias in estimates of the elasticity of mean
spell duration with respect to the weekly benefit from samples of claimants. Previous work has
often argued that endogenous takeup implies that duration elasticities are biased downward, since
non-claimants generally have shorter spells than claimants. The following example shows that
marginal non-claimants may very well have longer spells than claimants so that the sign of the
bias is indeterminate.
For simplicity, assume that utility is linear so that U''=0. Also assume that there are two
equally common types of individuals with known spells lengths 81 and 82, both less than d, and
that benefits have no effect on the duration of claims. The mean spell length of applicants is now
(3.5)

where

and

8

.

The mean duration of spells of claimants may increase or decrease with the level of UI benefits.
Without loss of generality, assume 81 > 82. Then
where

and

.

The intuition for this result should be pretty clear. The outcome depends on the proportionate
change in the number of new claims among those with long spells relative to that for those with
short spells. 8iLi' is the marginal change in new claims of type i, and dividing by Li puts it in
proportionate terms. More simply, the indeterminate sign occurs because an increase in the
weekly benefit amount has a greater effect on those who expect to be unemployed a long time
and thus expect to collect the higher weekly benefit for many weeks. This tendency can offset
the fact that a larger share of those who expect long spells will have already claimed. The
implication of this result is that endogenous takeup could bias unemployment duration estimates
in either direction.13
The model above assumed that an individual makes a one-time decision at the start of
unemployment as to whether or not to file for UI. Solon (1981), citing prior work by Ehrenberg,
Hamermesh and himself suggests a different argument. In studies that use the duration of UI
claims, it may be that higher benefits induce a person to file more quickly, but do not effect the
time out of work. Either this argument, or the one outlined above provide a reason that one may
want to obtain an estimate of duration effects of UI that is not potentially biased by an effect of
benefits on claim filing.

13

Since our model can be applied to durations on other social insurance program where the
generosity of the program and expected duration affect participation, the result of indeterminate
bias also applies to programs such as AFDC and workers' compensation.
9

4. Economic Conditions in New York State

This section provides some background statistics on the New York State labor market
around the time of the benefit increase. As this paper examines data from 1988 and 1989, it is
important to describe economic conditions at the time of the increase in UI benefits. Table 1
reports monthly data on employment and unemployment for the 1988-1990 period. Throughout
this period, the unemployment rate is quite low, averaging 4.2, 5.1, and 5.2 respectively in the
three years. Employment rises by about 100,000 in each of 1988 and 1989 and then falls back to
its earlier level by the end of 1990. During the period on which we primarily focus, the first two
quarters of 1988 and 1989, unemployment is almost 1 percentage point higher in the second year,
while employment is over 1 percent higher. These patterns can be seen visually in Figure 2
which graphs the monthly employment level and the unemployment rate for 1988-1990.
Employment patterns by industry and region are a bit more complex. Table 2 reports
employment by broad industry group. None of the industries have pronounced secular increases
or decreases in employment. Employment in Durable and Nondurable manufacturing does
decline somewhat, while the other industries tend to show increases. The bottom several lines of
the table report measures of volatility or dispersion of industry level quarterly employment. We
report the coefficient of variation of industry level employment measured in levels and
logarithms. We also report the variance of the residuals of log employment after regressing it on
a constant and a time trend. In these statistics construction sticks out as being much more
variable over time than any industry. In fact, the variance of the detrended residuals for
construction is more than fifteen times that of the closest other industry. This volatility of the
construction industry motivates our focus through much of the rest of the paper on a nonconstruction sample.

10

Appendix Table 1 reports average monthly employment by sub-state region within New
York.14 Due to changes in the benchmarks used in the data, the most valid comparisons can be
made between an April to October average for 1988 and 1989. Over this period, employment
rises 1-2.5 percent in all regions except Nassau-Suffolk PMSA, Poughkeepsie and Binghampton
which have stable or declining employment.

5. Descriptive Statistics on Incidence and Duration

To assess the effects of the benefit increase, we begin by reporting incidence and duration
numbers by quarter and earnings group. The statistics of most interest are the first quarter
duration statistics, and the second through fourth quarter incidence statistics. The first quarter
duration numbers could not have been affected by changes in the pool of recipients, as UI
claimants did not know about the increase at the time they filed for benefits. Increases in
duration for these claimants cannot be attributed to changes in the claimant pool, and may be
attributable to the benefit increase. Almost all of the second, and all of the third and fourth
quarters of 1989 took place after the benefit increase, so these quarters should be examined for
changes in claim filing after the increase.
Table 3 reports the incidence and duration of UI claims by quarter for the 1988 and
1989.15 We report separate estimates for the three earnings groups defined in Section 1 and
Figure 1. The three groups are the High Earnings group, whose members experienced the full
14

The numbers reported are for the 10 largest areas within New York state which included
88.8 percent of employment in 1988.
15

These tabulations exclude observations with no previous earnings, with weeks worked less
than 20 or real weekly earnings less than $80. We also exclude the .3 percent of observations
with pension reductions in benefits to avoid the complications they would add. These exclusions
eliminate 2.8 percent of observations in 1988 and 2.0 percent in 1989. We also exclude those
who worked in the construction industry, which is a further 16.2 percent of observations in 1988
and 16.8 percent of observations in 1989.
11

effect of the benefit increase after April 17, 1989, the Medium Earnings group which received on
average less than half of the increase of the High Earnings group, and the Low Earnings group
whose benefits were unchanged by the UI reform. The brackets for these earnings groups are
indexed using average weekly earnings in New York.16
For each quarter, we report the ratio of the number of claims in the two years and the
difference in the average number of weeks of benefits received in the two years. At the bottom
of the upper panel, we also report the change in incidence for the High and Medium earnings
groups relative to the Low earnings group. At the bottom of the lower panel, we report the
differences-in-differences for duration, comparing the changes for the High and Medium
earnings groups to those for the Low earnings group in each quarter.
Several patterns are evident in the data. First, there is a pronounced seasonality to both
the incidence and duration of claims. Incidence is lowest in the second quarter for all earnings
groups and both years. Duration is longest in the second and fourth quarters for all earnings
groups and both years. The pronounced seasonality is the reason for comparing the different
calendar quarters of 1989 to the same quarter in the previous year.
There are only moderate changes in incidence for all of the earnings groups in the first
quarter (though the changes are significantly different from zero), but large changes in later
quarters. In the first quarter, the High and Medium Earnings groups experience a 3-5 percent fall
in the number of claims, while Low Earnings incidence rises by 1 percent. The roughly stable
pattern of incidence for the first quarter of 1989 relative to 1988 is another reason we focus on
this quarter in subsequent duration analyses. There are large changes in incidence during the
other quarters, particularly quarters three and four. In those quarters High Earnings claims rise
40 percent while Medium and Low claims rise about 20 and 15 percent, respectively. These
16

E1, E2 and E3 in Figure 1 have been indexed using the annual change in average weekly
earnings of employees covered by the New York State UI law over 1987-1989, which was 5.3
percent and was supplied by the New York State Department of Labor. Precisely, E1, E2 and E3
are taken to be 80, 360, and 490/1.053 in 1988, respectively, and 80*1.053, 360*1.053, and 490
in 1989.
12

changes are highly statistically significant as the standard errors are always less than 1.5 percent
and often smaller. These numbers are consistent with large effects of the higher benefits on the
relative incidence of claims. The implied incidence elasticities for the 3rd quarter are 0.95 and
0.86 for the High and Medium Earnings groups. For the 4th quarter they are 0.73 and -0.09,
respectively. There is a possibility that these numbers could be due to macroeconomic shocks to
industries or regions that are disproportionate employers of High and Medium Earnings workers.
We show below that such shocks are not the explanation as the above patterns hold within substate region and industry.
The durations numbers are also consistent with UI benefit effects. There is a large
increase in mean duration of UI receipt in the first quarter for all earnings groups. The changes
between 1988 and 1989 are larger for the High and Medium Earnings groups. If one subtracts
off the change for Low Earnings individuals, the High and Medium changes are 0.66 and 0.11
weeks with standard errors of 0.10 and 0.12 respectively. Thus the increase in benefits appears
to be associated with an increase in weeks of UI receipt. One can scale these increases to arrive
at elasticities after making several assumptions. High Earnings individuals in the first quarter are
affected more by the benefit increase if their spell began closer to when benefits rose. We
calculate an average benefit for someone receiving 20 weeks of continuous benefits following the
claim week. We use 20 weeks because the mean duration is about 16 weeks, but many
individuals' period of receipt is likely interrupted by periods when they do not receive UI.17
Using these assumptions, we calculate elasticities of mean duration with respect to the average
benefit of 0.41 for High Earnings individuals and 0.26 for Medium Earnings individuals.18

17

The total weeks of benefits received in the benefit year may come from several spells. Often
benefits are received over a longer calendar period than the number of weeks of UI receipt.
18

The percentage increases in benefits for the High, Medium and Low groups are 12.6, 4.2 and
1.6 percent respectively in the first quarter. They are approximately 29.1, 13.2 and 0 percent in
the other three quarters.
13

The second quarter has patterns similar to those of the first, while a very different view of
duration effects would be obtained from looking at the third and fourth quarters. In these last
two quarters the duration of High Earnings claims falls relative to those of Low Earnings
individuals. One should note though, that the increased relative incidence of High Earnings
claims may be associated with changes in composition of the pool of claimants. The data from
the third and fourth quarter may provide a good example of the biases that can arise in duration
estimates when the effects of benefits on incidence are ignored. This possibility of bias in
duration estimates when incidence is ignored was one of the key implications of the model of
Section 3.
Since the principal puzzle in Table 3 is the shorter durations in the third and fourth
quarters for High Earnings claims, we further investigated evidence for a change in the
composition of claims in these quarters.19 For all four quarters and three earnings groups, we
predict durations in 1989 using a linear model estimated for that earnings group and quarter in
1988. We predict durations using base year earnings, weeks worked in the base year, age,
gender, race, education, industry and region. Table 4 reports the mean predicted duration from
these models along with the mean predicted duration for 1988 (which equals the actual mean
duration). We focus on observable characteristics of claimants with the presumption that
observable and unobservable characteristics will move in the same direction (see Altonji, Elder
and Taber 2005 for a discussion of a stronger version of this assumption).
We find that predicted durations change very little in the first quarter. High earnings
predicted durations change less than 0.05 of a week between 1988 and 1989. This result may be
expected since there was little change in the incidence of claims. On the other hand, after the
benefit increase, in the third and fourth quarters when High Earnings claims increase sharply (but
durations fall) we see that the observable characteristics of claimants have shifted sharply in the
direction of those that tend to have shorter spells. Mean predicted duration falls for the third
19

We thank Julie Cullen for suggesting that we pursue this idea.
14

quarter by three-quarters of a week, while fourth quarter predicted mean duration falls by more
than one-third of a week. This result is consistent with endogenous takeup and the changed
composition of claims being responsible for the counterintuitive drop in spell length for High
Earnings claimants in the third and fourth quarters.
We should also point out that the standard errors on changes in incidence and duration are
likely understated because observations that are part of large layoffs and recalls are not truly
independent. There may also be shocks that we cannot account for which are common to all
High or Medium Earnings individuals during a quarter.
To assess if macroeconomic shocks to particular regions or industries could have caused
the changes in incidence and duration, we also examine the same statistics within regions and
industries. For this analysis we group the 4 smallest regions together, to obtain 7 areas for which
we can obtain reasonably precise numbers. In 6 of 7 regions, the High Earnings claims have
larger increases in duration than the Low Earnings claims in the first quarter. In the third and
fourth quarters, all 7 regions experience larger increases in the incidence of claims for High
Earnings individuals than Low Earnings individuals, and 5 out of 7 do in the second quarter.
Within industry, the patterns of Table 3 are also fairly strong. 6 of the 7 largest industries
(in terms of first quarter UI claims) had larger increases in first quarter duration for the High
Earnings group than the Low Earnings group. The incidence changes in the later quarters were
even more widespread, with all 7 showing relative increases for the High Earnings group
compared to the Low Earnings group in the third and fourth quarters. Thus, the changes in
incidence and duration by previous earnings group are widespread and not due to shocks to
particular industries or regions.
6. Regression Estimates of Duration

The within region and industry analyses above suggest that changes in the composition of
the pool of UI claimants along these dimensions were not responsible for the increase in
15

duration. However, there are other characteristics of claimants that may have affected the
changes in duration such as age, education, race and previous earnings. We want to control for
all of these characteristics at once. This section reports regression equations for the duration of
UI claims which control for a large number of individual characteristics. We begin by estimating
equations that are the regression analog of differences-in-differences with controls. The
specifications that we estimate are variants of the equation:

(6.1) ln(duration) = " + $1 After Increase*High Earnings + $2 After Increase*Medium Earnings
+ $3 After Increase + $4 High Earnings + $5 Medium Earnings
+ $6 ln(previous weekly earnings) + $7 ln(previous weeks worked) + (’ X + ,

where ln(duration) is the log of duration in days,20 After Increase, High Earnings, and Medium
Earnings are indicator variables for being after the increase, in the high earnings group, and in the
medium earnings group, respectively. The vector X includes age, sex, education, race, industry
and sub-state region. Depending on the exact specification, X may also include indicator
variables for the week the spell began and additional interactions.
Table 5 reports the results from the regression estimates. In all specifications, the sample
is the first quarter data.21 Specifications (1) and (2) are the regression analogs of differences in
differences that are variants of equation (6.1). Specification (2) replaces the After Increase, High
Earnings and Medium Earnings indicators with their interactions with a full set of indicator
variables for the week of the year a UI spell began (12 indicator variables). The coefficients on
After Increase interacted with High Earnings ($1) and Medium Earnings ($2) are very similar to

20

We set durations of zero equal to 0.5 for this set of analyses.

21

The regressions drop observations with missing age, sex, race, education, earnings or
industry. They also drop out of state claims which by itself excludes 7.2 percent of the
observations. Including the exclusions of Section 5, 20.8 percent of the 1988 observations and
12.7 percent of the 1989 observations are dropped (mostly due to missing education).
16

the estimates obtained by taking logs of the numbers in Table 3 and subtracting the Low Earnings
numbers from the Medium and High numbers. This similarity suggests that changes in
observable individual characteristics in this sample are not very important (as was also found in
Section 5). High Earnings durations rise about 8 percent, while Medium Earnings durations do
not appreciably change. The coefficient on the High Earnings group after the increase is strongly
significant.
We also estimate specifications where the key explanatory variables are functions of the
weekly UI benefit amount. We measure the benefit increase using a variable which is the
average benefit that a claimant would receive during a 20 continuous week claim beginning after
the filing week (see Section 5 for a discussion). We can compare the coefficient on this variable
to that on a conventional benefit variable identified by the nonlinear relationship between
benefits and previous earnings. These specifications are of the form:

(6.2) ln(duration) = " + $1 [ln(average new benefit) - ln (old benefit)] + $2 ln(old benefit)
+ $3 After Increase + $4 High Earnings + $5 Medium Earnings
+ $6 ln(previous weekly earnings) + $7 ln(previous weeks worked) + (’ X + ,.

The first variable is the logarithm of the average weekly benefit a claimant would receive under
the new law during a 20 week claim minus the logarithm of the benefit under the old law. This
variable captures the change in the weekly benefit amount with the new law. The second
variable is the ln(old benefit) which is the logarithm of weekly benefits under the old UI law. It
is separately identified from previous earnings through the kink in the benefit schedule at E2 in
Figure 1. As both variables are in logarithms, their coefficients can be interpreted as elasticities.
Specifications (3) through (6) in Table 5 are variants of this equation.
The estimates of the two benefit coefficients ($1 and $2) are fairly similar across the
different specifications and are similar to each other. The coefficient on the old benefit is always
17

0.26. The coefficient on the change in the benefit amount varies from 0.23 to 0.42. A test of the
restriction $1 = $2 fails to reject in all of the specifications. A few of the specifications are
particularly noteworthy. Specification (4) replaces the After Increase indicator with a set of
indicator variables for each of the possible weeks a spell could have begun. Specification (5)
allows interactions between the 19 region and 10 industry dummies and the dummy variable for
being after the increase. Thus, this specification allows for shocks to industries and regions after
the increase that are common to all earnings groups. The coefficient on the benefit increase
variable is very similar to that in the other specifications. Specification (6) includes interactions
between being after the increase and in the High and Medium Earnings groups as well as
including the two benefit variables. Through Specification (5), the change in benefit coefficient
is strongly significant, while in Specification (6) the coefficient falls somewhat and is no longer
significant, largely due to a doubling of the standard error. It also appears that the change in
duration for the High Earnings group in 1989 is not fully captured by the average benefit variable
as the coefficient on After Increase*High Earnings is positive and significantly different from
zero.
Because durations are limited to be between 0 and 26 weeks, we also estimated Tobit
models which account for both this left and right censoring. These specifications are reported in
Table 6. The Tobit coefficients tend to be quite a bit larger than the linear regression estimates.
This result is not that surprising given that the Tobit coefficients can be interpreted as the effect
on underlying unemployment duration rather than the potentially censored weeks of UI receipt.
The benefit elasticities from the dummy variable coefficients are close to 0.5 while the ln(WBA)
specifications suggest higher elasticities. The change in ln(WBA) coefficients imply elasticities
of between 0.6 and 0.7, while the benefit coefficients identified through the bend in the schedule
suggest elasticities of around 0.4. A test of the restriction $1 = $2 fails to reject in most
specifications, though it does reject in the case of specification (4). The final specification in

18

Table 6 indicates that it is difficult to separate out the effect of the change in the weekly benefit
from indicators for the groups that received the benefit increase.

7. Hazard Model Estimates of Duration

Hazard models provide a sensible way to account for two key features of the data. First,
durations are both left censored at zero and right censored at 26 weeks as discussed above.
Second, the level of the weekly UI benefit amount varies over the course of a spell for those who
filed shortly before the April 1989 benefit increase (and are in the Medium or High Earnings
groups). Hazard models easily incorporate these two features of the data. We estimate a series
of specifications for the hazard of leaving UI as a function of measures of time, the UI benefit,
and individual characteristics. Formally, let Ti be the length of individual i's period of UI receipt.
Then the hazard for individual i at time t, 8i(t), is defined by the equation,

.

Before estimating parametric models, we plot the hazard rate of those in the High Earnings group
and that of the Low Earnings group for comparison using the weekly hazard derived from daily
data. The top panel of Figure 3 shows this pattern for 1988, while the bottom panel displays the
1989 pattern. In 1988 the High and Low Earnings groups have almost identical hazards. In
1989, after the increase in benefits in the 16th week for those in the High Earnings group, there
appears to be a fall in the hazard of those in the High Earnings group relative to that for the Low
Earnings group. This pattern accords with the expected decline in the departure rate from the UI
rolls after benefits have increased.

19

To account for individual characteristics and economic conditions, we parameterize the
hazard using a proportional hazards form, i.e. 8i(t)= 80(t)exp[zi(t)'$]. 80(t) is called the baseline
hazard and captures how exit rates change as a spell progresses. The time varying explanatory
variables zi(t) include the weekly benefit amount, as well as indicators for the current calendar
week. Thus, we can account for the changing benefit and potentially changing conditions in the
labor market in a sensible way. The vector zi(t) also includes time constant variables such as age,
gender, education, industry, region, previous earnings and weeks worked.
Given our parameterization and weekly data, spell continuation probabilities can be
written as

(7.1)

,

if zi(t) is constant between t and t+1. Equation (7.1) can be rewritten as
(7.2)

, where

.

A likelihood function can then be constructed from terms like (7.2) and one minus the probability
in (7.2) as in Meyer (1990).
The first set of hazard model estimates is reported in Table 7. Appendix Table 2 provides
the means by period and earnings group for the covariates that are included in the models
(variable definitions are provided in the Data Appendix). These specifications include a dummy
variable for the week in question being after the benefit increase (After 16th week of 1989)
interacted with the High Earnings or Medium Earnings group. Controls for previous earnings,
previous weeks worked, age, gender, education, race, industry, region, as well as indicators for

20

the calendar week and the current spell length are included. All of these specifications control
for being in the High Earnings group after the benefit increase. Benefit effects are identified
through the exact timing of when the benefit increase took place.
Specifications (1) and (2) do not include the Medium Earnings group. Specification (2)
and (4) through (6) include indicator variables for the week the spell began. Specifications (5)
and (6) include indicators for industry and region interacted with being in the year of the benefit
increase.
These specifications indicate that the hazard of ending a UI claim falls by about 6 percent
after the weekly benefit rises for the High Earnings group. The coefficients do not differ much
across specification. As expected, there is a smaller coefficient for the Medium Earnings group,
but the coefficient is only marginally significantly different from zero. The inclusion of controls
for the week a spell began or the interaction of industry and region with the second year of data
has little effect on the coefficients. While these specifications control for being in the High
Earnings group after the increase it is a concern that the coefficient on After*High Earnings is
significantly different from zero even when we are controlling for the exact timing of the benefit
increase. These coefficients suggest that there is an independent effect of being in the
After*High Earnings group or that our After 16th week variable does not fully capture the
benefits change. Specification (6) only includes the spells beginning in the first six weeks of the
year. This sample does not seem to suffer from this problem as the coefficient on After*High
Earnings is now small and not significant. This sample is also of interest for a second reason.
This sample will disproportionately include those whose benefits change later in their spell and
will thus emphasize changes in benefits near the end of the benefit entitlement period. Some
past work has emphasized that the effect of UI on the hazard should fall with duration (see
Arulampalam and Stewart 1995). This effect is a general prediction of search models, but does
not necessarily hold in labor supply models of unemployment. We find little support for this

21

prediction here as the coefficient estimate is slightly higher in specification (6) than in the other
specifications, the opposite of what some models predict
Our final set of duration estimates is reported in Table 8. These specifications include
functions of the weekly benefit amount rather than indicator variables. Precisely, these
specifications include the logarithm of the weekly benefit amount in the current week minus the
benefit under the old UI law as well as a variable for the weekly benefit under the old law. The
first variable captures the effect of the change in the schedule due to the benefit increase, while
the second variable identifies the effect of benefits through the bend in the schedule. The
specifications examined are those analogous to the specifications of Table 7. In addition
specification (7) is added to analyze the identification of benefit effects through the bend in the
schedule.
These specifications suggest that a ten percent increase in the benefit lowers the hazard of
ending a UI spell by about 3 percent. The estimates are not appreciably affected by adding
controls for the week a spell began or interactions of industry and region with the year of the
increase. Specifications (5) and (6) in this table also control for being in the High (and Medium)
Earnings groups after the benefit increase as in Table 7. We are now identified through the
exact timing of when benefits increase and by the amount that they increase. The coefficient on
the change in the weekly benefit ($1) falls somewhat, but is still significantly different from zero.
In specification (6) we again restrict the sample to the first half of the quarter with the coefficient
on After*High Earnings again much smaller and not significantly different from zero, while the
change in benefit coefficient is little altered.
In most of the specifications, the estimated effect of the benefit under the old UI law is
slightly smaller than the coefficient on the change in the weekly benefit, but still strongly
significant. We now more often reject the restriction $1 = $2 ; the evidence indicates that benefit
effect identified by the schedule nonlinearity is now statistically different from that identified by
the benefit increase, in specifications (1), (2) and (7). We should emphasize that this former
22

coefficient cannot be identified if one includes a completely flexible set of controls for prior
earnings. The last specification (7) makes this clear, as the inclusion of a spline in past earnings
drives the standard error on this coefficient sharply upward and the point estimate becomes
implausible.

Simulating Duration Elasticities
We also convert the duration coefficient estimates into elasticities. Following equation (7.2), we
can write the estimated survivor function for observation i as
(7.3)

for t$1, where

The average estimated survivor function then is
(7.4)

where

Predicted mean duration of UI receipt (compensated duration) and full duration are then

and

respectively. To calculate full duration we need to assume a value for

for

J>25. We use the average over 0 to 25. To simulate the effect of raising the level of UI benefits
by ten percent we can just multiply

in (7.3) by

23

for J<26, where

is the estimated

coefficient on ln(WBA in Current Week)-ln(WBA Under Old Law) from Table 8. We estimate
elasticities by dividing the change in estimated duration from this exercise by 0.1. For the
specifications in Table 8, using the first quarter of 1988 sample, the resulting elasticities are
reported in the last two rows. The compensated duration elasticities range from 0.09 to 0.17,
while the total duration elasticities range from 0.12 to 0.23. Overall, the benefit elasticity
estimates are smaller than many that have been found in the literature, such as those in Moffit
(1985), Meyer (1989, 1990), Classen (1979) and Solon (1985).

Subsamples
While the elasticities that we find for the overall sample are not large, there may be
components of the population whose durations respond strongly to UI. In Table 9 we report
coefficient estimates on the logarithm of the change in benefits for four subsamples of the data:
men, women, those under 40 years of age, and those 40 and older. The specifications that we
estimate are just those reported in the first six columns of Table 8, but estimated on these
subsamples. The estimates differ sharply across the subsamples. The total duration elasticities
for males range from 0.07 to 0.22, while for females they are much larger, ranging from 0.36 to
0.47. Labor supply elasticities are generally found to be larger for women, and this finding may
be just another example of this regularity. The total duration elasticities for those under 40, are
close to zero, while those for individuals 40 and older are quite large, ranging from 0.30 to 0.46.
Since younger workers are generally thought to be more likely to be liquidity constrained, this
finding does not support the notion that liquidity constraints drive the duration response to UI
(Chetty 2006), though other factors could be behind the difference between younger and older
workers.

24

8. Discussion and Conclusions

This paper examines the effect of a 36 percent increase in the maximum UI benefit in
New York State. The benefit increase in New York had the unusual feature that it applied to
only high and medium earnings claimants and to in-progress spells. The results suggest that this
increase in UI benefits led to a large increase in the number of unemployment insurance claims.
However, we cannot exclude the possibility that shocks which disproportionately affected high
wage workers resulted in the increases in claims among high earning workers that received the
higher benefits. We are able to rule out that shocks to particular industries or regions were
responsible for this result.
There is strong evidence of an effect of the benefit increase on the duration of claims.
We examine differences in means, regression estimates, as well as hazard model estimates that
use the exact timing and amount of the benefit increase. The estimated elasticity of claim
duration with respect to the benefit is around 0.3. This elasticty is somewhat lower that found by
Classen (1979), Solon (1985) and Meyer (1989) who also examined data around changes in
benefit generosity. The estimates are about in the middle of other previous estimates. We should
also note that the identification of the weekly benefit effect through the bend in the benefit
schedule alone yields roughly similar, though somewhat lower estimates.
We also demonstrate how endogenous UI takeup can bias estimates of the effect of the
level of benefits on the mean duration of UI receipt. We show the theoretical ambiguity of the
bias and the conflicting forces that lead to this result. One-year comparisons of mean duration
changes in the quarters where the benefit increase was known to potential claimants and takeup
could respond yields wrong signed elasticities, illustrating that the potential for bias is real.
Comparisons of observable characteristics of claimants indicate that there was a change in the

25

composition of claims following the benefit increase that could explain this otherwise anomalous
result.
The overall elasticities that we find tend to be low. However, for some large subsamples,
in particular those 40 and older and women, we find substantial elasticities. There are several
factors to consider when comparing the estimates in this paper to other estimates. First, it may be
that the estimates are biased because of macroeconomic shocks that disproportionately affect
High Earnings claims. We have used several identification strategies including those that rely on
the exact timing and amount of the benefit increase to reduce the likelihood of this possibility.
Second, it may be that the effect of a given benefit increase is smaller when the level of after-tax
benefits is low relative to previous earnings. Most previous work has examined UI in a period
when benefits were not taxable and thus after-tax replacement rates were high. We are also
primarily examining changes in benefits for the group with the lowest replacement rates, the
High Earnings group. Even after the increase in benefits, the average replacement rate for this
group is only 0.37, as reported in Appendix Table 2. Third, we capture a slightly different partial
derivative than usual since the benefit increase was a surprise. Changes in savings and other
responses could have not taken place. This short-run elasticity may be lower than the long-run
one.22 Fourth, it may be that UI benefits have a different impact during periods of low
unemployment such as New York in the late 1980's. Fifth, our first quarter duration estimates
will mostly capture the effects of UI towards the end of the eligibility period. One might expect a
given UI benefit increase to have a smaller impact then as suggested in Mortensen (1977) and

22

The effect of a surprise increase in benefits on unemployment could be either bigger or
smaller than the effect of an expected change. If workers expect a benefit increase, they might
change the type of job they take, or change the care they take to avoid being laid off (much of this
would appear in incidence but might affect duration through the types of composition changes
the paper emphasizes). These types of changes would likely make the response to an expected
increase greater than that to a surprise increase. On the other hand, if one considers savings
responses to UI, an increase in benefits that is expected will lead people to save less. Thus, the
difference in unemployment durations between the high and low benefit regimes would be
reduced because assets would be lower in the high benefit regime, implying that high benefit
durations would be shorter than they would be if assets did not change.
26

emphasized in Arulampalam and Stewart (1995). We have tested for this hypothesis above
(specification (6) in Tables 7 and 8) by examining the sample of spells starting in weeks 1-6 of
the first quarter. Since the coefficient estimates from these alternative specifications are very
similar to the full sample estimates, they do not support this hypothesis.

27

References
Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber (2005), “Selection on Observed and
Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools,” Journal of
Political Economy, vol. 113, pp. 151-184.
Anderson, Patricia M. and Meyer, Bruce D. (1997), "Unemployment Insurance Takeup Rates and
the After-tax Value of Benefits", Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 112, pp. 913-938.
Anderson, P. M. and Meyer, B. D. (2000), “The Effects of the Unemployment Insurance Payroll
Tax on Wages, Employment, Claims and Denials,” Journal of Public Economics vol. 78,
pp. 81-106.
Arulampalam, Wiji and Mark B. Stewart (1995), “The Determinants of Individual
Unemployment Durations in an Era of High Unemployment,” Economic Journal vol.
105, pp. 321-332.
Baily, Martin N. 1977. "Unemployment Insurance as Insurance for Workers," Industrial and
Labor Relations Review 30: 495-504.
Blank, Rebecca M. and David E. Card (1991): "Recent Trends in Insured and Uninsured
Unemployment: Is There an Explanation?," Quarterly Journal of Economics, November
1991, CVI, 1157-1190.
Card, D. and Levine, P. B. (2000), “Extended benefits and the duration of UI spells: evidence
from the New Jersey Extended Benefit Program”, Journal of Public Economics, vol.78,
pp. 107-138.
Carling, K., Holmlund, B.and Vejsiu, A. (2001), “Do Benefit Cuts Boost Job Finding? Swedish
Evidence from the 1990s,” Economic Journal vol. 111, pp. 766-790.
Chetty, Raj (forthcoming), “A General Formula for the Optimum Level of Social Insurance,”
Journal of Public Economics.
Chetty, Raj (2006), “Why do Unemployment Benefits Raise Unemployment Durations? Moral
Hazard vs. Liquidity,” Working Paper, University of California--Berkeley.
Classen, Kathleen P., "Unemployment Insurance and Job Search," in S.A. Lippman and J. J.
McCall, eds., Studies in the Economics of Search, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1979, ch.
10.
Corson, Walter and Walter Nicholson, "An Examination of Declining UI Claims During the
1980's," Unemployment Insurance Occasional Paper 88-3, Washington, DC: US
Department of Labor-ETA, 1988.
Danziger, Sheldon, Haveman, Robert and Plotnick, Robert, "How Income Transfer Programs
Affect Work, Savings, and the Income Distribution: A Critical Review," Journal of
Economic Literature, September 1981, XIX, 975-1028.

28

Ehrenberg, Ronald G. and Oaxaca, Ronald L., "Unemployment Insurance, Duration of
Unemployment, and Subsequent Wage Gain," American Economic Review, December
1976, 66, 754-766.
Gritz, R. Mark, and Thomas MaCurdy (1989): "The Influence of Unemployment Insurance on
the Unemployment Experiences of Young Workers," Working Paper, October 1989.
Gruber, Jonathan. 1997. "The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance,"
American Economic Review, 87, 192-205.
Gustman, Alan L., "Analyzing the Relation of Unemployment Insurance to Unemployment," in
Ronald Ehrenberg, ed., Research in Labor Economics, Vol. 5, 1982, 69-114.
Hamermesh, Daniel S., Jobless Pay and the Economy, Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1977.
Holmlund, B. (1998), “Unemployment Insurance in Theory and Practice,” Scandinavian Journal
of Economics, vol.100, pp.113-141.
Krueger, Alan B., and Bruce D. Meyer (2002): “Labor Supply Effects of Social Insurance,” in
Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 4, Alan Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, eds.
Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2002, 2327-2392.
Layard, Richard, Stephen Nickell, and Richard Jackman. 1991. Unemployment:
Macroeconomic Performance and the Labour Market, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas J. Sargent. 1998. “The European Unemployment Dilemma”
Journal of Political Economy 106: 514-550.
McCall, Brian P., "The Impact of Unemployment Insurance Benefit Levels on Recipiency,"
Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, XII (1995), 189-198.
Meyer, Bruce D. (1989), "A Quasi-Experimental Approach to the Effects of Unemployment
Insurance," April 1989, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 3159.
Meyer, Bruce D. (1990), "Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells," Econometrica,
July 1990, 757-782.
Meyer, Bruce D. (2002), "Unemployment and Workers’ Compensation Programmes: Rationale,
Design, Labour Supply and Income Support,” Fiscal Studies 23, March 2002, 1-49
Meyer, Bruce D., Viscusi, W. Kip and Durbin, David (1995), "Workers' Compensation and
Injury Duration: Evidence from a Natural Experiment", American Economic Review, vol.
85, pp. 322-340.
Moffitt, Robert (1985): "Unemployment Insurance and the Distribution of Unemployment
Spells," Journal of Econometrics, 28, 85-101.
Moffitt, Robert (1992): "Evaluation Methods for Program Entry Effects," in Evaluating Welfare
and Training Programs, Charles F. Manski and Irwin Garfinkel, eds. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
29

Mortensen, Dale T. (1977): "Unemployment Insurance and Job Search Decisions," Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, 30, 505-517.
Røed, Knut, Zhang, Tao (2003): “Does Unemployment Compensation Affect Unemployment
Duration?” Economic Journal 113, 190-206.
Røed, Knut and Zhang, Tao (2005): “Unemployment Duration and Economic Incentives - A
Quasi Random-Assignment Approach,” European Economic Review, 49, 1799-1825.
Solon, Gary, "Unemployment Insurance, Filing Delay, and Unemployment Duration," Working
Paper #144, Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University, 1981.
Solon, Gary, "Work Incentive Effects of Taxing Unemployment Benefits," Econometrica, March
1985, 53, 295-306.
Topel, Robert H., "On Layoffs and Unemployment Insurance," American Economic Review,
September 1983, 73, 541-559.
Topel, Robert H., "Experience Rating of Unemployment Insurance and the Incidence of
Unemployment," Journal of Law & Economics, October 1984, 27, 61-90.
U. S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Current Wage Developments, February
1988 to January 1990.
U. S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Mass Layoffs in 1988, Bulletin 2344,
November 1989.
U. S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Mass Layoffs in 1989, Bulletin 2375,
November 1990.
Vroman, Wayne (1991): The Decline in Unemployment Insurance Claims Activity in the 1980s,
Unemployment Insurance Occasional Paper 91-2, U.S. Department of Labor,
Employment and Training Administration, Unemployment Insurance Service.
Welch, Finis, "What Have We Learned from Empirical Studies of Unemployment Insurance?,"
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, July 1977, 30, 451-461.

30

Figure 1
New York State UI Benefit Schedule
Before and After April 17, 1989 Increase in Benefits

Weekly
Benefit
Amount ($)
245
After Increase

180

Before Increase

40

E1

E2
Low
Earnings Group

E3
Medium
Earnings Group

Average Weekly
Earnings ($)
High
Earnings Group

Figure 2
Employment Level and Unemployment Rate in New York State 1988-1990
Employment (Thousands)

Unemployment Rate (%)
6

8500

8400
5
8300

4

8200

8100
3
8000

2

7900

7800
1
7700

7600

Employment

SOURCE:

Unemployment Rate

Employment and Earnings, various issues.

12/1990

10/1990

07/1990

04/1990

01/1990

10/1989

07/1989

04/1989

01/1989

10/1988

07/1988

04/1988

01/1988

0

Figure 3
Empirical Hazard of 1988 First Quarter Claimants,
High Earnings Group and Low Earnings Group
0.09

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38
Calendar Week of 1988

High 1988

Low 1988

Empirical Hazard of 1989 First Quarter Claimants,
High Earnings Group and Low Earnings Group
0.09

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38
Calendar Week of 1989

High 1989

Low 1989

Note: These graphs show the Kaplan-Meier hazards for the High and Low Earnings Groups. Only first quarter
data are included, and those who worked in the construction industry are deleted. 95% confidence bands are also
displayed.

TABLE 1
Monthly Employment, Unemployment, and Labor Force
New York, 1988–1990 (thousands)
__________
Month

Employment

Unemployment

Labor Force

Unemployment
Rate
_

1988
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December

8105.4
8064.9
8075.5
7954.9
7943.2
8280.1
8362.8
8391.8
8158.6
8202.4
8210.8
8217.3

427.5
372.1
362.6
282.9
341.0
289.8
365.1
367.8
354.0
360.0
372.3
396.9

8532.9
8437.0
8438.1
8237.8
8284.2
8569.9
8727.9
8759.6
8512.6
8562.4
8583.1
8614.2

5.01
4.41
4.30
3.43
4.12
3.38
4.18
4.20
4.16
4.20
4.34
4.61

1989
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December

8169.3
8140.5
8101.6
8169.3
8143.2
8361.9
8445.3
8305.7
8140.1
8265.1
8307.0
8304.7

484.7
477.2
399.5
483.2
445.4
411.9
411.2
421.1
447.4
401.2
442.4
482.1

8654.0
8617.7
8501.1
8652.5
8588.6
8773.8
8856.5
8726.8
8587.5
8666.3
8749.4
8786.8

5.60
5.54
4.70
5.58
5.19
4.69
4.64
4.83
5.21
4.63
5.06
5.49

1990
January
8262.9
478.2
8741.1
5.47
February
8205.6
474.1
8679.7
5.46
March
8141.0
458.5
8599.5
5.33
April
8170.4
410.9
8581.3
4.79
May
8194.5
440.8
8635.3
5.10
June
8394.8
413.4
8808.2
4.69
July
8415.4
458.9
8874.3
5.17
August
8311.4
419.6
8731.0
4.81
September
8198.1
473.4
8671.5
5.46
October
8160.9
462.2
8623.1
5.36
November
8116.8
451.7
8568.5
5.27
December
8098.8
465.9
8564.2
5.44
____________________________________________________________________________
SOURCE:

Employment and Earnings, various issues.

TABLE 2
Quarterly Employment by Major Industry, its Ratio to the 1987 Average, and Measures of Variability
New York State, 1987-1989 (thousands)

Construction

Durable
Manufacturing

Nondurable
Manufacturing

Transport

Trade

FIRE

Services

Government

Non-Agriculture

1987:1

286.4
0.8709

672.7
1.0117

546.3
0.987

284.3
0.9812

1650.7
0.975

774.2
0.9757

2158.0
0.9752

1398.0
0.9971

7770.6
0.9788

1987:2

329.2
1.0011

662.9
0.997

553.7
1.0003

289.8
1.0004

1688.4
0.9973

789.6
0.9951

2214.3
1.0007

1416.5
1.0102

7944.5
1.0008

1987:3

354.4
1.0778

659.9
0.9925

556.4
1.0052

288.9
0.9971

1698.3
1.0031

807.4
1.0175

2221.6
1.0039

1367.2
0.9751

7954.2
1.002

1987:4

345.4
1.0502

664.0
0.9987

557.7
1.0075

295.9
1.0213

1734.5
1.0245

802.8
1.0117

2257.6
1.0202

1426.8
1.0176

8084.7
1.0184

1988:1

300.7
0.9145

657.6
0.989

542.4
0.9799

290.2
1.0016

1679.4
0.992

796.8
1.0041

2214.3
1.0006

1433.1
1.0221

7914.5
0.997

1988:2

342
1.04

665.9
1.0015

547.1
0.9883

296.0
1.0218

1711.3
1.0108

797.9
1.0056

2266.4
1.0242

1450.5
1.0345

8077.1
1.0175

1988:3

360.8
1.0972

666.7
1.0027

549.2
0.9921

297.8
1.0278

1720
1.016

799.3
1.0073

2281.8
1.0311

1396.9
0.9963

8072.4
1.0169

1988:4

347.7
1.0574

669.3
1.0066

551.8
0.9969

304.1
1.0498

1758.2
1.0385

795.2
1.0021

2312.5
1.045

1445.5
1.0310

8184.4
1.031

1989:1

304.2
0.9251

656
0.9867

537.6
0.9711

299.7
1.0344

1699.8
1.0041

788.30
0.9934

2287.1
1.0335

1450.1
1.0342

8022.8
1.0106

1989:2

339.1
1.0313

652.5
0.9813

543.7
0.9821

308.1
1.0634

1726.1
1.0195

794.3
1.0009

2345.7
1.0600

1465.5
1.0452

8174.9
1.0298

1989:3

360
1.0946

646.7
0.9726

543.8
0.9823

308.0
1.063

1725.5
1.0192

794.0
1.0006

2352.8
1.0632

1404.6
1.0018

8135.2
1.0248

1989:4

342.9
1.0428

639.1
0.9612

536.9
0.9699

318.5
1.0994

1744.2
1.0302

786.4
0.991

2375.6
1.0735

1470
1.0484

8213.5
1.0346

7.315
1.302

1.474
0.228

1.242
0.197

3.3
0.575

1.747
0.236

1.082
0.163

2.876
0.373

2.189
0.303

1.622
0.181

0.089

0.113

0.162

0.118

0.071

0.314

0.082

Coefficient of Variation
Levels
Logs

Variance of Detrended Log Employment Residuals (*103)
4.856

0.099

_________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
SOURCE: Unpublished tabulations supplied by the New York State Department of Labor.

TABLE 3
Incidence and Duration of UI Claims by Quarter
Year Before and Year of Benefit Increase
First
Quarter

Second
Quarter

Third
Quarter

Fourth
Quarter

Number of Claims (Incidence)
High Earnings Group
1988
1989

25384
23722

18961
22718

21926
30842

19604
27456

0.9345
(0.0084)

1.1981
(0.0118)

1.4066
(0.0124)

1.4005
(0.0131)

16604
15802

11980
13746

12767
15862

14833
17430

0.9517
(0.0106)

1.1474
(0.0143)

1.2424
(0.0148)

1.1751
(0.0131)

63450
64066

47374
57089

52193
58981

62727
74468

1989/1988

1.0097
(0.0057)

1.2051
(0.0075)

1.1301
(0.0068)

1.1872
(0.0064)

High - Low

-0.0752
(0.0102)

-0.0069
(0.0140)

0.2766
(0.0142)

0.2134
(0.0146)

Medium - Low

-0.0580
(0.0120)

-0.0577
(0.0162)

0.1124
(0.0163)

-0.0121
(0.0146)

14.8305
16.1064

16.3682
17.0709

13.8926
13.6652

16.1360
16.3244

1.2759
(0.0852)

0.7027
(0.0932)

-0.2275
(0.0884)

0.1884
(0.0891)

15.5545
16.2726

16.7124
17.2976

15.9172
16.3646

16.3703
17.2426

0.7181
(0.1058)

0.5852
(0.1187)

0.4473
(0.1163)

0.8723
(0.1060)

14.8878
15.5005

15.6045
15.7965

14.2683
15.0752

16.0267
16.4805

1989-1988

0.6128
(0.0535)

0.1920
(0.0586)

0.8069
(0.0571)

0.4538
(0.0500)

High - Low

0.6631
(0.1007)

0.5107
(0.1100)

-1.0344
(0.1052)

-0.2654
(0.1022)

Medium - Low

0.1053
(0.1186)

0.3932
(0.1324)

-0.3596
(0.1295)

0.4185
(0.1172)

1989/1988
Medium Earnings Group
1988
1989
1989/1988
Low Earnings Group
1988
1989

Average Duration of Claims (Weeks)
High Earnings Group
1988
1989
1989-1988
Medium Earnings Group
1988
1989
1989-1988
Low Earnings Group
1988
1989

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. The standard errors for ratios of number of claims
are calculated using the delta method applied to (sample size after)/(sample size after + sample
size before) treated as a binomial.
The sample excludes those who worked in the construction
industry prior to employment and includes some claimants who did not receive unemployment
benefits.

TABLE 4
Actual and Predicted Duration in 1988 and 1989 using Linear
Regression Equations Estimated on 1988 Data

1st Quarter
1988 Actual and Predicted
R2
1989 Predicted
1989 Actual
1989 Predicted -1988
2nd Quarter
1988 Actual and Predicted
R2
1989 Predicted
1989 Actual
1989 Predicted-1988
3rd Quarter
1988 Actual and Predicted
R2
1989 Predicted
1989 Actual
1989 Predicted -1988
4th Quarter
1988 Actual and Predicted
R2
1989 Predicted
1989 Actual
1989 Predicted-1988

High

Medium

Low

14.7666
0.0917
14.8040
15.9789
0.0374
(0.0124)

15.5758
0.0963
15.6821
16.2136
0.1063
(0.0147)

14.8893
0.0914
14.9228
15.4690
0.0335
(0.0064)

16.2423
0.0692
16.0035
16.8907
-0.2388
(0.0204)

16.9157
0.0945
16.7744
17.2887
-0.1413
(0.0159)

15.6706
0.0803
15.5746
15.7672
-0.0960
(0.0073)

13.4507
0.2090
12.6883
13.1597
-0.7624
(0.0167)

15.8832
0.0972
15.6499
16.3672
-0.2333
(0.0176)

14.1761
0.1014
14.2015
14.9582
0.0254
(0.0069)

15.9280
0.0862
15.5693
15.9047
-0.3587
(0.0193)

16.2567
0.1467
16.2958
17.1116
0.0391
(0.0165)

15.9576
0.0982
15.7264
16.4017
-0.2312
(0.0056)

Notes: (1) Separate regressions are estimated for each quarter and earnings group. (2) Each
regression has duration in days as the dependent variable. All equations include a constant, base
year earnings, weeks worked in the base year, age, gender, race and education indicator
variables, industry and region indicator variables. (3) Those in construction, with missing
demographics, no previous earnings, with weeks worked less than 20, real weekly earnings less
than $80 ($84.24 in 1989), out of state observations and those with pension reductions are
deleted.

TABLE 5
First Quarter Regression Equations for Natural Logarithm of Duration
Specification
_______________________________________________________
Explanatory Variable
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

After Increase*
High Earnings Group

0.0729
0.0869
(0.0152) (0.0153)

0.0478
(0.0265)

After Increase*
Medium Earnings Group

-0.0025
0.0081
(0.0173) (0.0174)

-0.0081
(0.0191)

(Ln(WBA Under New Law)
-Ln(WBA Under Old Law))
*After Benefit Increase

0.2752
0.4172
0.3591
0.2371
(0.0896) (0.0959) (0.0976) (0.1789)

Ln(WBA Under Old Law)

0.2610
0.2600
0.2615
0.2617
(0.0247) (0.0247) (0.0247) (0.0247)

Ln(Weekly Earnings)

0.1977
0.1946 -0.0043
(0.0107) (0.0107) (0.0219)
-0.5534 -0.5541 -0.5640
(0.0109) (0.0109) (0.0109)
-0.0032
-0.0032
(0.0076)
(0.0067)
-0.2222
-0.1091
(0.0158)
(0.0169)
-0.0383
-0.0499
(0.0140)
(0.0109)

-0.0066
(0.0219)
-0.5641
(0.0109)

-0.0076
(0.0219)
-0.5646
(0.0109)

-0.1219
(0.0170)
-0.0560
(0.0109)

-0.1175
(0.0170)
-0.0541
(0.0109)

Week Spell Began*
Before and After Increase

yes

yes

yes

Week Spell Began*
High and Medium Earnings

yes

Ln(Weeks Worked)
After Increase
High Earnings Group
Medium Earnings Group

-0.0082
(0.0220)
-0.5649
(0.0109)

yes

yes

Age, Sex, Education, and
Race Indicator Variables

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

Industry Indicators

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

Region Indicators

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

0.0559

0.0555

Industry and Region*
After Interactions
R2

0.0518

0.0549

0.0523

0.0551

Notes: (1) Standard errors are in parentheses. (2) The sample size is 173,927. (3) All equations include a constant, and all
earnings and benefit amounts are in 1988 dollars. (3) Durations of zero are recoded to 0.5. (4) Only Q1 observations are
included, those in construction, with missing demographics, no previous earnings, with weeks worked less than 20, real
weekly earnings less than $80 ($84.24 in 1989), out of state observations and those with pension reductions are deleted.

TABLE 6
First Quarter Tobit Regression Equations for Natural Logarithm of Duration
Specification
______________________________________________________
Explanatory Variable
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

After Increase*
High Earnings Group

0.1236
0.1479
(0.0223) (0.0224)

0.0838
(0.0390)

After Increase*
Medium Earnings Group

0.0117
0.0295
(0.0255) (0.0256)

0.0021
(0.0281)

(Ln(WBA Under New Law)
-Ln(WBA Under Old Law))
*After Benefit Increase

0.6253
0.7015
0.6085
0.3981
(0.1328) (0.1420) (0.1445) (0.2650)

Ln(WBA Under Old Law)

0.4007
0.3950
0.3964
0.3961
(0.0366) (0.0366) (0.0366) (0.0367)

Ln(Weekly Earnings)

0.2985
0.2927 -0.0135 -0.0143 -0.0152 -0.0158
(0.0158) (0.0158) (0.0325) (0.0325) (0.0325) (0.0326)

Ln(Weeks Worked)

-0.7626 -0.7657
(0.0163) (0.0162)
-0.0249
(0.0112)
-0.3447
(0.0232)
-0.0529
(0.0206)

After Increase
High Earnings Group
Medium Earnings Group
Week Spell Began*
Before and After Increase

yes

Week Spell Began*
High and Medium Earnings

yes

-0.7798
(0.0163)
0.0335
(0.0098)
-0.1764
(0.0250)
-0.0657
(0.0161)

-0.7814 -0.7822 -0.7829
(0.0163) (0.0163) (0.0163)

-0.1886
(0.0251)
-0.0724
(0.0161)

-0.1826
(0.0252)
-0.0699
(0.0161)

yes

yes

yes

yes

Age, Sex, Education, and
Race Indicator Variables

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

Industry Indicators

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

Region Indicators

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

Industry and Region*
After Interactions

yes

yes
_____
Notes: (1) Standard errors are in parentheses. (2) The sample size is 173,927. (3) All equations include a constant, and all
earnings and benefit amounts are in 1988 dollars. (4) Only Q1 observations are included, those in construction, with missing
demographics, no previous earnings, with weeks worked less than 20, real weekly earnings less than $80 ($84.24 in 1989),
out of state observations and those with pension reductions are deleted. The number of left censored observations is 6,810,
while the number of right censored observations is 53,778.

TABLE 7
First Quarter Duration Model Estimates,
Using Time-Period Interactions to Identify the Effect of the Benefit Increase
___________________________________________________________________________________
Specification
__________________________________________________________________________ __

Explanatory Variable
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

____________________________________________________________________________________
After 16th week of
1989*High Earnings
Group

-0.0587
(0.0205)

-0.0584
(0.0205)

After 16th week of
1989*Med Earnings
Group
High Earnings Group

0.2297
(0.0149)

0.2380
(0.0149)

Medium Earnings
Group
After*High Earnings

-0.0691
(0.0178)

-0.0795
(0.0179)

After*Med Earnings

Week Spell Began
Indicators

-0.0582
(0.0205)

-0.0578
(0.0205)

-0.0608
(0.0205)

-0.0701
(0.0282)

-0.0418
(0.0237)

-0.0419
(0.0237)

-0.0437
(0.0237)

0.0032
(0.0324)

0.2252
(0.0148)

0.2333
(0.0148)

0.2266
(0.0149)

0.1680
(0.0203)

0.0267
(0.0133)

0.0312
(0.0133)

0.0267
(0.0134)

-0.0097
(0.0182)

-0.0684
(0.0178)

-0.0785
(0.0178)

-0.0636
(0.0182)

-0.0202
(0.0232)

0.0027
(0.0207)

-0.0036
(0.0207)

0.0056
(0.0208)

-0.0301
(0.0265)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Industry and Region*
After Interactions
Medium Earnings
Group Included in
Sample
Only Spells
Beginning in
Weeks 1-6

Yes

Yes

Yes

_______________
Notes: (1) Standard errors are in parentheses. (2) Controls for previous earnings, previous weeks worked, age, gender,
education, race, industry and region are included. In addition, indicator variables for each calendar week are included.
(3) Only Q1 observations are included, those in construction, with missing demographics, no previous earnings, with weeks
worked less than 20, real weekly earnings less than $80 ($84.24 in 1989), out of state observations and those with pension
reductions are deleted.

Table 8
First Quarter Duration Model Estimates,
Using Benefit Level Variables to Capture the Effect of the Benefit Increase
Specification
_____________________________________________________________________________

Explanatory Variable
(1)

(2)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Ln(WBA in Current Week)
-Ln(WBA Under Old Law)

-0.3308
(0.0600)

-0.3468
(0.0599)

-0.2965
(0.0560)

-0.2797
(0.0563)

-0.1840
(0.0613)

-0.1794
(0.0848)

-0.3037
(0.0567)

Ln(WBA Under Old Law)

-0.1825
(0.0243)

-0.1820
(0.0243)

-0.2028
(0.0237)

-0.2066
(0.0238)

-0.2062
(0.0238)

-0.1010
(0.0323)

-1.9432
(0.7807)

High Earnings Group

0.1314
(0.0160)

0.1355
(0.0160)

0.1187
(0.0157)

0.1165
(0.0157)

0.1453
(0.0172)

0.1193
(0.0232)

-0.0082
(0.0431)

0.0243
(0.0104)

0.0235
(0.0104)

0.0241
(0.0134)

-0.0168
(0.0181)

0.0444
(0.0363)

After*High Earnings

-0.0664
(0.0163)

-0.0229
(0.0212)

After*Medium Earnings

-0.0040
(0.0170)

0.0447
(0.0229)

Medium Earnings Group

Week Spell Began
Indicators

(3)

(4)

Yes

Industry and Region*
After Interactions

Yes

Yes

Yes

Ln(Earnings)Spline

Yes

Yes

Medium Earnings Group
Included in Sample

Yes

Yes

Yes

Only Spells Beginning
in Weeks 1-6

Yes

Yes

Yes

Compensated Duration
Elasticity

0.1629

0.1686

0.1443

0.1363

0.0897

0.0900

0.1478

Total Duration
Elasticity

0.2205

0.2283

0.1958

0.1849

0.1216

0.1212

0.2005

Notes: (1) Standard errors are in parentheses. (2) Controls for previous earnings, previous weeks worked, age, gender,
education, race, industry and region are included. In addition, indicator variables for each calendar week, and the current
spell length are included. (3) Only Q1 observations are included, those in construction, with missing demographics, no
previous earnings, with weeks worked less than 20, real weekly earnings less than $80 ($84.24 in 1989), out of state
observations and those with pension reductions are deleted. (4) The compensated and total duration elasticities are
computed based on a simulated 10% benefit increase.

Table 9
First Quarter Duration Model Estimates, Table 8 Specifications,
Compensated and Total Duration Elasticities for Subsamples
Specification
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
________________________________________________________________________

Male
Ln(WBA in Current Week)
-Ln(WBA Under Old Law)

-0.3177
(0.0740)

-0.3212
(0.0740)

-0.2510
(0.0700)

-0.2279
(0.0703)

-0.1080
(0.0769)

-0.3320
(0.1048)

Compensated Elasticity

0.1594

0.1594

0.1243

0.1129

0.0535

0.1665

Total Duration Elasticity

0.2128

0.2128

0.1665

0.1511

0.0715

0.2229

-0.5520
(0.1168)

-0.5843
(0.1167)

-0.6528
(0.1044)

-0.6437
(0.1052)

-0.7343
(0.1128)

-0.6649
(0.1609)

Female
Ln(WBA in Current Week)
-Ln(WBA Under Old Law)
Compensated Elasticity

0.2631

0.2745

0.3068

0.3032

0.3453

0.3271

Total Duration Elasticity

0.3600

0.3757

0.4216

0.4167

0.4748

0.4426

Ln(WBA in Current Week)
-Ln(WBA Under Old Law)

-0.0583
(0.0823)

-0.0691
(0.0823)

-0.0605
(0.0759)

-0.0371
(0.0764)

0.0197
(0.0822)

0.0174
(0.1144)

Compensated Elasticity

0.0309

0.0362

0.0316

0.0194

-0.0103

-0.0093

Total Duration Elasticity

0.0410

0.0481

0.0421

0.0259

-0.0137

-0.0124

-0.7067
(0.0884)

-0.7414
(0.0884)

-0.6456
(0.0835)

-0.6397
(0.0841)

-0.5550
(0.0930)

-0.4759
(0.1275)

Age Less than 40

Age 40 and above
Ln(WBA in Current Week)
-Ln(WBA Under Old Law)
Compensated Elasticity

0.3166

0.3269

0.2864

0.2835

0.2463

0.2184

Total Duration Elasticity

0.4457

0.4600

0.4040

0.3989

0.3461

0.3045

Notes: (1) Standard errors for the Ln(WBA in Current Week)-Ln(WBA Under Old Law) coefficients are in parentheses. (2)
The specifications for these models are based on those in Table 8. See Table 8 for details on specification. (3) The
compensated and total duration elasticities are computed based on a simulated 10% benefit increase.

APPENDIX TABLE 1
Average Monthly Employment by Substate Region
New York State, 1988 and 1989 (thousands)

April to October Average Monthly Employment
Sub-state Region
1988

1989

New York PMSA

3913.0

3964.5

1989/1988
_
1.0132

Nassau-Suffolk PMSA

1379.9

1380.4

1.0004

Albany-Schenectady-Troy MSA

410.9

421.4

1.0254

Poughkeepsie MSA

125.8

126.6

1.0062

Orange County PMSA

129.5

132.9

1.0264

Binghamton MSA

122.7

120.8

0.9849

Buffalo PMSA

430.2

440.3

1.0235

Rochester MSA

485.5

496.3

1.0223

Syracuse MSA

302.4

310.1

1.0253

Utica-Rome MSA

130.2

132.9

1.0208

SOURCE: New York State Department of Labor (1991), Resident Employment Status
of the Civilian Labor Force, 1974-1991.

APPENDIX TABLE 2
Means and Standard Deviations of Various Characteristics,
First Quarter Observations in the Year Before and the Year of the Benefit Increase

25-34 Years of Age
35-44 Years of Age
45-54 Years of Age
55-64 Years of Age
65 Years of Age
Male
Black
Hispanic
Other Race
9-11 Years of Education
12 Years of Education
13-15 Years of Education
16 Years of Education
17 Years of Education
Previous Industry
Agriculture
Durable and Nondurable
Manufacturing
Transport
Finance, Insurance and Real
Estate
Services and Trade
Government
Communication
Sub-state Region
New York PMSA
Nassau-Suffolk PMSA
Albany, Schenectady and Troy
MSA
Poughkeepsie, Orange
County, Binghamton and
Utica-Rome MSA
Buffalo MSA
Rochester MSA
Syracuse MSA
Initial Replacement Rate

High Earnings Group
Before
After

Medium Earnings Group
Before
After

Low Earnings Group
Before
After

0.312
0.280
0.195
0.148
0.021
0.741
0.097
0.054
0.018
0.106
0.353
0.204
0.142
0.144

0.300
0.283
0.207
0.147
0.023
0.737
0.097
0.055
0.016
0.095
0.375
0.188
0.138
0.153

0.363
0.233
0.157
0.115
0.022
0.637
0.139
0.109
0.020
0.140
0.412
0.208
0.088
0.054

0.358
0.241
0.164
0.116
0.023
0.628
0.154
0.113
0.020
0.129
0.432
0.194
0.087
0.070

0.298
0.196
0.148
0.120
0.041
0.438
0.145
0.159
0.038
0.201
0.420
0.160
0.038
0.021

0.301
0.204
0.145
0.117
0.044
0.452
0.168
0.145
0.036
0.197
0.442
0.145
0.039
0.031

0.023
0.300

0.016
0.292

0.015
0.316

0.014
0.282

0.010
0.345

0.008
0.316

0.071
0.129

0.074
0.101

0.067
0.105

0.069
0.095

0.046
0.050

0.047
0.047

0.447
0.019
0.012

0.486
0.017
0.014

0.468
0.024
0.005

0.511
0.023
0.006

0.520
0.025
0.003

0.552
0.027
0.003

0.201
0.403
0.031

0.203
0.404
0.041

0.172
0.418
0.035

0.180
0.422
0.037

0.151
0.355
0.050

0.149
0.362
0.050

0.050

0.054

0.060

0.073

0.082

0.085

0.081
0.052
0.048

0.081
0.049
0.035

0.084
0.051
0.053

0.079
0.044
0.045

0.114
0.063
0.050

0.116
0.058
0.046

0.284
(0.072)

0.269
(0.068)

0.444
(0.033)

0.422
(0.031)

0.500
(0.000)

0.499
(0.003)

Replacement Rate
After Benefit Increase
Real Weekly Earnings

0.366
(0.093)

0.500
(0.000)

0.500
(0.000)

696.470
(267.162)

695.365
(263.011)

407.263
(30.088)

407.038
(30.054)

228.199
(70.034)

229.183
(70.699)

Weeks Worked in Base Year

44.203
(9.241)

44.390
(9.230)

42.639
(9.929)

43.078
(9.805)

38.857
(10.676)

39.479
(10.705)

N

17878

19173

12884

13615

52699

57678

Notes: (1) Standard deviations are in parentheses. (2) Only Q1 observations are included, those with missing demographics,
no previous earnings, with weeks worked less than 20, real weekly earnings less than $80 ($84.24 in 1989), out of state
observations and those in construction, with pension reductions are deleted. (3) Initial Replacement Rate is defined as the
ratio of the benefit amount in the first week of claim to the person’s average weekly earnings.

Data Appendix
Explanatory Variables Used in Regressions

Previous Weeks Worked: Number of weeks worked in the base year.
Average Weekly Earnings: Base year earnings divided by weeks worked in the base year. Base year
earnings are the earnings in the last 52 weeks prior to the week of filing.
Week Spell Began: 13 indicator variables for the first 13 calendar weeks. Equals one if the individual’s
claim began in the particular week.
Age: Indicator variables for age 25-34, 35-44, 45-54, 55-64, and 65+.
Race: Indicator variables for black, Hispanic, and other non-white groups.
Education: Indicator variables for years of education 9-11, 12, 13-15, 16, and 17 or more.
Gender: Indicator variable for male.
Industry: Indicator variables for agriculture, durable manufacturing, nondurable manufacturing,
transport, FIRE (finance, insurance and real estate), services, government, trade and communication.
The reference industry is trade.
Sub-state Region: Indicator variables for New York City, Bronx, Suffern, Westchester, Long Island,
Riverhead, AST (Albany, Schenectady and Troy), Kingston, Poughkeepsie, Monticel, Glenfall, Platts,
Syracuse, Utica, Water, Binghamton, Buffalo, Rochester, James and Elmira. The reference region is
James.
High Earnings Group: Indicator variable for those whose real average weekly earnings (in 1988 dollars)
are above $465.34.
Medium Earnings Group: Indicator variable for those whose real average weekly earnings (in 1988
dollars) are between $360 and $465.34.
Low Earnings Group: Indicator variable for those whose real average weekly earnings (in 1988 dollars)
were between $80 and $360.
After Increase: Indicator variable for those who filed a claim in 1989.
WBA under Old Law: Amount of weekly benefits under the law prior to the increase. It is 50% of
nominal average weekly earnings for those with nominal average weekly earnings between $80 and
$360. For those with average weekly earnings over $360, it is $180.
WBA under New Law: Average amount of weekly benefits under the law after the increase assuming a
20 week spell beginning with the file date. Weekly benefit amount from the date of increase is 50% of
nominal average weekly earnings for those with nominal average weekly earnings between $80 and
$490. For those with average weekly earnings over $490, it is $245.

Additional variables in duration models
Calendar Week: Indicator variables for each calendar week the person is at risk in the person-week
format of the data (38 × 2 variables).
Ln(Earnings) Spline: The positive part of the difference between Ln(Real Average Weekly Earnings)
and the logarithm of each decile of real average weekly earnings in the sample (9 variables in addition to
Ln(Earnings)).

