                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   COLLEGE COST AND TIME TO COMPLETE A DEGREE:
                      EVIDENCE FROM TUITION DISCONTINUITIES

                                           Pietro Garibaldi
                                          Francesco Giavazzi
                                            Andrea Ichino
                                            Enrico Rettore

                                         Working Paper 12863
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12863


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2007




We would like to thank the administration of Bocconi University for providing the data and for answering
our endless list of questions. We also thank Josh Angrist, Barbara Sianesi and seminar participants
at Bocconi University, CREST conference on the "Econometric Evaluation of Public Policies" - Paris
2005, CEPR PPS 2006, CEPR EEEPE 2006, EALE 2006, ESSLE 2006, Hebrew University, Koc University,
'Max Planck Institute - Rostock, NBER Education Meeting 2006, Universitá di Roma Tor Vergata,
Sebanci University for helpful comments and suggestions. Our special gratitude goes to Stefano Gagliarducci
whose help was determinant in preparing the data and to Silvia Caló for further assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Pietro Garibaldi, Francesco Giavazzi, Andrea Ichino, and Enrico Rettore. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
College Cost and Time to Complete a Degree: Evidence from Tuition Discontinuities
Pietro Garibaldi, Francesco Giavazzi, Andrea Ichino, and Enrico Rettore
NBER Working Paper No. 12863
January 2007, Revised April 2007
JEL No. C31,I2

                                              ABSTRACT

Many students enrolled in academic programs around the world take longer to obtain a degree than
the normal completion time while college tuition is typically constant during the years of enrollment.
In particular, it does not increase when a student remains in a program beyond the normal completion
time. Using a Regression Discontinuity Design on data from Bocconi University in Italy, this paper
shows that an increase of 1,000 euro in the continuation tuition reduces the probability of late graduation
by at least 6.1 percentage points with respect to a benchmark average probability of 80%. We conclude
suggesting that an increase in continuation tuition is efficient when effort is suboptimally supplied,
for instance in the presence of public subsidies to education, congestion externalities and/or peer effects.

Pietro Garibaldi                                     Andrea Ichino
University of Torino                                 University of Bologna
Collegio Carlo Alberto                               Dipartimento di Economia
Via Real Collegio, 30                                piazza Scaravilli, 2
10024 Moncalieri, Torino - Italy                     40126, Bologna - Italy
pietro.garibaldi@unito.it                            andrea.ichino@unibo.it

Francesco Giavazzi                                   Enrico Rettore
IGIER                                                University of Padova
Universita' L.Bocconi                                Dipartimento di Scienze Statistiche
5, via Salasco                                       via Cesare Battisti 241
20136 - Milano ITALY                                 35121, Padova - Italy
and NBER                                             enrico.rettore@stat.unipd.it
francesco.giavazzi@unibocconi.it
1     Introduction
Many students enrolled in academic programs around the world take longer to
obtain a degree than the normal completion time. Interestingly, this happens
while college tuition typically does not increase (actually it often decreases)
when a student remains in a program after its regular end. This paper shows
that these two facts–the time profile of tuition and the speed of graduation–
are related and suggests that if tuition were raised after the regular end of a
program the probability of late graduation would be reduced. It also suggests
that this outcome would be efficient in the presence of public subsidies to
education, congestion externalities and/or peer effects.
    We discuss the link between the time profile of tuition and time to grad-
uation in a simple model of human capital accumulation in which obtaining
a degree is an uncertain outcome and requires time. Whereas the tuition
a student pays during a program is a sunk cost, and thus has no effect on
incentives, students anticipate the tuition they would pay if they remained
enrolled beyond the regular completion time and react accordingly. As a
result, a higher continuation tuition raises students’ effort and increases the
overall speed of completion. The core of the paper takes this simple predic-
tion to the data.
    We base our empirical analysis on detailed administrative data from Boc-
coni University in Milan. During the period for which we have information
(1992-2000), Bocconi, a private institution, offered a 4-years college degree in
economics. This dataset is informative on the question under study not only
because more than 80% of Bocconi graduates typically complete their degree
in more than 4 years, but also because it offers a unique quasi-experimental
setting to analyze the effect of tuition on the probability of completing a
degree within the normal time.
    Upon enrollment in each academic year, Bocconi students in our sample
are assigned to one of 12 tuition levels on the basis of their income, assessed
by the university administration through the income tax declaration of the
student’s family and through further inquiries. A Regression Discontinuity


                                       1
Design (RDD) can then be used to compare students who, in terms of family
income, are immediately above or below each discontinuity threshold. These
two groups of students pay different tuitions to enroll, but should otherwise
be identical in terms of observable and unobservable characteristics deter-
mining the outcome of interest, which in our case is the decision to complete
the program in time. We focus on students in the last regular year of the
program exploiting the fact that their current tuition is a good predictor of
the tuition they would pay if they stayed in the program one more year.
Thus, students on the two sides of a discontinuity threshold in the last reg-
ular year should expect to pay different tuitions in the following year if they
do not graduate in time. Using this source of identification, we show that if
the tuition paid by a student in the last regular year increases by 1,000 euro,
the probability of late graduation decreases by at least 6.1 percentage points
(with respect to an observed probability of 80%). We also show that this de-
cline in the probability of late graduation is not associated with an increase
in the dropout rate or with a fall in the quality of students’ performance as
measured by the final graduation mark.
   In light of these results, we proceed to ask whether there might be ef-
ficiency reasons suggesting that continuation tuition should be increased in
real life academic institutions. We do not know much about the optimal
length of the learning period for given amount of notions to be learned–this
is in fact an issue that has been rarely explored in the literature. In principle
a student could be left to decide the optimal speed at which she learns, and
thus the time to graduation, and there is no reason why such a time should be
the same for all students. In the absence of imperfections, private incentives
would lead to completion times that are also socially optimal. We argue,
however, that this is not the case at least in the presence of public subsidies
to education, congestion externalities and peer effects. In the (frequent) sit-
uations in which these imperfections exist and generate externalities, tuition
should be raised at the end of a program, relative to the marginal cost of
providing education, since effort would otherwise be sub-optimally supplied.
   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the related literature.

                                       2
Section 3 presents the available international evidence on the time to degree
completion and on the time profile of tuition. Section 4 proposes a sim-
ple model of human capital accumulation that delivers our main empirical
prediction, namely, the existence of a negative causal effect of the size of con-
tinuation tuition on the probability of obtaining a degree beyond the normal
completion time. Section 5 describes the data, while Section 6 shows how
a Regression Discontinuity Design can be used to identify the causal effect
of interest and discusses the robustness of our results with respect to some
important complications generated by the institutional setting in which our
evaluation takes place. Finally, Section 7 discusses when and why raising
continuation tuition is efficient and Section 8 concludes.


2      Related Literature
There is a small literature looking at the effect of financial incentives on the
time to complete a college degree, but its findings are ambiguous and typi-
cally not based on experimental evidence capable to control adequately for
confounding factors and in particular for students’ ability. Among the less
recent non experimental studies, Bowen and Rudenstine (1992) and Ehren-
berg and Mavros (1995) find evidence of an effect of financial incentives, in
particular on completion rates and time to degree, while Booth and Satchell
(1995) find no such evidence.
    A more recent study by Hakkinen and Uusitalo (2003) evaluates a reform
of the financial aid system in Finland aimed at reducing incentives to delay
graduation, finding that the reform had some small effect in the desired direc-
tion. Similar in spirit, but with ambiguous findings, is the paper by Heineck
et al. (2006) that evaluates the German reform of 1998 which introduced a
fee on top of the normal tuition for students enrolled in a university program
beyond the regular completion time. Both these studies, although based on
the exogenous variation generated by a policy change, cannot fully control
for confounding factors because they identify the effect of a tuition increase
on delayed enrollment only on the basis of a comparison of students before

                                       3
and after the reform.
       Similarly plagued by the likely presence of confounding factors is the
study by Groen et al. (2006) which evaluates the effect of the Graduate
Education Initiative (GEI) financed by the A.W. Mellon Foundation. This
program distributed a total of 80 million dollars to 51 departments in 10
universities with the explicit goal of financing incentives aimed at reducing
students’ attrition and time to degree. By comparing these departments
with a sample of similar control institutions, the study concludes that the
GEI had a modest impact on the outcomes under study, mostly reducing
student attrition rather than increasing degree completion.1
       A larger and older literature studies the effect of tuition and financial aid
on college enrollment. Van der Klaauw (2002) exploits the evidence gener-
ated by discontinuities in the rules for the concession of financial aid in a
U.S. college. The methodology used in our paper is inspired by that study.
In terms of substantive results, among the most recent and reliable contribu-
tions based on a quasi-experimental framework, Kane (2003) estimates that
a 1,000$ increase in college costs decreases enrollment rates by 4 percentage
points while Dynarski (2003) finds that a grant aid of 1,000$ increases the
probability of attending college by 3.6 percentage points. Albeit related to
our work, however, the question addressed by this literature is very different.2
       Closer to our research goal are instead some recent papers that study, with
mixed results, the effect of merit based financial incentives on indicators of
student’s performance. Angrist and Lavy (2002) run different trials offering
financial incentives to Israeli highschool students aimed at increasing degree
completion and conclude that significant gains can be obtained by offering
cash awards in low-achieving schools. Dynarski (2005) finds substantial pos-
itive effects of merit aid programs in Georgia and Arkansas on the rate of
   1
     Other papers study different non-financial incentives affecting graduation times: for
example, demographic characteristics in Siegfried and Stock (2001); supervisor quality
in Van Ours and Ridder (2003) and labor market conditions in Brunello and Winter-
Ebmer (2003). Dearden et al. (2002) study instead the effects of financial incentives on
educational choices of highschool graduates.
   2
     See the surveys in Leslie and Brinkman (1987) and Dynarsky (2002).



                                            4
degree completion. On the contrary, within a randomized field experiment at
a large Canadian university, Angrist, Lang and Oreopulos (2006) find weak
effects of merit scholarship on grades and only for females. Similarly, Leuven
et al. (2006) perform a field experiment in which first year university stu-
dents can earn financial rewards for passing all first year requirements and
find small and non-significant average effects on passing rates and collected
credit points.
    Among the papers finding positive effects, Kremer et al. (2005) is partic-
ularly relevant from our viewpoint. These authors conducted a randomized
experiment in Kenia that offered school fees exemption and large cash awards
to girls who scored well on academic exams. Interestingly, they find that fi-
nancial incentives to student performance have positive externalities, since
boys, who were ineligible for the award, also experienced an improvement in
exam scores. The same happened for girls with low pretest scores who were
very unlikely to win. The authors conclude that these large externalities
address some of the equity concerns raised by critics of merit awards, and
provide further rationale for public education subsidies. This is particularly
relevant in our context because, as we argue in Section 7, the existence of
peer effects is one of the reasons that justify an increase in continuation tu-
ition, relative to the marginal cost of providing education, with the goal of
inducing students to exert the socially optimal amount of effort.
    To summarize, the mixed results of this literature may be a consequence of
the more general ambiguity of the effects of monetary incentives highlighted
by Gneezy and Rustichini (2000) and certainly require more research based
on (quasi-)experimental evidence, which is our goal in this paper.


3     Time to degree and time profile of tuition
      around the world
A simple Google search of the words “Time to degree completion” produces
an endless series of documents suggesting that throughout the world there is
a generalized concern for the fact that a large fraction of students remains

                                      5
in educational programs beyond their normal completion times. Moreover,
in many cases this tendency appears to have increased in recent years.
   At the Ph.D. level in the U.S. these are well known facts that have gen-
erated widespread concern. In the representative sample collected by Hoffer
and Welch (2006), the median time to obtain a Ph.D was 9 years in 1978 and
increased to 10.1 years in 2003 with a similar pattern across fields. Such a
number of years is almost twice what most universities consider as the regular
completion time (i.e. 4-5 years). These findings are confirmed also by OSEP
(1990), Ehrenberg and Mavros (1995), Groen et al. (2006) and Siegfried and
Stock (2001).
   Perhaps less well known is the fact that a problem exists in the U.S.
also at the undergraduate level where, according to Bound at al (2006),
time to completion of a degree has increased markedly over the last two
decades. These authors compare two cohorts of students who graduated
from highschool in 1972 and in 1992 finding that the fraction receiving a
degree within 4 years dropped from 57.6% to 44.0% and the average time to
degree increased by more than one-quarter of a year. Beyond the fact that
the increase in time to degree is localized among graduates of non-selective
public colleges and universities, they conclude that changes in observable
characteristics of the two cohorts do not contribute to explain the increase
in time to degree.
   A long series of documents, available on the internet, confirms this gen-
eral finding. The U.S. Department of Education (2003), reports that first-
time recipients of bachelor’s degrees in 1999-2000 took on average “about
55 months from first enrollment to degree completion”. This is about one
year more than the normal completion time of 45 months. The University
of Southern California finds for its graduates of the academic years 96/97 -
00/01 that in all fields more than 12 quarters (the standard duration) are
needed on average to obtain a degree. While in the social sciences the delay
is more limited (12.2 quarters on average) in engineering and natural sciences
completion time reaches 13.5 quarters. A report of the State of Illinois Board
of Higher Education (1999) shows that only “25% of the entering freshmen of

                                      6
the classes of 1987 through 1992 at the Illinois public universities graduated
within 4 years”, while 45% had not yet graduated at the end of the fifth
year. Similarly at UCDavis (2004), out of 5153 bachelor’s degrees conferred
in 2002-03, 46% of the students obtained a degree in more than 4 years. Even
at the level of 2-year community colleges there is evidence that delayed com-
pletion is an issue, as indicated by Gao (2002), who finds that only 45.2% of
the first-time full-time freshmen at the Collin County Community College in
Texas completed their studies within 150% of the legal duration.
   The situation is similar in Canada where a 2003 report of the Associa-
tion of Graduate Studies indicates that “ ... in many universities times to
completion were longer than desired.” Data are less easy to find for other
countries, but the problem of the excessive time to degree completion is cer-
tainly not restricted to North America. A survey conducted by Brunello and
Winter-Ebmer (2003) on 3000 Economics and Business college students in 10
European countries, finds that the percentage of students “expecting to com-
plete their degree at least one year later than the required time ranges from
31.2% in Sweden and 30.8% in Italy to close to zero in the UK and Ireland.
While Swiss and Portuguese students are close to the Anglo-Saxon pattern
(3.5% and 4.6% respectively), French and German students lie in between
these extremes (17.1% and 10% respectively).” The web site of the Spanish
Ministerio de Educacion y Ciencia reports that out of 91238 graduates of
the three year undergraduate program, only 38581 completed their studies
in time, and 33791 needed from 4 to 5 years. For the Netherlands, Van Ours
and Ridder (2003) analyse the administrative data of three universities and
find that “No Ph.D. student defends his or her thesis within three years,
while a few students graduate in three to four years. Most students finish in
five to seven years after the start, and after seven years the fraction remains
almost constant, i.e. there are few graduations after seven years”. According
to Hakkinen and Uusitalo (2003) the problem of reducing time to graduation
has been on the Finnish government agenda since at least 1969, given that
Finland is second only to Italy, among OECD countries, in terms of average
age of tertiary graduation.

                                      7
   Indeed, the country where the problem is perhaps more serious is Italy,
which offers the data used in the econometric analysis of this study. As
shown in Table 1 Italy is the Oecd country with the smallest employment
rate in the 25-29 age bracket, the highest enrollment rate in education in the
25-29 age bracket and the (second) lowest university graduation rate in the
35-44 age bracket. Since it is unlikely that cohort effects alone may explain
these figures, it seems that while most Italian youths remain in educational
institutions for a longer period than youths in other comparable countries,
very few of them complete their studies and obtain a degree. This is not
because these Italian youths drop out from a legal point of view, otherwise we
would not see so many of them registered as “non-employed, in education”.
The fact is that Italian students have an abnormal tendency to extend their
permanence in a university program beyond the normal completion time, as
documented in Dornbusch at al. (2000).
   Table 2 shows that while on average the mean legal duration of an Ital-
ian university program was 4.39 years, in a representative sample of 1995
graduates, the median effective duration was 7.00 years and the mean was
7.41. Moreover this tendency appears to be common to all fields. Table 3
shows that out of 1,684,993 students enrolled in Italian universities during
the academic year 1999-00, 41.1% are classified as Fuori Corso, i.e. they have
been enrolled for more than the legal length of their university program. Of
the 171,086 graduates of the same year, 83.5% obtained their degree as Fuori
Corso students.
   Interestingly, while throughout the world obtaining a degree within the
normal completion time is becoming the exception rather than the rule, uni-
versity tuition is often structured in a way such that students pay the same
for each year of enrollment, whether on schedule or beyond normal comple-
tion time. In some cases–one example is Italy–students pay less when they
enroll as Fuori Corso. We are aware of only three cases that go in the oppo-
site direction. In Germany a tuition ranging between 500 and 900 euro was
introduced for Fuori Corso students in different landers between 1998 and
2005, in a time when regular students paid no fee (see Heineck et al, 2006).

                                      8
Similarly, the Finnish government passed in 1992 a reform aimed at reducing
financial aid for students who delayed graduation (see Hakkinen and Uusi-
talo, 2003). In the same spirit, the Spanish system foresees that students
pay for the credits they acquire by passing exams, but the cost of each credit
increases with the number of times the student tries to pass the exam.
    Outside of these three cases, there seems to be no evidence that academic
institutions pay any attention to the possibility that the time profile of tuition
and the speed of graduation might be related. In the rest of this paper
we show, theoretically and empirically, that a link may instead exist with
possibly important efficiency consequences.


4     A simple theory
We consider a risk neutral individual enrolled in school. The education in-
vestment takes time and has a random outcome: graduation is not guar-
anteed and it can take one or two periods to complete the degree, that is
graduation–if it happens–can happen either in period 1 or in period 2. The
normal completion time is period 1 while the second period is the extra-time
required to graduate beyond regular completion. We assume that there is no
discounting. In each period the probability of graduating depends linearly
on individual effort at time t and we indicate it simply with et. Market re-
turns depend on whether students have graduated and on the speed at which
they have completed their studies.
    At time t = 1 there is the first attempt to graduate. Successful graduation
in the first period leads to a market return equal to βw, where w is the outside
option and β > 1. Education involves both financial and psychological costs.
The tuition at time t = 1 is indicated with τ1 and it represents the marginal
technological cost of providing education. Students in each period also face
a (psychological) convex cost of education that we express as
                                               xe2t
                                Ct (e) = λ +
                                                2
where x is an ability parameter, e is effort and λ is a parameter that in-

                                        9
dividuals take as given.3 The marginal cost of acquiring education, xet, is
increasing in effort. There is thus a link between ability and effort with bet-
ter students facing a lower marginal cost of effort (a lower x means higher
ability). An obvious interpretation of x is a measure of “learning stress”. For
given effort, students with higher x find it more costly to acquire education.
       A student may fail to graduate in period 1, the normal graduation time.
If this happens, she faces a refinancing decision. Students who refinance
education have a second attempt to graduate. The financial cost, that is
tuition at time t = 2, is indicated with τ2 , where τ2 is the technological
cost of providing education to a student who has refinanced her education.
In other words, τ2 is the continuation tuition. Successful graduation in the
second period leads to a return equal to βδw with 0 < δ < 1 but such that
βδ > 1. Students who fail to graduate in t = 2 get the outside option w.
       The equilibrium is described by the optimal effort levels (or graduation
probabilities) e1 and e2 at time t = 1 and t = 2. The model is solved
backward, beginning with the effort choice at time t = 2.4
       Our main interest is the link between continuation tuition and speed of
graduation. In this section we derive testable implications concerning the re-
lationship between these two variables; a discussion of normative implications
is postponed to Section 7.5
       Working backward, we first assume that an individual refinances educa-
tion at time t = 2. We compute optimal effort at time t = 2, and indicate
with U2 (e2, τ2 ) the lifetime utility of an individual that continues education
   3
     This parameter plays a role in a possible extension of the model that we discuss in
footnote 28.
   4
     A model with sequential schooling choices, uncertainty and drop out is described by
Altonji (1993). In that model there is no effort choice and the link between effort and speed
of graduation is not analyzed. Most of the emphasis of that paper is on college choice, i.e.
humanities versus math, and individuals have different attitudes toward different fields.
   5
     Note that our discussion is for a fixed level of income and does not consider explicitly
the individual’s ability to pay. In this interpretation the time profile of tuition should
be read as a pure technological parameter, as if it were associated to the marginal cost
of providing education. Such restriction is nevertheless consistent with our empirical
specification.




                                             10
at time t = 2. The expression is
                                                             
                                                      xe22
              U2 (e2 , τ2) = e2βδw + (1 − e2)w − τ2 +      +λ
                                                       2

With probability e2 the individual becomes a late graduate and enjoys a
market return equal to βδw while with the complement probability she will
accept the outside option w. The financial cost of education (the tuition) is
τ2 plus the convex cost C2(e). Simple algebra shows that the optimal effort
is
                                        w[βδ − 1]
                                e∗2 =                                             (1)
                                           x
Two remarks are in order

Remark 1 The time profile of tuition does not affect optimal effort in the
second period

Remark 2 The lower the student ability, the lower the effort in the second
period

                                                    ∂e∗2
     The first remark derives from the fact that    ∂τ2
                                                           = 0. Tuition is a sunk
cost when the student chooses effort and it affects neither the psychological
cost nor the marginal return, so that it can not have an impact on the
                                                               ∂e∗2
marginal effort. The second remark (which derives from         ∂x
                                                                      < 0) suggests a
complementarity between ability and effort. Other things equal, the better
the student the higher the effort.
     Refinancing is optimal at time t = 2 if and only if U2 (e∗2, τ2 ) > w where
e∗2 is described by equation 1. Simple algebra (see Section 9.1 in Appendix
A) shows that refinancing requires

                                     w2 [βδ − 1]2
                                x≤                                                (2)
                                          τ2
a restriction on the parameter x that we assume to be satisfied (remember:
the lower x, the higher the student’s ability). This solves the problem in the
second period.


                                         11
       We now proceed to characterize optimal effort in the first period. We
indicate with U1 (e1, τ1 ) the life time utility for an individual that has just
enrolled
                                                                                     
                                                                              xe22
            U1 (e1, τ1 ) = e1 βw + (1 − e1)    Max{U2 (e∗2, τ2 ); w}   − τ1 +      +λ
                                                                               2

where the max operator can be eliminated by virtue of equation 2. As shown
in Section 9.2 of Appendix A, the optimal first period effort is

                                              [βw − U2 (e∗2, τ2 )]
                                      e∗1 =                                               (3)
                                                     x
Clearly the effort chosen must be a positive number. Our key empirical
implication immediately follows

Proposition 1 A higher second period tuition increases effort and the grad-
uation probability in the first period

                   ∂U2
       Since       ∂τ2
                         < 0 individuals tend to work harder in the first period to avoid
the larger tuition. This in turn implies that, for given quality x, an increase
in second period tuition increases the probability of graduation. The time
profile of tuition does affect the graduation probability. Tuition is a sunk
cost within each period, but a forward looking student will take into account
the continuation cost of education and respond accordingly.
       We are now in a position to summarize the effect of a relative increase in
tuition in the second period An increase in the continuation tuition τ2 leads
to

             ∂e1
      i.     ∂τ2
                   > 0. An increase in effort and the graduation probability. This
             effect is our key empirical implication and motivates most of the em-
             pirical analysis that follows
             ∂U2
      ii.    ∂τ2
                   < 0. A reduction in the utility of refinancing.
             ∂U1
     iii.    ∂τ2
                   > 0 A decrease in utility from school participation.



                                                   12
    The second and third results are both standard and not particularly sur-
prising. An increase in tuition reduces, other things equal, the value of
education and the student’s incentive to refinance. The first result is the
most interesting, and highlights an important link between the time profile
of tuition, effort choice and the speed of graduation. Specifically, it shows
that a higher continuation tuition increases early effort and the graduation
probability. This is the prediction that we test empirically in the remaining
part of the paper.


5     The Bocconi dataset and the institutional
      framework
Bocconi is a private Italian university which offers undergraduate and grad-
uate degrees in economics. The administrative data we shall use refer to a
period (1992-1999) when Bocconi offered a 4-years college degree, the same
length of similar economics degrees offered by public universities at that time.
Since then Italian universities–as most universities in Continental Europe–
have shifted to 3-years undergraduate degrees.
    Although it differs in many ways from the rest of the Italian university
system, which is almost entirely public, Bocconi matches national averages
as far as the Fuori Corso problem is concerned, which is the focus of this
study. The last row of Table 2 shows that, like in the rest of the country,
the median and the mean effective time to obtain a degree are higher than
the legal duration but the difference is smaller at Bocconi. In line with the
national pattern is also the fraction of graduates who obtain a degree in more
than 4 years, which is reported in Table 3. Slightly lower than the national
average is instead the fraction of Fuori Corso students among all students
enrolled, confirming that, at Bocconi, students prolong their studies beyond
the regular time as frequently as elsewhere but for a shorter period. This
will be relevant for the interpretation of our results in Section 7.
    From the viewpoint of this study, however, the reason to focus on Bocconi
data is not only its similarity with the rest of the Italian university system

                                      13
with respect to the Fuori Corso problem. More importantly Bocconi offers
a unique quasi-experimental setting to analyze the effect of tuition on the
probability of delaying degree completion. Upon enrollment in each academic
year, Bocconi students are assigned to different tuition brackets on the basis
of their income assessed by the university administration through the income
tax declaration of the student’s household and through further inquiries. A
Regression Discontinuity Design (RDD) can thus be used to compare stu-
dents who, in terms of family income, are immediately above or below each
discontinuity threshold. These two groups of students pay different tuitions
to enroll, but should otherwise be identical in terms of observable and un-
observable characteristics determining the outcome of interest, which in our
case is the decision to complete the program.
       For all the 12,127 students enrolled in the four years undergraduate pro-
gram at Bocconi during the period 1992-1999 we received anonymized admin-
istrative records containing information on: (a) the high school final grade
and type; (b) family income as declared to the government for tax purposes;
(c) the theoretical tuition assigned to each student on the basis of her de-
clared family income; (d) the tuition actually paid, which may differ from the
theoretical tuition for reasons to be explained below; (e) the exams passed
in each year and the related grades; (f) demographic characteristics.
       Table 4 reports some descriptive statistics suggesting that Fuori Corso
status is correlated with indicators of lower ability and educational perfor-
mance. For example, the fractions of students with top highschool grades,
who graduate cum laude, who come from the public highschool system6 and
from top highschool tracks7 are all higher for students in time than for stu-
dents Fuori Corso. Interestingly, also the fraction of females is higher among
those who graduate in time, while coming to Bocconi from outside Milan,
   6
      With very few exceptions, private highschools in Italy are of a significantly lower
quality, admitting those students who do not survive in the public school system.
    7
      These are the highschool tracks that before 1968 granted access to university programs.
In 1968 access to tertiary education was completely liberalized in Italy, so that all fields and
all universities could be accessed by any student independently of the previous highschool
curriculum.



                                              14
where the university is located, does not seem to matter.8 Declared family in-
come is on average higher for students in time, although this obviously does
not say much on the causal relationship between ability to pay and Fuori
Corso status, since family income may be correlated positively or negatively
with students’ ability.9
       In the period covered by our data, students were admitted at Bocconi
after an entry exam and then assigned to one of 12 tuition brackets defined
in terms of family income. The highest bracket was reserved to students
who accepted without discussion the highest tuition and who were therefore
exempted from producing their family’s tax form. Since we have no income
information on the students assigned to this bracket, we drop them from the
analysis. Note that these students are in any case likely to be located far
away from any relevant discontinuity threshold. The temporal evolution of
tuition in the 11 remaining brackets is described in Figure 1. It should be
noted that, for Italian standards, tuition at Bocconi is fairly high, ranging, for
the observed 11 brackets, between 715 and 6,101 euro per year (in constant
2000 prices). In order to focus closely on the continuation decision beyond
normal completion, we restrict the analysis to students in the 4th year of
the program, i.e. the last regular year of studies.10 This restriction leaves us
with 10,216 students, whose distribution across theoretical tuition brackets
and Fuori corso status is described in Table 5.
       Note that students enrolled in the 4th and last regular year of the program
do not know the tuition they would have to pay if they remained enrolled
beyond the normal completion time. This because they do not know with
certainty the future income of their parents and the future possible read-
justments of the tuition structure (both in terms of levels and discontinuity
thresholds) implemented by Bocconi from year to year. As a consequence,
   8
     Bocconi is one of the very few Italian universities that attracts students from far away.
   9
     Given the relatively high tuition at Bocconi, for Italian standards, students with poor
family backgrounds or coming from far away with higher mobility costs, typically enroll
only if they have better highschool grades, which suggest higher ability.
  10
     These students are observed between 1995 and 2002, since they first enrolled between
1992 and 1999.



                                             15
to choose their optimal level of effort during the 4th year, they must rely on
a prediction of what their continuation tuition would be. We estimate that
the coefficient of a regression of the tuition paid by a student in a given year
on the tuition paid the year before, controlling for income and year effects,
is 0.81 with a standard error of 0.004.11 Thus, tuition in a given year is a
good predictor of tuition in the following year, and, more specifically, tuition
in the 4th year is a good proxy of what the students would pay if they went
Fuori Corso. So the main proposition of the theoretical model presented
in Section 4 can be tested in our experiment by replacing the continuation
tuition, unknown to 4th year students, with their 4th year tuition and by
looking at whether it has any causal effect on the speed of graduation.
       All Bocconi students – with the only exception of those who accept the
highest tuition bracket – are asked to produce the tax declaration from the
previous fiscal year, which reports their family’s income. This is the first of
three institutional features of our setting that make the RDD design of this
paper different from a standard design and that require proper considera-
tion in our analysis. Families can in principle control their declared taxable
income in order to be assigned to a lower bracket. As a result, while in a
typical RDD subjects cannot control the indicator that determines exposure
to treatment, in our case they can and this may cause an endogenous sorting
of students around a discontinuity threshold. Although this is a possibil-
ity we find no evidence that it actually takes place, as shown in Figure 2,
which plots the histogram of family incomes for 4th year students around
two representative discontinuity threshold, the second and the seventh, and
the associated estimate of the density function obtained by smoothing the
histogram by a fourth degree polynomial separately on the left and on the
right of the threshold. If sorting were important we should find a discontinu-
ity in the density function at the threshold and specifically a concentration
of probability mass immediately below it. It is evident from the figure that
this does not happen at these two thresholds (as well as at the others not
  11
    This estimate is based on all the 12,127 students enrolled at Bocconi during the period
1992-1999 for which we received the data.


                                            16
reported to save on space): if anything, the probability mass is concentrated
above the discontinuity. We also implemented a parametric version of the
test proposed by McCrary (2007) to check for the continuity of the density
function at the threshold. The t-statistics of the tests associated to the ten
discontinuities are all largely insignificant.
   The second institutional feature that differentiates our RDD from the
standard design relates to the fact that Bocconi reserves the right to make
its own re-assessment of a family’s ability to pay on the basis of further
inquiries. As a result of this re-assessment a student may be assigned to a
higher tuition level than the one implied by her declared taxable income.
Moreover, for a variety of reasons (e.g. merit, orphan because of “war or
assimilated reasons”, child of emigrants, etc.), students may have a right to
partial or total tuition exemptions, and may also end up paying less than
what would be implied by their taxable income.
   Figure 3 shows, again for 4th year students, what this means at the second
and the seventh representative thresholds that we have already examined. In
each panel the low theoretical tuition corresponding to each threshold has
been normalized to 1. Consider the panel for the seventh threshold. The
dark bars are the histogram of the tuition effectively paid by students who
in theory should pay the low theoretical level 1 (i.e. they have an income
lower than the cut-off point). The tallest dark bar corresponding to 1 indi-
cates that approximately 50% of the students who should pay the low tuition
effectively pay it. The other dark bars indicate that the remaining half of
the students assigned to the low theoretical tuition pay substantially more
or less than what should theoretically happen on the basis of the fact that
their income is below the cut-off point. The light bars can be interepreted
in the same way for the students who should pay the high theoretical tuition
corresponding to the seven threshold. Also in this case the tallest light bar
indicates that most students effectively pay the high theoretical tuition to
which they are assigned (because their income is above the cut-off point), but
many do not comply with the assignment, i.e. they pay a tuition that differs
from the theoretical one. The same happens for the second threshold in the

                                        17
other panel of the figure, as well as for the other thresholds not reported to
save space. Bocconi, unfortunately, refused to give us full information on the
specifc reasons of deviations from theoretical tuition for the cases in which
this happens and thus we cannot control for it. Nevertheless, our analysis
must take into account that while in the vicinity of a threshold assigned tu-
ition is binary, tuition actually paid is potentially continuous and effectively
multi-valued and this means that our RDD differs from the conventional “bi-
nary assignment – binary treatment” design in which counterfactual causal
analysis is typically framed.12.
      The third important way in which the RDD of this paper deviates from
the standard design is a direct consequence of the second. It is evident
from Figure 3 that our experimental framework features a large amount of
non-compliance with the assignment: in other words many students pay a
tuition level that differs from the one that they should pay theoretically as
a function of where their income is located with respect to the discontinuity
points. Moreover, Table 6 shows that this non-compliance is correlated with
relevant (i.e. non-ignorable) observable characteristics. In our context, in
which treatment is multivalued, this is equivalent to a fuzzy RDD, but what
is potentially more problematic is that it may imply a significant violation
of the monotonicity assumption which, as discussed in Section 6 below, is
needed for identification in a RDD.13 This assumption requires that, at each
threshold, students assigned to the lower theoretical tuition do not effectively
pay more than if they had been assigned to the higher theoretical tuition of
the same threshold. Consider a student with a family income immediately
below a threshold. Bocconi has a stronger incentive to open her file and
re-assess her income than if the student had been located immediately above
the threshold, because in the first case a small re-assesment would be enough
to increase the tuition obtained from this student. However, once the file is
open the re-assesment may be large and imply a large increase in tuition.
As a result, it is possible that the same student pays effectively more if
 12
      See, for example, Hahn, Todd and van der Klaauw, 2001.
 13
      See, Angrist, Imbens and Rubin (1996) and Hahn, Todd and van der Klaauw (2001).


                                          18
assigned immediately below a threshold than if assigned immediately above,
and this would imply a violation of monotonicity. A similar reasoning holds
for the case of a student assigned immediately above a threshold. In this
cases she will have a stronger incentive to ask for a tuition exemption than
if she had been assigned by family income to a threshold immediately below.
In Section 6.4 we will perform a formal test suggesting that monotonicity is
effectively violated in our context, but we will also show that our data feature
a specific case in which this violation does not prevent the identification and
interpretation of the causal effect we are interested in.
       Finally, as shown in Figure 4, many variables which are relevant for our
evaluation study display a significant time variation in these years. While
little can be said on the determinants of this time variation, our economet-
ric analysis will have to control for it in an appropriate way when pooling
together observations from different years.


6        The evidence
6.1       A Regression Discontinuity Design for our prob-
          lem
Let yj be the j-th discontinuity point corresponding to the income level that
separates tuition brackets j and j + 1 in the theoretical assignment rule
adopted by Bocconi University. We focus on the identification of causal
effects for students in a neighborhood of this discontinuity point. Let Y be the
student’s real income and τ t be the theoretical tuition that the student should
pay according to the assignment rule, with l and h being the values of τ t
respectively below and above the discontinuity point (h > l).14 Denote with
τhp (τlp ) the tuition that a student in a neighborhood of the discontinuity would
actually pay if the theoretical tuition assigned to her were h (l). As explained
in Section 5, both τhp and τlp are potentially continuous and effectively multi-
  14
     In principle, a subscript j should be attached to the values of the theoretical tuition,
but since in this sub-section we consider only one generic threshold j we omit this subscript
to simplify notation. It will instead be needed later in Section 6.4.


                                             19
valued. Finally, let Fh (Fl) be the binary Fuori Corso status of a student
under the theoretical tuition assignment h (l).
   Under the continuity conditions

                      E{Fl |Y = yj+ } = E{Fl|Y = yj− }                     (4)

                      E{τlp |Y = yj+ } = E{τlp|Y = yj− }                   (5)

(see Hahn, Todd and van der Klaauw, 2001) the mean effects of being as-
signed to the higher theoretical tuition bracket τ t = h (instead of the lower
one τ t = l) on the tuition actually paid τ p and on the Fuori corso status F
for a student in a neighborhood of the cut-off point are

                           E{τ p|yj+ } − E{τ p|yj− }.                      (6)

                            E{F |yj+} − E{F |yj−}.                         (7)

These are the so called Intention-to-Treat effects. For the sake of keeping the
notation simple, here and below we omit time subscripts, but in our context
these equations hold only conditioning on time periods. This because, as we
explained at the end of Section 5, the composition of the pool of Bocconi
students changed over the years with respect to some observables relevant
to the outcome. It is therefore necessary to condition on the time period
to make the students just above the cut-off point comparable to those just
below it with respect to such observables.
   To convert the Intention-to-Treat effects into a meaningful causal effect
of τp on F we rely on Angrist, Graddy and Imbens (2000). The exclusion
restriction requires that the theoretical tuition τt affects the Fuori Corso
status F only through the tuition effectively paid τp . This is a plausible
restriction in our context. More critical is the monotonicity condition that
we will discuss in Section 6.4, asserting that no one is induced to pay a lower
(higher) actual tuition if exogenously moved, in terms of theoretical tuition,
from l to h (from h to l). Under these assumptions, the ratio

                                  E{F |yj+} − E{F |yj−}
                       Λ(yj ) =                              ,             (8)
                                  E{τ p |yj+ } − E{τ p|yj− }

                                         20
identifies the mean effect of a unit change in τ p on the probability of going
Fuori Corso at Y = yj for those who are induced to pay a higher actual
tuition because their theoretical tuition increases from l to h. This is a mean
effect in the following sense. At the individual level the mean is taken by
averaging over the causal effect of τ p on F specific to that student at each
value of τ t in the range (l, h). Then, such individual-specific mean effects are
averaged over the pool of students whose actual tuition increases with the
theoretical one.

6.2    Graphical evidence
Figure 5 plots nonparametric regressions of the variables τ t , τ p and F on
Y respectively for 4th year students at the discontinuity thresholds 2 and 7,
which are representative of what we obtain in the other cases. The regressions
are estimated separately above and below the cut-off points to let the possible
jump at the threshold show up if it exists. Thus, these plots offer a visual
image of the intention-to-treat effects defined in equations (6) and (7).
   The tuition τ p effectively paid by the student is uniformly not lower than
the theoretical tuition τ t on both sides of the threshold. However, while at
the cut-off point 7 the mean value of τ p above the threshold is higher than
the mean value below, the reverse happens at the cut-off point 2. This again
suggests the possibility that the monotonicity condition is violated.
   As for the main outcome of interest, the probability to observe F = 1 is
higher above the cut-off point for discontinuity 7, but the opposite happens
at the second discontinuity. However, the mean impact of τ p on F , which
is the ratio between the jump of P r(F = 1) and the jump of τ p, turns
out to be negative at both discontinuities. This implies that in both cases
the probability of going Fuori Corso changes in the opposite direction with
respect to the tuition effectively paid when the threshold is crossed.
   To gather evidence on the validity of the continuity conditions (4) and (5)
on which our identification strategy relies, we implement an over-identification
test following Lee (2006). Consider the set of pre-intervention outcomes that


                                       21
meet the following two conditions: they should not be affected by the tuition
system of fourth-year students at Bocconi University, but they should de-
pend on the same unobservables (e.g. ability), likely to affect the Fuori Corso
status F . Two pre-intervention outcomes satisfying these requirements are
family income before enrollment at Bocconi and the grade that a student
receives in her final exam at the end of highschool. Both these variables are
observed at least three years before the fourth year at Bocconi in which our
quasi-experiment is framed. If we found that students on the two sides of
a discontinuity point differ with respect to these variables, we would have
to conclude that our identification strategy fails since students assigned to
τ t = h are presumably not comparable to student assigned to τ t = l with
respect to unobservables relevant for the outcome F . Figure 6 shows that no
discontinuity of this kind emerges at the representative discontinuities 2 and
7. A formal test confirming this evidence is described below in Section 6.3.
   More generally, in the next Section we go beyond the visual evidence
presented so far, showing how the estimates obtained separately at each
threshold can be aggregated in a single overall estimate. In Section 6.4 we
will then assess the robustness of these estimates with respect to violations
of monotonicity.

6.3    Aggregation of the mean effects at different thresh-
       olds
By aiming at a single aggregate estimate of the causal effect of the tuition
effectively paid on the probability of going Fuori Corso we gain precision at
the expense of some insight into how the mean effect of interest varies with
Y . Following Angrist and Lavy (1999), an overall estimate can be obtained
from the equation
                          F = g(Y ) + βτ p + γt +                         (9)

where g(Y ) is a fourth order polynomial in Y and τ t ⊥ is used as an instru-
ment for τ p . For the reasons explained at the end of Section 5, we include
year-specific effects γt in this regression. This IV estimate of the mean ef-


                                      22
fect is a weighted average of the RDD estimates at each discontinuity point,
where the weights are proportional to the local covariances cov(τ p, τ t|Y = yj ),
j = 1, 10.
   In Table 7 we report the Intention-to-Treat, the OLS and the IV results
for the analysis of the Fuori Corso outcome based on equation (9) estimated
separately at each discontinuity point. The final row contains aggregate
results based on the entire sample. There is not enough precision to trust
the estimates obtained separately for each discontinuity point, but when we
focus on the overall estimates in the last row, the results are sufficiently
precise.
   The overall Intention-to-Treat effect of τ t on τ p (column 1) indicates that
each additional euro of theoretical tuition converts into .59 euro of tuition
actually paid. This because, in the data, the downward readjustment for
students on the right of a threshold is on average more frequent and/or
larger than the upward readjustment for students on the left. However,
despite this dilution, the overall Intention-to-Treat effect of τ t on F (column
2) suggests that a tuition increase of 1,000 euro in the 4th year would decrease
by 3.6 percentage points the probability of going Fuori Corso, with respect
to a sample average of approximately 80%. As we explained at the end of
Section 5, since 4th year students use their current tuition to predict their
future tuition, we interpret this result as an estimate of the causal effect of
continuation tuition on the speed of graduation.
   While the OLS regression of F on τ p suggests a positive effect of the
tuition effectively paid on the probability of going Fuori Corso (column 3),
the IV estimate of the same effect is -.061 and is statistically significant
(column 4). This means that a 1,000 euro increase in the 4th year paid
tuition reduces the probability of late graduation by 6.1 percentage points,
an effect that should again be evaluated with respect to a sample average
of 80% Fuori Corso students. The large bias of the OLS estimate is due
to the confounding factors (e.g. ability) which are instead controlled for by
our Regression Discontinuity Design. Note that since the predicted value
of continuation tuition is 0.81 the value of 4th year tuition (see the last

                                       23
paragraph of Section 5), the estimated effect of 6.1 percentage points should
be divided by 0.81 to obtain the causal effect of continuation tuition on the
probability of late graduation. In other words, the effect of 4th year tuition
is likely to underestimate the effect of continuation tuition.
   These results rest of course on the validity of the continuity conditions
(4) and (5) for which we now provide formal support following Lee (2006).
The test is implemented by running the same IV regression (9) using as a
dependent variable a battery of pre-intervention outcomes. The evidence is
reported in Table 8. The first pre-intervention outcome that we consider is
family income before enrollment at Bocconi. This outcome allows to test
not only the validity of the continuity conditions but also the conclusion,
based on Figure 2, that even if families controlled their taxable income there
would be no sorting around thresholds (see Section 5). A negative estimate
of the IV coefficient on τ p in this equation (and of the corresponding ITT)
using τt as an instrument, would indicate that students below the cut-off
points in their 4th year have a disproportionally higher (real) family income
three years before. This would suggest the possibility that some of these
students are in fact richer but have manipulated their income just enough to
pay less once they enroll at Bocconi. No such evidence emerges in the first
row of Table 8. The intention to treat estimate in the first column indicates
that a 1,000 euro increase in the theoretical tuition τ t is associated with an
increase of 380 euro in yearly family income before enrollment. This estimate
is small, statistically not different from zero and its sign is opposite to the
one expected under the sorting hypothesis. Similarly insignificant is the IV
estimate in the third column. We can, therefore, exclude the existence of
sorting around the thresholds on the basis of family income.
   The rest of the Table presents evidence on other pre-intervention out-
comes that should not be affected by the tuition system of fourth-year stu-
dents while depending on the same unobservables (e.g. ability), likely to affect
the Fuori Corso status F . In addition to the final highschool grade, that we
already examined in Figure 6 for discontinuities 2 and 7, here we consider
also three other pre-intervention outcomes: the type of highschool attended

                                      24
by the student, her regional origin and her Grade Point Average (GPA) in
the first year at Bocconi. Attending a highschool designed to prepare for a
university curriculum (Liceo), as opposed to one designed to prepare for di-
rect entrance in the labor market (Istituto Tecnico e professionale), is likely
to be an outcome that depends on ability without being affected by tuition
at Bocconi.15 Going to Bocconi from outside Milan has significantly higher
relocation costs and is typically correlated with a higher student’s quality in
terms of highschool and university performance. Similarly correlated with
ability is the students’ GPA in the first year, but note that this variable is
arguably less likely to be unaffected by the time profile of tuition at Bocconi.
       As in the first row of Table 8, also in the other rows of the same table
each coefficient comes from a separate regression. For example, the left cell
of the row corresponding to the final highschool grade indicates that a 1,000
euro increase of the theoretical tuition τ t is associated with an increase of
0.19 percentage points of the grade and this estimate is not only small but
also statistically not different from zero. This is exactly what we should find
if our identification strategy is correct and such conclusion is confirmed in
the rest of the table: these proxies of individual ability do not differ across
students assigned to different levels of the theoretical tuition τ t (see the first
column). Moreover, no systematic difference emerges with respect to the
levels of tuition effectively paid τ p in the IV estimates of the third column,
although τ p and pre-intervention outcomes appear to be correlated in the
OLS regressions reported in the second column. The last row of the table
presents results in which the gender of the student is used as the dependent
variable in the regression (9). Although finding the same proportion of fe-
males on both sides of the discontinuities would not support our identification
assumption because gender is not obviously correlated with ability, it is still
the case that finding the opposite would cast doubts on such assumption. It
is therefore reassuring to find no evidence of a threat for our identification
  15
    Although the Italian highschool system is organized according to tracks that should
determine the access to college education, since 1968 all highschool graduates can access
any university in any field, independently of the track chosen during secondary education.



                                           25
strategy from this test.
      Summing up, Table 8 supports the validity of the continuity conditions
(4) and (5) on which our identification strategy is based. However, before
concluding that we have identified a negative and significant causal effect of
tuition on the probability of late graduation, we need to address the possi-
bility of violations of monotonicity suggested by the institutional framework
and by the visual evidence presented so far. This is done in the next section.

6.4       Testing for monotonicity and assessing the conse-
          quences of its failure
While the assumption of monotonicity is reasonable in many applications, it
cannot be safely made in our context since we have both theoretical reasons
for the occurrence of defiance16 and empirical evidence that it does occur at
least at some discontinuity points.
      In our context, defiers are students who would pay a higher actual tuition
if their theoretical tuition were to decrease from τ t = h to τ t = l and vicev-
ersa. As discussed in Section 5 this may happen if a theoretical assignment to
a lower bracket (based on declared family income) induces the administration
of Bocconi to search more actively for proofs of a student’s effective higher
ability to pay, or if a theoretical assignment to a higher bracket induces the
student to search more actively for ways to obtain a tuition discount.
      As already noted in Section 6.2, an indication that the problem might ex-
ist in our case is offered by the fact that at the second discontinuity threshold
the mean actual tuition paid by students assigned to the lower bracket τ t = l
exceeds the mean actual tuition paid by students assigned to the higher
bracket τ t = h (see Figure 5). Similar evidence can be found at some other
thresholds.
      A formal test for the occurrence of defiance has been proposed by An-
grist and Imbens (1995). The monotonicity condition in our case asserts
that τhp ≥ τlp with the strict inequality holding at least for some subjects. In
 16
      See Angrist, Imbens an Rubin (2006).



                                             26
words, no one would be induced to pay a lower actual tuition if her theo-
retical tuition shifted from low to high, while at least one subject should be
induced to pay a higher tuition in this event. This condition is not directly
testable since the two potential outcomes τhp and τlp of a specific student are
not simultaneously observable. However, a testable implication of the in-
equality is that at each discontinuity the tuition effectively paid by those in
a right neighborhood of the cut-off point must be stochastically larger than
the tuition effectively paid by those in a left neighborhood of the same cut-off
point. That is, the cumulative distribution function (cdf) for those on the
right of the cut-off point should not be above the cdf for those on the left
of it at any value of its support. In our case this implication is violated at
some cut-off points. In Figure 7 we present the estimated difference between
the cdf on the left and the corresponding cdf on the right at the second and
the seventh discontinuities (.95 confidence intervals are plotted). It is evi-
dent that the stochastic dominance hypohesis is rejected at these thresholds
suggesting that defiance occurs at least here.17
       In general, the failure of monotonicity prevents a causal interpretation of
the IV estimand. This happens because, under the continuity restrictions (4)
and (5), the IV estimand (8) is equal to:

                  E{Fh − Fl |yj , C}          E{Fh − Fl |yj , D}
       Λ(yj ) =      p     p         α(yj ) +                     (1 − α(yj )),      (10)
                  E{τh − τl |yj , C}          E{τhp − τlp|yj , D}

where
                                 E{τhp − τlp |yj , C}P r(C|yj )
       α(yj ) =                                                               ,      (11)
                E{τhp − τlp|yj , C}P r(C|yj ) + E{τhp − τlp|yj , D}P r(D|yj )

with D and C being the pools of defiers and compliers, respectively. In words,
Λ(yj ) is a weighted average of the mean effects of τ p on F for compliers and
defiers, respectively. In this expression, the weights add to one but do not
satisfy the non-negativity condition since E{τhp − τlp|yj , C} is by definition
  17
    To control for year specific effects at each discontinuity point we estimated the dif-
ference among the two cdfs and their standard errors separately for each calendar year.
Then we evaluated the weighted mean of such year-specific differences using as weights
the inverse of the sampling variances.


                                            27
positive while E{τhp − tpl |yj , D} is by definition negative. It is therefore in
general possible that even if the mean effect for compliers has the same sign
as the mean effect for defiers, the IV estimand Λ(yj ) has the opposite sign.
In this case IV would estimate a totally uninteresting and uninformative
parameter.
       To deal with this problem, in Appendix B we propose a simple model
of the occurrence of defiance in our context and show that it has a crucial
implication for our analysis: the weight α(yj ) in equation (11) should change
with j.
       On the other hand, our empirical evidence suggests that Λ(yj ) in (8) does
not change with j in the data. This is shown in Table 9 that reports esti-
mates based on equation (9) for the entire sample, in which the coefficient
β is allowed to differ between three groups of discontinuity thresholds. The
first row of the table reports the estimate for the first three discontinuities.
The other two rows report the difference with respect to the first row, cor-
responding, respectively, to the discontinuities 4-7 and 8-10. Inasmuch as β
estimates Λ(yj ) consistently, we observe no statistically significant difference
in this parameter across these three groups of thresholds.18
       By inspection of equation (10), for this empirical finding to be consistent
with the existence of defiers, suggested by theory and by the institutional
framework, it must be the case that the mean effect for compliers is equal to
the mean effect for defiers and both of them do not depend on j.
       We can therefore conclude that the IV estimates of Table 7 can be inter-
preted causally as estimates of Local Average Treatment Effects (LATE).19 A
1,000 euro increase in the theoretical tuition in the last year of the program
reduces the probability of late graduation by 3.6 percentage points, while an
increase of the tuition actually paid reduces the same probability by 6.1 per-
centage point, in a context in which late graduation occurs for approximately
80% of students.
  18
      As already mentioned, the data do not contain enough information to disaggregate
the estimates for a larger number of threshold groups.
  19
     See Imbens and Angrist (1994).



                                         28
6.5       Collateral effects
It could be argued that in order to interpret these findings and draw policy
conclusions one should know whether a higher tuition makes it more likely
that students drop out20 and whether those students who try to graduate in
time do so at the expense of the quality of the learning process. Table 10
rejects both these hypothesis.
       The first row in this table presents estimates based on an equation like
(9) in which the dependent variable is a dummy taking value 1 if the student
drops out after the 4th year. The IV estimate in the last column suggests that
an increase of 1,000 euro in the tuition actually paid reduces the probability
of dropping out by 0.01 percentage points. This effect is however statistically
insignificant: there is no evidence that students assigned to a higher tuition
or effectively paying a higher tuition are more likely to drop out.21
       In the second row of the table the dependent variable is the final gradu-
ation mark received by the 4th year students in our sample who had already
graduated by the time we obtained the data from Bocconi.22. This final
graduation mark is a number between 66 (passing level) and 110 plus honors
             23
(Laude).          It ranges effectively between 77 and honors with a standard de-
viation of 7 points, and it is determined by a committee of faculty members
on the basis of the grades obtained in all the exams of the four years and in
the final dissertation. The IV estimate in the last column suggests that an
increase of 1,000 euro in the tuition actually paid reduces the final mark only
by 0.46 points and this effect is again statistically insignificant. We conclude
  20
      Note that in the theoretical model of Section 4 this event was ruled out to simplify
the analysis in order to derive Proposition 1.
   21
      This result differs from the evidence of Dynarsky (2005) who exploits the introduction
of two large merit scholarship programs in Georgia and Arkansas to show that a reduction
of college costs increases significantly the probability of completing a degree. The difference
between our and her findings, concerning the effect of college costs on dropout rates, may
be explained by the fact that the two studies are based on different quasi-experimental
situations and identification assumptions. In particular, her study focuses on tuition
differences based on merit (a minimum GPA in highschool and in college), while in our
case tuition differences are independent of merit.
   22
      1010 students had not graduated yet by 2004.
   23
      We consider honors as an additional point.


                                              29
from this result that if a higher tuition induces students to speed up their
coursework in order to finish earlier, this does not happen at the expense of
the quality of the learning process inasmuch as this is measured by the final
grade.


7        Discussion and extensions
The empirical analysis has established that an increase in continuation tuition
decreases the probability of late graduation without inducing more dropouts
and without reducing the quality of students’ performance, at least as mea-
sured by the final graduation mark. In other words, students who expect to
pay more in case of delayed graduation just because they are exogenously
assigned to a higher theoretical tuition, seem to exert more effort in order
to graduate sooner but do not seem to learn less as a consequence of this
acceleration of the learning process.
       The size of the effect we have estimated – a mere 1,000 euro increase in
tuition actually paid reduces the probability of late graduation by 6.1 per-
centage points, in a context in which late graduation occurs for approximately
80% of students – may look at first puzzling. By postponing graduation a
student delays the moment she joins the labor market. This has an immedi-
ate direct cost in terms of foregone earnings during the additional time spent
in school and also an indirect long term (signalling) cost in terms of wages
and time to find the first job after graduation.24 We have no estimate of the
indirect cost for Bocconi students, but the direct cost is likely to be large.
One year after graduation Bocconi students earn on average 25,000 euro (at
2001 prices) and most of them find a job in few months.25 Not surprisingly,
  24
     Using as instruments “quarter of birth” and “distance from nearest college at entry
in junior highschool”, Brodaty et al. (2006) estimate for France that a year of delay
with respect to average completion time causes a significant 3% decrease of the wage and
a significant 15% decrease of the probability of employment in the first five years after
graduation.
  25
     Ichino and Filippin (2005) compare data on a sample of Bocconi graduates with similar
data on graduates from the State University of Milan studied by Checchi (2002). Their
most conservative estimate suggests that in 2001 Bocconi graduates who had first enrolled



                                           30
as reported in Table 2, the effective time to degree at Bocconi, albeit longer
than the legal time to degree, is significantly shorter than in the rest of the
Italian university system. In comparison with these figures, 1,000 euro of
additional tuition may look like a very small cost. What we have estimated,
however is a marginal effect. The expected foregone income from delaying
graduation by one year determines the speed at which students graduate
given the existing tuition profile. What we find is that 1,000 euro make a
significant difference at the margin, once the effect of the expected foregone
income is already taken into account.
    One thousand euro could still look too small an amount to produce such
a large shift in the incentive to graduate in time. A possible additional
justification is that the “value” of a given sum of money depends on how
the students earns it. One thousand euro earned on a job could indeed be
a relatively small sum – compared with the effect it has on the incentive to
speed up graduation – but for most students the money to finance education
comes effectively from their parents. An interpretation of our results is then
that the psycological cost of asking one’s parents, when falling behind school
work, can be quite large.
    Our finding – that the speed at which students decide to learn is affected
by the tuition they pay – does not necessarily mean that it is socially optimal
to adopt to increase continuation tuition. We do not know much about the
optimal length of the learning period for given amount of notions to be
learned – this is in fact an issue rarely explored in the literature.26 Each
student could choose the speed that she considers optimal for herself, and
different individual characteristics (including different preferences for work
and leisure) could result in quite different “optimal” learning speeds. To make
in 1997 earned at least 1.5 times more than State University graduates of the same year.
And 92% of Bocconi graduates had found a job within one year while the same happened
for only 46% of the gratuates at the other institution.
  26
     A related issue, also rarely explored, is the choice between a system, such as in un-
dergraduate U.K. courses, in which almost all students finish in time (because it is fairly
easy to get a passing grade) and quality is signalled by grades, and the alternative, more
common in continental Europe, in which passing grades are harder to get, thus resulting
in delayed graduation.


                                            31
a normative argument we need to point to reasons why individual decisions
might be sub-optimal. We see at least three reasons why this might happen.
       The most obvious one is that students, even in some private universities,
are often subsidized. If students (or their families) fail to pay the marginal
technological cost of their education they will not internalize the cost to
society of keeping them one more year in school and will make decisions that
are socially sub-optimal. Using the tuition profile to affect their incentives
can then improve society’s welfare.27
       Another example is suggested by the evidence of “peer effects” in educa-
tion. Peer effects in school are at work whenever there is a link between the
individual cost of exercising effort and the average effort elicited by the rest
of the class. There is a large and growing literature on peer effects. As al-
ready mentioned in the Introduction, the experiment conducted in Kenia and
discussed in Kremer et al. (2005)–where girls who scored well on academic ex-
ams were offered cash awards and an exemption from school fees–shows that
financial incentives to students’ performance can have positive externalities:
boys, who were ineligible for the award, also experienced an improvement in
exam scores, and the same happened for girls with low pre-test scores who
were very unlikely to win. Evidence of peer effects is also reported by Ding
and Lehrer (2005) in the context of China and by Sacerdote (2001) for the
U.S. The presence of peer effects offers another reason why it may be efficient
to increase continuation tutition in order to modify students’ incentives.28
  27
     The optimal time profile of tuition has been recently analysed by Gary-Bobo and Tran-
noy (2004) in a model in which both students and universities face imperfect information
on individuals’ ability.
  28
     The model presented in Section 4 can easily be extended to study peer effects. Assume
there is a continuum of identical individuals and that the psychological cost of education
depends not only on an individual choice of effort, but also on the average effort exercised
by the class. Let λ, the parameter in the cost of education that each individual takes as
given be λ = λ0 − λ1ē where ē is the average effort of the class. The cost function now
implies a positive externality between the effort decision of each individual and the effort
of other students. Studying requires less fatigue when other people also work hard: a
peer externality. Since each individual takes as given the average effort, the decentralized
equilibrium is identical to the model solved in the Section 4. A central planner that
maximizes average effort would however internalize the peer externality. Let ẽ2 be the
choice of effort by the central planner that takes into account the peer externality. It is


                                            32
    Externalities, however, can also be negative. By postponing graduation
students can produce congestion, in the classroom, the libraries, etc. This
can negatively affect the learning process of their colleagues. Although our
empirical work is mute on these normative issues, they each suggest relevant
arguments why using the time profile of tuition to change the speed at which
a student learns could be optimal.
    Finally a higher continuation tuition is likely to affect the decision to
enroll in a university, an issue on which our data are silent. If such a profile
were implemented keeping constant early tuition, fewer people would enter.
Conversely, if the early tuition were reduced, keeping the expected total cost
of enrollment constant, the effect on entry would be difficult to predict. This
because it would depend on the students’ assessment of their own ability and
on the odds of graduation for given ability. We leave the discussion of these
issues to future research.


8      Conclusions
This paper questions the way in which university tuition is typically struc-
tured as a function of the year of enrollment of a student. The claim is that
if continuation tuition were raised, the probability of late graduation would
be reduced. This result could be of interest for those universities throughout
the world that are concerned by the fact that their students typically grad-
uate beyond the normal completion time – a tendency that appears to have
become more pronounced recently.
    We have first shown in a simple model of human capital accumulation
that there exists a negative causal effect of the size of continuation tuition on
striaghforwrd to show that ẽ∗2 = e∗2 + λx1 > e∗2 . In other words, effort is suboptimal in the
decentralized equilibrium. The presence of peer effects naturally calls for an increase in
tuition in the second period: As we established in Section 4, first-period tuition can not
increase effort since first-period tuition is sunk and does not enter in the determination of
effort, either in the first or in the second period. Conversely, an increase in second period
tuition increases effort in the first period. It is easy to show that there exists a time profile
of tuition that implements the efficient outcome. Setting second period tuition to τ2 + λ1xẽ2
leads to optimal effort in the second period.



                                               33
the probability of late graduation. Next we have exploited data from Bocconi
University – where students are assigned to one of 12 tuition levels on the
basis of their declared family income – to implement a Regression Disconti-
nuity Design (RDD) which allows us to compare students with similar family
income immediately above or below each discontinuity threshold. We show
that these two groups of students pay different tuitions, but are otherwise
identical in terms of observable characteristics determining the probability
of late graduation. Using this source of identification, we find that 1,000
additional Euro of tuition paid in the last regular year of the program have
a negative causal effect on the probability of late graduation as large as 6.1
percentage points. Since students in the last regular year use their current
tuition to predict their future tuition in case of delayed graduation, we inter-
pret this result as an estimate of the causal effect of continuation tuition on
the speed of graduation. We also show that such a tuition increase does not
induce more students to drop out and its effect on the speed of completion
does not occur at the expense of the quality of the learning process.
    We have also discussed why it might be optimal to increase continua-
tion tuition with the goal of changing student’s incentives inducing them to
speed up their studies and graduate in time. We have argued that when
students are subsidized, when peer effects are important or when congestion
externalities are relevant, efficiency considerations suggest that continuation
tuition should be raised relative to the marginal cost of providing education.
More theoretical research and different data would be needed to explore the
robustness of these policy conclusions.


9     APPENDIX A
9.1    Optimal Refinancing at       t=2
Refinancing is optimal at time t = 2 if and only if

                                U2(e∗2 , x, τ2) > w



                                        34
which implies
                                                     xe∗2
                                                       2
                        e∗2w[βδ − 1] + w − τ2 −           −λ>w
                                                      2
where e∗2 is described by equation 1
    Simple algebra shows that the condition reads

                                     w2 [β(s)δ − 1]2
                 U2 (e∗2, x, τ2) =                   − τ2 − λ + w > w              (12)
                                            x
which is satisfied if
                                          w2 [β(s)δ − 1]2
                                     x≤
                                                τ2
a condition that we assume to be satisfied

9.2     Optimal Effort at t=1

Let’s indicate with U1 (e1, x, τ1) the life time utility for an individual at time t = 1
that has decided to enroll. Its expression reads

                                                                             xe21
  U1 (e1, x, τ1) = e1βw + (1 − e1)Max[U2(e∗2 , x, τ2); w] − (1 − τ2) −            −λ
                                                                              2
which by virtue of equation 12 can be written as

                                                                         xe21
       U1 (e1, x, τ1 ) = e1βw + (1 − e1 )U2(e∗2 , x, τ2) − (1 − τ2 ) −        −λ
                                                                          2
The optimal effort reads

                                       [βw − U2 (e∗2, x, τ2 )]
                               e∗1 =
                                               x

10       Appendix B
Let Yp be the permanent income of the student and let it differ from Y because of
a transitory shock. The theoretical tuition is assigned on the basis of Y according
to the function τ t (Y ), but the administration can acquire collateral information
on the student’s permanent income on the basis of which it can decide to move
the student’s tuition to τ p = τ t (Yp ). We assume that the administration changes
the student’s tuition if and only if the gain for the administration is large enough,
i.e. if τ t(Yp ) − τ t(Y ) > c with c a positive scalar.

                                             35
       As a result, the link between the tuition actually paid by a student whose
current income is in a neighbourhood of the j-th cut-off point, its current income
and its theoretical tuition is:

                    τ p = τ t(Yp ) ⇐⇒ τ t (Yp ) > c + lj + (hj − lj )Z.                 (13)

otherwise she pays τ p = τ t (Y ), where Z = I(Y ≥ yj ).
       We can now distinguish between different relevant cases. The first one is the
case in which τ t (Yp ) > c + hj . This is the case in which the administration believes
that the student has a high permanent income and raises her actual tuition to
τ t (Yp) no matter for the theoretical assignment Z and therefore independently
of the side of the discontinuity threshold to which the students is assigned by
transitory income. This is a case in which tuition actually paid by the student
would be the same on the two sides of the cut-off point.
       A second case is the one in which τ t (Yp ) < c + lj , meaning that the adminis-
tration does not modify the result of the theoretical assignment Z. This is a case
in which perfect compliance occurs.
       The third and intermediate case, in which c + lj < τ t (Yp ) < c + hj , is the one
that can generate defiance. In this case the administration raises the tuition of the
student to τ t (Yp ) only if transitory income assigns the student to the lower tuition
bracket (i.e. if Z = 0). If instead transitory income assigns the student above the
threshold (i.e. if Z = 1), Bocconi is willing to leave the tuition unchanged. As a
consequence, defiance occurs if hj < τ t(Yp ) < c + hj , because in this case if Z = 1
Bocconi leaves tuition at hj , while if Z = 0 Bocconi raises tuition above hj . On
the contrary, compliance prevails if c + lj < τ t (Yp ) < hj 29, because in this case
Bocconi leaves tuition at hj if Z = 1, while if Z = 0 tuition is raised above lj but
not above hj .
       A similar line of reasoning, applies to the behaviour of the student who has
to decide whether to ask for exemption from tuition or not. Applying for an
exemption is worthwhile only if the gain is sufficiently large to overcome the cost
of the application, that is if τ t (Y ) − τ t (Yp ) > b with b a positive constant.
  29
      Provided that c + lj < hj . To simplify the discussion, we maintain that this condition
is satisfied in what follows.


                                             36
   An obvious implication of this model is that in general the weight α(yj ) in
(11) depends on j. This because the distribution of Yp |yj and of τ t (Yp)|yj as well
as the theoretical tuitions hj and lj , which are relevant to define the domains of
integration over which the expected values in (11) are evaluated, depend on j.




                                         37
References
Altonji, Joseph G. (1993), “The Demand for and Return to Education When
    Education Outcomes are Uncertain”, Journal of Labor Economics, Vol.
    11, No. 1, pp. 48-83

Angrist, Joshua D. and Guido W. Imbens (1995), “Two–Stage Least Squares
   Estimation of Average Causal Effects in Models with Variable Treatment
   Intensity”, Journal of the American Statistical Association 90, 431–442.

Angrist, Joshua D., Guido W. Imbens and Donald B. Rubin (1996), “Identi-
   fication of Causal Effects Using Instrumental Variables”, Journal of the
   American Statistical Association 91, 444–472.

Angrist, Joshua D. and Victor Lavy (1999) “Using Maimonides rule to esti-
   mate the effect of class size on scholastic achievment”, Quarterly Journal
   of Economics, May, pp. 533-575

Angrist, Joshua D. and Victor Lavy (2002), “ The Effect of High School Ma-
   triculation Awards: Evidence from Randomized Trials”, NBER Working
   Paper No. 9389

Angrist, Joshua D., Kathryn Graddy and Guido W. Imbens (2000), “The In-
   terpretation of Instrumental Variables Estimators in Simultaneous Equa-
   tions Models with an Application to the Demand for Fish”, Review of
   Economic Studies, Vol. 67, Issue 3, pp. 499-527

Angrist, Joshua D., Daniel Lang and Philip Oreopoulos (2006), “ Lead them
   to water and pay them to drink: an experiment with services and incen-
   tives for college achievement ”, NBER Working Paper No. 12790

Brodaty, Thomas O., Robert J. Gary-Boboy and Ana Prieto, (2006) “Does
    Speed Signal Ability? The Impact of Grade Repetitions on Employment
    and Wages”, Paris School of Economics, mimeo.

Booth, Alison L. and Stephen E. Satchell (1995), “The Hazards of Doing a
    PhD: An Analysis of Completion and Withdrawal Rates of British PhD
    Students in the 1980s”, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series
    A, Vol. 158, No. 2, pp. 297-318

Bound, John, Michael Lovenheim and Sarah Turner (2006), ”Understanding
   the Increased Time to the Baccalaureate Degree”, mimeo, Univesrsity
   of Michigan

                                     38
Bowen, William G. and Neil L. Rudenstine (1992), “In pursuit of the PhD”,
   Princeton University Press Princeton, NJ

Brunello, Giorgio and Rudolf Winter-Ebmer (2003), “Why do students ex-
   pect to stay longer in college? Evidence from Europe”, Economics Let-
   ters, Vol. 80, No. 2, pp. 247-253

Checchi, Daniele, (2002), “Formazione e Percorsi Lavorativi dei laureati del-
   lUniversità degli Studi di Milano”, Working Paper n. 14.2002, Università
   Statale of Milan.

Canadian Association for Graduate Studies (2003) “The Completion of Grad-
   uate Studies in Canadian Universities: Report and Reccomendations”

Dearden, Lorraine, Carl Emmerson, Christine Frayne, Costas Meghir, Karl
    Ashworth, Jay Hardman, Yvette Hartfree, Sue Maguire, Sue Middleton
    and Debbi Smith (2002), “Education Maintenance Allowance: The First
    Two Years A Quantitative Evaluation”, UK Department for Education
    and Skills Research Report No. 352

Ding, Weili and Steven Lehrer, (2005), “Do peers affect student achievement
    in China’s secondary schools?” mimeo, Queen’s University.

Dornbusch, Rudi, Andrea Gentilini and Francesco Giavazzi (2000), Italian
    Labor Forse Participation: Disguised Unemployment on Campus”, un-
    published, Igier, Bocconi University.

Dynarski, Susan (2002). “The Behavioral and Distributional Implications of
   Aid for College.” American Economic Review 92:2, 279-285.

Dynarski, Susan (2003). “Does Aid Matter? Measuring the Effect of Stu-
   dent Aid on College Attendance and Completion.” American Economic
   Review 93:1, 279-288.

Dynarski, Susan (2005). “Building the Stock of College-Educated Labor.”
   Working paper, Kennedy School, Harvard University.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G., and Panagiotis G. Mavros (1995), “Do Doctoral Stu-
    dents’ Financial Support Patterns Affect Their Times-To-Degree and
    Completion Probabilities?”, Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 30, No.
    3, pp. 581-609



                                     39
Filippin, Antonio and Andrea Ichino, (2005) “Gender Wage Gap in Expec-
     tations and Realizations”, Labour Economics, February, 12 (1), pp. 125-
     145.

Gao, Hong (2002), “Examining the Length of Time to Completion at a Com-
    munity College”, Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Southern
    Association for Institutional Research, Baton Rouge, LA, October 12-15

Gary-Bobo Robert, J. Trannoy, A. (2004), “Efficient Tuition Fees, Examina-
    tion, Subsidies”, CES-Ifo Working Paper 1189

Gneezy, Uri and Aldo Rustichini (2000), “A Fine is a Price”, Journal of Legal
   Studies, Vol. 29, No. 1, pp. 1-18

Groen, Jeffrey, George Jakubson, Ronald G. Ehrenberg, Scott Condie and
    Albert Yung-Hsu Liu (2006), “Program Design and Student Outcomes
    in Graduate Education”, NBER Working Paper No. 12064

Hahn, Jinyhong, Petra Todd and Wilbert van der Klaauw (2001), “Identifica-
   tion and Estimation of Treatment Effects with a Regression-Discontinuity
   Design”, Econometrica vol.69, n. 1 (January), pp. 201-209.

Hakkinen, Iida and Roope Uusitalo (2003), “The Effect of a Student Aid
   Reform on Graduation: A Duration Analysis”, Uppsala University, De-
   partment of Economics Working Paper No. 8

Heineck, Martin, Mathias Kifmann and Normann Lorenz (2006), “A duration
    analysis of the effects of tuition fees for long term students in Germany”,
    University of Konstanz, Centre for European Economic Research Discus-
    sion Paper No. 5

Hoffer, Thomas B. and Vincent Welch (2006), “Time to Degree of U.S. Re-
    search Doctorate Recipients”, National Science Foundation, Directorate
    for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences InfoBrief No. 312

Imbens, Guido W. and Joshua D. Angrist (1994), “Identification and Es-
   timation of Local Average Treatment Effects”, Econometrica, Vol. 62,
   No. 2, pp. 467-75

Kane, Thomas J. (2003), “A Quasi-Experimental Estimate of the Impact of
   Financial Aid on College-Going”, NBER Working Paper No. 9703

Kremer, M., Miguel, E. and Thornotn, R. (2005), “Incentives to Learn”,
   mimeo, Harvard University

                                      40
Lee, David S. (2006), “Randomized Experiments from Non-random Selection
    in U.S. House Elections”, forthcoming in Journal of Econometrics”
Leslie, Larry L. and Paul T. Brinkman (1987), “Student Price Response in
     Higher Education: The Student Demand Studies”, Journal of Higher
     Education, Vol. 58, No. 2, pp. 181-204
Leuven, Edwin, Hessel Oosterbeek and Bas van der Klaauw (2006), “The
    effect of financial rewards on students’ achievement: Evidence from a
    randomized experiment”, mimeo, University of Amsterdam
McCrary, Justin (2007), “Manipulation of the running variable in the re-
   gression discontinuity design: a density test”, NBER Technical Working
   Paper No. 334
Office of Scientific and Engineering Personnel (1990), On Time to the Doctorate:
     A Study of the Lengthening Time to Completion for Doctorates in Sci-
     ence and Engineering
Sacerdote, B., (2001) “Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for
    Dartmouth Roommates”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(2), 681-
    704.
Siegfried, John J. and Wendy Stock (2001), “So You Want to Earn a Ph.D.
    in Economics? How Long Do You Think it Will Take?”, The Journal of
    Human Resources 36, 2, 364-378
Illinois Board of Higher Education (1999), “Persistence, Completion, and
     Time to Degree”, mimeo.
UCDavis (2004), “Undergraduate Time to Degree Completion Rates by Col-
   lege and Division”, Office of Resource Management and Planning, Issue
   Report, March.
US Department of Education (2003), “The Condition of Education 2003”,
   Institute of Education Sciences, NCES 2003-067.
van der Klaauw, W., (2002), “Estimating the effect of financial aid offers on
    college enrollment: a regression-discontinuity approach”, International
    Economic Review, vol. 43, No. 4., pp. 1249-1287.
van Ours, J. C. and G. Ridder, (2003), “Fast track or failure: a study of
    the graduation and dropout rates of Ph D students in economics”, Eco-
    nomics of Education Review, vol. 22, No. 2, pp. 157-166


                                     41
Table 1: Employment, educational enrollment and educational attainment
of Italian youth older than 25


                    25-29 years old:                  35-44 years old:
                 Employed In education      Male graduates Female graduates
 Italy             61.1         14.7             11.0                11.0
 Finland           61.1         10.7             32.0                42.0
 Greece            68.7          6.4             24.0                19.0
 Spain             69.7         10.4             25.0                25.0
 Germany           74.9           7              30.0                21.0
 France            76.3          5.4             21.0                24.0
 Australia         78.4          4.5             27.0                32.0
 Canada            78.6          5.6             39.0                46.0
 Norway            78.7          11              28.0                30.0
 Sweden            80.1          13              31.0                35.0
 United Kingdom    80.3          3.6             28.0                26.0
 Belgium           80.6          3.9             28.0                31.0
 Austria           80.7          6.6             19.0                14.0
 Denmark           80.8         11.5             24.0                32.0
 United States     81.2          2.9             37.0                38.0
 Portugal          83.9          4.8              7.0                11.0
 Switzerland       85.1          5.1             37.0                21.0
 Ireland           85.4          8.9             37.0                36.0
 Netherlands       85.9          2.2             27.0                22.0
 Country Average   77.4          7.3             26.9                27.2

Source: OECD Education at a Glance, 2002.




                                       42
    Table 2: Legal and effective duration of university programs in Italy


                                      Mean                 Median                  Mean
                                  legal duration     effective duration     effective duration
 Sciences                              4.01                  6.0                    6.94
 Chemistry and Pharmacy                4.66                  6.0                    6.95
 Geo-biology                           4.17                  7.0                    7.63
 Medical school                        5.77                  7.0                    8.28
 Engineering                           4.99                  7.0                    7.73
 Architecture                          4.99                  8.0                    8.79
 Agrarian sciences                     4.83                  7.0                    8.21
 Economics and statistics              4.04                  6.0                    6.74
 Political sciences                    4.02                  6.0                    7.23
 Law                                   4.02                  6.0                    7.04
 Arts                                  4.02                  7.0                    7.61
 Literature                            4.02                  7.0                    7.38
 Teaching                              4.01                  7.0                    8.55
 Psychology                            4.92                  6.0                    6.71
 Total                                 4.39                  7.0                    7.41
 Bocconi University                    4.00                  5.5                    5.00

Source: Representative sample of graduates in 1995 surveyed in 1998 - Standard sample
file “Indagine sull’inserimento professionale dei laureati dell’anno 1995” , ISTAT, 1998.
Our sample for statistics concerning Bocconi.




                                           43
              Table 3: Fraction of Fuori Corso students in Italy



                                All Italy Economics in Italy Bocconi University


 Enrolled in year 99-00         1684993            237893                    8298
 % of Fuori corso                 41.1              43.6                     28.9


 Graduates in year 99-00         171806             28106                    1182
 % of Fuori corso                 83.5               89.9                    81.2


Source: Italian Ministry of Education and our sample for statistics concerning Bocconi.




                                          44
                                      Table 4: Descriptive statistics by fuori corso status
                                                                    Conditional on being                        Of the total
                                                                    in time fuori corso
                  % of the 12127 enrolled from 1992 to 1999 who:
                  are females                                        44.62       39.57                            40.92
                  are from the Milan area                            40.58       40.84                            40.77
45




                  graduated from highschool with top grades          28.83       22.01                            23.83
                  attended top highschool tracks                     70.40       65.98                            67.16
                  graduated cum laude from Bocconi                   57.76       23.67                            32.79
                  have family income (in euro) equal to              41872       38637                            39502
                  Total                                              26.74       73.26                            100.00

     Source: Statistics for all the students who enrolled in the first year at Bocconi between 1992 and 1999.
                                                                                Figure 1: Time profile of tuition at Bocconi


                                                                                                                                                                             tuition by income bracket              simple average by year
                                                     Tuition as a function of real income                                                                                                                                 11                  11
                                                                                                                                                            6.10194                                            11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    11
                                                                                                                                                                                                         11
                                            6



                                                                                                                                                                                           11
       Real tuition in thousands of Euros




                                                                                                                                                                               11                                         10        10        10
                                                                                                                                                                                                               10
                                                                                                                                                                                                         10




                                                                                                                       Real tuition in thousands of Euros
                                                                                                                                                                       11
                                                                                                                                                                                           10
                                            5




                                                                                                                                                                               10

                                                                                                                                                                       10                                                 9          9         9
                                                                                                                                                                                                         9     9
                                                                                                                                                                                           9
                                                                                                                                                                                9
                                            4




                                                                                                                                                                       9
                                                                                                                                                                                                               8          8          8         8
                                                                                                                                                                                           8             8
                                                                                                                                                                       8        8
46



                                            3




                                                                                                                                                                                                               7          7          7         7
                                                                                                                                                                                           7             7
                                                                                                                                                                                7
                                                                                                                                                                       7
                                                                                                                                                                                                         6     6          6          6         6
                                                                                                                                                                                           6
                                            2




                                                                                                                                                                       6        6

                                                                                                                                                                                           5             5     5          5          5         5
                                                                                                                                                                       5        5

                                                                                                                                                                                4          4             4     4          4          4         4
                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                                3          3             3     3          3          3         3
                                                                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                                                                       2        2          2             2     2          2          2         2
                                                                                                                                                                       1        1          1             1     1          1          1         1
                                                0     20           40            60            80                100                                        .715795
                                                      Real income − thousands of Euros, base 2000
                                                                                                                                                                      1995                                                                   2002
                                                    tuition structure in 1995        tuition structure in 2002                                                                            Calendar year of 4th academic year
                                                                                                                                                                                    Average tuition in real terms

     Source: Statistics for all the students who enrolled in the first year at Bocconi between 1992 and 1999.
                        Table 5: 4th year students by theoretical tuition bracket and Fuori Corso status

      Tuition bracket                     “in time”                                    Fuori Corso                            All students
                                 n.obs.                   %                   n.obs.                  %              n.obs                     %

      1                           167                   14.67                  971                   85.33           1,138                   100.00
      2                            79                   16.09                  412                   83.91            491                    100.00
      3                            63                   14.58                  369                   85.42            432                    100.00
      4                           117                   17.84                  539                   82.16            656                    100.00
47




      5                            86                   14.60                  503                   85.40            589                    100.00
      6                           174                   18.20                  782                   81.80            956                    100.00
      7                           182                   18.69                  792                   81.31            974                    100.00
      8                           356                   21.65                 1,288                  78.35           1,644                   100.00
      9                           303                   25.83                  870                   74.17           1,173                   100.00
      10                          194                   24.56                  596                   75.44            790                    100.00
      11                          342                   24.91                 1,031                  75.09           1,373                   100.00
      Total                      2,063                  20.19                 8,153                  79.81           10,216                  100.00

     Source: Statistics for the 4th year students who enrolled in the first year at Bocconi between 1992 and 1999.
                                                                   Figure 2: Histogram of family income around thresholds



                                                             Discontinuity 2                                                                           Discontinuity 7




                                                                                                                                      .015
                                             .03
          empirical and smoothed frequency




                                                                                                   empirical and smoothed frequency
                                                                                                                                      .01
                                             .02
48




                                                                                                                                      .005
                                             .01
                                             0




                                                                                                                                      0
                                                 −2          −1          0             1                                                   −3 −2 −1        0    1    2      3     4   5
                                               Distance from nearest discontinuity in 1000 euros                                         Distance from nearest discontinuity in 1000 euros



     Source: Statistics for the 4th year students who enrolled in the first year at Bocconi between 1992 and 1999.
                                   Figure 3: Histogram of paid tuition given a theoretical tuition



                                Discontinuity 2                                                  Discontinuity 7


                25




                                                                                  60
                20




                                                                                  40
                15
          Percent




                                                                            Percent
                10
49




                                                                                  20
                5
                0




                                                                                  0
                     0    1    2      3     4      5      6      7                     0                  1                     2
                         Tuition normalized to t_theo=low                                  Tuition normalized to t_theo=low
                              t_theo=low               t_theo=high                             t_theo=low                t_theo=high




     Note: For each discontinuity, all tuition levels (whether theoretical or actually paid) have been divided by τ t = l. Thus, for example,
     the histogram bar at 1 is for τ t = l while the highest light bar on the right of 1 is for τ t = h.
     Source: Statistics for the 4th year students who enrolled in the first year at Bocconi between 1992 and 1999.
     Table 6: Characteristics of 4th year students according to whether their actual tuition is equal to, larger than or
     smaller than the theoretical one


                                                                  For given theoretical tuition, fraction paying:

                                                           less                        same                        more
50




             Females                                      44.02                        40.87                        42.22
             From Milan area                              27.39                        44.69                        38.50
             With top highschool grade                    39.34                        25.03                        21.76
             From top highschool tracks                   56.99                        71.08                        67.06


     Source: Statistics for the 4th year students who enrolled in the first year at Bocconi between 1992 and 1999. The sample size is 10,216.
                                                                                                            Figure 4: Time trends of relevant variables


                                                                 1995                                                                                                                               1994
                                                       .911458                                                                                                            .169609




     Average highschool grade; max = 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1996




                                                                                                                                           Fraction of dropout students
                                                                             1996                                                                                                                             1995




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1997
                                                                                                                                    2002
                                                                                                                                                                                            1993
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1998

                                                                                                                            2001

                                                                                     1997
                                                                                                                     2000

                                                                                                          1999
                                                                                                                                                                                    1992

                                                                                                1998                                                                                                                                               1999
                                                        .85871                                                                                                            .094328
                                                                 1995                                                              2002                                             1992                                                          1999
                                                                                      Calendar year of 4th academic year                                                                              Calendar year of immatriculation
                                                                        Evolution of the quality of 4th year students                                                       Evolution of the probability that a 1st year student drops out
51




                                                                 1995                                                                                                                                                                      2001
                                                       .879281               1996
                                                                                                                                                                          40.7123
     Fraction of 4th year students going fuori corso




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2000
                                                                                     1997
                                                                                                1998



                                                                                                          1999




                                                                                                                                           Thousands of Euros
                                                                                                                     2000
                                                                                                                                                                                    1995                                                           2002
                                                                                                                                                                                            1996




                                                                                                                            2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                              1998


                                                                                                                                    2002                                                            1997
                                                       .661854                                                                                                            39.3246
                                                                 1995                                                              2002                                             1995                                                          2002
                                                                                      Calendar year of 4th academic year                                                                            Calendar year of 4th academic year
                                                       Evolution of the probability of fuori corso for 4th year students                                                              Evolution of real income of 4th year students


     Source: Statistics for the 4th year students who enrolled in the first year at Bocconi between 1992 and 1999.
                                                                            Figure 5: Intention-to-treat effects



                                                    Theor. and paid tuition: disc = 2                                 Prob. of fuori corso: disc = 2




                                                                                                        .9
                           .5 1.5 2.5 3.5 4.5 5.5
          Smooth average




                                                                                                 Smooth average
                                                                                                  .75 .8 .85
                                                    t_paid


                                                    t_theo




                                                                                                        .7
                                               −2        −1         0           1         2                        −2         −1         0           1          2
                                             Distance from nearest discontinuity in 1000 euros                    Distance from nearest discontinuity in 1000 euros
52




                                                    Theor. and paid tuition: disc = 7                                 Prob. of fuori corso: disc = 7




                                                                                                        .9
                           .5 1.5 2.5 3.5 4.5 5.5
          Smooth average




                                                                                                 Smooth average
                                                                                                  .75 .8 .85
                                                    t_paid


                                                    t_theo



                                                                                                        .7
                                               −4       −2      0       2          4      6                        −4       −2       0       2          4       6
                                             Distance from nearest discontinuity in 1000 euros                    Distance from nearest discontinuity in 1000 euros



     Source: Statistics for the 4th year students who enrolled in the first year at Bocconi between 1992 and 1999.
                                                   Figure 6: Evidence on sorting and continuity conditions



                                  Pre−Bocconi income: disc=2                                             Highschool grade: disc= 2


                         30




                                                                                         .9
          Smooth average




                                                                                  Smooth average
                                                                                   .75 .8 .85
               20  10




                                                                                         .7
                               −2         −1         0           1          2                       −2         −1         0           1          2
                              Distance from nearest discontinuity in 1000 euros                    Distance from nearest discontinuity in 1000 euros
53




                                  Pre−Bocconi income: disc=7                                             Highschool grade: disc= 7
                         50




                                                                                         .9
          Smooth average




                                                                                  Smooth average
                                                                                   .75 .8 .85
               40  30




                                                                                         .7
                               −4       −2       0       2          4       6                       −4       −2       0       2          4       6
                              Distance from nearest discontinuity in 1000 euros                    Distance from nearest discontinuity in 1000 euros



     Source: Statistics for the 4th year students who enrolled in the first year at Bocconi between 1992 and 1999.
     Table 7: Regression discontinuity estimates of the effect of tuition on the probability of late graduation (Fuori corso)


      Method                      OLS-ITT                       OLS-ITT                        OLS                     IV-LATE                 N. of obs.
      Outcome                    Paid Tuition                  Fuori Corso                 Fuori Corso                Fuori Corso
      Treatment                                                                            Paid Tuition              Paid Tuition
      Instrument             Theoretical Tuition          Theoretical Tuition                                      Theoretical Tuition

      Discontinuity 1                  -2.5                          .42                       -.0086                        -.17                1376
      s.e.                            (2.2)                        (.54)                       (.007)                       (.26)
      Discontinuity 2                  -2.4                          .21                        .0047                       -.088                 463
      s.e.                            (1.5)                        (.37)                       (.011)                       (.16)
      Discontinuity 3                   .64                         -.13                        -.012                         -.2                 563
      s.e.                            (1.2)                        (.31)                       (.013)                       (.59)
      Discontinuity 4                   .51                          .17                       -.0058                         .33                 636
      s.e.                            (.64)                        (.17)                        (.01)                       (.54)
      Discontinuity 5                   -.4                          -.2                         .017                          .5                 742
      s.e.                            (.54)                        (.14)                        (.01)                       (.77)
      Discontinuity 6                   .52                        -.078                        .0063                        -.15                 961
54




      s.e.                            (.41)                        (.11)                        (.01)                       (.25)
      Discontinuity 7                   .11                         -.06                         .011                        -.56                1331
      s.e.                            (.25)                        (.10)                        (.01)                       (1.6)
      Discontinuity 8                   .38                         -.07                         .017                        -.19                1453
      s.e.                            (.14)                       (.076)                       (.014)                       (.21)
      Discontinuity 9                   .24                        -.022                         .027                       -.095                 957
      s.e.                            (.12)                        (.09)                        (.02)                       (.38)
      Discontinuity 10                  .57                          .11                         .046                          .2                1734
      s.e.                            (.12)                        (.09)                       (.022)                       (.17)
      All                               .59                        -.036                        .0021                       -.061                10216
      s.e.                            (.05)                       (.018)                       (.004)                      (.031)

     Note: Each coefficient (and related robust standard error in parenthesis) is an estimate of β obtained from separate regressions of the
     form:
                                                           W = g(Y ) + βτ K + γt + 
     where W is the tuition actually paid τ p in column 1 and the Fuori Corso status F in the other columns; τ k is the theoretical tuition
     τ t in column 1 and 2, and the tuition actually paid τ p in column 3 and 4. Estimates in columns 1,2 and 3 are obtained with OLS; in
     column 4 with IV using τ t as an instrument for τ p . γt are time dummies.
     Source: Statistics for the 4th year students who enrolled in the first year at Bocconi between 1992 and 1999.
                    Table 8: Tests for the presence of sorting and for the validity of the continuity conditions


      Method                                         OLS-ITT                         OLS                      IV-LATE                 N. of obs.
      Treatment                                                                  Paid Tuition               Paid Tuition
      Instrument                               Theoretical Tuition                                        Theoretical Tuition


      Income before Bocconi                               .38                           .75                         .66                  9800
                                                        ( .46)                       ( .11)                        (.81)
      Highschool grade                                  .0019                         -.013                        .0032                10216
                                                      ( .0048)                     ( .00096)                     (.0082)
      Highschool type                                   -.032                          .029                        -.055                10216
                                                        ( .02)                      ( .0042)                      ( .034)
55




      Family of origin outside Milan                    -.025                         -.017                        -.042                10216
                                                       ( .022)                      ( .0041)                      ( .038)
      GPA in first year at Bocconi                     -.0024                        -.0075                       -.0041                10153
                                                      ( .0033)                     ( .00066)                     ( .0057)
      Female                                             .029                        -.0068                         .05                 10216
                                                       ( .022)                      ( .0044)                      ( .038)


     Note: Each coefficient (and related robust standard error in parenthesis) is an estimate of β obtained from separate regressions of the
     form:
                                                           S = g(Y ) + βτ K + γt + 
     where S is the pre-intervention outcome indicated in the corresponding row of the table; τ k is the theoretical tuition τ t in column 1 and
     the tuition actually paid τ p in column 2 and 3. Estimates in columns 1 and 2 are obtained with OLS; in column 3 with IV using τ t as
     an instrument for τ p . γt are time dummies.
     Source: Statistics for the 4th year students who enrolled in the first year at Bocconi between 1992 and 1999.
                                            Figure 7: A test of monotonicity: CDF crossing
56




     For each discontinuity the figure plots the estimated difference between the cdf of the tuition actually paid by students in a left
     neighbourhood of the cut-off point and the corresponding cdf paid by students in a right neighbourhood. 0.95 confidence intervals are
     plotted as well. The left (right) neighbourhood is defined selecting students whose family income is below (above) the cut-off point by
     no more than 500 euro.
     Source: Statistics for the 4th year students who enrolled in the first year at Bocconi between 1992 and 1999.
                   Table 9: Test for the equality of the IV estimand Λ(yj ) at different discontinuity thresholds

                 Method                            OLS-ITT                           OLS                           IV-LATE
                 Outcome                          Fuori Corso                    Fuori Corso                      Fuori Corso
                 Treatment                     Theoretical Tuition               Paid Tuition                    Paid Tuition
                 Instrument                                                                                    Theoretical Tuition


                 IV estimand Λ(yj )                     -0.065                        -0.008                          -0.090
                 at the discontinuities                (0.027)                       (0.005)                         (0.036)
                 1 2 and 3

                 Deviation of the                       0.019                         0.016                           0.015
                 IV estimand Λ(yj )                    (0.016)                       (0.006)                         (0.013)
57




                 at the discontinuities
                 4, 5, 6 and 7

                 Deviation of the                       0.013                         0.017                           0.014
                 IV estimand Λ(yj )                    (0.018)                       (0.007)                         (0.015)
                 at the discontinuities
                 8, 9 and 10


     Note: The rows of the table report respectively the coefficients β1,3 β4,7 and β8,10 of the regression

                                          F = g(Y ) + β1,3τ K D1,3 + β4,7 τ K D4,7 + β8,10τ K D8,10 + γt + 

     where F is the Fuori Corso status; the dummies Di,j denote the discontinuity thresholds from i to j; τ k is the theoretical tuition τ t in
     column 1, and the tuition actually paid τ p in column 2 and 3. Estimates in columns 1 and 2 are obtained with OLS; in column 3 with
     IV using τ t as an instrument for τ p . γt are time dummies.
     Source: Statistics for the 4th year students who enrolled in the first year at Bocconi between 1992 and 1999.
                               Table 10: Effect of tuition on dropout rates and final graduation marks

         Method                                OLS-ITT                         OLS                      IV-LATE                 N. of obs.
         Treatment                                                         Paid Tuition               Paid Tuition
         Instrument                      Theoretical Tuition                                        Theoretical Tuition


         Drop-out                                 -.006                         -.004                         -.010                10212
                                                 (.008)                        (.002)                        (.013)
58




         Final graduation mark                     -.29                          -.83                         -.46                  9206
         (min= 66; max= 110)                      (.33)                         (.06)                        (.52)


     Note: Each coefficient (and related robust standard error in parenthesis) is an estimate of β obtained from separate regressions of the
     form:
                                                           W = g(Y ) + βτ K + γt + 
     where W is a dummy for dropping out in top panel and the final graduation mark ranging between 66 and 110 (111 in case of honors)
     with a standard deviation of 7 points in the bottom panel; τ k is the theoretical tuition τ t in column 1, and the tuition actually paid τ p
     in column 2 and 3. Estimates in columns 1 and 2 are obtained with OLS; in column 3 with IV using τ t as an instrument for τ p . γt are
     time dummies.
     Source: Statistics for the 4th year students who enrolled in the first year at Bocconi between 1992 and 1999. The smaller sample size in
     the bottom panel originates from the fact that 1010 studens had not graduated yet by 2004, when we received the data from Bocconi.
