                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE MYSTERY OF HUMAN CAPITAL AS ENGINE OF GROWTH, OR WHY THE
       US BECAME THE ECONOMIC SUPERPOWER IN THE 20TH CENTURY

                                             Isaac Ehrlich

                                         Working Paper 12868
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12868


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2007




The original version of this paper was presented as the author’s thesis lecture for his Honorary Doctorate
from the Université d’Orleans, France, on October 1, 2002. It was later presented in the April 2003,
NSF-supported interdisciplinary conference The Mystery of Capital and the New Philosophy of Social
Reality held at UB and revised as NBER Working Paper No. 12868, 2007. It was also presented as
the author’s Provost Lecture at SUNY Stony Brook on April 12, 2007. The author is indebted to Jinyoung
Kim for collaboration on section 6.C of this paper, and to Robert King, Warren Sanderson, Eric Hanushek,
Sam Peltzman, Claudia Goldin, Yong Yin, Serguey Braguinsky, and Zhiqiang Liu for valuable comments
and suggestions on earlier drafts. Hyong-uk Kim, Xuezheng Qin, and Yiqun Wu provided dedicated
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Isaac Ehrlich. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Mystery of Human Capital as Engine of Growth, or Why the US Became the Economic
Superpower in the 20th Century
Isaac Ehrlich
NBER Working Paper No. 12868
January 2007, Revised February 2008
JEL No. H1,I2,N1,N3,O0,O4

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper offers a thesis as to why the US overtook the UK and other European countries in the 20th
century in both aggregate and per-capita GDP, as a case study of recent models of endogenous growth
where human capital is the "engine of growth". The conjecture is that the ascendancy of the US as
an economic superpower owes in large measure to its relatively faster human capital formation. Whether
the thesis has legs to stand on is assessed through stylized facts indicating that the US led other OECD
countries in schooling attainments per adult population over the 20 century, especially at the secondary
and tertiary levels. While human capital is viewed as the direct facilitator of growth, the underlying
factors driving the US ascendancy are linked to the superior returns the political-economic system
in the US has so far offered individual human capital attainments, both home-produced and imported.


Isaac Ehrlich
415 Fronczak Hall
University of Buffalo
Box 601520
Buffalo, NY 14260-1520
and NBER
mgtehrl@buffalo.edu
                                       Prologue


Common to the bulk of the “new” economic growth and development literature is the
idea that the process by which less-developed countries break out of a poverty trap
and achieve steady, self-sustaining growth in real per-capita income is predicated on
persistent production and accumulation of “human capital.” This powerful concept is
wrapped up in three layers of mystery. First, unlike physical capital, human capital is
not a tangible asset. How, then, can we account for it empirically? Second, what
explains its continuous formation over time? Third, how is such formation
transformed into growth in real output and personal income?

One of the objectives of this essay is to unwrap this apparent mystery through an
exposition of a general-equilibrium paradigm of economic development where human
capital, or knowledge, is the engine of growth, its accumulation is enabled by parental
and public investments in children’s education, and underlying “exogenous”
institutional and policy variables are ultimately responsible for both human capital
formation and long-term growth.

The paradigm is developed in the context of a competitive market economy in which
human capital, measured imperfectly by quantitative indicators of schooling and
training, is competitively rewarded and efficiently allocated to productive activities.
The model also recognizes, however, the role of externalities such as market
imperfections that affect adversely the accessibility and financing costs of schooling
for those with borrowing constraints, or informal knowledge-spillover effects
emanating from workers and entrepreneurs with superior education and skill, which
enhance the productivity of others with whom they interact. The way these
externalities are internalized may vary across different economies by the political and
legal framework governing the economy, and as a consequence of accommodating
economic and educational public policies, especially insofar as higher education is
concerned. Such factors ultimately account for differential long-term growth patterns
in different countries.

A more specific objective of the presentation is to illustrate the power of the “human
capital hypothesis” to explain observed differences in long-term growth dynamics
across specific countries. The case in point is the emergence of the U.S. as the world
economic superpower, overtaking the U.K., and Europe in general. The U.S. was a
relatively poor country over much of the nineteenth century. In the last few decades
of that century, and especially during the twentieth century, however, the U.S. has
overtaken the U.K. and other major European countries, and then developed
considerable advantage over these countries in terms of not just gross domestic
product, but per-capita GDP as well. What may be less known is that over the same
period the U.S. has developed a considerable gap over Europe in the schooling
attainments of its labor force, especially at the higher education level. The gap
remained significant through the entire twentieth century, although it narrowed in the

                                         1
    latter part of it, and is continuing to narrow in this decade. Largely accounting for this
    gap was the massive high school movement of 1915–1940, but an independent gap
    emerged as early as the 1860s with the U.S. foray into tertiary education beginning
    with the first Morrill Act of 1862, and continuing especially with the massive higher
    education movement following World War II. A basic argument of this paper is that
    the U.S. lead in knowledge formation, imperfectly measured by higher educational
    attainments, has been a major, and perhaps the major instrument through which the
    U.S. overtook Europe as the economic superpower in the twentieth century.

    To illustrate the case empirically, it is worth noting that by popular measures of real
    income used in international comparisons (GDP, adjusted by Purchasing Power
    Parity), the U.S. maintains a considerably larger level of per-capita income relative to
    practically all top twenty-five countries in the world, including even small tax-heaven
    countries (see appendix A, table A). In the early1800s, however, the U.S. had levels
    of GDP and GDP per capita considerably below that of the U.K. and it was not until
    1872 for GDP and 1905 for GDP per capita when the U.S. has overtaken the U.K.
    Figures 1 and 2 (see appendix B) illustrate the comparisons poignantly. Abstracting
    from year-to-year and cyclical fluctuations, both the U.S. and U.K. graphs relating
    the logarithm of GDP or GDP per capita to chronological time appear over the long
    haul to resemble the shape of an upward-sloping straight line. The slope of each line
    represents the long-term annual growth rate of GDP or GDP per capita. The
    fundamental difference is that the slopes are higher for the U.S. relative to the U.K. In
    other words, the U.S. has overtaken the U.K. because its long-term growth rates have
    been higher: Over the 131-year period 1871–2003 (starting at the point of overtaking)
    the U.S. versus U.K. GDP growth rates have been 3.39% versus 1.91% per annum
    while the corresponding per-capita GDP growth rates were 1.87% versus 1.42%.1 In
    recent decades, these gaps have narrowed. For example, over the period 1961–2003,
    the comparative growth rates of GDP in the U.S. versus the U.K. were 3.37% versus
    2.43%, while those for per-capita GDP were 2.25% versus 2.11%, respectively.2 My
    basic thesis is that differences in long-term per-capita income growth stem primarily
    not from differences in physical stocks, including land or other natural resources, but

1
  These statistics are taken from Maddison 2003. All figures are converted to 1990 U.S.
dollars using the Geary Khamis Purchasing-Power-Parity (PPP) method. Similar graphs
apply to other major European countries as well. For example the growth rates of GDP
and GDP per capita (in parentheses) over the period 1850–2003—starting when the U.S.
overtook other major European countries in per-capita GDP—were: 3.52 (1.83) for the
U.S.; 1.98 (1.46) for the U.K.; 2.06 (1.72) for France; 2.31 (1.71) for Germany; 2.48
(1.75) for Italy; 2.18 (1.82) for Spain.
2
  The shorter-term trends have been uneven for other major European countries. Over the
period 1961–2003 the per-capita GDP growth rate in France and Italy were 0.21% and
0.40% higher than in the U.S., respectively, while in Germany it was .14% lower.
However, over 1976–2003, e.g., the U.S.’s per-capita GDP growth was 0.28% higher
than France’s, 0.47% higher than Germany’s, and .06% higher than Italy’s.

                                              2
from differences in the rates of growth of human capital. Both human capital
formation and its impact on growth, however, are ultimately attributable to
underlying institutional and policy factors which reward knowledge formation within
an economy. In what follows I examine whether this hypothesis has a leg to stand on.

1. The “Mystery” of Growth: The Human Capital Hypothesis

What accounts for differences in wealth across nations has been a key puzzle of
economic science since Adam Smith. Logically, the question involves both static and
dynamic elements: why are some nations doing better than others economically at a
point in time, and why some nations become more successful than others over time.
In the terminology of the current literature on economic growth and development, this
two-part question relates to determinants of the long-term rate of growth, as distinct
from the level, of per-capita real income or GDP, taking the latter to represent a scalar
measure of personal economic welfare.

A significant advance in the modern economic treatment of the problem came about
with the neoclassical growth model, which identifies key factors contributing to a
steady-state level of per-capita income and its associated capital-labor ratio (K/L),
under any exogenously given rate of population growth and level of production
technology. The model thus attributes persistent growth in per-capita income over
time, which is a more relevant measure of private economic welfare than aggregate
income, strictly to exogenous technological shocks. This inference can be
conveniently illustrated via the following “neoclassical” aggregate production
function:

Y = B(T)F(L, K), where Y is the economy’s aggregate output, F is a constant-returns-
to-scale production function summarizing the impact of conventional labor (L) and
physical capital (K) inputs on production, and B(T) represents the process by which
“technology” (T) augments the impact of these inputs. Under an exogenously given
technology, the neoclassical growth model suggests that the steady-state level of per-
capita real income (y) is given by:

(1) y* ≡ B(T)f(k*),

where k* ≡ (K/L)* is the “golden rule,” or equilibrium capital to labor ratio.

Growth in the equilibrium per-capita income level y* can thus occur by this analysis
through exogenous technological advances. The role of technology, B(T), can be
interpreted more broadly to include any and all factors that enhance the utilization of
the labor and physical capital resources available to the economy at a point it time. In
principle, therefore, the economic and regulatory policies that facilitate the
operational efficiency of the market economy within which economic resources are
utilized are also subsumed by this factor—a point that will be further underscored in
later sections. Like technology, these factors are assumed to be exogenously given to
the economy. They affect the level of output per capita at a point in time.

                                         3
In the last two hundred years or so, however, the world has witnessed a relatively new
phenomenon in economic history: persistent and seemingly self-sustaining growth in
per-capita real income over the long haul in most of the so-called developed
economies following the technological shock produced by the industrial revolution.
Periodic and occasionally large business-cycle disturbances notwithstanding, this
phenomenon is still continuing, although at a different pace in different countries.
Furthermore, over the last century or so, the world has also experienced episodes of
economic takeoffs by less developed countries from relatively stagnant, low income
levels into regimes of self-sustaining growth (e.g., the Asian Tigers), as well as
episodes in which a relatively poor economy has overtaken a much wealthier one
(e.g., the U.S. versus Europe). If “exogenous” factors, such as accidental
technological discoveries, are the key to this mystery, what accounts for the smooth
and continuous, but also variable, productivity growth in different countries,
especially when technological discoveries originating in one country can be rapidly
imitated and adopted by any other country?

The answer offered by much of the recently developed “endogenous growth”
literature (see Lucas 1988, and the articles in Ehrlich 1990) rests on identifying
“technology” as “human capital,” and modeling continuous and self-sustaining
technological advances as the outcome of persistent investment in human capital
treated as a decision variable, subject to individual and social choice, within a
dynamic, general equilibrium framework. The concept of human capital as an
intangible asset is perhaps best defined as a stock of embodied and disembodied
knowledge, comprising education, information, health, entrepreneurship, and
productive and innovative skills, that is formed through investments in schooling, job
training, and health, as well as through research and development projects, and
informal knowledge transfers (see Ehrlich and Murphy 2007). By this definition
human capital has two inherent dimensions: “embodied” and “disembodied.” The
first is knowledge embodied in workers, or skill, which augments the productivity of
labor and physical capital inputs at a point in time. The second is creative knowledge
that flows from the minds of scholars, scientists, inventors, and entrepreneurs and
increases their capacity to accumulate new knowledge. This “disembodied”
knowledge is manifested in papers, books, patents, and algorithms, and winds up as
technological advances—product and process innovations—at the firm and industry
levels. It is thus more likely to be acquired and produced in tertiary institutions of
teaching and research. While these types of human capital are distinct, they are also
complementary, as creative knowledge feeds on previously accumulated embodied
knowledge and facilitates the acquisition of new knowledge.

In this view, technology as popularly understood—inventions, innovations, scientific
discoveries—does not “fall from heaven”: it stems from decisions made by families,
firms, and governments to invest in schooling, job training, and research and
development, making human capital the relevant “engine,” or facilitator, of growth.
The fuel that feeds this engine are the rewards or rates of return offered by efficient
markets and government policies to investments in knowledge formation, or human

                                         4
capital. Skill and creative knowledge can accumulate continuously in a given
economy only if the underlying reward system in that economy supports a sufficient
investment in skills and creative knowledge beyond a critical level.

But how does one measure human capital empirically? The empirical literature
associated with this concept identifies it typically as a function of years of schooling
and job experience. These measures must be supplemented, however, by
corresponding measures of educational quality. Also missing are supplementary
education and research efforts at the firm level, which become more important at
advanced stages of development, and informal knowledge transfers. Indeed, the
hypothesis that investment in schooling serves as an engine of long-term growth is
yet to be verified through systematic econometric studies (but see section 6.C for
some empirical insights). Nevertheless, I here venture to apply this hypothesis using
as a case study the comparative long-term real income growth and educational
attainment paths of the U.S. versus the U.K. and other major European countries over
the last century. My dual hypotheses are: first, the economic overtaking of Europe by
the U.S. beginning in the late nineteenth century, and its continuing dominance
through the twentieth century, owe largely to the faster and more widespread
schooling attainments, especially at the upper-secondary and the tertiary levels; and
second, these differential schooling attainments, whether domestically produced or
imported, are ultimately attributable to the higher reward the U.S. economy has
offered to human capital attainments owing to accommodating political and
institutional factors. To flash out these arguments I begin by surveying some
historical evidence on the evolution of different schooling attainments in the U.S.
relative to Europe over the twentieth century.

2. Evidence on Educational Attainments: Does the Thesis Have a Leg to Stand
On?

The following is a summary of illustrative data on comparative educational
attainments and educational spending by selected categories involving the U.S. and
other European or OECD countries, as reported in authoritative publications. Since
year-to-year reports do not always involve the same categories, occasionally
alternative years of data have been selected.

2.1. Data on Schooling Attainments in the U.S. versus OECD Countries over the
Last Century

Table 1: Average years of formal educational experience of the population aged 15–
64 in 1913 and 1989 (Maddison’s data). Highlights of table 1 (see appendix A)
include Maddison’s finding (1991) that in 1913 average schooling years in the U.S.
(6.93) was behind Germany (6.94) and the U.K. (7.28). Japan had the lowest
attainment (5.10). Even at that point, however, the U.S. already had the highest
average higher education attainments in years in 1913 (0.2), followed by Netherlands
(0.11), and France (0.10). In 1989, in contrast, Maddison’s data indicate that the U.S.
became the leader in schooling attainments at all levels. Average schooling years in
the U.S. shot up to 13.39, ahead of Japan (11.66), France (11.61), and the U.K.

                                         5
    (11.28). Germany slipped to last place at 9.58. The average number of higher-
    education years attained in the U.S. was 1.67, ahead of France (1.32), with other
    countries substantially lower. Note that Japan, which was at the last place in average
    schooling attainments in 1913, rose to second place in 1989.3 Unfortunately, no
    comparable data were available for the same population groups and countries in more
    recent years, but the following tables allow for such international comparisons using
    alternative educational attainment measures.

    2.2. Recent Evidence from OECD’s Education at a Glance, 1998 and 2003

       2.2.1. Schooling Attainments

    Table 2: Percentage of the population that has attained at least tertiary education
    Type-A by age group 1998 and 2003. Table 2 (see appendix A) shows that in 1998,
    the U.S.’s percentage of the population 25–64 years of age educated in tertiary type-A
    programs, defined as regular four-year colleges or universities and advanced research
    programs, reaches 26.6%, followed by Norway’s 23.7%. In this year, the U.S. figure
    is decisively above Europe’s five major economies: U.K., Germany, France, Italy,
    and Spain (E-5), while the average for all OECD countries is scarcely above half of
    the U.S. A striking pattern of the educational gap is that it is higher among older age
    cohorts. In the age group 55–64, for example, the corresponding U.S. percentage is
    22%, relative to just 9% for the OECD average. By 2003 Norway catches up with the
    U.S. in the age group 25–64 at 29%, but the average for all OECD countries is still
    substantially below the U.S. (16%). In the age groups 45–54 and 55–64, however, the
    U.S. maintains a decisive advantage of a 2 to 1 ratio or over in 2003 as well.

    Tertiary type-B programs, in contrast, which are more popular in some OECD
    countries (e.g., Canada, Japan, New Zealand, Sweden) relate to vocational, rather
    than academic institutions. But even in total tertiary educational attainments, the U.S.
    is second only to Canada in the age group 25–64 and is leading in the age group 55–
    64 in 2003. (These data are not included in table 2, but the source for both is the
    same.)

    Table 3: Distribution of the population that has attained at least upper secondary
    education, by age group 1998 and 2003. Highlights of table 3 (see appendix A)
    include that in 1998 and 2003, the U.S. is leading in the age group 25–64 (86%,
    88%), relative to the OECD means (61%, 66%) but much more so in the age group
    55–64 (80%, 85%), where the second highest are Germany and Japan (76%, 78%).
    The gap narrows at younger age groups. In the age group 25–34 in 2003, the U.S. is
    in eighth place behind, Korea, Norway, Japan, the Czech and Slovak Republics,
    Sweden, Finland, and Canada, but above all the E-5, including Germany. These data

3
 Early comparative educational data are difficult to collect. Some economic historians
believe, however, that the U.S. relative advantage in education was showing up even
before 1913, which would even more strongly support the basic thesis of this paper.

                                             6
indicate that a number of OECD countries have caught up with the U.S. in terms of
secondary schooling in more recent years. But the U.S. again shows overwhelming
leadership in terms of the proportion of the population that has attained at least
tertiary education.

Table 4: Expected years of tertiary education for all 17-year-olds (1998). This table
(see appendix A) demonstrates more vividly that while the U.S. is still in a dominant
position in terms of the expected number of years of tertiary type-A education: 2.7
years for both part-time and full-time workers, Finland (2.9) and Norway (2.7) have
already caught up with the U.S., but France at 1.9 and the U.K. at 1.7 have not done
so.

The attainments data tell a dynamic story: the U.S. advantage is highest in the older
age categories. The gap is narrowing at the younger ages as well as over time, which
indicates that Europe is closing the educational gap. But the U.S. still holds a
commanding lead in the category of those who hold at least tertiary type-A education,
especially at older age cohorts.


   2.2.2. Expenditures on Education

Comparative schooling attainments, as illustrated by tables 1-4 are but one dimension
of an effective measure of human capital. As important is the quality of the education
experience. A possible measure of quality typically used by economists is educational
spending, to which I turn next.

Table 5: Expenditure on educational institutions as a percentage of GDP for all
levels of education by source of funds (1990, 1995, and 2002) (see appendix A). At
7.2% of GDP in 2002, the U.S. ranks among the top countries in terms of total
expenditure from both public and private sources for education institutions, being
surpassed only by Iceland (7.4%), with Denmark and Korea (both 7.1%) following
the U.S. But these numbers are not fully revealing because they do not account for the
differences in the magnitude and composition of student populations across countries.
More relevant are data on total spending per student, and these are much higher in the
U.S. relative to other OECD countries (see below).

Table 6: Annual expenditures on educational institutions per student (U.S. dollars
converted using PPP) by levels of education based on full-time equivalents (2002)
(see appendix A). The U.S. expenditure per student on all levels of secondary
education in 2002 was $9098, while the average among OECD countries was $6992,
but at this point the U.S. already ranks behind Switzerland ($11,900), and Norway
($10,154) (Luxembourg at $15,195, is not a comparable country). In the case of
tertiary educational expenditures (both type A and B), however, the U.S. ($20,545) is
second only to Switzerland ($23,714), and only Sweden ($15,715) and Denmark
($15,183) have spending levels above $15,000.



                                        7
Table 7: Expenditure per student (private and public) relative to GDP per capita by
level of education based on full-time equivalents (2002) (see appendix A). The U.S.
ratio here (25) is just about equal to the average in OECD countries in the case of all
secondary expenditures (26), but at 57, it is still substantially above the average in
OECD countries (43) in the case of all tertiary expenditures. To the extent that
education can be considered a consumption good, this ranking indicates only that
higher education in the U.S. is now a necessity rather than a luxury good (with
income elasticity of demand falling short of unity). But these ratios may largely
reflect differences in the weight of other types of spending on, say, private
consumption or public defense, across different countries.


3. How the U.S. Schooling Advantage Emerged: Major Sources and Trends

a. The secondary schooling advantage. Claudia Goldin (see, e.g., 2001) argues that
   what has been mainly responsible for the U.S. advance over Europe is the massive
   “high school movement of 1910–1940.” Her thesis is that, although advances in
   higher education have been important, the mass secondary education system,
   which first emerged in the U.S., set the stage for the subsequent transition to the
   mass higher education movement. In 1910, school enrollment rates for five- to
   nineteen-year-olds were fairly similar among the world’s economic leaders (the
   ratio of enrollments relative to the U.S. set at 1 was: .93 in France, .96 in
   Germany, and .82 in the U.K.). But by 1930, the U.S. was three to four decades
   ahead of Britain and France, and the high school gap remained large until the
   1950s. The median eighteen-year-old person was already a high school graduate
   in the early 1940s. This had a knock-on effect on the massive development of
   higher education institutions after World War II: when President Franklin
   Roosevelt signed the GI Bill in 1944, the average GI could attend college because
   (s)he had already graduated from high school.

b. The Morrill Acts and the Land Grant institutions of higher learning. What is
   being overlooked by the previous explanation, however, is that the U.S. already
   held the lead in tertiary enrollment in 1913, as Maddison’s data show. What may
   have been responsible for this historical development are the Morrill Acts (Land
   Grant Creation) of 1862 and 1890, and related accommodating factors which
   made higher education in the U.S. accessible to larger segments of the population
   relative to Europe. John Morrill was a Congressman from Vermont who managed
   to convince Congress and President Lincoln to launch a system of public higher
   education, to be financed through land grants from the federal government to the
   states. Under the terms of the original Morrill Act, later supplemented by the
   Hatch Act of 1887, the second Morrill Act of 1890, and the Smith-Lever Act of
   1914, public lands, or funds in lieu of public lands, were granted to the states for
   the establishment and support of land-grant colleges and universities, as well as
   research stations that focused on agricultural and mechanical-art studies and
   research. I am not aware of any systematic analysis of the role the Morrill Acts
   had in the evolution of the higher education system in the U.S., but some

                                         8
       important facts allude to their significance. There were sixty-eight land-grant
       public institutions and universities located in the fifty states and Puerto Rico in
       1961. Although at that point in time—following the explosion in tertiary
       institutions after World War II—these institutions, varying greatly in size from
       the University of California to Delaware State College, accounted for just less
       than 5% of all four-year institutions of higher learning, they still accounted for
       48% of total organized research expenditures, 40% of the doctorates conferred,
       33% of the current-fund income for educational and general purposes, and 28% of
       the value of plant assets in the U.S.4

    c. The GI Bill of 1944. The public education system, bolstered by the Land Grant
       movement, received a huge impetus by the Servicemen’s Readjustment Act,
       popularly known as the GI Bill, signed by President Roosevelt in June 1944. The
       act mandated the federal government to subsidize tuition, fees, books, and
       educational materials for veterans meeting educational admission requirements,
       and to contribute to the living expenses they would incur while attending college
       or other approved institutions of their free choosing. The GI Bill created a
       massive higher education movement. Within the following seven years,
       approximately eight million veterans received educational benefits. Of that
       number, approximately 2.3 million attended colleges and universities. The high
       school movement of 1910–1940 played a critical role in facilitating this
       development since almost half of the soldiers returning home from World War II
       had a high school diploma and were thus eligible to enroll in colleges and
       universities. The U.S. lead in higher education was enhanced not just by the GI
       Bill, but also by federal Pell grants and the legislation of tuition assistance
       supports in many states. Again, Europe was lagging behind the U.S. in this regard
       over much of the second half of the twentieth century. The British Education Act
       of 1955, for example, just guaranteed all youth a publicly funded elementary and
       secondary schooling.

    d. Immigration and the brain drain. Another key factor which accounts for a good
       part of the U.S. schooling advantage is immigration of human capital into the U.S.
       In an open economy human capital is not necessarily just homegrown—it can be
       imported through immigration of skilled and highly educated labor. It is beyond
       the scope of this essay to assess systematically the brain drain into the U.S., but
       there is general agreement for the proposition that the U.S. became a magnet for
4
  See Statistics of Land-Grant Colleges and Universities [LGCU], Year ended June 1961,
U.S. Department of Health Education and Welfare, Office of Education. In June 2005,
the LGCU national association had 214 members. This includes seventy-six land-grant
universities (36% of the membership), of which eighteen are the historically black public
institutions created by the Second Morrill Act of 1890, and twenty-seven public higher
education systems (12% of the membership). In addition, tribal colleges became land-
grant institutions in 1994 and 33 are represented in the National Association of State
Universities and Land-Grant Colleges) through the membership of the American Indian
Higher Education Consortium.

                                            9
         skilled labor and scientists, first from Europe and later from Asia as well,
         following the economic advances of the U.S. in the twentieth century, especially
         after World War II. Dramatic support for this conjecture is provided in a 2005
         study by the Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy, showing that
         the share of all the science and engineering doctorates awarded to international
         students rose from 23% in 1966 to 39% in 2000, the share of temporary residence
         among science and engineering post-doctoral scholars increased from 37% in
         1982 to 59% in 2002, and more than one-third of U.S. Nobel Laureates to date are
         foreign born.

   A number of caveats need to be recognized, however, for a more complete
   assessment of the U.S. schooling advantage:

   i.    The U.S. advantage at the tertiary level applies unequivocally to type-A
         institutions (regular four-year colleges/universities), but not as much to tertiary
         type-B, which are more vocational in nature. The latter has remained more
         popular in Europe. Also, the numbers do not include post formal training and
         apprenticeships, which are more prevalent in Europe.

   ii.   However, schooling attainments, measured as the number of years of schooling
         or the percentage of the population with tertiary education, have institutional
         upper limits, for instance, a PhD degree, thus becoming a less effective measure
         of knowledge formation in highly developed economies. It is thus critical to take
         into account another dimension of educational attainments, which is more open-
         ended—schooling quality as captured by level of spending per student. In this
         regard, the educational gap between the US and the major European countries
         remains significant, as illustrated by Tables 5-7. Furthermore, investments in
         knowledge at the firm level via general on-the-job training and specific research
         and development programs are becoming a more important means of knowledge
         formation in the more developed economies. The U.S. may still hold a sizeable
         advantage over Europe in this supplementary human capital measure as well.

   iii. Both schooling lengths and expenditure levels are in essence “inputs” into
        effective human capital formation. The picture is far more mixed concerning
        “output” or quality measures, such as math test scores. Evidence indicates that
        the distribution of U.S. combined mathematics literacy scores of fifteen-year-old
        students is, in fact, below that of the average of OECD countries and in the mid-
        range of the E-5 countries (see appendix A, table 8). In contrast, at the tertiary
        level, U.S. academic institutions are generally ranked higher than Europe’s and
        attract more international students and faculty.


4. Whence the Divergence? Contributing Factors

   (a) Educational templates. Goldin (2001) and Goldin and Katz (1999) emphasize
       the implicit choice between general training (formal schooling) and specific

                                              10
        training (apprenticeship, on-the-job training options). General training is more
        expensive, but it produces more transferable and flexible skills across
        geographical areas, occupations and industries. The focus on general training in
        the U.S. is attributable to the U.S. developing into a larger open-trade area
        relative to European countries. Its labor force in the early twentieth century was
        more mobile and responsive to technological changes in manufacturing,
        telecommunications, large-scale farming, and retailing.

    (b) Economic development. The growth of the industrial and transportation sectors
        of the economy and the expanding size of the U.S. domestic market raised the
        rate of return to education, secondary and higher education specifically. The
        intellectual high school movements which started in New England spread
        quickly to the rich agricultural areas in central and western states, where rates of
        return to schooling were as high for blue-collar workers and farmers as for
        white-collar workers. The high school movement gained momentum also
        because of the decentralized educational system in the U.S. owing to the fiscal
        independence of local school boards.

    (c) Feedback wealth effects. By the early twentieth century, the U.S. already had the
        highest income per capita, enabling families to more easily finance the higher
        education of offspring.

    (d) Educational policies. The U.S. educational system has been more democratic,
        secular, and gender neutral. In contrast, the educational systems in Germany,
        France, and other European countries were more rigid and elitist over much of
        the twentieth century. Differences in institutional restrictions are manifested
        especially in the context of tertiary education. In the U.S., publicly subsidized
        higher education started with the Morrill Acts, becoming massive in 1944, while
        in Europe this process began later—in some countries not until the 1960s and
        70s. In France, for example, the number of college students started increasing
        considerably only during the 1980s because of the knock-on effect of expanding
        secondary education: a political decision was made to increase to 80% the
        percentage of age cohorts that would reach the level of the baccalauriat, and
        admissions to the first year of university studies was guaranteed to anyone with a
        high school diploma, regardless of type. Although European tertiary institutions
        have become virtually tuition-free in recent decades, access to these colleges and
        universities remained much more restricted until recently. The U.S., in contrast,
        has practiced virtually universal admission to higher education, albeit with
        differences between community colleges and public and private colleges and
        universities. As noted in section 2, however, that the gap in higher education
        enrollments between the U.S. and Europe is fast closing.5



5
 For a survey of European school systems, see section B (Structures and Schools) of
Eurodice 2000.

                                             11
(e)    The political-economic systems. Last, but not least, the U.S. has had a more
      democratic political system; e.g., suffrage was extended to all (white) U.S. males
      early in the nineteenth century, but much later in almost all European countries.
      It has also had a freer and more decentralized economy, where individuals,
      families, and firms can make resource allocation decisions in largely free
      markets, bolstered by the rule of law and protection of property rights, including
      intellectual property. The U.S. has also had less regulated labor markets, and
      greater openness to external trade and immigration relative to Europe. These
      factors helped produce a relatively high rate of return to human capital
      investments for the domestic population, and a larger premium on completed
      education for skilled immigrants.

The preceding analysis traces the gap in educational attainments favoring the U.S. in
the twentieth century to the interplay of two main forces: first, the feedback effects
on private demand for education generated by the new industrial economy, economic
growth, and personal wealth; second, the impact of the more open economy and
society in the U.S. on the returns to human capital formation, whether domestically
produced or imported, and thereby on economic growth.

By items (a)–(c) above, economic affluence leads to greater demand for education as
consumption, or to greater ability to finance private educational investments by
overcoming inherent imperfections in the capital market. Items (d)–(e) above trace
the growth in educational attainments to institutional, political, and economic policies
that lower the costs, or raise the potential returns to investment in especially higher
education, thus enabling individuals and firms to capture more fully any external
effects generated by education. These factors also encourage immigration of workers
with superior education or entrepreneurial ability. Put differently, the democratic
capitalism exercised in the U.S. has0 contributed to a higher rate of return to
individual investment in human capital generally, and tertiary education in particular.

While the two groups of factors represent apparently opposite directions of causality
regarding the association between human capital formation and economic growth,
they are, in fact, complementary. Greater investment in human capital as a proportion
of total production capacity raises productivity growth, while the demand for human
capital investments is partly a by-product of economic growth, and this needs to be
accounted for in regression analyses aiming to explain productivity growth as a
function of educational spending. But this would be a partial-equilibrium view of
economic development. The endogenous growth, general equilibrium model
discussed below sees both human capital formation and productivity growth as
endogenous outcomes of underlying legal and political factors. Moreover, prudent
political and economic policies are also affected by the schooling level of the
electorate. In this view, the critical causal factors can be traced especially to those
summarized in item (e).

5. Linking Human Capital Formation with Economic Growth



                                         12
5.1. The Endogenous Growth Hypothesis: Human Capital as the Engine of
Growth

The literature on endogenous growth attempts to go beyond the neoclassical model of
economic growth in two important ways: (a) explaining persistent growth as a result of
factors endogenous to the economy, rather than exogenous, unpredictable technological
inventions; (b) identifying “technology” as human capital, or knowledge. By this view,
knowledge breeds greater knowledge. Some new knowledge translates into higher
productivity of existing resources (embodied human capital), and some is manifested
through innovations, patents, manuscripts, and specialized capital goods that account for
what is commonly perceived of as technological innovations (“disembodied human
capital”). Human capital is ultimately the source of both types of “technology,” and can
therefore be considered the engine of growth (see Lucas 1988, Becker et al. 1990, and
Ehrlich and Lui 1991).

The reason persistent growth is enabled by human capital formation is that knowledge is
the only instrument of production that is not subject to diminishing returns, as John
Maurice Clark (1923) argued. The idea can be formalized in a simple way by specifying
a law of human capital accumulation as follows:

(2) Ht+1 = A (He + Ht) ht

Here Ht and Ht+1 represent the human capital stocks of a representative agent in
generations t and t+1, A represents the technology of learning and human capital
transfer, (He + Ht) denotes production capacity (He representing fixed personal or family
endowments and Ht acquired knowledge at t), which is transformed to per-capita real
income, or output y = (He + Ht), at an implicit constant competitive rental rate
(normalized at 1); and ht represents the fraction of production capacity spent by
members of generation t on the human capital formation of members of generation t+1.
While the level of human capital attained by the next generation, Ht+1, could in principle
be subject to diminishing returns in the rate of investment by the current generation,
captured by ht, it is specified as a linear function of the human capital attained by the
current generation, Ht. The implicit argument is that attained knowledge and skill by any
given generation enhances both the creation of new knowledge and the productivity of
intergenerational knowledge transfer to the overlapping future generation, thus escaping
diminishing returns.

Human capital can thus grow perpetually from one generation to the other essentially
because the level of productive knowledge attained by a current generation serves as an
input into the generation of knowledge in the succeeding generation. But whether the
latter exceeds the former (or Ht+1 > Ht) and to what extent, critically depends on whether
investment in human capital exceeds a threshold level: by equation (2) if investment, ht,
is not sufficiently high, the knowledge attained by generation t + 1 will be stuck at the
level of generation t, Ht, producing a stagnant equilibrium level of output. In a
decentralized market economy and a democratic political system, investment in human



                                          13
capital is affected directly by individuals and families, as well as indirectly by the level
of public spending they demand from their local and federal government.

Of course, the production of human capital is a necessary but not a sufficient condition
for expansion in productive capacity. Implicit in this analysis is the assumption that
accumulated human capital contributes to expansion in desired output (Y) through the
aggregate production function introduced in section 1 and the accommodating role of
efficient markets, which assure the allocation of skill and creative knowledge to their
most productive uses. The endogenous growth paradigm indicates that in a steady state
of continuous growth, physical capital accumulation, including natural resources and
productive land, would adjust to the pace of human capital accumulation, making the
latter the economy’s engine of growth. At a given population level, continuous human
capital formation will lead to continuous expansion in real output per capita (y). Human
capital (H) thus replaces the concept of “technology” (T) in equation (1).

The model outlined in the preceding discussion is a closed economy model. In an
open economy, expansion of output is also conditional on the ability of the economy
to retain the human capital it produces. The U.S. was not the first to take off: the
industrial revolution began in Europe. But the emergence of the U.S. as an economic
superpower can be attributed to the ability of the U.S. market to provide a high
reward for human capital investments, and thus to both retain domestically produced
human capital and attract human capital produced abroad.

5.2. The Special Role of Higher Education in Economic Growth

The previous analysis also rests on the simplifying assumption that workers are
homogenous. In reality, people are heterogeneous in terms of both innate ability and
family endowments they possess. A more complete view of endogenous growth and
development, based on human capital as engine of growth, must recognize
differences among individuals and families in terms of their capacity to both acquire
and implement knowledge. This is the framework used in my current joint work on
income growth and income inequality (Ehrlich and Kim 2007) which is used to
explain the dynamic pattern of both income growth and income distribution over
different stages of economic development.

The story is simple: human capital, as measured by average schooling attainments,
has a direct effect on the skill and productivity of the existing labor force, but also an
indirect effect on the emergence of new ideas, that is, technological innovations and
productivity growth. Those who are in a position to acquire more human capital,
especially higher education, because of personal ability or family endowments
allowing them to more economically finance higher education, are likely to be the
“first movers” when it comes to create new knowledge, or implement advances in
knowledge triggered by technological shocks. Both schools and the labor market also
allow for the socialization of knowledge, whereby the achievements of workers with
superior knowledge can spill over to, and be shared by, other workers. These
“spillover effects” tie population groups of different human capital attainments

                                           14
together over the development process as well as in a regime of persistent growth,
and ultimately produce stable income distributions. The existence of spillover effects
and imperfections in the capital market also justify government’s subsidization of
education, and especially higher education, in order to maximize social income and
welfare.

5.3. The Role of Underlying Factors

The endogenous growth models described above are general equilibrium models. In
such models, both human capital accumulation and income growth are “endogenous”
choice variables: they attain self-sustaining growth as a consequence of individual
choices about optimal investments individuals make in themselves and their
offspring, motivated by a desire to maximize the return they obtain on these
investments. Individual welfare maximization in a decentralized market system thus
leads to continuous, self-sustaining growth for the average person in the economy—a
dynamic restatement of Adam Smith’s basic proposition.

But this also means that human capital accumulation and income growth are two
sides of the same coin: while the production functions (1) and (2) represent a causal
relation flowing from per-capita human capital formation (H) to per-capita income
(y), this is a secondary causality. The primary one relates to the causal effects of
underlying “parameters” that influence both variables; most importantly, factors
enhancing the incentives individuals and families have to invest in their own, and
their offspring’s, knowledge, as well as the ability of the domestic economy to
effectively utilize the human capital it generates or imports in domestic production.

Basic parameters affecting both output and knowledge accumulation are knowledge
production and transfer technologies—A and B (T) in equations 2 and 1—and
population longevity (see Ehrlich and Lui 1991), which enable those investing in
learning and training to recoup the benefits of their investments over a longer lifetime
horizon. Equally important, however, are “institutional” factors, such as the “rule of
law”, a legal system which protects intellectual and property rights, and a free-
enterprise system where wages and rates of return on investment are determined by
competitive market forces rather than bureaucratic intervention. They also include
accommodating public educational policies that help overcome capital market
constraints in education financing and internalize spillover effects generated by basic
science. These accommodating factors, including government regulations and tax
policies, can greatly affect output growth by the way they enhance or discourage the
incentives to invest in human capital. For example, under a heavily regulated system,
let alone a command economy, the bureaucracy rather than free markets determines
the allocation and remuneration of resources, including education. The Soviet Union
invested heavily in basic sciences used largely to promote military might, not
necessarily economic might. Its command economy system also fostered investment
in “political capital” promising bureaucratic power to apparatchiks, rather than in
market-driven productive human capital (see Ehrlich and Lui 1999.) A free market



                                         15
system is better geared to reward human capital of the productive type through the
market mechanism, and is thus more likely to produce self-generating growth.

Free trade and an open economy create greater opportunities for human capital
accumulation, but also greater challenges. Greater opportunities, because investment
in “disembodied knowledge” such as new production processes or new products is
subject to scale economies, which make their returns higher in a larger market open to
free trade. Greater challenges, because opportunities to migrate from one region or
country to another mean that investment in human capital made in one place may
actually wind up benefiting another. Public investment in human capital in Peru or in
Ireland before 1986, for example, did not bring about an economic takeoff and self-
sustaining growth partly because graduates of institutions of higher learning sought
employment in the U.S. market rather than in their own countries. But this does not
refute the thesis that investment in human capital is the key to economic growth. It
simply reflects the fact that investment that is not backed up by a market system that
assures an adequate reward to knowledge cannot be expected to yield its full
economic benefits.

A final underlying factor is the role of externalities inherent in both the production
and transfer of human capital. Private human capital, unlike physical capital, cannot
serve as collateral in financial markets, which limits borrowing opportunities. This
justifies a public role in the financing of education at all levels, but especially higher
education, where investment is substantial, which enhances accessibility to such
educational opportunities according to talent rather than social class and borrowing
constraints. Moreover, since higher education can generate spillover effects on the
productivity of less educated workers that are not fully internalized through a private
reward system, subsidizing it becomes an especially important role of government.
That the U.S. was a leader in opening up massive high school and higher-education
systems has been a significant factor explaining its emergence as an economic
superpower.


6. Evidence Linking Education and Productivity Growth

6.1. Evidence from Growth Accounting

Estimates of the role of schooling in explaining per-worker income variations or
growth rely on a “growth accounting methodology,” following the works of Denison
(1974) and Solow (1957). The technique ascribes changes in the aggregate economy
(GDP per capita) to variations in aggregate measures of capital utilization and labor
employment, with the labor employment index weighted by measures of the
education attainments of workers. Claudia Goldin and others estimate that over the
twentieth century (actually since 1915) the expansion in the educational index has
accounted for close to a quarter of the 1.62 percent per year increase in U.S. labor
productivity. Hall and Jones (1999) estimate that in 1988, educational attainments



                                          16
    account for over 20 percent of the international variation in labor productivity across
    different countries.

    Studies using the growth accounting methodology invariably find a substantial
    unexplained residual variation in productivity, known as the “Solow residual.” It is
    generally attributed to “technological growth.” However, much of this residual
    variation may be ascribed to the indirect role of education in inducing technological
    advancements, as technology is a derivative of special knowledge, or specific human
    capital. Indeed, this is the crux of the "endogenous growth" literature that identifies
    human capital as the engine of growth.

    6.2. Evidence from Rates of Return to Education

    That education is the critical factor explaining differences in earnings across
    individuals at a point in time has been well established by human capital theory and
    related empirical work. The human-capital-earnings-generating function formulated
    by Jacob Mincer links the logarithm of individual earnings to the number of years of
    schooling and a quadratic specification of the number of years of job-market
    experience. This specification allows the measurement of the “rate of return to human
    capital” as the regression coefficient associated with the number of years of
    schooling. Table 9 (see appendix A), based on a study by Heckman, Lochner, and
    Todd (2003), indicates that the real rate of return to schooling thus measured has been
    stable at upward of 10% in six decennial years, but has approached 13% in 1990.
    More important, by estimating separate regressions for white and black males, this
    study shows that over the period 1940–1990, rates of return to blacks, initially lower
    than those of whites, have more than caught up with the latter in 1990, indicating that
    the U.S. labor markets have become more competitive over time, and better able to
    reward human capital regardless of race.

    The Mincerian linear regression model does not allow for separate estimation of rates
    of returns by alternative levels of schooling. By relaxing various linearity restrictions
    implicit in the Mincer model, however, Heckman, Lochner, and Todd (2003) have
    also estimated rates of return for primary, secondary, and tertiary levels of schooling
    as well. Their results indicate that the rates of return are considerably higher for those
    actually completing high school and college education relative to other levels of
    schooling.6 Other studies indicate that that the rate of return to especially college
    education shoots upward at times of rapid technological innovation, essentially
    because people with higher skills adapt more quickly to changes in technology.

6
  International comparisons using Mincer’s model or related techniques are hampered by
the absence of comparable data. Existing evidence suggests, however, that estimated rates
of return in the U.S. tend to be high relative to those in other highly developed countries
(See, e.g., Psacharopulous and Patrinos 2002). Less developed countries may show
unusually high rates of return to schooling during a takeoff period from stagnation to
continuous, self-sustaining growth regimes.

                                              17
These studies focus on returns to education captured in market earnings. New work in
economics indicates that this may greatly understate the full individual returns to
education, which are derived from various nonmarket activities as well, such as
improved health, longevity, and implicit individual assessments of their own life-
saving values. Ehrlich and Yin (2005), for example, estimate that both age-specific
life expectancies and implicit private values of life-saving are substantially higher for
those with tertiary, relative to high-school education.

6.3. Linking Investment in Schooling and Per-Capita Income Growth

Empirical studies linking educational attainments and economic growth have not
produced uniform conclusions, partly because of disagreements about the quality of
available schooling data. Barro and Lee’s (1993) study, for example, indicates some
positive but weak correlation between the overall schooling data they assembled and
growth rates. Following Ehrlich and Kim 2007, we here attempt to offer a different
perspective on the link between education and growth by stressing the
correspondence between investments in education, rather than the level of educational
attainments, and long-term growth rates of per-capita income. By our theoretical
analysis, the steady state rates of investment in human capital, which are endogenous
outcomes of underlying demographic, institutional and public policy variables, are the
critical determinant of corresponding long-term growth rates of both per-worker
human capital stocks and per-capita real output in a growth-equilibrium regime.
While reported data on educational outlays are incomplete, investment levels can be
imputed from time-series evidence on relatively long-term rates of growth of
schooling attainments in different countries. We thus expect a systematic link
between equilibrium values of average growth rates of schooling attainments per
worker (H) and per-capita GDP (GDPPC) over relatively lengthy periods of time in
countries experiencing persistent growth. To test this hypothesis, we first estimate
expected growth rates of per-capita GDP, [1 + g(GDPPC)*], and schooling
attainments, [1 + g(H)*], which are predicted from underlying country-specific
factors through a regression model described below, and then compute their
association using the following log-linear regression specification:

(3) Log[1 + g(GDPPC)]* = α + βlog[1+ g(H)]*

Specifically, we use Barro and Lee (2003) data on average schooling years attained
by the population aged 15–65, and Summers and Heston estimates of real GDPPC as
proxies for our endogenous variables, along with data on explanatory variables listed
below, to construct a panel of fifty-seven developing and developed countries over an
intermediate-length period of thirty-one years (1960–1991). We first run fixed-effects
regressions relating each of our two endogenous variables to a set of underlying
country-specific factors. These include demographic variables (population longevity
measures), public policy variables (the share of government spending in GDP and a
measure of the social security tax rate), as well as chronological time and the
interaction terms of these explanatory variables with time. (For an explanation of the

                                         18
    role of these explanatory variables see Ehrlich and Kim 2007) The fixed-effects
    specification also accounts for the role of idiosyncratic institutional factors that are
    unchanging over the sample period. This method allows us to generate multiple
    predicted values of g(GDPPC)* and g(H)*, in each country over our sample period.
    We can then estimate equation (3) using an OLS regression model. Variant 1 of the
    model imposes a common intercept term (α) representing the same technology linking
    human capital formation to output growth in all countries, whereas variant 2 allows
    for variation in the latter, using a fixed-effects regression specification.7

    The idea behind this experiment follows the basic thesis underlying our endogenous
    growth model. If human capital is the engine of growth, the equilibrium rates of
    growth of the two endogenous variables of the model—human capital attainments
    g(H) and real income g(GDPPC)—should be outcomes of the economy’s institutional
    and demographic factors, including the degree of government intervention in private
    economic activity. If these two variables are predicted separately from these
    underlying country-specific “parameters,” they should be closely related within
    countries. The results are presented in figure 3 (appendix B) and table 10 (appendix
    A). Figure 3 shows the noisy scatter of estimated expected growth rates of per-capita
    GDP and average schooling attainments within countries. The line going through this
    scatter represents the estimated regression line of variant 1 of equation (3). Table 10
    shows also the estimated results of variant (2) of equation (3), which cannot be
    depicted graphically. The results in table 10 indicate the existence of a statistically
    significant correlation between the predicted growth rates of per-capita schooling
    attainments and real income within countries in our panel. These results are
    experimental and preliminary. More complete measures of human capital formation
    and productivity growth over longer periods, and more elaborate sensitivity analyses,
    would be required to confirm the findings.

7
   The analysis involves the following steps. In step 1 we run fixed-effects regressions of
log(GDPPC) or log(H) as a dependent variable on a set of regressors as follows: t,
t*log(Pi1), t*log(Pi2), t*log(G), t*log(PEN), log(Pi1), log(Pi2), log(G), log(PEN), where
t is chronological time in years, PEN is a measure of the social security tax rate, Pi1 and
Pi2 are probabilities of survival of children to adulthood and of adults to old age,
respectively, and G is the share of government spending in GDP. (For detail see Ehrlich
and Kim 2007.) In step 2 we compute multiple predicted country-specific growth rates of
GDP and H over the entire sample period, g(GDPPC)* and g(H)*, based on the estimated
regression coefficients involving t and the interaction terms of the basic explanatory
variables with t from step 1. This produces a large scatter of observations on
1+g(GDPPC)* and 1+g(H)* allowing a meaningful estimation of equation (3). In step 3
we then estimate variants 1 and 2 of equation (3) via OLS and fixed-effects regressions.
Since the countries in our panel are in varying development stages, in additional
regressions which we skip here for simplicity, we also allow the intercept terms in
variants 1 and 2 to drift downward over time, which our model predicts to occur over the
development process. These regressions produce very similar results to those reported in
table 10, and have even higher explanatory power.

                                            19
                   Epilogue: Looking Back and Looking Ahead

Although the evidence assembled in this paper concerning the long-term growth
dynamics of per-capita GDP and schooling attainments is largely “circumstantial,” it
appear to be remarkably consistent with the view that human capital formation, even
though imperfectly measured by schooling, has been the “secret weapon” through
which the U.S. has been able to achieve its robust long-term rate of persistent, self-
sustaining growth in productivity and per-capital income. Moreover, it supports the
hypothesis that the documented educational gap between the U.S. and Europe in
terms of average high school, and especially higher education attainments, is a major
factor explaining why the U.S. has overtaken Europe as an economic superpower in
the twentieth century. Can the U.S. maintain its lead in the twenty-first century?

Table 11 (see appendix A) summarizes the evidence on schooling attainments shown
in tables 2 and 3 for the 5 major European countries (E-5: Germany, U.K., France,
Italy, Spain) expressed as percentages of the U.S.’s attainments over the period
1998–2003, which may serve as a rough indicator of the trends over the last few
decades as well. Even over this short period we see evidence of closing educational
gaps, primarily for upper high-school attainments, where the simple average level of
schooling attainment for the age group 25–64 in the E-5 rose from 64.9% to 68.2% of
that of the U.S. The gaps are closing even faster at the tertiary type-A level, where the
corresponding simple average level of schooling attainments rose from 46.7% to
51.7%. Of all E-5 countries, the U.K. has converged most closely to the U.S.’s
schooling attainments at the tertiary level, rising from 55.6% in 1998 to 65.5% in
2003.

However, as argued earlier, schooling attainments are subject to institutional upper
limits (say, Ph.D. education), thus becoming a less effective indicator of human
capital formation at more advanced development levels, where spending on
educational quality and knowledge generated within firms may be more important
supplementary measures of effective human capital. The US may still maintain a
significant lead over much of Europe in these measures. Indeed, corresponding trends
in long-term GDP and per-capita GDP (GDPPC) growth rates present a more mixed
picture. Figure 4 shows how percentage differences in long-term real GDPPC growth
rates between the U.S., U.K., and the E-5 (based on the Maddison 2003 data) have
evolved over the last 150 years, as we gradually shift the starting reference period
from 1850–2003 (the longest time period) to 1991–2003 (the shortest and recent time
period). The long-term percentage differences indicate a consistent U.S. advantage,
although they also exhibit quite a bit of noise and sensitivity to influential
intermediate-term sub-periods. For example, over the Great Depression, the U.S.
absolute GDPPC gap over the E-5 was declining significantly along with the U.S.’s
long-term growth rate advantage before rising again during recovery. Over World
War II and its aftermath, in contrast, the U.S. absolute gap over the E-5 was first
rising because of the collapse of the E-5 economies, but was then falling because of
the exceptionally high GDPPC growth rates in the E-5 over the following 2–3

                                         20
    decades of European recovery. More recently, however, the U.S. GDPPC growth rate
    advantage over the E-5 has trended back toward its 1850–2003 level.

    One exception seems to be the U.K., where the U.S.’s long-term GDPPC growth-rate
    gap has been falling more steadily since the early 1930s, and again from the early
    1960s when the U.K. has also made significant progress in relative educational
    attainments. In Germany, in contrast, the U.S.’s GDPPC growth-rate advantage has
    intensified since 1967, while its educational advantage over Germany has been
    increasing in more recent years. Thus even this, more recent evidence points to a
    positive correlation between relative growth rates of tertiary schooling attainments
    and per-capita GDP, at least in these two countries.8

    Clearly, there are other forces in play which explain the evolution of comparative
    growth rates of the U.S. and the E-5 over the twentieth century, such as changes in
    labor market, welfare, free-trade, and immigration policies, but the U.S. advantage in
    human capital formation, as judged by schooling attainments especially at the tertiary
    level, seems to provide a powerful explanation for its long-term growth rate
    advantage over Europe.

    Is the U.S. losing this advantage? The closing schooling gaps might indicate that
    Europe could catch up with, and even surpass this indicator of U.S.’s human capital
    formation and ensuing per-capita income growth. However, as figure 5 shows, the
    absolute historic gap between the U.S. and the E-5 in per-capita GDP levels is still far
    from closing, and it will continue to grow in absolute terms even if the respective
    growth rates converge. More important, future developments depend on the
    comparative trends in the underlying causal factors which produced the U.S. long-
    term advantage in the first place.

    Looking back, it is ultimately the relative efficiency of the free-market and open-
    economy system in the U.S. and the relatively higher reward it provided to skill and
    creative knowledge, which induced a higher rate of growth and efficient utilization of
    various components of human capital, whether domestically produced or imported.
    The democratic political system in the U.S. has also augmented the process of human
    capital formation through prudent government subsidization of education generally,
    and higher education in particular, much ahead of similar efforts by Europe. These
    accommodating factors have been a major determinant of the ability of the U.S. to
    attract, and put to effective use, human capital from other countries as well.

    Looking ahead, therefore, one may conclude that continued support of an efficient
    economic environment that assures a competitive reward to investment in human

8
 Spain constitutes another example: while the U.S.’s long-term growth rate of GDPPC
1850–2003 slightly exceeds that of Spain, from 1877 Spain is reported to have had a
higher growth rate, which expanded during World War II. Spain’s advantage is still
holding in recent years as well, but it also shows the highest percentage increase in
higher-education attainments among the E-5, according to table 12.
                                            21
capital and encourages its persistent formation and utilization could sustain the U.S.
lead for years to come. The U.S. still enjoys a significant advantage in terms of the
quality of its higher education system and innovative activities relative to Europe and
other countries. At the same time, there are strong indications of the failure of the
public elementary system in the U.S. to produce competitive educational outcomes
relative to other countries. Recognition of current shortcomings in the public
education system in the U.S., along with the challenge to compete with educational
systems in other countries, may improve human capital formation in the U.S. at all
levels. Whether or not the U.S. lead is maintained is ultimately a secondary issue.
World welfare would be best served if all countries adopt competitive economic and
educational policies yielding continuous human capital formation, per-capita income
growth, and equitable income distributions.




                                        22
   References

Barro, Robert J., and Lee Jong-Wha. 1993. “International Comparisons of Educational
       Attainments.” Journal of Monetary Economics 32:363–94.

Becker, Gary S., Kevin M. Murphy, and Robert Tamura. 1990. “Human Capital, Fertility,
   and Economic Growth.” Journal of Political Economy 98, no. 5, pt. 2: S12–S37.

Clark, John M. 1923. “Overhead costs in the Modern Industry.” Journal of Political
       Economy 31 (October): 606–36.

Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy (COSEPUP). 2005. Policy
   Implications of International Graduate Students and Postdoctoral Scholars in the
   United States, Board on Higher Education and Workforce, National Research
   Council.

Denison, Edward F. 1974. Accounting for United States Economic growth 1929–1969.
   Washington DC: Brookings Institution.

Ehrlich, Isaac, ed. 1990. “The Problem of Economic Development. A Conference of the
    Institute for the Study of Free Enterprise Systems.” Journal of Political Economy 98,
    no. 5, pt. 2: S1–S11.

Ehrlich, Isaac, and Francis Lui. 1991. “Intergenerational Trade, Longevity, and Economic
    Growth.” Journal of Political Economy 99, no. 5 (October): 1029–59.

———. 1999. “Bureaucratic Corruption and Endogenous Economic Growth.” Journal of
  Political Economy 107, no. 6, pt. 2: S270–S293.

Ehrlich, Isaac, and Jinyoung Kim. 2007. “The Evolution of Income and Fertility
       Inequalities Over the Course of Economic Development: A Human Capital
       Perspective.” Journal of Human Capital 1 (December): 137–74.

Ehrlich, Isaac, and Kevin Murphy. 2007. “Why Does Human Capital Need a Journal?”
       Journal of Human Capital 1 (December): 1–7.

Ehrlich, Isaac, and Yong Yin. 2005. “Explaining Diversities in Age-Specific Life
       Expectancies and values of Life Saving: A Numerical Analysis. Journal of Risk
       and Uncertainty 31, no. 2: 129–62.

Eurodice. 2000. “Key Data on Education in Europe—1999/2000 Edition.” Brussels:
      Eurostat.

Goldin, Claudia. 2001. “The Human Capital Century and American Leadership: Virtues
    of the Past.” Journal of Economic History 61, no. 2: 263–92.



                                           23
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 1999. “The Higher Education: The Formative
    Years in the United States, 1890 to 1940.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 13, no.
    1: 37–62.

Hall, Robert, and Charles Jones. 1999. “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much
    More Output Per Worker Than Others.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114
    (February): 83–116.

Heckman, James J., Lance J. Lochner, and Petra E. Todd. 2003. “Fifty Years of Mincer
     Earnings Regressions.” NBER Working Papers 9732.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1988. “On the Mechanics of Economic Development,” Journal of
   Monetary Economics 22, no. 1: 3–42.

Maddison, Angus. 1991. Dynamic Forces in Capitalist Development: A Long-Run
   Comparative View. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Maddison, Angus. 2003. Development Centre Studies: The World Economy; Historical
   Statistics. OECD, Paris.

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2001–2007.
   “Education at a Glance.”
   http://www.oecd.org/statisticsdata/0,3381,en_2649_37455_1_119656_1_1_37455,00
   .html.

Psacharopoulos, G., and H.A. Patrinos. 2002. Returns to Investment in Education: A
    Further Update. Washington D.C. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper.

Solow, Robert M. 1957. “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 39, no. 3 (August): 312–20.




                                          24
                                   Appendix A: Tables

            Table A Comparison of real GDP per capita for the top 25 countries
                  (U.S. dollars converted using purchasing power parity)

Country        Per Capita GDP Estimate Year    Country        Per Capita GDP Estimate Year
Luxembourg          58900         2004         Austria             31300         2004
Jersey              40000         2003         Belgium             30600         2004
United States       40100         2004         United Kingdom      29600         2004
Norway              40000         2004         Netherlands         29500         2004
Bermuda             36000         2003         Japan               29400         2004
San Marino          34600         2001         Finland             29000         2004
Hong Kong           34200         2004         Aruba               28000         2002
Switzerland         33800         2004         Germany             28700         2004
Cayman Islands      32300         2004         France              28700         2004
Denmark             32200         2004         Sweden              28400         2004
Ireland             31900         2004         Monaco              27000         2000
Iceland             31900         2004         Singapore           27800         2004
Canada              31500         2004

Sources: Central Intelligence Agency, The Word Factbook 2005,
         http://www.cia.gov/cia/publications/factbook, file name:
         factbook2005\factbook\fields\2004.html

         World Facts and Figures for 2005.
         http://www.worldfactsandfigures.com/gdp_country_desc.php.




                                              25
Table 1 Average years of formal educational experience of the population aged 15–64 in
1913 and 1989

                                         1913
Country            Total (Rank)    Primary (Rank)   Secondary (Rank)   Higher (Rank)
France               6.18 (4)         4.31 (5)          1.77 (4)          0.10 (3)
Germany              6.94 (2)         3.50 (6)          3.35 (1)          0.09 (4)
Japan                5.10 (6)         4.50 (4)          0.56 (6)          0.04 (6)
Netherlands          6.05 (5)         5.30 (1)          0.64 (5)          0.11 (2)
United Kingdom       7.28 (1)         5.30 (1)          1.90 (2)          0.08 (5)
United States        6.93 (3)         4.90 (3)          1.83 (3)          0.20 (1)

                                         1989
Country            Total (Rank)    Primary (Rank)   Secondary (Rank)   Higher (Rank)
France              11.61 (3)         5.00 (5)          5.29 (2)          1.32 (2)
Germany              9.58 (6)         4.00 (6)          5.20 (3)          0.38 (6)
Japan               11.66 (2)         6.00 (1)          4.95 (4)          0.71 (3)
Netherlands         10.51 (5)         6.00 (1)          3.82 (6)          0.69 (4)
United Kingdom      11.28 (4)         6.00 (1)          4.75 (5)          0.53 (5)
United States       13.39 (1)         6.00 (1)          5.72 (1)          1.67 (1)


Source: Data from Maddison 1991, 64.




                                         26
    Table 2 Percentage of the population that has attained at least tertiary education
                       Type-A by age group (1998 and 2003)

                             1998                         2003
Country         25–64 25–34 35–44 45–54 55–64 25-64 25–34 35–44 45–54 55–64
Australia        17    19     18   16     10   20    25    21    20     14
Austria           6     7      8    5     4     7     8     8     7     5
Belgium          12    16     13   10     6    13    18    14    11     8
Canada           19    23     18   18     13   22    28    22    20     18
Czech Republic   10    10     12   10     8    12    12    14    11     10
Finland          13    14     15   13     8    16    23    17    14     12
France           11    15     10   10     6    14    22    13    11     10
Germany          14    14     16   15     10   14    14    15    15     12
Greece           11    15     14   10     6    13    17    15    12     7
Hungary          13    14     14   14     10   15    17    16    15     14
Iceland          16    19     18   15     9    20    23    22    19     12
Ireland          11    16     11    7     5    16    23    16    13     9
Italy             9     9     11    9     5    10    12    11    10     7
Japan            18    23     23   15     9    21    26    25    20     12
Korea            17    23     19   11     8    22    30    26    14     9
Luxembourg       N/A   N/A   N/A   N/A   N/A    6     7     7     6     4
Mexico           12    15     14   10     5    14    16    15    12     7
Netherlands      24    27     26   23     17   22    25    23    21     17
New Zealand      13    16     13   12     7    16    21    17    15     10
Norway           24    27     25   22     17   29    37    30    25     20
Poland           11    12     10   11     10   14    20    13    11     11
Portugal          7     8      7    5     4     8    13     9     6     3
Slovak Republic N/A    N/A   N/A   N/A   N/A   11    13    11    12     8
Spain            14    21     16   11     6    18    26    19    14     9
Sweden           13    10     14   15     11   18    24    17    17     16
Switzerland      14    16     15   13     11   18    20    19    16     15
Turkey            6     7      7    6     3    10    11     8     9     7
United Kingdom   15    17     17   15     11   19    24    19    18     14
United States    27    27     26   29     22   29    30    29    30     27
Country Mean     14    16     15   13     9    16    20    17    15     12
Note: Denmark is omitted in this table because the reported annual data for tertiary type-
A attainments in Denmark are incompatible between 1998 and 2003. But the overall
country mean includes Denmark.

Source: OECD, Education at a Glance 2000, 36, table A2.2b
OECD, Education at a Glance 2005, Indicator A1: Educational attainment of the adult
population, http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/22/35/35282639.xls (table A.1.3a).

                                            27
    Table 3 Distribution of the population that has attained at least upper secondary
education, by age group (1998 and 2003)

                               1998                          2003
Country           25–64 25–34 35–44 45–54 55–64 25–64 25–34 35–44 45–54 55–64
Australia           56     64     58     52      44     62     75     64      58        47
Austria             73     84     78     68      56     79     85     83      75        69
Belgium             57     73     61     51      34     62     78     68      55        43
Canada              80     87     83     77      65     84     90     86      83        71
Czech Republic      85     92     88     84      74     86     92     90      84        77
Denmark             78     85     80     78      67     81     86     82      80        74
Finland             68     84     78     62      41     76     89     85      73        55
France              61     75     63     56      41     65     80     69      59        48
Germany             84     88     87     84      76     83     85     86      84        78
Greece              44     66     52     36      22     51     72     60      44        28
Hungary             63     77     73     65      31     74     83     81      75        53
Iceland             55     61     58     55      40     59     64     62      58        48
Ireland             51     67     56     41      31     62     78     67      52        38
Italy              41      55     50      35     19     44     60     50      39        24
Japan              80      93     91      77     57     84     94     94      82        65
Korea              65      92     70      45     27     73     97     83      55        32
Luxembourg         N/A    N/A    N/A     N/A    N/A     59     68     61      54        50
Mexico             21      26     23      16     9      21     25     24      18        12
Netherlands        64      74     68      59     50     66     76     71      62        53
New Zealand        73      79     77      69     58     78     84     81      76        64
Norway             83      93     88      78     65     87     95     92      85        76
Poland             54      62     59      53     37     48     57     49      46        40
Portugal           20      29     20      14     12     23     37     22      16        10
Slovak Republic    N/A    N/A    N/A     N/A    N/A     87     94     91      84        70
Spain              33      53     38      23     12     43     60     48      33        19
Sweden             76      87     80      73     60     82     91     88      80        69
Switzerland        81      88     83      80     71     70     76     72      68        61
Turkey             18      24     19      13     7      26     33     25      21        16
United Kingdom      60     63     62     58      53     65     71     65      64        57
United States       86     88     88     87      80     88     87     88      89        85
Country Mean        61     72     65     57      44     66     75     70      62        51

Source: OECD, Education at a Glance 2000, 35, table A2.2.
       OECD, Education at a Glance 2005, Indicator A1: Educational attainment of the
       adult population, http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/22/35/35282639.xls (table
       A.1.2a).

                                           28
        Table 4 Expected years of tertiary education for all 17-year-olds (1998)

       Country              Full and Part Time   Rank    Full Time Only    Rank
       Australia                    2.3           5            1.4          16
       Austria                      1.8           14           1.8           8
       Belgium                      1.3           21           1.2          20
       Canada                       1.9           10           1.4          16
       Czech Republic               0.9           24           0.8          24
       Denmark                      1.3           21           1.3          19
       Finland                      2.9           1            2.9           1
       France                       1.9           11           1.9           5
       Germany                      1.7           15           1.7          11
       Greece                       1.7           15           1.7          11
       Hungary                      1.6           19           0.9          23
       Iceland                      1.6           19           1.6          14
       Ireland                     N/A            ~            N/A          ~
       Italy                        2.2           7            2.2           4
       Japan                       N/A            ~            N/A          ~
       Korea                        1.9           11           1.9           5
       Luxembourg                  N/A            ~            N/A          ~
       Mexico                       0.8           25           0.8          24
       Netherlands                  2.2           7            1.9           5
       New Zealand                  2.1           9            1.5          15
       Norway                       2.7           2            2.4           2
       Poland                       1.9           11           1.0          22
       Portugal                     1.7           15           1.7          11
       Spain                        2.5           4            2.3           3
       Sweden                       2.3           5            1.8           8
       Switzerland                  1.1           23           1.1          21
       Turkey                       0.8           26           0.8          24
       United Kingdom               1.7           15           1.4          16
       United States                2.7           2            1.8           8
       OECD Average                 1.8                        1.6

Source: OECD, Education at a Glance 2000, 158, table C3.2.




                                          29
Table 5 Expenditure on educational institutions as a percentage of GDP for all levels of
               education by source of funds (1990, 1995, and 2002)

                   2002                 1995                      1990
Country           Public Private Total Public     Private Total   Public Private Total
Australia           4.4    1.5    6.0    4.5        1.2    5.7     4.2     0.8    5.0
Austria             5.4    0.3    5.7    5.9        0.3    6.1     N/A    N/A    N/A
Belgium             6.1    0.3    6.4   N/A        N/A    N/A      N/A    N/A    N/A
Canada             N/A    N/A    N/A     6.2        0.8    7.0     N/A    N/A    N/A
Czech Republic      4.2    0.2    4.4    4.7        0.7    5.4     N/A    N/A    N/A
Denmark             6.8    0.3    7.1    6.1        0.2    6.3     N/A    N/A    N/A
Finland             5.9    0.1    6.0    6.2         x     6.3     N/A    N/A    N/A
France              5.7    0.4    6.1    5.9        0.4    6.3     5.1     0.5    5.7
Germany             4.4    0.9    5.3    4.5        0.9    5.4     N/A    N/A    N/A
Greece              3.9    0.2    4.1    3.1         n     3.2     N/A    N/A    N/A
Hungary             5.0    0.6    5.6    4.9        0.6    5.5     N/A    N/A    N/A
Iceland             6.8    0.6    7.4   N/A        N/A    N/A      N/A    N/A    N/A
Ireland             4.1    0.3    4.4    4.7        0.5    5.3     N/A    N/A    N/A
Italy               4.6    0.3    4.9    4.7       N/A    N/A      N/A    N/A    N/A
Japan               3.5    1.2    4.7    3.5        1.1    4.7     N/A    N/A    N/A
Korea               4.2    2.9    7.1   N/A        N/A    N/A      N/A    N/A    N/A
Luxembourg         N/A    N/A    N/A    N/A        N/A    N/A      N/A    N/A    N/A
Mexico              5.1    1.1    6.3    4.6        1.0    5.6     N/A    N/A    N/A
Netherlands         4.6    0.5    5.1    4.5        0.4    4.9     N/A    N/A    N/A
New Zealand         5.6    1.2    6.8    4.8       N/A    N/A      N/A    N/A    N/A
Norway              6.7    0.3    6.9    6.8        0.4    7.1     8.1    N/A    N/A
Poland              5.5    0.7    6.1    5.7       N/A    N/A      N/A    N/A    N/A
Portugal            5.7    0.1    5.8    5.3         n     5.3     N/A    N/A    N/A
Slovak Republic     4.0    0.2    4.2    4.6        0.1    4.7     4.8     0.3    5.1
Spain               4.3    0.5    4.9    4.5        0.9    5.4     4.4     0.7    5.1
Sweden              6.7    0.2    6.9    6.1        0.1    6.2     5.1    N/A     5.1
Switzerland         5.7    0.5    6.2    5.4       N/A    N/A      N/A    N/A    N/A
Turkey              3.4    0.4    3.8    2.3       N/A     2.3     2.8    N/A     2.8
United Kingdom      5.0    0.9    5.9    4.8        0.7    5.5     4.2     0.1    4.3
United States       5.3    1.9    7.2    5.0        2.2    7.2     4.9     2.2    7.1
Country mean        5.1    0.7    5.8     ~          ~      ~       ~       ~      ~
OECD total          4.9    1.2    6.1     ~          ~      ~       ~       ~      ~

Source: OECD, Education at a Glance 2005, Indicator B2: Expenditure on educational
      institutions relative to Gross Domestic Product,
      http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/2/11/35286380.xls (table B2.1a).


                                          30
    Table 6 Annual expenditures on educational institutions per student (US dollars
   converted using PPP) by levels of education based on full-time equivalents (2002)

   Country                 Primary      All secondary Tertiary-type A   All tertiary
   Australia                 5169            7375          13410          12416
   Austria                   7015            8887          12701          12448
   Belgium                   5665            8272           N/A           12019
   Canada                    N/A             N/A            N/A            N/A
   Czech Republic            2077            3628          6671            6236
   Denmark                   7727            8003           N/A           15183
   Finland                   5087            7121          11833          11768
   France                    5033            8472          9132            9276
   Germany                   4537            7025          11860          10999
   Greece                    3803            4058          5646            4731
   Hungary                   3016            3184          8187            8205
   Iceland                   7171            7229          8232            8251
   Ireland                   4180            5725           N/A            9809
   Italy                     7231            7568          8649            8636
   Japan                     6117            6952          11984          11716
   Korea                     3553            5882          7630            6047
   Luxembourg               10611           15195           N/A            N/A
   Mexico                    1467            1768           N/A            6074
   Netherlands               5558            6823          13163          13101
   New Zealand               4536            5698           N/A            N/A
   Norway                    7508           10154           N/A           13739
   Poland                    2585            N/A            N/A            4834
   Portugal                  4940            6921           N/A            6960
   Slovak Republic           1471            2193          4756            4756
   Spain                     4592            6010          8074            8020
   Sweden                    7143            7400           N/A           15715
   Switzerland               7776           11900          25524          23714
   Turkey                    N/A             N/A            N/A            N/A
   United Kingdom            5150            6505           N/A           11822
   United States             8049            9098           N/A           20545
   Country Mean              5313            7002            ~            10655
   OECD Mean                 5273            6992            ~            13343

Source: OECD, Education at Glance 2005, Indicator B1: Educational expenditure per
       student, http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/2/12/35286348.xls (table B1.1).




                                          31
Table 7 Expenditure per student (public and private) relative to GDP per capita by level
                 of education based on full-time equivalents (2002)

           Country                All secondary education All tertiary education
           Australia                        27                       45
           Austria                          30                       41
           Belgium                          29                       42
           Canada                          N/A                      N/A
           Czech Republic                   22                       38
           Denmark                          27                       51
           Finland                          26                       42
           France                           31                       34
           Germany                          26                       41
           Greece                           21                       25
           Hungary                          22                       57
           Iceland                          25                       29
           Ireland                          18                       30
           Italy                            29                       33
           Japan                            26                       43
           Korea                            32                       33
           Luxembourg                       29                      N/A
           Mexico                           19                       65
           Netherlands                      23                       44
           New Zealand                      26                      N/A
           Norway                           28                       37
           Poland                          N/A                       43
           Portugal                         37                       37
           Slovak Republic                  17                       38
           Spain                            26                       35
           Sweden                           26                       56
           Switzerland                      37                       73
           Turkey                          N/A                      N/A
           United Kingdom                   23                       41
           United States                    25                       57
           Country Mean                     26                       43

Source: OECD, Education at Glance 2005, Indicator B1: Educational expenditure per
       student, http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/2/12/35286348.xls (table B1.2).




                                           32
   Table 8 Average combined mathematics literacy scores of 15-year-old students by
                               percentiles (2003)

                                                                             90th–0th
 Country                 5th     10th     25th     75th      90th     95th    difference
 Australia               364      399      460      592       645      676           246
 Austria                 353      384      439      571       626      658           242
 Belgium                 334      381      456      611       664      693           284
 Canada                  386      419      474      593       644      673           225
 Czech Republic          358      392      449      584       641      672           249
 Denmark                 361      396      453      578       632      662           236
 Finland                 406      438      488      603       652      680           214
 France                  352      389      449      575       628      656           239
 Germany                 324      363      432      578       632      662           269
 Greece                  288      324      382      508       566      598           242
 Hungary                 335      370      426      556       611      644           241
 Iceland                 362      396      454      578       629      658           233
 Ireland                 360      393      445      562       614      641           221
 Italy                   307      342      400      530       589      623           247
 Japan                   361      402      467      605       660      690           258
 Korea                   388      423      479      606       659      690           236
 Luxembourg              338      373      430      557       611      641           239
 Mexico                  247      276      327      444       497      527           221
 Netherlands             385      415      471      608       657      684           241
 New Zealand             359      394      455      593       650      682           256
 Norway                  343      376      433      560       614      645           238
 Poland                  343      376      428      553       607      640           231
 Portugal                321      352      406      526       580      610           228
 Slovak Republic         342      379      436      565       619      648           241
 Spain                   335      369      426      546       597      626           229
 Sweden                  353      387      446      576       631      662           243
 Switzerland             359      396      461      595       652      684           256
 Turkey                  270      300      351      485       560      614           260
 United States           323      357      418      550       607      638           251
 OECD Average            332      369      432      570       628      660           259

Source: U.S. Department of Education, Institute for Education Sciences, National Center
       for Education Statistics, “International Comparisons of Mathematics Literacy,”
       http://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/2006/section2/table.asp?tableID=464.




                                          33
 Table 9 Estimated Coefficients from Mincer Log-Earnings Regressions for Males

                                        Whites                   Blacks
                               Coefficient Std. Error   Coefficient   Std. Error
  1940   Intercept               4.4771       0.0096     4.6711         0.0298
         Education               0.1250       0.0007     0.0871         0.0022
         Experience              0.0904       0.0005     0.0646         0.0018
         Experience-Squared     -0.0013       0.0000     -0.0009        0.0000

  1950   Intercept               5.3120      0.0132      5.0716        0.0409
         Education               0.1058      0.0009      0.0998        0.0030
         Experience              0.1074      0.0006      0.0933        0.0023
         Experience-Squared     -0.0017      0.0000      -0.0014       0.0000
  1960   Intercept               5.6478      0.0066      5.4107        0.0220
         Education               0.1152      0.0005      0.1034        0.0016
         Experience              0.1156      0.0003      0.1035        0.0011
         Experience-Squared     -0.0018      0.0000      -0.0016       0.0000
  1970   Intercept               5.9113      0.0045      5.8938        0.0155
         Education               0.1179      0.0003      0.1100        0.0012
         Experience              0.1323      0.0002      0.1074        0.0007
         Experience-Squared     -0.0022      0.0000      -0.0016       0.0000

  1980   Intercept               6.8913      0.0030      6.4448        0.0120
         Education               0.1023      0.0002      0.1176        0.0009
         Experience              0.1255      0.0001      0.1075        0.0005
         Experience-Squared     -0.0022      00.000      -0.0016       0.0000

  1990   Intercept               6.8912      0.0034      6.3474        0.0144
         Education               0.1292      0.0002      0.1524        0.0011
         Experience              0.1301      0.0001      0.1109        0.0006
         Experience-Squared     -0.0023      0.0000      -0.0017       0.0000



Source: Heckman, Lochner, and Todd 2003.




                                      34
Table 10 Correlating Predicted Growth Rates in Per Capita GDP and Average School
Years of the Adult Population (based on Ehrlich and Kim 2007)

                        Intercept (α)     Slope(β)      t-value (β)   Adjusted R2
           Variant 1 *    0.00567         1.67458          21.23        0.3036
           Variant 2 **       **          1.25854          11.40        0.3682

   Number of observations = 1,032.

   * OLS regression estimates of equation (3)
   ** OLS fixed-effects regression estimates of equation (3) allowing for
      country-specific intercepts, not reported in this table.

   Econometric procedure: see text and footnote 6.




                                              35
Table 11 Relative percentage differences in educational attainments (U.S. = 100) by level and age group (1998 and 2003)
Attaining at least tertiary education Type-A:
                                                  1998                                                              2003
Country                 25-64        25-34        35-44        45-54        55-64        25-64         25-34        35-44        45-54        55-64
US                      100.0        100.0        100.0        100.0        100.0        100.0         100.0        100.0        100.0        100.0
France                   40.7         55.6         38.5         34.5         27.3         48.3          73.3         44.8         36.7         37.0
Germany                  51.9         51.9         61.5         51.7         45.5         48.3          46.7         51.7         50.0         44.4
Italy                    33.3         33.3         42.3         31.0         22.7         34.5          40.0         37.9         33.3         25.9
Spain                    51.9         77.8         61.5         37.9         27.3         62.1          86.7         65.5         46.7         33.3
United Kingdom           55.6         63.0         65.4         51.7         50.0         65.5          80.0         65.5         60.0         51.9
E4*                      44.4         54.6         51.0         38.8         30.7         48.3          61.7         50.0         41.7         35.2
E5**                     46.7         56.3         53.8         41.4         34.5         51.7          65.3         53.1         45.3         38.5
E11***                   52.2         57.9         59.4         47.0         43.8         56.4          68.8         58.3         50.0         45.8

Attaining at least upper secondary education:
                                                    1998                                                              2003
Country                  25-64        25-34         35-44         45-54        55-64        25-64         25-34       35-44        45-54       55-64
United States            100.0        100.0         100.0         100.0        100.0        100.0         100.0       100.0        100.0       100.0
France                    70.9         85.2          71.6          64.4         51.3         73.9          92.0        78.4         66.3        56.5
Germany                   97.7        100.0          98.9          96.6         95.0         94.3          97.7        97.7         94.4        91.8
Italy                     47.7         62.5          56.8          40.2         23.8         50.0          69.0        56.8         43.8        28.2
Spain                     38.4         60.2          43.2          26.4         15.0         48.9          69.0        54.5         37.1        22.4
United Kingdom            69.8         71.6          70.5          66.7         66.3         73.9          81.6        73.9         71.9        67.1
E4*                       63.7         77.0          67.6          56.9         46.3         66.8          81.9        71.9         60.4        49.7
E5**                      64.9         75.9          68.2          58.9         50.3         68.2          81.8        72.3         62.7        53.2
E12****                   80.0         89.9          83.1          74.9         65.9         81.4          93.1        86.3         77.2        69.3
*E4: Simple average of the normalized data for France, Germany, Italy, and Spain
**E5: Simple average of the normalized data for France, Germany, Italy, Spain and United Kingdom
*** E11: Simple average of the normalized data for Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Netherland, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland,
     and the United Kingdom
**** E12: Simple average of the normalized data for E11 countries and Denmark



                                                                           36
                                                      Appendix B: Figures


Figure 1 Comparison of U.S. and U.K. Real GDP in Log Terms (1850–2003)




                                                                                                            UK           US

17


16


15


14


13


12


11


10
     1850

            1859

                   1868

                          1877

                                 1886

                                        1895

                                               1904

                                                        1913

                                                               1922

                                                                       1931

                                                                              1940

                                                                                     1949

                                                                                            1958

                                                                                                   1967

                                                                                                          1976

                                                                                                                 1985

                                                                                                                        1994

                                                                                                                               2003
Note: GDP data are converted to 1990 U.S. dollars using the Geary-Khamis Purchasing-Power-
Parity (PPP) method. Data for 1851–1859 and 1861–1869 are imputed.

Source: Data from Maddison 2003.




                                                                      37
Figure 2 Comparison of U.S. and U.K. Real GDP per capita in log terms (1850–2003)

                                                                                                            UK           US
10.5

 10

 9.5

  9

 8.5

  8

 7.5

  7
       1850

              1859

                     1868

                            1877

                                   1886

                                          1895

                                                 1904

                                                        1913

                                                               1922

                                                                      1931

                                                                             1940

                                                                                    1949

                                                                                           1958

                                                                                                  1967

                                                                                                         1976

                                                                                                                 1985

                                                                                                                        1994

                                                                                                                               2003
Note: Per-capita GDP data are converted to 1990 U.S. dollars using the Geary-Khamis
Purchasing-Power-Parity (PPP) method. Data for 1851–1859 and 1861–1869 are imputed.

Source: Data from Maddison 2003.




                                                                 38
Figure 3 Correlating predicted growth rates in per-capita GDP and average school years
           .06
              of the adult population (based on Ehrlich and Kim 2007)
                 .04
    Log(1+g(GDP)*)
   .02     0




                       .005   .01              .015                .02           .025
                                           Log(1+g(H)*)


Note: The regression line in this scatter is based on Variant 1 of Equation 3.




                                             39
Figure 4 Deviations in long-term per-capita GDP growth rates per annum over the
period 1850–2003 between the U.S. and E-5, and U.S. and U.K.

                       Growth Rate Differences US-E5, US-UK                       US-E5
                               Real GDP Per-Capita                                US-UK

  1.00%



  0.50%
                                                1918
                    1871                                      1939
           1850                               1914     1929
                                       1905
  0.00%

                                                                           1967

                                                                 1945                     1991
  -0.50%



  -1.00%



  -1.50%



   Notes: Chart shows Percentage differences measured at progressively later starting dates from
   1850-2003 up to 1991-2003. GDP data are in real (PPP) 1990 Geary-Khamis dollars.
   * E5 includes: France, Germany, Italy, Spain, and United Kingdom

   Source: Data from Maddison 2003




                                               40
            Figure 5 Annual per-capita GDP differences between the U.S. and
              major European countries 1871–2003 (1990 Geary Khamis $)

                                                                   US-FR
                         Per-Capita GDP Differences                US-GR
                                                                   US-IT
                                                                   US-SPA
 14,000

 12,000

 10,000

  8,000                                                            1991

  6,000

  4,000                                          1945
                                                          1967
  2,000

                                     1929
     0
                         1905 19141918       1939
          1871
 -2,000



Source: Data from Maddison 2003.




                                            41
