                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             HOW BIG IS THE TAX ADVANTAGE TO DEBT?


                           Alex Kane
                         Alan J. Marcus
                       Robert L. McDonald


                     Working Paper No. 1286




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                           March 19814




The authors are grateful to Betty Yobaccio for expert research
assistance, and to Wayne Mikkeison and Daniel Siegel for comments
on an earlier draft. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                          NBER Working Paper #1286
                                          March 198)4




               How Big is the Tax Advantage to Debt?



                              ABSTRACT


This paper uses an option valuation model of the firm to answer the

question, "What magnitude tax advantage to debt s consistent with

the range of observed corporate debt ratios?" We incorporate into the

model differential personal tax rates on capital gains and ordinary

income. We conclude that variations in the magnitude of bankruptcy

costs across firms can not by itself account for the simultaneous

existence of levered and unlevered firms. When it is possible for

the value of the underlying assets to junip discretely to zero, dif-

ferences across firms in the probability of this jump can account for

the simultaneous existence of levered and unlevered firms.

Moreover, if the tax advantage to debt is small, the annual rate of

return advantage offered by optimal leverage may be so small as to

make the firm indifferent about debt policy over a wide range of

debt—to—firm value ratios.




                                          Alex Kane, Alan J. Marcus
                                          and Robert L. McDonald
                                          School of Management
                                          Boston University
                                          TO)4 Commonwealth Avenue
                                          Boston, MPL 02215
                          HOW BIG IS THE TAX ADVANTAGE TO DEBT ?

        The observed range of debt—to—firm—value ratios in the U.S. economy is,

roughly speaking, from zero to 60 percent. Traditional explanatory models of

capital structure have focused on the tradeoff between the tax shield and

bankruptcy costs arising from the use of debt finance 2,9,10,18,19]. Other

models have focused on information issues, such as agency costs [7,16] and

signalling [17], though it is fair to say that bankruptcy costs are still

thought to be an important determinant of debt structure.

        One important recent criticism of the bankruptcy cost models was that of

'i   i i ier LJ, wiiu ryueu Lildi. ui.ri
A11._ r11 ..i_.... _....J &.L_. ......L __...J..._
                                                     were L.OU.._..11
                                                                ii i I re.__1....L.._
                                                                           i L ive LU £... £L..... L..
                                                                                         LJ1C LdX
benefits     of debt to explain the existence of unlevered firms. Instead, Miller

argued that taking personal as well as corporate taxation into account

eliminated any net tax advantage of debt finance, so that individual firms

would be indifferent about financial policy. DeAngelo and Masulis [4],

however, argued that if there were bankruptcy costs (which Miller ignored),

then the net tax advantage to debt would in equilibrium be low but positive,

exactly offsetting marginal bankruptcy costs. Every firm. could have a

determinate debt structure based on the tax advantage—bankruptcy cost

tradeoff, no matter how small bankruptcy costs were.

       Surprisingly, there is no evidence as to whether bankruptcy—cost models

which take account of personal as well as corporate taxes can explain the

observed range of debt ratios in the U.S. economy. It is known that a

bankruptcy cost model will predict high debt ratios——even with large

bankruptcy costs——when the corporate tax rate is set at 50 percent and

personal taxes are ignored (Kim, [9]). It is not known whether such a model

has reasonable explanatory power when the net tax advantage to debt is much

lower, as it would be in the DeAngelo—Masulis equilibrium.

       In this paper we develop a valuation model for a levered firm with
                                       —2—

bankruptcy costs, incorporating personal taxes, and attempt to see whether

such a model can potentially account for the observed range of debt—equity

ratios in the U.S. We find that differences across firms in bankruptcy costs

alone cannot account for the simultaneous existence of levered and unlevered

firms. Next, we use simulation analysis to determine a reasonable

cross—sectional range for optimal debt ratios, given the taxadvantage to

debt. The simulation results indicate that if the tax advantage to debt is

small, then the cost of substantially deviating from the optimal debt ratio is

small (in a sense we make precise). In this sense, the model is consistent

wjth a wide range of observed debt ratios. These results leave open the

possibility that other factors, such as moral hazard considerations, may be

more important determinants of debt policy than traditional tax and

bankruptcy—cost considerations.

    Several authors have developed similar models to examine the tradeoff

between the tax advantage and potential bankruptcy cost attributable to debt

finance. In particular, Turnbull [19] and Brennan and Schwartz [2] use

option—valuation models to value a levered firm and derive optimal debt

positions. The aivantage of their contingent claims framework is that the

valuation formula requires only easily interpreted and estimated parameters.

    Our model uses the contingent claims methodology, but differs

significantly from that used by Turnbull and Brennan and Schwartz. We

incorporate personal taxes and allow for the possibility that the underlying

asset ——   unlevered capital —— follows a mixed jump—diffusion process rather
than a simple diffusion process. In addition, if there is a net tax advantage

to debt, and if there are no arbitrage opportunities in the market for

physical assets, then it will be suboptimal for investors to hold unlevered

capital. Consequently, unlike the earlier papers, we assume that unlevered

assets are not held by investors. Incorporating this into the derivation
                                           —3—

provides us with a measure of the advantage to leverage which is a flow

measure (the extra rate of return earned by a levered firm) rather than the

standard stock measure (the extra price that would be paid for a levered

firm). The flow measure provides an easily interpreted notion of what

constitutes a "large" advantage to debt finance.1 Also, the solution

implicitly accounts forthe firm's rebalancing its capital structure at

periodic intervals. Finally, the previous papers assume that the tax

deduction attributable to debt is based on an exogenously given coupon rate.

In this paper, the tax deduction is endogenous A weakness of the model is

that we do not allow the firm to go bankrupt except at maturity (c.f. [2J).

    Section 1 of the paper sets out the model and analytic solutions for debt

and equity values. Section 2 proves that marginal bankruptcy costs are

generally zero at a zero debt level, which implies that an all—equity capital

structure is suboptimal regardless of the magnitude of bankruptcy costs as

long as there is some tax advantage to debt. Section 3presents simulations

snowing equilibrium debt to value ratios for a variety of personal tax rates.

The results suggest that the marginal personal tax rate on interest income

must be quite close to the corporate tax rate to account for the range of debt

ratios commonly observed in the U.S. and that at those tax rates the

equilibrium advantage to leverage is small. Section 4 concludes.



1. Valuation of the Firm

    We will value the levered firm relative to the value of its unlevered

assets, the market value of which is assumed to evolve according to the

stochastic process:2

         dA = (a+A)Adt + aAdz + Adq                                        (1)

where dz is a Wiener process, a     is   the instantaneous expected rate of return

on A and a   is   the instantaneous standard deviation of the rate of return, and
                                                 —4—

dq is a Poisson process which takes on value —1 with probability xdt and value

0 otherwise. The jump process is a generalization of the usual diffusion

process used in earlier contingent—claims analysis of debt structure. We will

assume that dq is uncorrelated with the market in order to obtain closed—form

solutions,

      For simplicity, we model the levered firm as issuing pure discount bonds

with maturity T, which can be rolled over at maturity. The debt affects the

value of the firm via two channels. First, it creates the possibility of

UrI.ruIfl.LJ   w il_ru
                                           .-1,.4-,.,A
                            i at-eu ru t- ucuiu  r.eu k..
                                                       LJJ0.w t-iicc      t-cuu t- tat I...v     A..
                                                                                        4..-t- , euur.c
the current value of the firm.. However, offsetting the bankruptcy cost is a
tax shield generated by the tax deductibility of interest payments.

     To calculate the tax shield, let D denote the face value of the bonds and

P0 the market value of t.he debt at the issue date, 0. Then the yield on the

bond is defined by p =                     and the interest attributed for tax
                             4-ln(D/P0)
purposes at time t is pP = pP0ePt, where P is the value ascribed to

the bond by the tax authorities at time t. (This value need not equal the

actual market value of the bond at t except at t=0.) The implicit interest

generates a cash flow of                where      denotes the corporate tax rate.

     We assume that the firm is prevented by a bond covenant from paying out

dividends before the debt matures, The tax deduction is invested ma special

account at rate rIS.          The funds thus invested grow at an after tax rate

of r(1—), so that the tax shield, TS, accumulates by I to a value of

                    T
                                                                                rTS(1—)T
          IS =     f0 oPe
                              r15(1)(T_t) dt =
                                                        r1
                                                       p—iS—/
                                                                       [0—P0e                         (2)



We   assume a full loss—offset provision, so that the tax shield accumulates in

all states of nature, except those in which the firm is bankrupt at maturity.

     We model bankruptcy costs, B (conditional on bankruptcy occurring), as
                                         —5—

increasing with the face value of debt, 0:

          B =                      0 <         0 <        < 1
                b0b1D                    b0,         b1
The model we develop below is partial equilibrium, but is consistent with a

general equilibrium in which all firms and investors face the same statuory

tax rates respectively, with bankruptcy costs differing across firms.          It is

obvious that if the tax advantage differs across firms, debt ratios will differ,

so we do not consider this possibility.

A. Boundary Conditions

    Let P(A,D,T), S(A,D,T) and V(A,D,T) denote the market values of debt,

equity and firm value at 1. The payoffs to claimants at time I depend upon

whether or not the tax shield is lost in bankruptcy.4 We treat both cases:

    Case 1: Tax shield lost in event of bankruptcy.

Event                   P(A,D,T)          S(A,D,T)              V(A,D,T)

ATS>D                      0              A—DTS                   ATS
D>ATS>B+TS                A—B                  0                  A—B             (3a)

D>ATS and B>A              0                   0                   0

In the event that B+TS>D, the second event does not occur.

    Case 2: Tax shield retained in bankruptcy.

Event                   P(A,D,T)           S(A,D,T)             V(A,D,T)

ATS>D                      0              A—DTS                   ATS
D>ATS>B                 A+TS—B                 0                ATS—B             (3b)

B>A+TS                     0                   0                   0

In the event that B>D, the second event again does not occur.          In Case 2, it

is easiest to think of the tax shield proceeds as literally being invested in

a special account or financial asset. Thus, even if firm value jumps to zero,

the tax shield remains.

    The foregoing are terminal boundary conditions. It is also necessary to

characterize the relationship between V0 and A0. Brennan and Schwartz and

Turnbull do so by assuming that both V and A are the prices of assets which

are willingly held by investors. This assumption implies the ongoing
                                               —6—

existence of unlevered assets even in a world with a tax advantage to debt.

In this world, V0 >         and it would be possible for investors to perform
                      A0,
arbitrage by purchasing unlevered assets and levering them. We assume, to the

contrary, that equilibrium in the market for unlevered assets precludes the

existence of such arbitrage opportunities, so that V0 =                   Our
                                                                    A0.
assumption implies that rio investor would buy and hol.d an unlevered asset

without levering it. Thus A is not the price of an asset which would be

willingly be held by investors.



B. Valuation Equations for Debt and Equity

    We now derive the partial differential equations (p.d.e.s) which must be

satisfied by the values of debt and equity. We will follow Constantinides [3]

in using the CAPM5 to derive the p.d.e. for each security. The CAPM

approach is appropriate in this case because the underlying asset, A, would

never be held as an unlevered asset in and of itself, since to hold A would be

to forego valuable tax shields. The usual formation of the Black—Scholes [1]

hedge portfolio is therefore inappropriate. In addition, the possibility of a

jump in A precludes the formation of a riskiess hedge portfolio. The

equilibrium (versus arbitrage) approach avoids these problems.

    Denote by u and g the tax rates on debt and equity income. We assume that

all returns on debt and equity are taxed on accrual, and that all investors

are in the same tax bracket. The after tax expected rates of return on the

market and on thstantaneously riskiess bonds therefore can be written as

(l_g)r (assuming all returns to equity are taxed at the capital gains rate)

and (1—u)r. Written in terms of after—tax rates of return, the intertemporal

CAPM of Merton [14] then implies that



                                (1-u)r   +                (1-u)r]
         (1-g) 4   E(4)     =
                                             85[(lg)r -                         (4)
                                                     —7—

 where E(.) is the expectations operator, S denotes the value of equity,

 S(A, 0, t), and        is the beta of the after—tax return on levered equity

 with the after tax market return. There are no dividend payments.

     To derive an expression for                    note that the diffusion components of S

 and A are instantaneously perfectly correlated, with                      =
                                                                               aAS1/S (Galai
 and Masulis, [6]). Therefore, since the jump is non—systematic,



                 BS =   T
                        ASA



where 8A is the beta of the after—tax rate of return on the underlying

asset, and where SA = aS/GA.               Therefore, (4) may be rewritten


                                                    AS
          (1-g)         E() = (1-u)r            +
                                                    {(1g)a* -      (1u)r]                        (5)

where a*(1_g) = r(1—u) +
                                  B[r(l_g)       —   r(1—u)], i.e., a, is       the before—tax

equilibrium required rate of return on an asset with a beta of

differs from a    if   and only if there is value to leverage. (See below.)

    Finally using Ito's lemma6 to derive E(dS/S) and substituting that

expression into equation (5) yields:



          SAAAa + St          -   (x   ÷
                                           r)S       +
                                                         SAA[r()
                                                                   -   +   x]   =   0            (6)

where   is defined as a*.a,            subscripts     denote partial derivatives, and the

fact that S(O,D,T) = 0 is used to eliminate one of the jump terms.                        will be

positive precisely when the underlying asset is priced to reflect tax shields

which the asset in and of itself does not pay.                   measures the rate of return

deficiency of A, which arises because A is priced to reflect the debt (and

concomitant tax shields) that it can support, while the capital gains rate on

A by itself does not include those tax shields. The rate of appreciation on A

alone (as opposed to the total rate of return on the levered firm) will

therefore not be sufficient to compensate the investor for holding the
                                                —8-

asset.7 s may thus be interpreted as the penalty rate per period for

maintaining zero leverage, or equivalently, as the net tax advantage of debt

in terms of rate of return. If there were only corporate taxes (g=u=O),

would approximately equal the amortized tax shield less amortized expected

bankruptcy costs.

    Equation (6) is a p.d.e. that must be satisfied by the equity valuation

formula together with the boundary conditions of Section A. Using an

analogous derivation but recalling that interest is taxed at u, the p.d.e. for

c1ht    ran alcn h drivd

            AAAa +        Pt
                               -
                                   r1P   PAA i_*] =       -AP(O)             (7)


where:

                    ÷
            r1= r


               =     — (x+*)..
          P(O) = the nonstochastic value of debt in the event of a jump to zero.

Notice that the p.d.e.'s for equity and debt are not identical, and also that

the required rate of return on the unlevered assets, cz*, appears in the p.d.e.

for debt. Both of these facts are attributable to the different tax treatment

of debt and equity. For u = g, the p,d.e.'s are identical in form.



C. Solution

    The solution to equation (6) subject to the terminal boundary conditions

(3a) or (3b) is:

                         —T                     —ri
                                                 2
        S(A,D, 0) = Ae        N(d1) + (TS-D)e         N(d2)                  (8)


where
                                                       —9—

                      I   —u
             r2 =



                    ln(A/(D-TS)) + (r2-6+a2/2)T
             d1=
                                         a   /1
                                               —                           d2=d1—aT

The debt solution, however, depends on whether (3a) or (3b) holds:8

Case 1: Tax Shield lost in bankruptcy

    Because the tax shield is lost in bankruptcy, we have P(O,D,T)=O.

Nevertheless, we must distinguish two cases. If D—TS>B, the solution to (7) is


                                               —r I
                                                 1            —r1T
                                                                                 _*T
        P(A, 0, 0) = Ae                N(d3) — e    BN(d4) + e     (B÷D)N(d6) — Ae  N(d5) (9)

    If D—TS<B, on the other hand, the solution •is

                          —r I
                               1
        P(A, 0, 0) = De                N(d5)                                                        (10)

where

                    ln(A/B) ÷
                                        (r1-   *   + 2,2)1
            d =                                                           d4=d3—a/T
                                       air

                    ln(A/(D        -   IS)) + (r1-     *   + a2/2)T
            d5=                            a /1
                                                   —                  ,   d6=d5—a/r
Case 2: Tax Shield retained in bankruptcy.

    If TS<B, then P(0,D,T)=0 as before, and the solution to (7) is


                                                             —rT
                                                               1
                                                                          —rT
                                                                            1
           P(A,D,0) = Ae                N(d7) ÷ (TS—B)e        N(d8) + e        (B....Is+D)N(d6)




                      _Ae6*TN(d5)                                                                  (11)


    On the other hand, if TS>B, then P(O,D,t)=(TS_B)e_Tt), and the

solution to (7) is
                                           —10—

                                         —rI      —r I
            P(A,D,O) = Ae      ÷ (TS—B)e       + e 1 (B—TS÷D)N(d5) — Ae
                                                                          N(d5) (12)

where
                  ln(A/(B-TS)) +
                                   (r1_*+a2/2)T
            d7=             alT                    ,        d3=d7—a/T
The value of the firm in all cases is given by

            V(A, 0, 0) = P(A, 0, 0) + S(A, 0, 0).                              (13)

These equations can only be solved implicitly, since the tax shield enters the

cumulative normal density, and it is a function of P. Furthermore, s is also

determined endogenously. As noted above, we will also impose the requirement

            A0, which amounts toruling out arbitrage resulting from
that V0 =

levering up unlevered assets. The market values of assets are assumed to

fully reflect the value of debt they can support.

     The solutions presented above are fully consistent with a multiperiod

interpretation in which the firm reoptimizes its debt position at the end of

every period, although it appears to be cast in a one—period (of duration T)

context. Because the firm can freely rebalance capital structure at, the

maturity date, it can make a leverage decision looking ahead only one period.

The rebalancing feature is embodied in the boundary condition: Firm value at I

reverts to A. A equals the value of the optimally levered firm, because

equilibrium in the market for assets requires that the underlying asset be bid

to a level which reflects the potential of leverage. Thus, even if debt

policy is temporarily suboptimal, the market value of the underlying asset at

maturity will reflect future gains from leverage.

2.   Is Zero Debt Ever Optimal?

     We now ask whether bankruptcy costs can help explain the simultaneous

existence of levered and unlevered firms. The general conclusion of this

section is that when the tax advantage to debt is positive, however small, it
                                                —11—

is never optimal for firms to have strictly zero debt, however large their

bankruptcy costs. If the tax advantage is literally zero, then in one case

(when the tax shield is not lost in bankruptcy and TS>B) it is optimal for all

firms to have positive leverage. In all other cases they are indifferent

about the debt—equity ratio in the vicinity of zero debt if the Miller

condition holds. Thus, unless the Miller condition holds, bankruptcy cost

models are inconsistent with the simultaneous existence of both levered and

unlevered firms.

    A. Case 1 and Case 2 (TS<B).

    In these cases, the equations for P are given by equations (9), (10), and

(11). In each case, as D approaches zero, the market value of debt, P,

approaches Dexp(—r1T) and the yield to maturity on the debt, p, approaches

r1. If we also assume that r15 =                then as D approaches zero the
                                          r1,
value of the tax shield approaches

                    —r1T + rTC(1—)T
     TS=D[1—e                         ]                                                 (14)

The assumption rTS=rl implies that the firm earns an actuarially fair rate

of return on the tax shield. Since in each case the firm loses the tax shield

in bankruptcy (in Case 2 bankruptcy costs exhaust the tax shield), the

proceeds from the tax shield must be invested not at r, but at r+x (ignoring

taxes) to account for bankruptcy risk. Using (14), it is possible to show that


                            r[(1-) -
               = e-r2T [1 - e
                                                (lu)]T
                                                  -g)
     a                                                                                  (15)
         D=0


If the Miller [15] condition holds [i.e., 1—ô=(1—u)/(1—g)], the marginal gain

from issuing debt is zero at zero debt. Therefore, if rTS =                 aV/aD = 0
                                                                      r1,
at zero debt regardless of the magnitude of bankruptcy costs. This result has

the interpretation that marginal bankruptcy costs are always zero at zero

debt. The marginal contribution from the tax shield is positive if
                                       —12—

1—<(1—u)/(1—g). If there is a positive tax advantage to debt, all firms

should issue positive debt, since (16) is independent of bankruptcy costs.      If

the tax shield proceeds are irwested at a rate less than r1, then it will be

optimal for all firms to issue zero debt when the Miller condition holds.

Indifference requires that the Miller condition hold and that rTS=rl.
•

    B. Case II (TS>B).

    In the cases just considered, the tax shield is always lost in the event

the firm bankrupts, so that the firm receives the tax deduction for interest

payments only in those states of the world where full interest is actually

paid on the debt. If the tax shield is not lost in bankruptcy and TS>B, then

issuing debt generates at least a partial tax deduction for interest payments

even in states where the firm does not actually make interest payments. This

is clearly a gain for the firm's security holders at the expense of the

government in these states, since corporate tax deductions are taken on the

interest without personal taxes being paid. Thus, even if the Miller

condition holds, the firm will issue a positive amount of debt in order to

take advantage of this gain in loss states.

    The discussion in this section has assumed that r15 =
                                                            r1.   If x >   0,
it is possible that rIS <         In this case, differences in x across firms
                            r1,
can account for different debt policies. In particular, if there were a small

positive tax advantage to debt, firms with x=0 would issue positive debt (with

the amount depending on firm—specific parameters such as the level of

bankruptcy costs), and firms with sufficiently great x would issue no debt.



3. Simulation esults

    To derive the optimal debt ratio for any set of parameters, we maximize V

with respect to 0. As we have argued, however, if the value A is bid up in

equilibrium to reflect the optimal debt position assets can support, then it
                                           —.13—

must be true that V(A, D, 0) = A at the optimal level of D. To satisfy these

conditions we must find the value of 6 which solves the problem

         Max V(D;6) subject to V(D*; 6)       = A.
          D

The value of 6   is   endogenously determined as part of the solution, and is

precisely the equilibrium net tax advantage of debt expressed as a rate of

retutn. The problem of optimal debt structure is equivalent to that of

choosingD to maximize 6,      subject   to the constraint that A0 =
                                                                       V0.
                                                                               The

level of debt which maximizes firm value is also the level which maximizes the

tax advantage net of bankruptcy penalties.

    We report simulation results corresponding to a real interest rate of 2

percent, bankruptcy costs of 15 percent of debt (b0 =      0,   b1 =   .15),   a

rebalancing interval of 1 year, and an annual standard deviation of 25

percent. Note that this value of a must be interpreted as the standard

deviation of the rate of return of the unlevered

                                                     LWe also allow x, the

probability that the value of the assets jump to zero, to equal both 0 and

.01. It is assumed that the tax shield is lost in bankruptcy and that

rTS=r, independent of x. Both assumptions are designed to minimize the

importance of debt. Nevertheless, optimal debt ratios are quite high.

    Figure 1 displays the optimal debt ratios as a function of the personal

tax rate on debt (g is set equal to zero). The corporate tax rate is set

equal to .46 and we then calculate debt ratios and 6      for   different personal

tax rates. The tax rate on the horizontal axis in the figures should be

interpreted as 1      (1—u)/(1—g), which equals the actual rate of tax on

interest income for g=0.     In the Miller equilibrium (1—u)/(1—g) equals 1 minus

the corporate tax rate, at which point there is no tax advantage to debt. In

the graph, it can be seen that the debt ratio falls to zero at this point,
                                    —14—

reflecting the fact that with possible bankruptcy and no tax advantage,

optimal debt must be zero. The graphs for different A'S are almost

indistinguishable, although debt ratios are higher for the firm with =.01.

   The most striking characteristic of the graph is the extremely sharp

increase in debt ratios as the personal tax rate falls just below the

corporate rate and the fairly flat increase in the ratio thereafter. We have

found that this general shape occurs for virtually any set of parameters

and that the optimal debt ratio is relatively insensitive to a change in

bankruptcy costs. The debt-to-value ratio reaches approximately 40 percent

as soon as there is a small difference in the corporate and personal tax rates.

These results suggest that the tax advantage to debt would need to be approximately

zero for the range of observed debt ratios to be consistent with the model.


     Figure 2 displays the annual rate of return advantage to debt, ó, for X=O

and A=.01. When A rises, both debt ratios and s rise. With greater x the risk

premium on debt, and hence the tax shield, are greater. This induces more debt.

Bankruptcy is also more probable, but this does not discourage debt; a jump to
                                                                   so that
zero will induce bankruptcy, however little debt the firm has issued,! more debt

does not increase the chance of a bankruptcy due to a jump. Our estimates of the

rate of return advantage to debt are extremely small. The net advantage falls

below one-half of one percent per year for personal tax rates above 35 percent.

At personal tax rates of 40 percent, the net advantage is generally below two-tenths

of a percent. The penalty of suboptimal leverage would thus be small.

    Other comparative static properties of the model are straightforward.9

The optimal debt level arid the rate of return advantage to debt are larger for

smaller bankruptcy costs, for smaller standard deviations and for shorter

rebalancing intervals. The last result is attributable to the fact that

shorter rebalancing intervals reduce the probability of bankruptcy for any

level of debt. A reduction in T thus allows the firm to maintain a higher
                                     —15—

debt ratio with a greater tax shield. With no debt issue costs, the optimal

rebalancing interval would be zero and firms would always be fully levered.

    Figure 3 (in which x=0) shows the rate of return penalty (the amount by

which 6 is less than the maximum possible) for firms with positive, but

below—optimal debt, and for firms with above—optimal debt)0 The figure

shows clearly that it is more costly to exceed the optimal debt ratio by a

given amount than to fall below that ratio. The penalty for being unlevered

when the personal tax rate is 30 percent is less than 20. basis points, while

with a personal tax rate of 45.5 percent, the penalty is under one basis

point. The asymmetry suggests that we would be likelier to observe firms with

too little debt, as opposed to firms with too much debt.

    These simulation results suggest that, on the whole, the bankruptcy

cost/tax advantage model provides little insight into the determination of

capital structure. When calculated at values consistent with observed debt

ratios of below 50 percent, the equilibrium rate of return advantage of

optimal leverage is so small as to be nearly unnoticeable.



4. Conclusion

    We have presented a model of optimal debt policy which incorporates

personal taxes and bankruptcy costs. The solution of the model suggests that

the advantage of debt finance is best measured as a rate of return per

period. Simulation results indicate that the advantage of debt measured in

this way is quite small for reasonable parameters. The personal tax rate must

be extremely close to the corporate rate in order to explain the existence of

unlevered firms, and, at those rates, the annual rate of return advantage to

debt is small. We conclude that the tax advantage/bankruptcy cost tradeoff is

unlikely to play a major role in explaining observed leverage patterns.
                                    —16—

                                  Footnotes

1. Consider the Modigliani—Miller formula for the value of a levered firm:

   VL =    + oD, where o is the corporate tax rate and D is the value of
   debt issued by the firm. The formula can be misleading: an unlevered firm

   would sell for V only if it was certain that the firm would never

   become levered in the future. Thus, the cost to a firm of failing to

   become levered today is not oD. Rather it is the reduction in value

   associated with the length of time for which the firm will be unlevered.

2. This process fully accounts for the effect of corporate taxation on value,

   except for the incremental-value from the tax shield on debt. In assuming

   a full loss offset, we ignore the possibility that inability to use tax

    shields may affect debt policy (c.f. [4]).

3. At an opposite extreme, it also would have been possible to model the tax

    shield as paid out to equity holders in an initial dividend. In this

   case, the tax shield would be certain, and we would have inferred an even

    lower range for the net tax advantage to debt than that reported below.

4. Does the firm in fact lose the tax shield in bankruptcy? To the extent

   that the firm reinvests previous deductions for interest expense, it is

   reasonable to treat this part of the tax shield like any other asset that

    is not lost in bankruptcy. If the tax shield is literally kept in a

   special separate account, then it would not be lost even if firm value

   jumped to zero. However, if the firm has unused interest deductions and

    it goes bankrupt, these would likely be lost, since under the Internal

   Revenue Code the unused deductions would be offset against the gain from

   repaying the debt at a discount. (This gain would otherwise not be

   taxed.) Thus given our assumption that the tax shield is contained in a

   special account, we conclude that if the debt is long maturity most of the
                                      —17—

    tax shield would not be lost in bankruptcy, while if the debt was short

    maturity, it would be.

5. Any mean—variance of security pricing would generate the same result.

6. Merton [12] discusses Ito's Lemma for mixed jump—diffusion processes.

7. The importance of the rate—of—return shortfall in option pricing models is

    elaborated in McDonald and Siegel [11].

8. A stochastic bankruptcy cost can be incorporated into the valuation

    formula. Assume that bankruptcy costs follow

           dB = pBdt + sBdw

    This specification allows     to be random in the proportional cost case

    and it would allow b0 to be random in the fixed bankruptcy cost case.

    In general, the solution will depend (because B is a non—traded asset)

    upon the correlation of B with the market. If we consider the special

    case where =0, and where B is uncorrelated with both A and with the

    market, then the solution (9) is unchanged, except that in d3 and d4,

    a2 is replaced by a2 + S2.   It is straightforward to find the

    solution in cases of non—zero drift, and with general correlations between

    B, A, and the market, by applying the methods in Fischer [5].

9. Kane, Marcus and McDonald [8] study the properties of a similar model in

    greater detail.

10. The rate of return penalty for a nonoptimal debt ratio is calculated as

    the percentage decline in firm value for maintaining that debt ratio for

    one period, and then optimally rebalancing. This penalty is calculated

    assuming that the prices of assets in the economy are bid up to reflect

    the gains from optimal leverage policy. The value of    used in the

   calculations is therefore the rate of return premium to optimal leverage,

   as in the other simulations. As with the other figures, we have found that

   the shape of Ftgure 3 is not sensftive to parameter choice.
                                     —18—

                                 Ref erences




1. Black, Fischer and Myron Scholes. "The Pricing of Options and Corporate

   Liabilities, Journal of Political Economy 81 (May/June 1973), 637—654.

2. Brennan, Michael J. and Eduardo S. Schwartz. "Corporate Income Taxes,

   Valuation, and the Problem of Optimal Capital Structure," Journal of

    Business 51 (January 1978), 103—114.

3. Constantinides, GeorgeM. uMarket Risk Adjustment in Project Valuation,"

    Journal of Finance 33 (May 1978), 603—616.

4. DeAngelo, Harry and RonaldMasulis. "Optimal Capital Structure Under

   Corporate and Personal Taxation," Journal of Financial Economics, 8

    (1980), 3—29.

5. Fischer, Stanley. "Call Option Pricing When the Exercise Price is

    Uncertain, and the Valuation of Index Bonds," Journal of Finance 33 (March

    1978), 169—176.

6. Galai, Dan and R.W. Masulis. "The Option Pricing Model and the Risk

    Factor of Stock," Journal of Financial Economics 34 (1976) 53—81.

7. Jensen, Michael C. and William H. Meckling. "Theory of the Firm:

    Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure," Journal of

    Financial Economics 3 (1976), 305—360.

8. Kane, Alex, Alan J. Marcus and Robert L. McDonald. "Debt Policy and the

    Rate of Return Premium to Leverage," Boston University mimeo, 1983.

9. Kim, E. Han. "A Mean—Variance Theory of Optimal Capital Structure and

    Corporate Debt Capacity," Journal of Finance 33 (March 1978), 5—63.

10. Kraus, A. and R. Litzenberger. "A State Preference Theory of Optimal

    Financial Leverage," Journal of Finance 28 (September 1973), 911—922.

11. McDonald, Robert and Daniel Siegel. "Option Pricing When the Underlying
                                          —19—

      Asset Earns a Below—Equilibrium Rate of Return: A Note," Journal of

      Finance, forthcàming (1984).

12. Merton, Robert C. "Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a Continuous—

      Time Model," Journal of Ecomomic Theory 3 (1971), 373—413.

13. ____________.    "Option Pricing when Underlying Stock Returns are
      Discontinuous," Journal of Financial Economics 3 (1976),125—144.

14.   ___________.      "An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model,"

      Econometrica 41 (September 1973), 867—886.

15. Miller, Merton. "Debt and Taxes," Journal of Finance 32 (May 1977),

      261—275.

16. Myers, Stewart. "Determinants of Corporate Borrowing," Journal of

      Financial Economics 5 (1977), 147—175.

17. Ross, Stephen A. "The Determination of Financial Structure: The Incentive—

      Signaling Approach," Bell Journal of Economics 8 (Spring 1977), 23—40.

18. Scott, James H. Jr. "A Theory of Optimal Capital Structure", Bell

      Journal of Economics, Vol. 7, No. 1 (Spring, 1976), pp. 33—54.

19. Turnbull, Stuart M. "Debt Capacity," Journal of Finance 34 (September

      1979), 931—940.
                                     flGURE        I
                      Debt Ratios as a Function of the Personal Tax Rate
              0.7.
              0.5
       Debt
      Value
              0.4
              0.2
a,
C'J
'-I           0.1
ci)
                       —
                0.0                0.2            0.3        04            0.0
                              Personal Tax Rate   (1    —
0
                    FiGURE 2
Rate of Return. Advantage as a Function of the Personal Tax Rate
N
              Personal Tax Rate   (1 —
                         FIGURE 3
      Annual Loss Rate as a Function of Book Debt
                                             personal tax
                                             rate = .455
                                                              personal tax
                                                              rate = .30
                       personal tax
'0
(N
'—4
         Face Value of Debt as   a   Fraction of Firm Value
0
