NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DETERMINANTS OF DEPOSIT-INSURANCE ADOPTION AND DESIGN
Asli Demirguc-Kunt
Edward J. Kane
Luc Laeven
Working Paper 12862
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12862

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2007

Demirguc-Kunt: World Bank; Kane: Boston College and NBER; Laeven: IMF and CEPR. Corresponding
author: Edward Kane, James F. Cleary Professor in Finance, Boston College, Fulton Hall 330A, Chestnut
Hill, MA 02467, e-mail: edward.kane@bc.edu, phone: (617) 552-3986, fax: (617) 552-0431. We are
grateful to George Pennacchi (the Editor), two anonymous referees, Thorsten Beck, Stijn Claessens,
Mark Flannery, Patrick Honohan, Ozer Karagedikli, and Loretta Mester for very useful comments.
For additional suggestions, we also want to thank seminar participants at the Reserve Bank of New
Zealand, Victoria University of Wellington, the FDIC Center for Financial Research's Fifth Annual
Banking Research Conference, and the 2005 AFA meetings in Philadelphia. We thank Baybars Karacaovali
and Guillermo Noguera for helping to construct the new database and for providing excellent research
assistance, and we thank numerous colleagues at the World Bank for providing input for the deposit
insurance database. This paper's findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the
authors and do not represent the views of the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, their Executive
Directors, or the countries they represent. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Asli Demirguc-Kunt, Edward J. Kane, and Luc Laeven. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Determinants of Deposit-Insurance Adoption and Design
Asli Demirguc-Kunt, Edward J. Kane, and Luc Laeven
NBER Working Paper No. 12862
January 2007
JEL No. G21,G28,P51
ABSTRACT
This paper identifies factors that influence decisions about a country's financial safety net, using a
comprehensive dataset covering 180 countries during the 1960-2003 period. Our analysis focuses on
how private interest-group pressures, outside influences, and political-institutional factors affect deposit-insurance
adoption and design. Controlling for macroeconomic shocks, quality of bank regulations, and institutional
development, we find that both private and public interests, as well as outside influences to emulate
developed-country regulatory schemes, can explain the timing of adoption decisions and the rigor
of loss-control arrangements. Controlling for other factors, political systems that facilitate intersectoral
power sharing dispose a country toward design features that accommodate risk-shifting by banks.
Asli Demirguc-Kunt
World Bank
1818 H Street
Washington, DC 20433
ademirguckunt@worldbank.org
Edward J. Kane
Department of Finance
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
edward.kane@bc.edu

Luc Laeven
Senior Economist
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20431
Llaeven@imf.org

Introduction
This paper portrays government decisions about the design of a country’s financial safety net as
an exercise in incomplete social contracting. The contract authorizes failed financial institutions
and their customers to transfer some of their losses to taxpayers in other sectors of the economy.
Social contracting is a political bargaining process in which different sectors attempt to extract
net value from government services. Although financial stability is a nonexclusive good, its
benefits need not be enjoyed equally by every sector. Successful contracting requires that the
terms appear mutually beneficial. Especially because the rights and duties generated in safety net
contracting are incomplete, sectoral concerns and contract terms may be expected to vary greatly
across countries. This paper tests and confirms the hypothesis that across countries salient
differences in safety net design can be explained to an important degree by differences in
economic and political circumstances.
Our analysis seeks particularly to determine what factors influence two issues in safety
net design: (1) a country’s decision on whether or not to adopt a system of explicit deposit
insurance; and (2) for countries that adopt explicit deposit insurance, the type of design features
imbedded in their deposit insurance system. We focus on the extent of deposit insurance
coverage, but also include other design features that could control the banking sector’s ability to
extract net rents from other sectors. We investigate these issues using a newly collected dataset
on deposit insurance schemes and selected design features for a large sample of countries.
Cross-country differences in political arrangements are bound to affect both kinds of
decisions. The presence of an explicit deposit insurance system and how it is designed affects
many constituencies, especially banks, depositors, creditors, specialized bureaucracies, and
taxpayers. Because individual constituencies have conflicting interests, the political process
governing adoption and design decisions can be complex.

2

Economists presume that political dealmaking serves both public and private interests.
Public-interest rationales for deposit insurance focus on protecting small, uninformed depositors
and assuring the stability of the banking system (Diamond and Dybvig, 1983). Private-interest
rationales portray regulatory decisions as the outcome of interest-group competition, in which
well-organized or powerful groups compete with voters to pressure public-spirited, but
opportunistic politicians and regulators for regulatory interventions that enable sponsoring
groups to capture rents from other sectors (Stigler, 1971; Peltzman, 1976; Becker, 1983).
Deposit insurance subsidizes banks that are prepared to exploit weaknesses in
supervisory risk control to extract value from taxpayers and safer banks. Safety-net subsidies
may be defined as implicit risk capital that the government administers in helping to recapitalize
banks when they become deeply insolvent. It is natural to hypothesize that differences in the
distribution of political clout would influence safety net design. Financial institutions regularly
lobby for “reforms” that promise to increase their franchise value (Kroszner and Stratmann,
1998). The more a country’s political system allows sectors to share power, the better narrow
private interests can make their concerns felt.
An extensive literature analyzes the public and private benefits and costs of explicit
deposit insurance and explores theoretically the challenges of designing an optimal deposit
insurance system.1 Our paper is part of an emerging, complementary body of empirical research.
Demirgüç-Kunt and Detragiache (2002) and Demirgüç-Kunt and Huizinga (2004) show that
deposit insurance design features affect banking system fragility and market discipline.
Demirgüç-Kunt and Kane (2002), Laeven (2002), and Hovakimian, Kane and Laeven (2003)
show that weak institutional environments undermine deposit insurance design.
1

See for example, Diamond and Dybvig (1983), Ronn and Verma (1986), Pennacchi (1987), Chari and Jagannathan
(1988), Cooperstein et al. (1995), Kane (1995), Wheelock and Wilson (1995), Calomiris (1996), Bhattacharya et al.
(1998), and Allen and Gale (1998), and Pennacchi (2006).

3

Studies of how political factors affect deposit insurance reform focus predominantly on
the United States. Calomiris and White (1994) argue that federal deposit insurance benefited
predominantly small and poorly diversified unit banks and that, had not the Great Depression
reduced confidence in the banking system as a whole, their pleas for federal insurance could not
have overcome the opposition of politically stronger large banks. Kane and Wilson (1998) show
that, in the face of the Great Depression, large banks’ wish list changed and that large banks’
share prices benefited greatly from introducing deposit insurance precisely because depositors
had lost confidence in banks of all sizes. Kroszner (1998) argues that deposit insurance is
favored by riskier banks, because they can extract a net subsidy at the expense of safer banks in
the presence of an insufficiently risk-sensitive premium structure. He shows that lobbying by
small, risky banks in U.S. has historically accorded with the private interests of this sector.
Similarly, Economides, Hubbard, and Palia (1996) argue that in the U.S. deposit insurance was
instituted for the benefit of the small, unit banks.
Kroszner and Strahan (2001) study whether interest-group pressures can explain voting
outcomes in the U.S. House of Representatives on the Wylie Amendment on limiting deposit
insurance to a single account per bank. They find that limits to deposit insurance were opposed
by representatives from states where small banks had a large share of the market and by states
with a large proportion of elderly people. The amendment was favored by representatives of
states where banks could sell insurance products and where the insurance industry was relatively
large.
Our paper is most closely related to Laeven’s (2004) investigation of how political
arrangements affect coverage levels across countries. Our more comprehensive dataset lets us
model simultaneously decisions about adoption and numerous aspects of system design.

4

It is important to investigate how different country characteristics, including differences
in political systems, affect political support for deposit insurance. Laeven (2004) is able to study
only one element of deposit insurance design in a cross-country context (deposit insurance
coverage) and uses single-equation methods to explain this variable in only one date (the year
2000). Using a two-equation framework that controls for how country characteristics influence
the logically prior decision to adopt deposit insurance, we are able to study how the evolution of
characteristics over time affects the adoption of a series of loss-control features. Like Laeven, we
find that deposit insurance coverage is higher in countries where poorly capitalized banks
dominate the market, but we are able to show that risky banks lobby against efforts to control
risk-shifting in other ways as well.
Our paper offers two advances. First, we create a new dataset of deposit insurance design
features that (unlike previous studies) covers all countries that offer explicit deposit insurance
and tracks changes in design features across time in every country. Second, we use this
comprehensive database to generate cross-country evidence on the determinants of the adoption
and design of deposit insurance systems.
We use discrete choice and proportional hazard models to analyze the adoption of deposit
insurance.2 To study deposit insurance design, we use two-stage selection models that account
for selection bias by including countries that lack explicit deposit insurance.
We find that external pressures and internal politics play significant roles in adoption and
design decisions. Other things equal, the more contestable a country’s political system, the more
likely it is both to adopt explicit deposit insurance and to adopt inadequate risk controls. We

2

Similar models have previously been used by Kroszner and Strahan (1999) to analyze the timing of the elimination
of bank branching restrictions in U.S. states, by Pagano, Penetta and Zingales (1998) to explain the decision of
companies to go public, and by Shumway (2001) to explain corporate bankruptcies.

5

confirm that private interests, particularly the relative importance of risky banks in the country,
exercise an important but not exclusive influence on adoption and design decisions.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes some recent trends in
deposit insurance adoption and design. Section 3 introduces testable hypotheses about the nature
of interest-group bargaining, defines the main variables used in the empirical analysis, describes
the sources used to construct these variables, and presents summary statistics for all included
variables. Section 4 specifies and estimates statistical models of the adoption decision. Section 5
explains how selection models can be used to explain deposit insurance design and offers
empirical estimates of two-stage models of adoption and design. Section 6 underscores our
principal findings.

2. Adoption and Design Features of Deposit Insurance
The first national system of deposit insurance was introduced in 1934 in the United States. Since
then, many countries have followed suit. Figure 1 displays all countries with explicit deposit
insurance schemes as of year-end 2003. The 1990s saw a particularly rapid spread of explicit
deposit insurance. In 1995, only 49 countries offered explicit deposit insurance, but by 2003 this
number had surged to 87 countries, an increase of almost 80 percent. Although much of this
recent surge can be attributed to transition countries of Eastern Europe, recent adopters can be
found on every continent.
Besides adoption dates, we compile information about specific design features of the
particular scheme that each adopting country installs. Since deposit insurance reduces depositor
incentives to monitor banks and increases stockholder incentives to increase bank risk taking,
deposit insurance design should seek to counterbalance these adverse incentives (Kane, 1995;
Bhattacharya, Boot, and Thakor, 1998).

6

Depositor and other private discipline are improved by: (i) limiting coverage, (ii)
excluding particular types of deposits (such as foreign-currency or interbank deposits) from the
system, (iii) introducing coinsurance of depositors, and (iv) setting coverage limits per depositor
rather than per account, so that depositors cannot simply increase coverage by spreading deposit
balances across multiple accounts. Stockholder discipline can be improved by introducing risksensitive premia, so that banks that take more risk are “penalized” by higher premiums.3
Regulatory discipline is also key to a well-functioning deposit insurance regime.
Regulatory discipline can be improved by private-sector involvement in the management of the
deposit insurance system, because private parties are generally considered to be better at
monitoring banks and banks (in particular) are apt to solicit better information with which to
monitor one another than government officials can. It also matters whether membership in a
country’s scheme is compulsory or voluntary. Compulsory membership reduces adverse
selection among banks and forces strong banks to lobby for effective risk-shifting control.
Demirgüç-Kunt and Detragiache (2002) confirm that systems with compulsory membership
outperform voluntary schemes.
Our analysis focuses not only on decisions about individual design features, but looks
also at how features interact in indices of overall risk control described in section 4.

3. Hypotheses and Definitions
Our goal is to assess the relative importance of public interests, private interests, external
pressures, and internal institutional and political environments in influencing a country’s

3

The risk-controlling potential of ex ante deposit insurance premiums may be limited. Chan, Greenbaum , and
Thakor (1992) argue that it is difficult to introduce risk-based deposit insurance premiums because this would
require perfect information on banks behavior. With imperfect information, actuarially fair premiums may not be
feasible and may generate additional risk shifting. Pennacchi (2006) shows that even actuarially fair insurance
premiums would not eliminate incentives for banks to take excessive risks.

7

decision to adopt deposit insurance and follow-on decisions it makes about safety-net design,
specifically about the extent of deposit insurance coverage and other risk-shifting controls.
We pattern our tests as closely as possible on models others have used to explain
adoption and coverage decisions (Kroszner and Strahan, 2001; Laeven, 2004). However,
differences in data availability across countries obviously constrain the span of variables we can
include. Public and private benefits cannot always be separated and many variables can only be
observed for a few points in time. To include time-invariant country-level variables in the
analysis, we experiment with country fixed effects.
Sections 3a and 3b develop testable hypotheses about the roles of public interests, private
interests, and internal and external political and institutional forces. These sections also explain
the data sources from which particular variables are constructed.

3.a. Hypotheses
Banking structure
Social costs of deposit insurance are apt to grow with the size and riskiness of the protected
sector. Social costs arise from deadweight costs of intervention, from the displacement of market
discipline, and from moral hazard effects on insured banks. Small and undercapitalized banks
have traditionally been cast as supporters of deposit insurance (Kroszner and Strahan, 2001;
Laeven, 2004).4 5 These banks’ private interests are best served when deposit insurance is
adopted earlier and entails fewer risk-shifting controls. This leads us to investigate whether it
makes a differences if the market share of small (or undercapitalized) banks is large relative to
4

Keeley (1990) shows that banks will risk bankruptcy only if the option value of deposit insurance exceeds the
franchise value of continuing to operate the bank. Given that small and undercapitalized banks tend to have lower
franchise values, it is expected that they benefit to a greater extent from explicit deposit insurance than large and
well-capitalized banks.

8

that of large (or well-capitalized) banks. Where small or undercapitalized banks are relatively
important, public interests would be best served if deposit insurance were adopted late and were
to incorporate rigorous risk-shifting control.
Banks relative to other providers of financial services
A number of countries permit banks to sell insurance products. In such countries, one would
expect insurance firms to oppose the adoption of deposit insurance for fear that government
backing would make it easier for banks to take business away from them. Where banks can
underwrite insurance products and the insurance industry is important relative to the banking
industry, insurers’ might be able to both delay deposit insurance adoption and to impose morerigorous risk-shifting controls. On the other hand, the public interest would favor adoption if
deposit insurance makes it easier for banks to exploit economies of scope. In this case, efficiency
gains would rise with the size of bank insurance offerings and the public interest would call for
early adoption in countries where banks already sell insurance and the insurance sector is large.
Demographics
As a block, elderly people generally have more financial assets than younger people and often
employ bank deposits as their main savings vehicle. This would dispose them to favor deposit
insurance. Their private interests would seem to be better served when deposit insurance is
adopted earlier. However, rigorous risk-shifting control also seems more likely to emerge in
countries with a relatively large share of elderly people. To the extent that elderly people are less
sophisticated and exert less depositor discipline on banks, the public interest would call for early
adoption and rigorous risk control.
External political pressure and financial crises

5

On the other hand, Kane and Wilson (1998) find evidence that large banks benefited most from the introduction of
deposit insurance in the United States. If this were true in other countries as well, then large-bank interests might
dominate adoption and decision decisions.

9

Outside pressure may be generated in several ways. We hypothesize that, when deciding whether
to adopt deposit insurance, policymakers are influenced by choices made by policymakers in
other countries. As explicit deposit insurance becomes widespread, it becomes a hallmark of
regulatory best practice, and countries become more prone to adopt it (Demirgüç-Kunt and
Detragiache, 2002).
In some countries, the restraining influence of internal economic and political
determinants may have been overcome by domestic and foreign pressure to emulate safety-net
arrangements in other countries, without adequately tailoring the design features to differences in
public and private contracting environments. To test this hypothesis, we estimate models of
deposit insurance adoption and design that include proxies for outside pressure.
Outside pressure may come directly from supranational agencies. Starting in the 1990s,
IMF crisis-management advice recommended adopting explicit deposit insurance as a way either
of containing crises or of formally winding down crisis-generated blanket guarantees (FolkertsLandau and Lindgren, 1998; Garcia, 1999). The World Bank and European Union (EU) have
endorsed explicit deposit insurance as well.
External political pressure is particularly effective during times of financial crises. The
adoption of deposit insurance is more likely during banking crises because one of the public
rationales for deposit insurance is to prevent bank runs and ensure financial stability (Diamond
and Dybvig, 1983). This leads us to investigate whether and how the occurrence of a financial
crisis might affect the timing and character of deposit insurance decisions.
Political and legal institutions
In addition to identifiable private and public interests, specific political, legal, and economic
factors are likely to affect the timing and character of deposit insurance decisions. Demirgüç-

10

Kunt and Kane (2002) argue that countries have different contracting environments, and that
these differences must be taken into account when designing a country’s financial safety net.
To separate economic from political and legal influences, all regression experiments
control for the level of economic development. We also control for differences in political
environments. In political systems that are more democratic, the voices of minority interest
groups can express themselves more forcefully. Presumably, forces that lobby for deposit
insurance can be more effective in democracies (Kroszner and Strahan, 1999). We test the
hypothesis that, ceteris paribus, deposit insurance is adopted earlier and with fewer risk-shifting
controls in more-democratic countries.
Because moral hazard is exacerbated in countries with poor legal institutions (DemirgüçKunt and Kane, 2002), the quality and enforcement of applicable laws may affect the adoption
and design of deposit insurance. In countries where the quality of legal institutions is poor, the
potential for corruption and abuse is higher. This is apt to generate opportunities for risk-shifting
by insured banks. In countries with poor legal institutions, the public interest would be better
served if deposit insurance were adopted later and imposed stronger risk-shifting controls.
Bank regulation and supervision
Increases in the rigor of bank regulation and supervision are apt to reduce the budgetary cost of
providing deposit insurance. The pre-existence of expense-saving forms of regulatory discipline
is likely to encourage the decision to install an explicit deposit insurance scheme. At the same
time, the rigor of bank regulation is probably controlled by the very same political and economic
factors that affect deposit insurance adoption and design (Barth, Caprio, and Levine, 2006). To
investigate this issue, we examine the influence exerted by four aspects of bank regulation and
supervision: stringency of capital regulations, restrictions on the activities banks can engage in
(including securities underwriting, insurance, and real estate), entry restrictions, and official

11

supervisory power (including whether the supervisory framework supports prompt corrective
action).
Macroeconomic environment
Finally, we introduce variables that capture macroeconomic developments that may affect the
quality of bank assets, particularly the rate of growth of real GDP and the rate of inflation. These
variables were used previously by Demirgüç-Kunt and Detragiache (2002) to explain the
incidence of banking crises. Our regression experiments introduce the size of a country’s fiscal
deficit as well. High inflation often results from budget deficits that a government finances
predominantly through money creation. Assuming taxpayers resist deficit expansion, a
government may decide against introducing explicit deposit insurance when the contingent
liabilities it creates for the government could not be tax-financed.

3.b Data Sources and Definitions of Included Variables
Our dataset is unique in covering design features for all countries that had adopted explicit
deposit insurance through yearend 2003. The data were collected both from official country
sources and supplemented by information fromWorld Bank country specialists. We also
contacted deposit insurance agencies to extend data availability where necessary. Appendix 2
details the sources of the data we employ.
Our work expands an earlier Demirgüç-Kunt and Sobaci (2001) database in two ways.
First, we update the endpoint to 2003 to incorporate data on recent adopters. Second, we create a
time series of individual-country design features. Whereas the 2001 database provided data on
coverage only for the year 2000, we track coverage levels for every year in which an explicit

12

deposit insurance scheme existed.6 The complete database covers 181 countries. Of these
countries, 87 (or 48%) have explicit deposit insurance (as of end-2003). This includes countries
with blanket guarantees. Interestingly, although deposit insurance schemes can be found in all
parts of the world, we find that explicit deposit insurance schemes are observed more frequently
in developed countries than in developing countries7.
For all countries with explicit deposit insurance, we compile time-series information on
eight design features: (i) the coverage ratio (Coverage ratio), which we define as the ratio of the
coverage limit on insured deposits to per capita GDP; (ii) whether or not foreign currency
deposits are covered (Foreign currency deposits); (iii) whether or not interbank deposits are
covered (Interbank deposits); (iv) whether or not there is coinsurance (Coinsurance); (v) whether
coverage applies per account or per depositor (Payment); (vi) whether premiums are flat or riskadjusted (Premiums); (vii) whether or not the administration of the scheme is exclusively
publicly managed (i.e., without participation from the private sector) (Administration); and (viii)
whether or not membership is voluntary (Membership). We calibrate each indicator variable so
that a higher score denotes an increased potential for risk-shifting. We also aggregate these
individual features to form indices of the overall rigor of risk-shifting control.
We first investigate the determinants each index component separately. “Moral hazard
indices” (Moral hazard) combine the eight individual features in different ways. The preeminent index is the first principal component of the variance-covariance matrix of the eight
features. As robustness tests, we also experiment with alternative moral hazard indexes that
either include additional principal components or straightforwardly average the values of

6

For example, coverage levels in the United States have increased five times: from US$ 5,000 at adoption in 1934,
to US$ 10,000 in 1950, to US$ 15,000 in 1966, to US$ 20,000 in 1969, to $40,000 in 1974, and finally to US$
100,000 since 1980.
7
Using the World bank definition of a high-income and low-income country, we find that 78% of high-income
countries, but only 16% of low-income countries offer explicit deposit insurance by year-end 2003.

13

individual indicators. Table 1 lists adopting countries, the year explicit deposit insurance was
introduced, and the design features we investigate.
We also collect data on the political and economic variables needed to test the hypotheses
mentioned earlier. For all variables, time-series data cover the period 1960-2002, unless
otherwise noted.
We proxy the political clout of small banks by Small Banks, the fraction of banking assets
in small banks in the country. A bank is considered small if its total assets are below 1 billion
U.S. dollars. To proxy the clout of undercapitalized banks, we use Undercapitalized Banks, the
fraction of a country’s banking assets in banks showing a below-median capital to asset ratio.
Data on bank size and capital come from Bankscope, a database containing financial data on
international banks. Both categorizations are based on 1995-99 averages.
To express the clout of the insurance sector, we use Insurance penetration. This variable
expresses gross insurance premiums underwritten as a share of GDP. This information is
collected from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators. Because data on insurance
penetration starts in 1987, we use the mean value for 1987-2002.
To represent the clout exercised by elderly people, we use Pop65, which is the share of
the population age 65 and over. These data also come from the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators database.
To proxy outside pressure, we experiment with several variables. Contagion is the
fraction of countries in the sample that has adopted explicit deposit insurance at each point in
time. This variable proxies the extent to which deposit insurance is believed to be a universal
best practice. As more and more countries adopt deposit insurance, this nonlinear trend variable
increases in value. IMF Pressure is a zero-one indicator whose value is one from 1999 on. In
1999, the IMF published a best-practice paper on deposit insurance and its design, which

14

recommended explicit deposit insurance for developing countries. The World Bank also
recommended explicit deposit insurance for specific developing countries during the sample
period. World Bank Loan is an indicator variable that has the value one for countries starting in
the year the World Bank began an adjustment lending program that entailed installation of
explicit deposit insurance. Data on World Bank lending programs that support deposit insurance
come from World Bank (2004). The EU Directive on Deposit Insurance (which came into force
in 1994) also encouraged deposit-insurance adoption, particularly for the EU accession countries.
The 10 countries that joined the EU in 2004 had no choice but to adopt the minimum coverage
set forth by the Directive. Prior to accession, these countries all established an explicit deposit
insurance scheme. To capture this influence, we construct a variable, EU candidacy, that for EU
candidate countries only, takes a value of one from 1994 on.
To represent banking crises, we construct a binary variable, Crisis, whose value is one in
years that a given country is experiencing a systemic banking crisis, and is zero otherwise. Data
on the timing of banking crises come from Caprio et al. (2005). A banking crisis is defined as a
situation in which significant segments of the banking sector become insolvent or illiquid, and
cannot operate without special assistance from monetary or supervisory authorities.
To characterize the political environment of a country, we focus on Polity score, an index
that ranges from –10 to 10. Negative scores are assigned to countries that are autocracies and
positive values to democracies. As a robustness check, we experiment with three other proxies.
Democracy is a variable that ranges from 0 to 10, with higher scores assigned to countries that
are more democratic. Executive constraints is an index that measures the extent to which a
country’s institutions constrain the decision-making powers of the country’s chief executive in
ways that create other “accountability groups.” This index ranges from 1 to 7. Higher values
indicate stronger restrictions on executive authority. Finally, political competition ranges from 1

15

to 10, with higher scores representing increased political competition. This index tracks the
extent to which non-elites access institutional structures for political expression. These data
come from the Center for International Development and Conflict Management at the University
of Maryland. Regression experiments presume that minority interest groups exercise more
influence in political systems that are democratic, that place constraints on the executive power,
and that are politically competitive.
To capture the contracting environment of the country and the development of economic
institutions more generally, we use the we use GDP per capita, and indices for Bureaucracy and
Law and Order. Bureaucracy ranges from 0 to 4, increasing with strength and quality of the
bureaucracy. Law and Order expresses the quality of country’s legal system and rule of law. It
ranges from 0 to 6, where high scores indicate a high level of law and order. Because data on the
quality of bureaucracy and law and order do not start until1984, we average data for these two
variables over 1984-2002.
We represent differences in the macroeconomic environment by the following variables:
GDP growth, Inflation, and Fiscal deficit. Movement in these variables captures the size of
internal and external macroeconomic shocks a country experiences. GDP growth is the growth
rate in real GDP. Inflation is defined as the annual rate of inflation. Fiscal surplus is the ratio of
fiscal surplus to GDP, where negative values denote fiscal deficits and positive values denote
fiscal surpluses. These data come from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators
database. Because data on fiscal deficits are sparse (in particular, data are lacking for the last
years in our sample period for many countries), our fiscal-deficit variable averages data over
whatever sample is available.
To measure the quality of bank regulation, we use four different variables. These
variables are taken from the Barth et al. (2006) database and refer to data for the year 2003. In all

16

cases, higher scores denote greater restrictiveness. Capital regulatory index measures the
stringency of capital regulations in the banking system. The index ranges from 0 to 7. Activity
restrictions measures the degree to which banks can engage in securities underwriting, insurance,
and real estate. The index ranges from 3 to 12. Entry restrictions captures regulatory
requirements to set up a bank. The index ranges from 0 to 8. Official supervisory power is an
index of the power supervisors have to discipline banks. The index ranges from 0 to 14. Barth et
al. (2006) provides details on the construction of each variable.
Table 2 presents summary statistics for the variables used in our study. The unit of
observation is a country-year. For each variable, detailed definitions and sources are provided in
Appendix 1. The first part of Table 2 lists a series of endogenous design features. The mean
value of the deposit insurance indicator variable, Deposit insurance, states the proportion of
country-years in which the countries in our sample included explicit deposit guarantees in their
safety net. This turns out to be only 17 percent, since many countries adopted deposit insurance
relatively recently. The mean value of indicator variables for specific design characteristics tells
us what proportion of explicit deposit insurance schemes incorporates each particular
characteristic. Design variables are coded so that higher values indicate an increased exposure to
risk-shifting, meaning that moral hazard is less rigorously controlled by that particular design
feature.
Table 3 reports the correlation matrix of deposit insurance variables and country
characteristics across the years and countries for which data are available for both halves of each
pair of variables. The presence of explicit deposit insurance is positively associated with
economic development (as measured by GDP per capita), external pressure indicators, crisis
experience, and constraints on executive authority. For countries with explicit insurance, we find
that coverage levels and exposures to moral hazard are higher when per capita GDP and

17

constraints on executive authority are low, and during periods of increased external pressure.
Coverage levels prove higher in countries where government ownership of banks is more
extensive. Because we expect that the same variables would influence adoption and design,
design decisions must be modeled simultaneously with adoption. To avoid selection bias,
regressions seeking to explain design decisions are estimated simultaneously with a selection
model of the adoption decision.

4. Statistical Models of the Adoption Decision
Using a hazard model, we first estimate how the political and economic variables we consider
influence the timing of deposit insurance adoption. To explore the robustness of the inferences
we make, we experiment with alternative models, including Probit models with time-fixed
effects.
A. Hazard Model of the Adoption Decision
A powerful way to analyze adoption timing is to estimate a hazard model. The hazard
rate λ(t) estimates the probability that a country adopts deposit insurance in year t, given that it
had not yet done so when the year began (Kiefer, 1988). Hazard models surmount the missingdata problem created by right-censored data. Adoption dates for countries that had not yet
adopted deposit insurance by 2003 are estimated by a synthetic adoption date extrapolated from
the transitions observed for countries that did adopt during the sample period.
We experiment with two widely used models of the hazard rate. The first is the Cox
proportional hazards model, which expresses the hazard rate as:
λi(t) = λ(t) exp (β'xi),

(1)

where x is any specified vector of potential explanatory variables. The second is the Weibull
model, which specifies that λ(t) in (1) evolves as:

18

λ(t) = λαtα-1.

(2)

The evolutionary parameter α determines whether the hazard rate is increasing (α > 1),
decreasing (α < 1), or constant (α = 1) over time. We report robust standard errors following Lin
and Wei (1989).
We designate the Weibull model as our preferred specification because it allows us to
estimate the evolutionary parameter α. High and significant values of α denote positive duration
dependence and can be interpreted as evidence of external influence or emulation. When
employing duration-model techniques, our dataset reduces to a cross section of durations. The
Weibull model lets us compare alternative specifications (focusing specifically on the values of
α) to investigate the presence of external influence rather than either estimating a time trend or
including Contagion as an explanatory variable.
Assuming the availability of data for our explanatory variables, our sample period
consists of the period 1960-2002. We exclude countries that adopted deposit insurance before
1960 (i.e., the United States) from our analysis. Our initial sample consists of 180 countries, of
which 86 adopted deposit insurance during the period 1960-2002.
Figure 1 presents the Kaplan-Meier nonparametric estimate of the hazard function over
time. The figure shows that the hazard function is relatively flat in the early years and then grows
steeper in the later years. The particularly large increase observed in the hazard function during
the 1990s coincides with the period that the IMF and the WB began to urge deposit insurance
adoption. EU pressure towards EU accession countries probably also helped to increase the
hazard function in the second part of the 1990s. During the period covered by the EU Directive
on Deposit Insurance, 1994-2003, 42 countries introduced deposit insurance systems. Fourteen
of these (i.e., one-third) are EU accession countries.

19

B. Regression Experiments Employing Weibull Hazard Models of the Adoption Decision
Table 5 presents regression results for the Weibull hazard model. We first present regressions
that exclude the bank regulatory variables, the institutional variables, and the insurancepenetration variable because information on these variables is missing for many countries. We
designate the main specification as regression (1). It uses Polity scores to proxy differences in
political environments. Regressions (2) to (4) consider Democracy, Executive Constraints, and
Political Competition as alternative proxies. Regression (5) adds the insurance-penetration
variable and bank regulatory variables. Regression (6) introduces proxies for the quality of the
bureaucracy and the law-and-order tradition in the country. Regressions (7) to (10) include the
external-influence indicators WB Loan and EU Candidacy, experimenting with alternative
proxies for political institutions.8 Because explanatory variables enter exponentially, the
coefficients reported in Table 5 are the logarithms of the underlying relative hazard coefficients.
The relative hazard coefficients can be calculated as the antilog of the reported coefficients. The
exponent of each coefficient estimate shows the proportional increase in the hazard rate that
occurs when the focal explanatory variable increases by one unit.
We find that our proxy for the clout of small banks delays the introduction of deposit
insurance. This result runs counter to the narrow private-interest view that presumes that small
banks are invariably riskier than large ones and would lobby strongly for the adoption of deposit
insurance. On the other hand, the result parallels the evidence presented by Kane and Wilson
(1998) who show that large banks benefited most from the introduction of deposit insurance in
the United States. The result is also consistent with public-interest theories that predict that
deposit insurance should be adopted later in countries where small, risky banks are relatively
important.

20

We also find that deposit insurance is adopted earlier in countries where undercapitalized
banks have substantial clout. This is consistent with these banks’ private interests (and with the
findings of Laeven, 2004).
Both banking-structure effects are economically important. For example, regression (1)
indicates that a one-standard deviation (22.5%) increase in Undercapitalized Banks would
increase the hazard rate for adopting deposit insurance by exp(0.013*22.5) = 1.34 points (or an
increase of about 34 percent). This implies that countries with higher levels of Undercapitalized
Banks are more likely to adopt sooner.
Banking crises also raise the probability of early adoption. This is consistent with the
notion that external political pressure to adopt deposit insurance may be particularly effective
during financial crises, when the public rationales for deposit insurance spelled out by Diamond
and Dybvig (1983) -- i.e., to prevent bank runs and re-establish financial stability-- gain ground.
We do not find that the share of elderly people significantly influences the probability of
early adoption. While regression experiments usually generate a positive coefficient for Pop65
(consistent with the private interests of the elderly), the effect never becomes statistically
significant.
Differences in the political environment of sample countries appear highly relevant. No
matter how we proxy the quality of democratic institutions in the country, we find that increases
in the political contestability of government control significantly raise the probability of early
adoption. For example, in regression (1) the coefficient on Polity suggests that a one-standard
deviation (7.6) increase in Polity would increase the hazard rate for adopting deposit insurance
by exp(0.058*7.6) = 1.55 points (or an increase of about 55 percent). This result accords with

8

We do not include the IMF and Contagion variables because these variables do not display cross-country variation
and would therefore drop out of a Cox proportional hazards model.

21

Kroszner and Strahan (1999) who hold that the political lobby for deposit insurance is more
effective in democracies where minority interest groups are more likely to be heard.
Differences in macroeconomic environment of the country do not seem to matter much,
although we find some weak evidence that countries are more likely to adopt deposit insurance
when they run a fiscal surplus. This finding supports the view that in countries with persistent
fiscal deficits governments may be unable or unwilling to introduce schemes that create
contingent liabilities for the government.
The bank regulatory and supervisory framework also does not appear to be an important
factor in the adoption decision, although when we seek to control for bank regulatory and
supervisory differences, our tests become less powerful. The usable sample shrinks to 1808
observations for 72 countries. We find weak evidence that deposit insurance is introduced earlier
in countries that allow banks to engage in a variety of activities, including securities, insurance,
and real estate business. This finding challenges private-interest explanations that predict that
adoption would be delayed in countries where banks can engage in nonbanking activities, such
as the sale of insurance products. However, the result is consistent with the public-interest
theories that predict that adoption should occur earlier in jurisdictions where banks offer
insurance.
Efforts to control for the quality of the bureaucracy and the law-and-order tradition serve
mainly as robustness checks. Proxies for the quality of legal institutions do not add to the
explanatory power of the model. They leave our main results unaltered and even increase the
importance of the Polity variable, although the significance of the increase is undermined by the
reduction in sample size.
Finally, regressions (7) to (10) confirm the commonsense expectation that external
pressure from the EU encouraged earlier adoption of deposit insurance by EU accession

22

countries. On the other hand, World Bank endorsement does not seem to have wielded a
significant influence.
We also obtain a positive and significant estimate for the evolutionary parameter α . This
tells us that the hazard function for adopting deposit insurance increases during our sample
period 1960 – 2002. To show how quickly, we compare the hazard rates for the years 1980 and
2000. Focusing on the estimate of α in regression (1), we find that for a typical country:

λ (Year 2000) = λ (40) = λα (λ 40)α −1
= (40 / 20)α −1 = (40 / 20) 2.16−1 = 2.23.
λ (Year 1980) = λ (20) = λα (λ 20)α −1
This tells us that such a country is more than 2 times more likely to adopt deposit insurance in
2000 than in 1980. This nonlinear trend approximates the emulation effect that we go on to
estimate directly using the Contagion variable in Probit specifications.9 That significant positive
values are found for α in all Weibull specifications supports our contention that external
influence is important. The likelihood of adoption at time t, conditional upon nonadoption prior
to time t, increases over time.

C. Robustness Experiments Employing Cox and Probit Models of the Adoption Decision
Table 6 shows that results are similar if we use the Cox model rather than the Weibull model of
the hazard rate. Because the Cox model excludes time variation in the hazard rate, it is
impossible to include Contagion and IMF external pressure as potential determinants. In this
model too [regressions (1) and (2)], deposit insurance is adopted earlier in countries that show a
greater clout for large banks, that show greater clout for undercapitalized banks, that undergo
financial crises, that are more democratic, and that are (former) EU accession countries.
As a further robustness check, we also estimate Probit models of the decision. The
endogenous variable has the value one in years when the country has explicit deposit insurance,

23

but is zero otherwise. We allow for correlation among errors for each country by estimating
Probit regressions using clustered errors at the country level. Probit models accommodate the
time-varying external pressure variables Contagion and IMF.
Regressions (3) and (4) are Probit regressions of the adoption decision. These equations
include year-fixed effects to control for unobserved common elements that make deposit
insurance more desirable in countries as time goes by (other than those captured by the WB and
EU Candidacy variables).
Probit models assume that a country makes each year a decision about changing its
deposit-insurance status. However, once explicit insurance is in place, countries rarely jettison
it. To parallel hazard models, we drop all post-adoption observations. Although the Probit
approach uses right-censored observations that potentially bias the results, the Probit results turn
out to be broadly similar to those obtained from the hazard models.
Probit regressions (5) and (6) replace the time dummies by the time-varying external
pressure variables Contagion and IMF. Contagion proxies how widely deposit insurance is
believed to be a universal best practice. Consistent with this interpretation, we find that as more
and more countries adopt deposit insurance, countries without deposit insurance become more
likely to follow their lead. Although Contagion is strongly significant, IMF does not enter
significantly once we control for the other sources of external influence.
Overall, these experiments confirm the hypothesis that domestic private and public
interests and external influence play important roles in adoption decisions.

5. Explaining Deposit Insurance Design

9

The impact of the external pressure variables Contagion and IMF are already captured by the evolutionary trend α.

24

We next use Heckman’s two-stage selection framework to investigate whether and how
political and economic factors influence the design of deposit insurance systems in adopting
countries. We test hypotheses about the “liberality” of system design. By the liberality of a
design feature, we mean the extent to which empirical evidence summarized in Demirgüç-Kunt
and Kane (2002) indicates that it is likely to promote moral hazard and risk-shifting by banks. To
recognize that particular combinations of features might mute or reinforce the impact of some of
the others, we construct a covariance matrix of design features in which each variable is
standardized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. We define the first principal
component of the covariance matrix of the eight features listed in section 2 as our first Moral
Hazard index.
The first-stage equation is a selection model for adoption. It uses the same set of
regressors used in the hazard models of Section 4. The second-stage models incorporate a
regressor called Heckman’s Lambda that accounts for the sample-selection bias that would
emerge if one sought to explain design features in a single-equation context. As an inverse
measure of the odds of adopting, this variable measures the degree to which adoption proves
surprising. A positive and significant coefficient for Heckman’s Lambda indicates that latent
characteristics that make adoption surprising also encourage liberality in design.
We experiment with two versions of Heckman’s two-step selection models.10 First, we
estimate a model using identical regressors in both stages. This model is identified only by the
fact that Heckman’s Lambda is a nonlinear function of the regressors. Second, we estimate a
model that excludes the selection variable Contagion from the second-stage regression. As
shown in the previous section, Contagion is an important determinant of adoption. This variable

10

We obtain qualitatively similar results when using maximum likelihood to estimate the Heckman selection model.

25

satisfies the exclusion restriction if Contagion partly explains adoption (as shown in section 4),
but does not wield much influence on decisions about the design features of deposit insurance.
Regression (1) of Table 7 uses the first principal component of the vector of design
features as the endogenous variable in the second stage. Heckman’s Lambda receives a positive
coefficient, indicating that latent characteristics that make adoption less likely also encourage
liberality in design, but this variable is not statistically significant. We find that design features
are more liberal in countries where insurance markets are relatively large. This is inconsistent
with the view that the private interests of a powerful insurance lobby seeking to promote losscontrol features so as to make it harder for banks to compete with the insurance industry. If
banks enjoy efficiency gains from economies of scope that rise with the size of the insurance
markets, this sign would indicate pursuit of public benefits.
We also find more risk controls in countries showing larger shares of elderly people. This
is inconsistent with this demographic bloc’s private interests unless elderly people lobby for
extensive risk controls to contain bank risk-shifting for fear that safety-net subsidies would end
up being captured by people younger than themselves.
The results also indicate that countries with higher levels of per capita income are more
apt to adopt design features that mitigate moral hazard behavior by banks. This may be because
sophisticated risk-control features such as coinsurance and risk-adjusted premiums are more
readily understood and easier to enforce in economically developed countries.
We also find that countries are apt to adopt better risk controls if they also have more
stringent capital regulations. This supports the view that capital requirements are complementary
ways to limit risk-shifting.
Finally, we find that countries that impose strict entry restrictions on banks tend to adopt
a more-liberal deposit insurance scheme. This suggests that the banking industry has

26

extraordinary political clout in such countries, since entry restrictions and generous deposit
insurance both enhance the franchise value of incumbent banks.
Regression (2) includes year-fixed effects to control for unobserved elements that might
make deposit insurance become more desirable in countries as time goes by. This experiment
confirms that countries with large shares of undercapitalized banks adopt more liberal deposit
insurance. This is consistent with the private interests of risky banks, who can benefit from
extensive deposit insurance coverage and few risk controls.
These experiments also show that more-democratic countries adopt more-liberal deposit
insurance. This result is consistent with the private-interest view that the lobbying for deposit
insurance subsidies is more effective where minority interest groups have better access to power.
We also find that countries with high inflation rates and wide supervisory authority tend to have
less generous deposit insurance schemes. The experiment confirms the positive (and now
statistically significant) sign accorded Heckman’s Lambda. Latent characteristics that make
adoption less likely also encourage liberality in design. This result underscores the value of
making inferences about design in a two-stage framework.
Regression (3) drops the time-fixed effects included in the previous regression and
instead includes Contagion as selection variable in the first-stage regression. As before, the firststage regression indicates that as time goes by and more countries adopt deposit insurance, other
countries become more likely to adopt deposit insurance. A positive and significant coefficient
continues to be assigned to Heckman’s lambda.
These findings are broadly consistent with those obtained using time-fixed effects, except
that this experiment indicates that countries that run fiscal deficits seem less likely to impose risk
controls and more likely to load contingent liabilities on the government.

27

Regression (4) explores the effects of introducing the external pressure variables IMF,
WB, and EU Candidacy into the model, when excluding Contagion from the second stage. While
we found earlier that external pressure by the WB and EU can lead countries to adopt deposit
insurance earlier, this experiment indicates that these same pressures dispose countries to adopt
schemes that include better risk controls. Expert advice that accompanies international pressure
is likely to lead to more prudent design of deposit insurance. This experiment also indicates that,
consistent with private-interest origins, countries with a larger proportion of small banks tend to
prefer more liberal deposit insurance.
Regression experiments (5) through (7) use alternative moral-hazard indices as the
endogenous variable in second-stage regressions. The covariates included in these robustness
checks and the first-stage regressions are the same as those in regression (4). The endogenous
variable in regression (5) is a moral-hazard index based on the first two principal components of
design features. Regression (6) uses the moral-hazard index based on the first three principal
components of the design features. The endogenous variable in regression (7) is the simple
average of the individual design-feature scores. While the results are broadly similar across the
alternative specifications, a few differences emerge. In particular, the role of inflation and fiscal
deficits lacks robustness again.
Although not reported here, we also experimented with specifications including the
alternative political-environment variables (Democracy, Executive Constraints, and Political
Competition). These experiments show much the same results as those obtained when political
institutions are proxied by Polity.
Table 8 presents Heckman selection regressions for each of the design features that make
up the composite moral hazard indices. First-stage coefficients are virtually identical in all
columns. While second-stage estimates are similar across specifications, a few noticeable

28

differences emerge. For example, while countries with a large proportion of small banks
generally adopt fewer risk controls, they tend not to cover foreign-currency deposits. This may
be because foreign-currency deposits flow largely to a country’s largest banks, so that small
banks have little incentive to lobby for this form of coverage.
Also, whereas previous experiments indicated that moral-hazard indices were not
significantly influenced by the occurrence of banking crises, in this experiment coverage tends to
increase in countries that experience banking crises. This finding is consistent with evidence
presented by Hovakimian, Kane, and Laeven (2003) that systems adopted in crisis circumstances
tend to be poorly designed.

6. Summary
Analyzing data covering the experience of up to 180 countries over the past four decades, this
paper studies determinants of the adoption and design of explicit deposit insurance systems.
Regression experiments confirm that the interplay of private and public interests influences the
adoption and design of deposit insurance schemes. Within countries, outside influences and
internal political factors significantly modify the intersectoral contracting process.
Three principal findings emerge. First, countries with more-democratic environments and
countries with a larger proportion of risky banks are more likely both to adopt deposit insurance
and to design it with fewer risk controls. Other things equal, systems that allow sectoral interests
to negotiate more openly with one another appear more likely both to adopt deposit insurance
and to design it poorly. Second, deposit insurance is more likely to be adopted during financial
crises, presumably because representatives for sectoral interests find it easier to negotiate
regulatory reform in distressed circumstances. Third, external pressures from institutions such as
the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the European Union influence the

29

domestic decision-making process. Pressure to emulate developed-country regulatory
frameworks appears to promote adoption of deposit insurance, but also to dispose a country
toward better design. These inferences prove robust to a host of different statistical methods and
control variables.

30

References
Allen, F., and D. Gale. 1998. “Optimal Banking Crises” Journal of Finance 53, 1245-1284.
Barth, J.R., G. Caprio, and R. Levine. 2004. “Bank Regulation and Supervision: What Works
Best?” Journal of Financial Intermediation 13, 205-248.
Barth, J.R., G. Caprio, and R. Levine. 2006. Rethinking Bank Regulation: Till Angles Govern,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Beck, T., G. Clarke, A. Groff, P. Keefer, and P. Walsh. 2001. “New Tools in Comparative
Political Economy: The Database of Political Institutions.” World Bank Economic Review
15, 165-176.
Becker, G.S. 1983. “A Theory of Competition among Pressure Groups for Political Influence.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 98, 371-400.
Bhattacharya, S., A.W.A. Boot, and A.V. Thakor. 1998.”The Economics of Bank Regulation.”
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 30, 745-770.
Calomiris, C., and E. White. 1994. “The Origins of Federal Deposit Insurance,” In: C. Goldin
and G. Libecap, eds., The Regulated Economy: A Historical Approach to Political
Economy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 145-188.
Caprio, G., D. Klingebiel, L. Laeven, and G. Noguera. 2005. “Banking Crisis Database.” In: P.
Honohan and L. Laeven (Eds.), Systemic Financial Crises: Containment and Resolution.
New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 307-340.
Chan, Y.-S., S. Greenbaum and A. Thakor, 1992. “Is Fairly Priced Deposit Insurance Possible?”,
Journal of Finance 47, 227-245.
Chari, V.V., and R. Jagannathan. 1988. “Banking Panics, Information, and Rational Expectations
Equilibrium”, Journal of Finance 43, 749-761.
Cooperstein, R., G. Pennacchi, and R. Stevens, 1995. “The Aggregate Cost of Deposit Insurance:
A Multiperiod Analysis”, Journal of Financial Intermediation 4, 242-271.
Demirgüç-Kunt, A., and E. Detragiache. 2002. “Does Deposit Insurance Increase Banking
System Stability? An Empirical Investigation.” Journal of Monetary Economics 49,
1373-1406.
Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and H. Huizinga. 2004. “Market Discipline and Deposit Insurance.” Journal
of Monetary Economics 51, 375-399.
Demirgüç-Kunt, A., and E. Kane. 2002. “Deposit Insurance Around the World: Where Does it
Work?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 16, 175-195.
31

Demirgüç-Kunt, A., and T. Sobaci. 2001. “A New Development Database. Deposit Insurance
around the World.” World Bank Economic Review 15, 481-490.
Diamond, D., and P. Dybvig. 1983. “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance and Liquidity.” Journal of
Political Economy 91, 401-419.
Economides, N., R.G. Hubbard, and D. Palia. 1996. “The Political Economy of Branching
Restrictions and Deposit Insurance.” Journal of Law and Economics 29, 667-704.
European Commission. 1994. Directive 94/19/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 30 May 1994 on deposit-guarantee schemes, O.J., L135, pp.5-14.
Folkerts-Landau, D., and C.-J. Lindgren. 1998. “Toward a Framework for Financial Stability.”
Mimeo. International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Garcia, G.G. 1999. “Deposit Insurance: Actual and Best Practices.” IMF Working Paper 99/54,
Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
Garcia, G.G. 2000. “Deposit Insurance: Actual and Good Practices.” Occasional Paper No. 197,
Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
Giammarino, R., E. Schwartz, and J. Zechner. 1989. “Market Valuation of Banks Assets and
Deposit Insurance in Canada.” Canadian Journal of Economics 22, 109-127.
Honohan, P., and L. Laeven. 2005. Systemic Financial Crises: Containment and Resolution.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming.
Hovakimian, A., E. Kane, and L. Laeven. 2003. “How Country and Safety-Net Characteristics
Affect Bank Risk-Shifting.” Journal of Financial Services Research 23, 177-204.
International Association of Deposit Insurers. 2003. International Deposit Insurance Survey.
http://www.iadi.org/html/App/SiteContent/Complete%20Surveys/
International Monetary Fund. 1999. Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes:
Bulgaria. Section VI. System of Deposit Insurance. Washington, DC: International
Monetary Fund. http://www.imf.org/external/np/rosc/bgr/depos.htm
Joskow, P.L., and R.G. Noll. 1981. “Regulation in Theory and Practice: An Overview.” In: G.
Fromm, ed., Studies in Public Regulation. Cambridge: MIT Press, pp. 1-65.
Kane, E.J. 1995. “Three Paradigms for the Role of Capitalization Requirements in Insured
Financial Institutions.” Journal of Banking and Finance 19, 431-59.
Kane, E.J. 1996. “De Jure Interstate Banking: Why Only Now?” Journal of Money, Credit, and
Banking 28, 141-161.

32

Kane, E.J., and B.K. Wilson. 1998. “A Contracting-Theory Interpretation of the Origins of
Federal Deposit Insurance.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 30, 573-595.
Kiefer, Nicholas. 1988. “Economic Duration Data and Hazard Functions.” Journal of Economic
Literature 26, 646-679.
Kroszner, R.S. 1998. “The Political Economy of Banking and Financial Regulatory Reform in
Emerging Markets.” Research in Financial Services 10, 33-51.
Kroszner, R.S., and P. Strahan. 1999. “What Drives Deregulation? Economics and Politics of the
Relaxation of Bank Branching Restrictions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 14371467.
Kroszner, R.S., and P. Strahan. 2001. “Obstacles to Optimal Policy: The Interplay of Politics and
Economics in Shaping Bank Supervision and Regulation Reforms.” In: F.S. Mishkin, ed.,
Prudential Supervision: What Works and What Doesn't. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, pp. 233-273.
Kroszner, R.S., and T. Stratmann. 1998. “Interest Group Competition and the Organization of
Congress: Theory and Evidence from Financial Services’ Political Action Committees.”
American Economic Review 88, 1163-1187.
Krueger, A.O. 1974. “The Political Economy of the Rent-Seeking Society.” American Economic
Review 64, 291-303.
Kyei, A. 1995. “Deposit Protection Arrangements: A Comparative Study,” IMF Working Paper
95/134, Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny. 1999. “The Quality of
Government.” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 15, 222-279.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer. 2002. “Government Ownership of Banks.”
Journal of Finance 57, 265-301.
Laeven, L. 2002. “Bank Risk and Deposit Insurance.” World Bank Economic Review 16, 109137.
Laeven, L. 2004. “The Political Economy of Deposit Insurance”. Journal of Financial Services
Research 26(3), 201-224.
Lin, D.Y. and L.J. Wei, 1989. “The Robust Inference for the Cox Proportional Hazards Model”,
Journal of the American Statistical Association 84, 1074-1078.
Merton, R. 1977. “An Analytical Derivation of the Cost of Deposit Insurance and Loan
Guarantees.” Journal of Banking and Finance 1, 3-11.
33

North, D.C. 1990. “A Transactions Cost Theory of Politics.” Journal of Theoretical Politics 2,
355-367.
Peltzman, S. 1976. “Toward a More General Theory of Regulation.” Journal of Law and
Economics 19, 109-148.
Pennacchi, G., 1987. “A Reexamination of the Over- (or Under-) Pricing of Deposit Insurance.”
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 19, 340-360.
Pennacchi, G., 2006. “Deposit Insurance, Bank Regulation, and Financial System Risks.”
Journal of Monetary Economics 53, 1-30.
Ronn, E.I., and A.K. Verma. 1986. “Pricing Risk-Adjusted Deposit Insurance: An Option-Based
Model.” Journal of Finance 41, 871-895.
Stigler, G.J. 1971. “The Theory of Economic Regulation.” Bell Journal of Economics and
Management Science 2, 3-21.
Talley, S.H., and I. Mas. 1990. “Deposit Insurance in Developing Countries,” Policy Research
Working Paper, No. 548, Washington, DC: World Bank.
Wheelock, D.C., and P.W. Wilson, 1995. “Explaining Bank Failures: Deposit Insurance,
Regulation, and Efficiency.” Review of Economics and Statistics 77, 689-700.
World Bank. 2004. “Deposit Insurance – Reforms Supported by the World Bank during the
Period 1993-2004.” Mimeo. Operations Evaluation Department, World Bank.

34

Table 1. Explicit deposit insurance systems at year-end 2003
This table lists the countries that adopted explicit deposit insurance systems by year-end 2003. All data refer to year-end 2003. We refer to the data section of this paper for details about
the data sources and variable definitions. GDP per capita are from International Financial Statistics (IFS). The following “non-adopting” countries are included in our sample:
Afghanistan, Angola, Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Boliviae, Botswana, Brunei, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroong, Cape Verde,
Central African Republicg, Chadg, China, Comoro Islands, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial Guineag, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabong, Gambia, Georgia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hong Kong (China), Iran, Iraq, Israel, Kiribati, Kyrgyz Republic, Laos, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Moldovad, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand, Niger, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Qatar,
Republic of Congog, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, St. Lucia, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syria,
Tajikistan, Togo, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Uruguayf, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, W. Samoa, Yemen, Zaire, Zambia. Total sample consists of 181 countries.

Country
Albania
Algeria
Argentina
Austria
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia-Herzegovina
Brazil
Bulgaria
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Rep.
Denmarkc
Dominican Republic
Ecuador

Unlimited
Coverage
guarantee Coverage GDP per limit to
Date (1=Yes;
limit
capita per capita
enacted 0=No) (in US$) (in US$) GDP
2002
1997
1979
1979
1999
1993
1984
1996
1974
1998
1995
1995
1967
1986
1985
1997
2000
1994
1988
1962
1999

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1

6,568
8,263
10,327
25,260
50,000
39,894
1,021
1,000
25,260
3,228
6,925
9,686
46,425
3,764
7,192
16,343
25,260
31,575
40,296
Full
Full

1,811
2,135
3,410
31,429
17,497
13,741
380
1,805
29,320
1,812
2,788
2,549
27,080
4,620
1,796
6,484
16,134
8,881
39,182
1,889
2,232

3.6
3.9
3.0
0.8
2.9
2.9
2.7
0.6
0.9
1.8
2.5
3.8
1.7
0.8
4.0
2.5
1.6
3.6
1.0
n.a.
n.a.

Foreign Interbank
Payment
deposits deposits
(1=Per
covered covered Coinsurance account;
(1=Yes; (1=Yes;
(1=No;
0=Per
0=No)
0=No)
0=Yes)
depositor)
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0

35

0h
0
1
0
1
1
1
0i
0
1
1
1
1
0i
0
1
0
0
1
1
1

0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
n.a.
0

Riskadjusted
Public
funding Compulsory
premiums
Public
(1=No; administration (1=Yes; Membership
0=Yes) (1=Yes; 0=No) 0=No) (0=No; 1=Yes)

Funded
(1=Yes;
0=No)
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

1
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

1
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
1

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
n.a.

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0

Country
El Salvador
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Gibraltar
Greece
Guatemala
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Ireland
Isle of Man
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakstan
Kenya
Korea
Kuwait
Latvia
Lebanon
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malaysia

Unlimited
Coverage
guarantee Coverage GDP per limit to
Date (1=Yes;
limit
capita per capita
enacted 0=No) (in US$) (in US$) GDP
1999
0
4,720
2,265
2.1
1998
0
8,058
6,790
1.2
1969
0 31,863 31,034
1.0
1980
0 88,410 29,805
3.0
1966
0 25,260 29,602
0.9
1998
0 25,260
n.a.
n.a.
1993
0 25,260 15,700
1.6
1999
0
2,487
2,074
1.2
1999
0
9,297
996
9.3
1993
0 14,429
8,209
1.8
1985
0 29,455 35,905
0.8
1961
0
2,193
564
3.9
1998
1
Full
1,106
n.a.
1989
0 25,260 38,074
0.7
1991
0 35,694 29,424
1.2
1987
0 130,457 25,471
5.1
1998
0
4,957
3,131
1.6
1971
0 93,371 33,637
2.8
2000
0 14,104
1,979
7.1
1999
0
2,774
2,068
1.3
1985
0
1,313
459
2.9
1996
0 41,925 12,710
3.3
1982
0
Full 19,279
n.a.
1998
0
5,545
4,810
1.2
1967
0
3,317
5,703
0.6
1992
0 25,260
n.a.
n.a.
1996
0 16,293
5,369
3.0
1989
0 25,260 60,092
0.4
1996
0 25,260
2,285
11.1
1998
1
Full
4,254
n.a.

Foreign Interbank
Payment
Riskdeposits deposits
(1=Per
adjusted
covered covered Coinsurance account;
Funded premiums
Public
(1=Yes; (1=Yes;
(1=No;
0=Per
(1=Yes;
(1=No; administration
0=No)
0=No)
depositor) 0=No)
0=Yes) (1=Yes; 0=No)
0=Yes)
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
n.a.
1
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
n.a.
0
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
k
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0l
0
1
0
0
1
n.a.
0
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

36

Public
funding Compulsory
(1=Yes; Membership
0=No) (0=No; 1=Yes)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
n.a.
n.a.
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
n.a.
n.a.
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
n.a.
n.a.

Unlimited
Coverage
guarantee Coverage GDP per limit to
Date (1=Yes;
limit
capita per capita
Country
enacted 0=No) (in US$) (in US$) GDP
Malta
2003
0 25,260 12,169
2.1
Marshall Islands
1975
0 100,000
2,171
46.1
Mexico
1986
0 2,871,337
6,327 453.9 a
Micronesia
1963
0 100,000
2,132
46.9
Netherlands
1979
0 25,260 31,601
0.8
Nicaragua
2001
0 20,000
779
25.7
Nigeria
1988
0
366
463
0.8
0 299,401 48,193
6.2
Norway
1961b
Oman
1995
0 52,016
8,600
6.0
Paraguay
2003
0 10,500
1,026
10.2
Peru
1992
0 19,773
2,238
8.8
Philippines
1963
0
1,800
1,004
1.8
Poland
1995
0 28,418
5,669
5.0
Portugal
1992
0 31,575 14,108
2.2
Romania
1996
0
3,842
2,737
1.4
Russia
2003
0
6,098
2,984
2.0
Serbia and Montenegro
2001
0
87
2,535
0.0
Slovak Republic
1996
0 25,260
6,072
4.2
Slovenia
2001
0 26,931 14,065
1.9
Spain
1977
0 25,260 20,974
1.2
Sri Lanka
1987
0
1,034
948
1.1
Sweden
1996
0 34,364 33,670
1.0
Switzerland
1984
0 24,254 43,848
0.6
Taiwan
1985
0 29,420 13,288
2.2
Tanzania
1994
0
235
279
0.8
Thailand
1997
1
Full
2,263
n.a.
Trinidad & Tobago
1986
0
7,937
8,297
1.0
Turkey
1983
1
Full
3,399
n.a.
Uganda
1994
0
1,550
233
6.7
Ukraine
1998
0
281
1,049
0.3

Foreign Interbank
Payment
Riskdeposits deposits
(1=Per
adjusted
covered covered Coinsurance account;
Funded premiums
Public
(1=Yes; (1=Yes;
(1=No;
0=Per
(1=Yes;
(1=No; administration
0=No)
0=No)
depositor) 0=No)
0=Yes) (1=Yes; 0=No)
0=Yes)
1
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0m
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
0n
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
n.a.
n.a.
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1

37

Public
funding Compulsory
(1=Yes; Membership
0=No) (0=No; 1=Yes)
n.a.
n.a.
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
n.a.
n.a.
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
n.a.
n.a.
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
n.a.
n.a.
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Foreign Interbank
Payment
RiskUnlimited
Coverage deposits deposits
(1=Per
adjusted
Public
guarantee Coverage GDP per limit to covered covered Coinsurance account;
funding Compulsory
Funded premiums
Public
Date (1=Yes;
limit
capita per capita (1=Yes; (1=Yes;
(1=No;
0=Per
(1=Yes;
(1=No; administration (1=Yes; Membership
Country
enacted 0=No) (in US$) (in US$) GDP
0=No)
0=No)
depositor) 0=No)
0=Yes) (1=Yes; 0=No) 0=No) (0=No; 1=Yes)
0=Yes)
United Kingdom
1982
0 19,611 30,173
0.6
1
0
0o
0
0
1
1
0
0
United States
1934
0 100,000 37,658
2.7
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
Venezuela
1985
0
6,258
3,250
1.9
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
0
Vietnam
2000
0
1,948
488
4.0
n.a.
n.a.
1
0
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Zimbabwe
2003
0
3,640
615
5.9
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
b
In Norway, a private guarantee fund for savings banks with voluntary membership had been in place since 1921, with membership becoming obligatory in 1924. A private guarantee
fund for commercial banks was first introduced in 1938. Both guarantee funds were not pure deposit insurance schemes but had wide mandates to support member banks in liquidity or
solvency crisis.
c
Banks in Greenland with Danish ownership are covered by the Danish deposit insurance scheme.
d
Moldova has adopted deposit insurance in 2004.
e
While Bolivia does not have a formal deposit insurance system, it has a Financial Restructuring Fund set up in December 2001 that acts as deposit insurance.
f
Uruguay has established a deposit insurance system in 2002 (Law on protection of bank deposits was enacted on December 27, 2002, creating a bank deposits collateral fund and a
Superintendency of Bank Savings Protection), but it is not yet regulated.
g
A proposal for explicit deposit insurance was drafted in 1999 by these 6 Francophone African countries but the proposal has only been ratified by 2 out of the 6 Communauté
Économique et Monétaire de l'Afrique Centrale (CEMAC) countries: Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, and Republic of Congo.
h
Coinsurance of up to 15% (up to 350,000 Lek full insurance, and from 35,000 to 700,000 insurance at 85%).
i
The equivalent of USD 2000 (per person per bank) is fully covered by insurance. 80% coverage is provided for the next USD 3000 (that is from USD 2000 to USD 5000). Amounts
exceeding the equivalent of USD 5000 per person per bank are not insured.
j
Full guarantee on time deposits; 90% coverage of savings deposits up to a limit of 120 Unidades de Fomento. (1 Unidad de Fomento = US$ 24).
k
Coverage of 100% up to LTL 10,000 and the balance at 90 percent.
l
Coverage of 100% up to 10,000 Euro; 90% next 10,000 Euro.
m
Coverage is RO 20,000 or 75% of net deposits, whichever is less.
n
Coverage is 100% of deposits up to 1000 Euro; and 90% from 1000 to 18000 Euro.
o
Coverage is 100% of the first ₤2000, and 90% of the next ₤33,000.

38

Table 2. Summary statistics
This table presents summary statistics for the endogenous and explanatory variables used in the regressions. See Appendix 1 for a detailed explanation of variables
and data sources.
Variable
Endogenous
Deposit Insurance
Coverage ratio
Foreign currency deposits
Interbank deposits
Coinsurance
Payment
Premiums
Administration
Membership
Moral-hazard composite
Explanatory
Small Banks
Undercapitalized Banks
Insurance penetration
Pop65
Crisis
Polity score
Democracy score
Executive Constraints
Political Competition
Log of GDP per capita
Bureaucracy
Law & Order
GDP Growth
Inflation
Fiscal Surplus
Capital stringency
Restrict
Entry
Official
Contagion
IMF
WB Loan
EU Candidacy

Mean

Median

Std. dev.

Min

Max

No. obs

0.17
6.24
0.75
0.24
0.74
0.24
0.76
0.55
0.14
0.00

0.00
2.46
1.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
-0.10

0.37
13.72
0.43
0.43
0.44
0.42
0.43
0.50
0.35
1.00

0.00
0.05
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
-1.25

1.00
117.86
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
4.63

7964
920
1256
1256
1221
1221
1250
1250
1250
912

49.88
65.22
3.80
5.78
0.06
-0.20
3.76
3.88
4.87
0.57
2.13
3.69
3.64
13.82
-3.18
4.08
7.28
7.46
10.75
0.16
0.11
0.01
0.01

38.57
66.49
2.45
4.04
0.00
-3.00
1.00
3.00
3.00
0.44
2.00
3.58
3.89
6.51
-2.75
4.00
7.00
8.00
11.00
0.10
0.00
0.00
0.00

43.70
22.46
3.34
3.85
0.24
7.64
4.20
2.34
3.77
1.55
1.08
1.29
5.82
22.33
3.21
1.52
2.02
1.15
2.79
0.14
0.32
0.10
0.12

0.00
7.67
0.47
1.00
0.00
-10.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
-3.01
0.00
0.95
-34.86
-31.91
-18.42
1.00
3.00
0.00
4.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00

100.00
98.08
15.95
19.33
1.00
10.00
10.00
7.00
10.00
4.03
4.00
6.00
34.31
100.00
8.81
7.00
12.00
8.00
14.00
0.48
1.00
1.00
1.00

7084
6380
4400
7571
7964
5667
5667
5667
5667
5847
6116
6116
5811
5788
6336
5500
5940
5896
5940
7964
7964
7964
7964

39

Table 3. Correlation matrix

Moral hazard composite
-.31*

.10*

.17*

Undercapitalized banks

.21*

-.13*

-.14*

-.33*

Insurance penetration

.15*

-.28*

-.12*

-.27*

.10*

-.43* -.41*

.25*

.43*

.29*

-.30*

Crisis Dummy

.10*

-.01

.02*

.01

.00

-.05*

-.04*

Polity score

.42*

-.22*

-.21*

-.30*

.22*

.49*

.51*

Exec. constraints

.40*

-.23*

-.25*

-.34*

.24*

.49*

.52*

.03

.95*

GDP per capita

.36*

-.25*

-.33*

-.64*

.26*

.56*

.69*

-.09*

.52*

.54*

.02

.04

-.10*

.04*

.00

-.05*

-.12*

-.06*

-.06*

.02

GDP Growth

-.02

World Bank Loan

IMF

Contagion

Official

Entry

Restrict

Capital stringency

Fiscal surplus

.04*

Inflation

-.07*

-.05

-.03

.06*

-.03*

-.18*

-.05*

.18*

-.02

-.04*

-.12*

-.26*

Fiscal surplus

.10*

-.05

-.06

-.09*

.00

.03

.10*

.01

-.03

-.04*

.21*

.03*

Capital stringency

Inflation

GDP Growth

GDP per capita

Exec. constraints

Polity Score

Crisis Dummy

.76*

Small banks

Pop65

Pop65

Insurance penetration

Undercapitalized banks

Small banks

Moral hazard composite

Coverage ratio

Deposit insurance

This table shows the bivariate correlation between the variables used in the regressions and the significance level of each correlation coefficient. * indicates
significance at the 5% level.

.05*

.04*

-.09*

.06*

-.02

-.24*

-.06*

.09*

.11*

.01

-.04*

.04*

.05*

Restrict

-.12*

.31*

.35*

.28*

-.08*

-.15*

-.27*

.00

-.02

-.03

-.32*

.04*

.06*

-.04*

-.25*

.12*
.05

Entry

-.06*

.06

.18*

.23*

-.01

-.14*

-.08*

.04*

-.20*

-.21*

-.21*

-.04*

-.04*

.07*

.05*

.09*

-.01

-.04

-.10*

-.16*

.04*

-.22*

-.20*

-.09*

.07*

-.03 -.04*

.04*

.06*

.19*

.00

.00

.00

.01

.15*

.24*

.21*

.04*

-.11*

.05*

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

Official

-.04*

.12*

Contagion

.37*

-.11*

IMF

.28*

-.10*

-.08*

.00

.00

.00

.01

-.01

.15*

.13*

.02

-.02

-.07*

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

.74*

World Bank Loan

.15*

-.04

-.07*

.00

-.01

-.07*

.05*

.02

.09*

.07*

.01

.00

.00

.02

-.08*

.00

.01

.01

.19*

.18*

EU Candidacy

.16*

-.08*

-.17*

-.03*

-.05*

-.06*

.18*

.05*

.15*

.16*

.07*

.00

.02

.06*

-.05*

-.03

.02

.04*

.19*

.14*

.20*
-.12*

40

.26*

Figure 1: Kaplan-Meier estimate of hazard rate for deposit insurance adoption (1960-2003)
0.5

Hazard rate

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

41

1995

2000

Table 5. Hazard models of deposit-insurance adoption
This table presents hazard regressions seeking to explain the hazard rate of adopting explicit deposit insurance over the period 1960-2002. The model considers the
adoption of deposit insurance as a “transforming event.” The endogenous variable is the number of years between 1960 and the adoption date. The assumed
distribution of the hazard function is Weibull. The coefficients reported are the logarithms of the underlying relative-hazard coefficients. Regressions 2 to 4 consider
alternative proxies for political institutions. Regression 5 controls for the scope and quality of bank regulations and supervision. Regression 6 includes additional
proxies for the institutional environment of the country. Regressions 7 to 10 add external influence variables, using alternative proxies for political institutions. The
number of adopting countries is the number of countries that have adopted deposit insurance during the observation period. An intercept is used but not shown. Lin
and Wei (1989) standard errors are shown in brackets. The standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the country-level. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10%,
5% and 1% level, respectively.

Small Banks
Undercapitalized Banks
Pop65
Crisis
Polity

(1)
-0.013**
(0.005)
0.013**
(0.007)
0.053
(0.045)
1.220***
(0.304)
0.058**
(0.027)

Democ

(2)
-0.013**
(0.005)
0.013*
(0.007)
0.053
(0.045)
1.227***
(0.307)

(3)
-0.012**
(0.005)
0.012*
(0.006)
0.057
(0.043)
1.192***
(0.309)

Inflation
Fiscal surplus

(6)
-0.017***
(0.007)
0.015*
(0.008)
0.031
(0.052)
1.084***
(0.415)
0.101***
(0.039)

(7)
-0.016**
(0.007)
0.015**
(0.007)
-0.007
(0.055)
0.751
(0.495)
0.091**
(0.039)

(8)
-0.017**
(0.007)
0.015**
(0.007)
-0.005
(0.055)
0.773
(0.501)

0.181**
(0.085)

-0.026
(0.178)
-0.016
(0.027)
-0.007
(0.006)
0.070*
(0.041)

-0.044
(0.182)
-0.016
(0.026)
-0.006
(0.006)
0.072*
(0.042)

(9)
-0.016**
(0.007)
0.015**
(0.007)
0.003
(0.053)
0.758
(0.505)

(10)
-0.016**
(0.007)
0.016**
(0.007)
-0.005
(0.056)
0.781*
(0.474)

0.164**
(0.066)

Political competition

Real GDP growth

(5)
-0.015**
(0.006)
0.016**
(0.008)
0.040
(0.051)
1.104***
(0.410)
0.098**
(0.039)

0.102**
(0.049)

Executive constraints

Log of GDP per capita

(4)
-0.013***
(0.005)
0.013**
(0.007)
0.046
(0.046)
1.237***
(0.296)

-0.015
(0.176)
-0.015
(0.026)
-0.006
(0.006)
0.069*
(0.041)

0.292**
(0.114)
0.133**
(0.055)
-0.044
(0.176)
-0.017
(0.027)
-0.007
(0.006)
0.075*
(0.041)

-0.269
(0.271)
-0.003
(0.032)
-0.017*
(0.010)
0.094
(0.069)

-0.277
(0.280)
-0.001
(0.031)
-0.018*
(0.010)
0.081
(0.068)

-0.168
(0.290)
-0.032
(0.034)
-0.018
(0.012)
0.046
(0.067)

-0.237
(0.292)
-0.028
(0.033)
-0.017
(0.011)
0.057
(0.065)

-0.188
(0.284)
-0.025
(0.031)
-0.017
(0.011)
0.054
(0.063)

0.170**
(0.073)
-0.204
(0.299)
-0.032
(0.034)
-0.017
(0.011)
0.055
(0.066)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)
-0.102
(0.065)
0.015
(0.094)
-0.178*
(0.095)
-0.067
(0.093)
0.011
(0.054)

(6)
-0.070
(0.066)
0.032
(0.093)
-0.177*
(0.095)
-0.062
(0.087)
0.002
(0.055)
-0.355
(0.284)
0.177
(0.230)

(7)
-0.045
(0.067)
0.013
(0.093)
-0.141
(0.099)
-0.032
(0.090)
0.025
(0.067)
-0.257
(0.316)
0.147
(0.232)
0.775
(0.586)
1.092***
(0.411)

(8)
-0.044
(0.067)
0.010
(0.094)
-0.140
(0.099)
-0.036
(0.089)
0.022
(0.067)
-0.261
(0.317)
0.154
(0.233)
0.755
(0.606)
1.015**
(0.426)

(9)
-0.048
(0.068)
0.016
(0.091)
-0.127
(0.099)
-0.046
(0.089)
0.013
(0.067)
-0.304
(0.320)
0.181
(0.240)
0.883
(0.572)
0.922**
(0.422)

(10)
-0.030
(0.063)
0.021
(0.095)
-0.125
(0.093)
-0.036
(0.090)
0.010
(0.064)
-0.233
(0.314)
0.143
(0.228)
0.572
(0.552)
1.244***
(0.423)

3175
119
63
92.73
2.16

3175
119
63
92.21
2.17

3175
119
63
87.31
2.15

3175
119
63
96.87
2.14

1808
72
50
60.94
2.29

1786
71
50
67.53
2.31

1786
71
50
101.18
2.06

1786
71
50
99.66
2.10

1786
71
50
99.28
2.08

1786
71
50
106.95
2.05

Insurance penetration
Capital Stringency
Restrict
Entry
Official
Bureaucracy
Law and Order
WB
EU Candidacy

Observations
Number of countries
Number of adopting countries
Model χ2
Evolutionary parameter α

Table 6. Alternative models of deposit-insurance adoption
This table presents regressions that explain the adoption of explicit deposit insurance over the period 1960-2002. Regressions 1 and 2 are based on a proportional Cox
(1972) hazard model. The endogenous variable is the number of years between 1960 and the adoption date. Regressions 3 and 4 are based on a Probit model with
year-fixed effects. Regressions 5 and 6 are based on a Probit model without year-fixed effects. The endogenous variable is the explicit deposit-insurance indicator.
We drop observations after deposit insurance is adopted in the country. An intercept is used but not shown. For regressions 1 and 2, Lin and Wei (1989) standard
errors are shown in brackets. For regressions 3 to 6, White standard errors are shown in brackets. The standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the country-level.
*, **, *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

Small Banks
Undercapitalized Banks
Pop65
Crisis
Polity
Log of GDP per capita
Real GDP growth
Inflation
Fiscal surplus
Insurance penetration
Bureaucracy
Law and Order
Capital Stringency

(1)
-0.014***
(0.005)
0.014**
(0.006)
0.066
(0.042)
1.097***
(0.318)
0.048*
(0.028)
0.023
(0.177)
-0.031
(0.025)
-0.003
(0.006)
0.069
(0.045)

(2)
-0.018**
(0.007)
0.017**
(0.007)
-0.009
(0.054)
0.771
(0.491)
0.088**
(0.039)
-0.199
(0.306)
-0.031
(0.034)
-0.013
(0.011)
0.049
(0.073)
-0.039
(0.069)
-0.273
(0.332)
0.206
(0.250)
-0.001
(0.093)

(3)
-0.007***
(0.002)
0.008**
(0.003)
0.033
(0.020)
0.520***
(0.173)
0.020*
(0.011)
0.013
(0.082)
-0.010
(0.012)
-0.000
(0.003)
0.035*
(0.021)

(4)
-0.010***
(0.003)
0.010***
(0.004)
-0.008
(0.026)
0.411
(0.253)
0.041***
(0.016)
-0.110
(0.135)
-0.009
(0.015)
-0.004
(0.004)
0.024
(0.031)
-0.017
(0.036)
-0.181
(0.160)
0.117
(0.119)
0.009
(0.045)

(5)
-0.006***
(0.002)
0.008***
(0.003)
0.009
(0.020)
0.476***
(0.179)
0.017
(0.011)
0.033
(0.079)
-0.014
(0.011)
-0.001
(0.003)
0.024
(0.019)

(6)
-0.009***
(0.003)
0.009**
(0.004)
-0.009
(0.025)
0.427*
(0.245)
0.035**
(0.015)
-0.076
(0.131)
-0.009
(0.015)
-0.004
(0.004)
0.019
(0.029)
-0.023
(0.034)
-0.130
(0.162)
0.093
(0.114)
0.013
(0.043)

Restrict

-0.150
(0.103)
-0.019
(0.091)
0.020
(0.071)
0.563
(0.580)
1.135**
(0.495)

Entry
Official
WB
EU Candidacy

-0.081
(0.050)
-0.013
(0.040)
-0.006
(0.030)
0.631*
(0.371)
0.820***
(0.279)

IMF
Contagion

Observations
Countries
Number of adopting
countries
Chi-squared
Pseudo-R2

0.808**
(0.331)
0.737***
(0.201)
-0.318
(0.249)
2.900***
(0.675)

-0.065
(0.046)
-0.019
(0.040)
-0.007
(0.028)
0.594
(0.374)
0.663***
(0.212)
-0.523
(0.327)
3.356***
(0.819)

3175
119
63

1786
71
50

2087
119
63

1062
71
50

3176
119
63

1062
71
50

87.24
--

61.07
--

126.29
0.17

168.60
0.16

154.56
0.20

168.60
0.16

Table 7. Heckman two-step selection model for deposit-insurance coverage and other design features
This table reports a series of Heckman two-stage selection regressions for design features. The endogenous variable in the first-stage regression (selection equation) is the explicit
deposit insurance indicator. The endogenous variable in the second-stage (design equation) is a composite moral hazard index. In regressions (1) to (4), we use the moral hazard index
based on the first principal component of following design features: Coverage ratio, Foreign currency deposits, Interbank deposits, Coinsurance, Payment, Premiums, Administration,
and Membership. In regression (5), we use the moral hazard index based on the first two principal components of the design features. In regression (6), we use the moral hazard index
based on the first three principal components of the design features. In regression (7), we use the moral hazard that is the simple average of the design feature variables. All design
features have been transformed to standardized variables (with mean zero and standard deviation of one) for the principal component calculations. We report Heckman’s (1979) twostep efficient estimates. Model (2) includes year-fixed effects in both the first-stage and second-stage regression. Model (3) adds the Contagion variable as selection variable to the firststage regression. Models (4) to (7) add the external influence variables to the first-stage and second-stage regressions. Standard errors are shown in brackets and *, **, *** indicate
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

Second-stage: Design
Small Banks
Undercapitalized Banks
Insurance penetration
Pop65
Crisis
Polity
Log of GDP per capita
Bureaucracy
Law and Order
Real GDP growth
Inflation

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

-0.000
(0.004)
0.006
(0.005)
0.088**
(0.037)
-0.058***
(0.009)
0.197
(0.237)
0.047
(0.047)
-0.202***
(0.034)
-0.065
(0.061)
0.021
(0.059)
-0.010
(0.017)
-0.006
(0.007)

-0.003
(0.003)
0.009***
(0.003)
0.078***
(0.019)
-0.048***
(0.011)
0.138
(0.110)
0.055***
(0.019)
-0.305***
(0.077)
-0.007
(0.076)
0.050
(0.048)
-0.006
(0.009)
-0.007**
(0.003)

0.003*
(0.001)
0.004**
(0.002)
0.095***
(0.014)
-0.055***
(0.008)
0.055
(0.077)
0.024***
(0.007)
-0.188***
(0.031)
-0.079
(0.054)
0.042
(0.038)
-0.002
(0.008)
-0.003*
(0.002)

0.005***
(0.001)
0.001
(0.002)
0.083***
(0.013)
-0.027***
(0.008)
0.091
(0.071)
0.023***
(0.006)
-0.268***
(0.030)
-0.161***
(0.050)
0.137***
(0.036)
0.009
(0.007)
-0.002
(0.002)

0.018***
(0.002)
0.006**
(0.003)
0.124***
(0.022)
-0.123***
(0.013)
0.180
(0.119)
0.054***
(0.011)
-0.326***
(0.050)
0.192**
(0.085)
0.052
(0.060)
0.010
(0.012)
-0.006**
(0.003)

0.010***
(0.003)
0.015***
(0.004)
0.091***
(0.032)
-0.112***
(0.019)
0.095
(0.174)
0.069***
(0.016)
-0.560***
(0.073)
-0.022
(0.124)
0.556***
(0.088)
0.009
(0.017)
-0.000
(0.004)

0.013***
(0.004)
0.033***
(0.005)
0.107**
(0.043)
-0.138***
(0.026)
0.168
(0.235)
0.049**
(0.021)
-1.367***
(0.099)
0.227
(0.168)
0.739***
(0.118)
0.048**
(0.023)
-0.020***
(0.005)

Fiscal surplus
Capital Stringency
Restrict
Entry
Official

-0.029*
(0.016)
-0.160***
(0.018)
0.020
(0.056)
0.186***
(0.018)
0.041
(0.030)

-0.020
(0.016)
-0.166***
(0.021)
0.005
(0.030)
0.181***
(0.021)
0.041**
(0.016)

-0.035***
(0.011)
-0.163***
(0.016)
0.052***
(0.014)
0.176***
(0.016)
0.027***
(0.011)

0.284***
(0.058)

-0.017
(0.011)
-0.213***
(0.016)
0.061***
(0.013)
0.192***
(0.014)
0.029***
(0.010)
0.056
(0.056)
-0.601***
(0.108)
-0.738***
(0.095)
0.166***
(0.063)

0.030*
(0.018)
-0.459***
(0.026)
0.053**
(0.022)
0.341***
(0.024)
0.095***
(0.016)
0.123
(0.095)
-0.845***
(0.183)
-1.830***
(0.161)
0.317***
(0.106)

0.044*
(0.026)
-0.523***
(0.038)
0.019
(0.032)
0.432***
(0.035)
0.262***
(0.024)
0.300**
(0.138)
-1.227***
(0.266)
-2.242***
(0.235)
0.489***
(0.154)

0.074**
(0.035)
-0.470***
(0.052)
-0.125***
(0.043)
0.492***
(0.048)
0.148***
(0.032)
0.270
(0.187)
-1.225***
(0.361)
-3.091***
(0.318)
0.710***
(0.209)

0.571
(0.644)

0.848***
(0.287)

-0.009***
(0.001)
0.012***
(0.002)
-0.081***
(0.015)
-0.000
(0.011)
0.542***
(0.114)
0.101***
(0.006)
0.006
(0.042)
0.014
(0.073)
-0.085*

-0.019***
(0.002)
0.018***
(0.002)
-0.032*
(0.017)
0.015
(0.013)
0.306**
(0.124)
0.100***
(0.008)
-0.394***
(0.054)
0.132
(0.086)
0.043

-0.018***
(0.002)
0.018***
(0.002)
-0.040**
(0.017)
0.005
(0.013)
0.412***
(0.121)
0.095***
(0.008)
-0.306***
(0.051)
0.167**
(0.085)
0.014

-0.018***
(0.002)
0.018***
(0.002)
-0.037**
(0.017)
0.004
(0.013)
0.346***
(0.122)
0.095***
(0.008)
-0.315***
(0.053)
0.173**
(0.087)
0.014

-0.018***
(0.002)
0.018***
(0.002)
-0.037**
(0.017)
0.004
(0.013)
0.346***
(0.122)
0.095***
(0.008)
-0.315***
(0.053)
0.173**
(0.087)
0.014

-0.018***
(0.002)
0.018***
(0.002)
-0.037**
(0.017)
0.004
(0.013)
0.346***
(0.122)
0.095***
(0.008)
-0.315***
(0.053)
0.173**
(0.087)
0.014

-0.018***
(0.002)
0.018***
(0.002)
-0.037**
(0.017)
0.004
(0.013)
0.346***
(0.122)
0.095***
(0.008)
-0.315***
(0.053)
0.173**
(0.087)
0.014

IMF
WB
EU Candidacy
Heckman’s lambda
First-stage: DI
Small Banks
Undercapitalized Banks
Insurance penetration
Pop65
Crisis
Polity
Log of GDP per capita
Bureaucracy
Law and Order

Real GDP growth
Inflation
Fiscal surplus
Capital Stringency
Restrict
Entry
Official

(0.048)
-0.034***
(0.007)
-0.015***
(0.002)
0.024*
(0.014)
0.005
(0.021)
-0.126***
(0.019)
0.008
(0.021)
0.065***
(0.014)

(0.056)
-0.011
(0.009)
-0.012***
(0.002)
0.056***
(0.016)
-0.011
(0.023)
-0.149***
(0.022)
0.032
(0.025)
0.066***
(0.016)

(0.055)
-0.014
(0.009)
-0.009***
(0.002)
0.047***
(0.016)
-0.012
(0.023)
-0.141***
(0.021)
0.028
(0.025)
0.066***
(0.016)

5.999***
(0.301)

(0.056)
-0.015*
(0.009)
-0.010***
(0.002)
0.046***
(0.016)
-0.011
(0.023)
-0.143***
(0.021)
0.030
(0.025)
0.065***
(0.016)
-0.453***
(0.143)
0.104
(0.225)
0.135
(0.179)
6.727***
(0.414)

(0.056)
-0.015*
(0.009)
-0.010***
(0.002)
0.046***
(0.016)
-0.011
(0.023)
-0.143***
(0.021)
0.030
(0.025)
0.065***
(0.016)
-0.453***
(0.143)
0.104
(0.225)
0.135
(0.179)
6.727***
(0.414)

(0.056)
-0.015*
(0.009)
-0.010***
(0.002)
0.046***
(0.016)
-0.011
(0.023)
-0.143***
(0.021)
0.030
(0.025)
0.065***
(0.016)
-0.453***
(0.143)
0.104
(0.225)
0.135
(0.179)
6.727***
(0.414)

(0.056)
-0.015*
(0.009)
-0.010***
(0.002)
0.046***
(0.016)
-0.011
(0.023)
-0.143***
(0.021)
0.030
(0.025)
0.065***
(0.016)
-0.453***
(0.143)
0.104
(0.225)
0.135
(0.179)
6.727***
(0.414)

2450
1739

2450
1739

2450
1739

2450
1739

2450
1739

IMF
WB
EU Candidacy
Contagion

Observations
Censored observations

2450
1739

2450
1739

Table 8. Heckman two-step selection model for deposit-insurance design features: individual design features
This table reports a series of Heckman two-stage selection regressions for design features. The endogenous variable in the first-stage regression (selection equation) is the explicit
deposit insurance indicator. The endogenous variable in the second-stage (design equation) is one of the following design features that make up the moral hazard index: Coverage ratio,
Foreign currency deposits, Interbank deposits, Coinsurance, Payment, Premiums, Administration, or Membership. All design features have been transformed to standardized variables
(with mean zero and standard deviation of one). We report Heckman’s (1979) two-step efficient estimates. All models include the Contagion variable as selection variable in the firststage regression. Standard errors are shown in brackets and *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

Second-stage: Design
Small Banks
Undercapitalized Banks
Insurance penetration
Pop65
Crisis
Polity
Log of GDP per capita
Bureaucracy
Law and Order
Real GDP growth
Inflation
Fiscal surplus
Capital Stringency

(1)
Coverage ratio
-0.018*
(0.010)
0.002
(0.012)
-0.274***
(0.102)
0.076
(0.063)
1.787***
(0.564)
0.076
(0.051)
-0.233
(0.236)
1.575***
(0.401)
-1.693***
(0.283)
0.036
(0.056)
-0.033***
(0.013)
0.109
(0.084)
-0.309**

(2)
Foreign currency
deposits
-0.007***
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.020***
(0.007)
0.031***
(0.005)
-0.018
(0.040)
-0.014***
(0.004)
-0.151***
(0.018)
-0.168***
(0.031)
0.232***
(0.022)
0.003
(0.004)
0.001*
(0.001)
0.000
(0.007)
0.104***

(3)
Interbank deposits

(4)
Coinsurance

(5)
Payment

(6)
Premiums

(7)
Administration

(8)
Membership

0.002***
(0.001)
0.004***
(0.001)
-0.009
(0.008)
-0.011**
(0.005)
0.082**
(0.042)
0.012***
(0.004)
-0.081***
(0.019)
0.163***
(0.032)
-0.063***
(0.022)
-0.000
(0.004)
-0.003***
(0.001)
0.058***
(0.007)
-0.094***

0.002**
(0.001)
-0.003***
(0.001)
0.038***
(0.008)
-0.021***
(0.005)
0.077*
(0.044)
0.003
(0.004)
-0.161***
(0.021)
-0.190***
(0.035)
0.227***
(0.024)
-0.002
(0.004)
0.002**
(0.001)
-0.022***
(0.007)
-0.098***

-0.001
(0.001)
0.005***
(0.001)
-0.050***
(0.008)
-0.020***
(0.005)
0.069
(0.042)
0.009**
(0.004)
0.025
(0.020)
0.112***
(0.033)
0.146***
(0.023)
0.000
(0.004)
0.006***
(0.001)
-0.020***
(0.007)
-0.041***

0.004***
(0.001)
0.007***
(0.001)
-0.003
(0.008)
-0.019***
(0.005)
0.002
(0.042)
-0.000
(0.004)
0.012
(0.019)
0.239***
(0.032)
-0.201***
(0.022)
0.001
(0.004)
-0.007***
(0.001)
0.045***
(0.007)
0.019*

0.003***
(0.001)
0.002***
(0.001)
0.074***
(0.008)
-0.023***
(0.005)
-0.171***
(0.043)
0.011***
(0.004)
-0.295***
(0.020)
-0.092***
(0.033)
0.134***
(0.023)
0.013***
(0.004)
0.000
(0.001)
0.004
(0.007)
-0.112***

0.001***
(0.000)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.008***
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.002)
0.002
(0.015)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.021***
(0.007)
0.001
(0.011)
-0.050***
(0.008)
0.003*
(0.001)
-0.001***
(0.000)
-0.029***
(0.002)
0.001

Restrict
Entry
Official
IMF
WB
EU Candidacy
Heckman’s lambda
First-stage: DI
Small Banks
Undercapitalized Banks
Insurance penetration
Pop65
Crisis
Polity
Log of GDP per capita
Bureaucracy
Law and Order
Real GDP growth

(0.124)
0.429***
(0.104)
0.314***
(0.115)
0.168**
(0.077)
-0.622
(0.450)
0.967
(0.866)
-1.359*
(0.763)
1.978***
(0.499)

(0.009)
-0.036***
(0.008)
-0.048***
(0.009)
-0.012**
(0.005)
0.040
(0.034)
0.027
(0.068)
0.188***
(0.059)
-0.048
(0.039)

(0.010)
-0.025***
(0.008)
0.081***
(0.009)
0.039***
(0.005)
0.048
(0.036)
-0.264***
(0.072)
-0.302***
(0.062)
0.249***
(0.040)

(0.011)
0.023***
(0.009)
0.085***
(0.010)
-0.044***
(0.006)
0.036
(0.038)
-0.443***
(0.076)
-0.384***
(0.066)
0.057
(0.044)

(0.010)
-0.003
(0.008)
0.060***
(0.009)
0.069***
(0.006)
0.103***
(0.036)
-0.044
(0.072)
-0.367***
(0.063)
0.126***
(0.041)

(0.010)
-0.044***
(0.008)
-0.038***
(0.009)
0.006
(0.005)
-0.042
(0.035)
0.205***
(0.070)
0.000
(0.061)
-0.048
(0.040)

(0.010)
0.003
(0.008)
0.033***
(0.009)
0.028***
(0.006)
0.031
(0.036)
-0.117
(0.072)
-0.628***
(0.063)
-0.108***
(0.041)

(0.003)
0.012***
(0.003)
0.019***
(0.003)
-0.021***
(0.002)
-0.020
(0.012)
-0.001
(0.024)
0.040*
(0.021)
-0.009
(0.014)

-0.018***
(0.002)
0.018***
(0.002)
-0.037**
(0.017)
0.004
(0.013)
0.346***
(0.122)
0.095***
(0.008)
-0.315***
(0.053)
0.173**
(0.087)
0.014
(0.056)
-0.015*
(0.009)

-0.017***
(0.002)
0.012***
(0.002)
-0.032**
(0.016)
0.006
(0.013)
0.472***
(0.111)
0.080***
(0.007)
-0.281***
(0.051)
0.157*
(0.084)
0.075
(0.054)
-0.006
(0.008)

-0.017***
(0.002)
0.012***
(0.002)
-0.032**
(0.016)
0.006
(0.013)
0.472***
(0.111)
0.080***
(0.007)
-0.281***
(0.051)
0.157*
(0.084)
0.075
(0.054)
-0.006
(0.008)

-0.017***
(0.002)
0.012***
(0.002)
-0.032**
(0.016)
0.006
(0.013)
0.472***
(0.111)
0.080***
(0.007)
-0.281***
(0.051)
0.157*
(0.084)
0.075
(0.054)
-0.006
(0.008)

-0.017***
(0.002)
0.012***
(0.002)
-0.032**
(0.016)
0.006
(0.013)
0.472***
(0.111)
0.080***
(0.007)
-0.281***
(0.051)
0.157*
(0.084)
0.075
(0.054)
-0.006
(0.008)

-0.017***
(0.002)
0.012***
(0.002)
-0.032**
(0.016)
0.006
(0.013)
0.466***
(0.112)
0.080***
(0.007)
-0.280***
(0.051)
0.156*
(0.084)
0.074
(0.054)
-0.006
(0.008)

-0.017***
(0.002)
0.012***
(0.002)
-0.032**
(0.016)
0.006
(0.013)
0.466***
(0.112)
0.080***
(0.007)
-0.280***
(0.051)
0.156*
(0.084)
0.074
(0.054)
-0.006
(0.008)

-0.017***
(0.002)
0.012***
(0.002)
-0.032**
(0.016)
0.006
(0.013)
0.466***
(0.112)
0.080***
(0.007)
-0.280***
(0.051)
0.156*
(0.084)
0.074
(0.054)
-0.006
(0.008)

Inflation
Fiscal surplus
Capital Stringency
Restrict
Entry
Official
IMF
WB
EU Candidacy
Contagion

Observations
Censored observations

-0.010***
(0.002)
0.046***
(0.016)
-0.011
(0.023)
-0.143***
(0.021)
0.030
(0.025)
0.065***
(0.016)
-0.453***
(0.143)
0.104
(0.225)
0.135
(0.179)
6.727***
(0.414)

-0.004**
(0.002)
0.043***
(0.015)
0.007
(0.022)
-0.115***
(0.020)
0.024
(0.024)
0.010
(0.014)
-0.340**
(0.137)
0.024
(0.219)
-0.006
(0.173)
6.403***
(0.394)

-0.004**
(0.002)
0.043***
(0.015)
0.007
(0.022)
-0.115***
(0.020)
0.024
(0.024)
0.010
(0.014)
-0.340**
(0.137)
0.024
(0.219)
-0.006
(0.173)
6.403***
(0.394)

-0.004**
(0.002)
0.043***
(0.015)
0.007
(0.022)
-0.115***
(0.020)
0.024
(0.024)
0.010
(0.014)
-0.340**
(0.137)
0.024
(0.219)
-0.006
(0.173)
6.403***
(0.394)

-0.004**
(0.002)
0.043***
(0.015)
0.007
(0.022)
-0.115***
(0.020)
0.024
(0.024)
0.010
(0.014)
-0.340**
(0.137)
0.024
(0.219)
-0.006
(0.173)
6.403***
(0.394)

-0.004**
(0.002)
0.043***
(0.015)
0.007
(0.022)
-0.115***
(0.020)
0.024
(0.024)
0.010
(0.014)
-0.342**
(0.137)
0.027
(0.219)
-0.005
(0.173)
6.395***
(0.394)

-0.004**
(0.002)
0.043***
(0.015)
0.007
(0.022)
-0.115***
(0.020)
0.024
(0.024)
0.010
(0.014)
-0.342**
(0.137)
0.027
(0.219)
-0.005
(0.173)
6.395***
(0.394)

-0.004**
(0.002)
0.043***
(0.015)
0.007
(0.022)
-0.115***
(0.020)
0.024
(0.024)
0.010
(0.014)
-0.342**
(0.137)
0.027
(0.219)
-0.005
(0.173)
6.395***
(0.394)

2450
1739

2519
1739

2519
1739

2519
1739

2519
1739

2513
1739

2513
1739

2513
1739

Appendix 1. Variable definitions and data sources
Whenever we indicate the data source as “Authors’ calculation”, we refer to the data section of this paper and to Appendix 2 for
details about the data sources and variable definitions.
Variable
Deposit Insurance
Coverage ratio
Foreign currency
deposits
Interbank deposits
Coinsurance
Payment
Premium
Administration
Membership
Moral hazard

Small banks

Definition
Dummy that equals 1 if the country has explicit deposit insurance (including
blanket guarantees) and 0 if it has implicit deposit insurance.
Coverage limit of deposit insurance scheme in local currency divided by GDP
per capita. Missing for countries with full coverage.
Equals 1 if foreign deposits are covered by the deposit insurance scheme, 0 if
they are not covered, and missing otherwise.
Equals 1 if interbank deposits are covered by the deposit insurance scheme, 0 if
they are covered, and missing otherwise.
Equals 1 if deposit insurance scheme has no coinsurance, 0 if it has coinsurance,
and missing otherwise.
Equals 1 if coverage is per account, 0 if coverage is per depositor, and missing
otherwise.
Equals 1 if deposit insurance premiums are flat, 0 if premiums are risk-adjusted,
and missing otherwise.
Equals 1 if the administration of the deposit insurance scheme is public, 0 if it is
private or joint (public and private), and missing otherwise.
Equals 1 if membership to the deposit insurance scheme is voluntary, 0 if it is
compulsory to all banks, and missing otherwise.
Principal component of the variables coverage ratio, foreign deposits, interbank
deposits, coinsurance, payment, premium, administration, and membership. All
variables are standardized with mean of zero and standard deviation of one
before conducting the principal component analysis.
Share of banks in the country with total assets less than 1 billion U.S. dollars.

Source
Authors’ calculation.
Authors’ calculation
Authors’ calculation
Authors’ calculation
Authors’ calculation
Authors’ calculation.
Authors’ calculation.
Authors’ calculation
Authors’ calculation
Authors’ calculation

Bankscope

Variable

Definition
Average over the period 1995-99.

Source

Undercapitalized
banks
Insurance
penetration
Pop65

Share of banks in the country with capital-to-asset ratio less than the median
capital-to-asset ratio in the country. Average over the period 1995-99.
Gross insurance premiums underwritten as a share of GDP. Average over the
period 1987-2002.
Share of population age 65 and over.

Bankscope

Contagion

Fraction of countries in the sample that has adopted explicit deposit insurance
at each point in time.
Dummy variable that takes a value of one for the years 1999 and onwards, the
year 1999 being the year that the IMF endorsed deposit insurance by publishing
a paper on best practices and guidelines in deposit insurance, and zero
otherwise.
Dummy variable that takes the value of one during and following the year that
the World Bank started an adjustment lending program with the country for
reforms to establish deposit insurance (in addition to possibly other objectives),
and zero otherwise. This variable takes a value of one for the following
countries and periods (between brackets): Albania (2002 and onwards), Bolivia
(1998 and onwards), Bosnia-Herzegovina (1996 and onwards), Croatia (1995
and onwards), El Salvador (1996 and onwards), Jordan (1995 and onwards),
Lithuania (1996 and onwards), Nicaragua (2000 and onwards), Poland (1993
and onwards), Romania (1996 and onwards), Russia (1997 and onwards),
Ukraine (1998 and onwards).
Dummy variable that takes a value of one for the years 1994 and onwards for
EU candidate countries only (i.e., Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Romania, Slovak Republic,
Slovenia), and zero otherwise. The year 1994 was the year when the EU
Directive on Deposit Insurance came into force.

Authors’ calculation.

IMF

WB loan

EU Candidate

WDI
WDI

Garcia (2000)

World Bank (2004)

EU (1994)

Variable
Crisis

Definition
Dummy variable that takes a value of one in years that the country is
experiencing a systemic banking crisis, and zero otherwise.

Polity Score

Index combining democracy and autocracy scores. It ranges from –10 to 10,
where negative scores are assigned to countries under autocracies and positive
values to countries under democracies and –10 and 10 are the extreme cases of
these two systems. Autocracies sharply restrict or suppress competitive
political participation. Their chief executives are chosen in a regularized
process of selection within the political elite, and once in office they exercise
power with few institutional constraints. Democracy is conceived as three
essential, interdependent elements. One is the presence of institutions and
procedures through which citizens can express effective preferences about
alternative policies and leaders. Second is the existence of institutionalized
constraints on the exercise of power by the executive. Third is the guarantee of
civil liberties to all citizens in their daily lives and in acts of political
participation.
Democracy score. It ranges from 0 to 10, with higher scores denoting more
democratic systems. Democracy is conceived as three essential, interdependent
elements. One is the presence of institutions and procedures through which
citizens can express effective preferences about alternative policies and leaders.
Second is the existence of institutionalized constraints on the exercise of power
by the executive. Third is the guarantee of civil liberties to all citizens in their
daily lives and in acts of political participation.
Index measuring the extent of institutionalized constraints on the decisionmaking powers of chief executives. Such limitations may be imposed by any
accountability group. The index ranges from 1 to 7, where 1 represents
unlimited authority and 7 Executive parity or subordination.

Democracy

Executive
Constraints

Source
Caprio,
Klingebiel,
Laeven and Noguera
(2005)
Polity
IV,
INSCR
Program,
CIDCM,
University of Maryland,
College Park

Polity
IV,
INSCR
Program,
CIDCM,
University of Maryland,
College Park

Polity
IV,
INSCR
Program,
CIDCM,
University of Maryland,
College Park

Variable
Political
Competition

GDP per capita
Bureaucracy

Law & Order

Definition
Index combining regulation of participation and competitiveness of
participation scores. It ranges from 1 to 10, where higher scores represent
more political competition. Participation is regulated to the extent that there
are binding rules on when, whether, and how political preferences are
expressed. One-party states and Western democracies both regulate
participation but they do so in different ways, the former by channeling
participation through a single party structure, with sharp limits on diversity of
opinion; the latter by allowing relatively stable and enduring groups to compete
nonviolently for political influence. The polar opposite is unregulated
participation, in which there are no enduring national political organizations
and no effective regime controls on political activity. In such situations
political competition is fluid and often characterized by recurring coercion
among shifting coalitions of partisan groups. The competitiveness of
participation refers to the extent to which alternative preferences for policy and
leadership can be pursued in the political arena.
GDP per capita (constant 1995 thousands of US$).

Source
Polity
IV,
INSCR
Program,
CIDCM,
University of Maryland,
College Park

Index measuring the institutional strength and quality of the bureaucracy. It
ranges from 0 to 4. High points are given to countries where the bureaucracy
has the strength and expertise to govern without drastic changes in policy or
interruptions in government services. In these low-risk countries, the
bureaucracy tends to be somewhat autonomous from political pressure and to
have an established mechanism for recruitment and training. Countries that
lack the cushioning effect of a strong bureaucracy receive low points because a
change in government tends to be traumatic in terms of policy formulation and
day-to-day administrative functions. Average over the period 1984-2002.
Index measuring a country’s legal system and rule of law. It ranges from 0 to 6,
where a high score indicates high level of law and order. Law and order are
assessed separately, with each sub-component comprising zero to three points.

International Country Risk
Guide (ICRG)

WDI

International Country Risk
Guide (ICRG)

Variable

GDP Growth

Definition
The law sub-component is an assessment of the strength and impartiality of the
legal system while the order sub-component is an assessment of popular
observance of law. Average over the period 1984-2002.
Real GDP growth rate (in %).

WDI

Inflation

Inflation, GDP deflator (annual %).

WDI

Fiscal surplus

Fiscal surplus to GDP (in %). Positive values denote fiscal surpluses. Negative
values denote fiscal deficits. Average over the period 1960-2002, when
available.
Capital regulatory
An index of the stringency of capital regulations in the banking system. The
index
index captures whether the capital requirement reflects certain risk elements
and deducts certain market value losses from capital before minimum capital
adequacy is determined. Index ranges from 0 to 7. Higher values denote greater
stringency. Data refer to the year 2003.
Activity restrictions An index that measures the degree to which banks can engage in securities
underwriting and dealing, insurance underwriting and selling, and real estate
investment and management. Index ranges from 3 to 12. Higher scores denote
more restrictiveness. Data refer to the year 2003.
Entry restrictions
An index that captures regulatory requirements to obtain a license to set up a
bank. Index ranges from 0 to 8. Higher scores indicate greater stringency. Data
refer to the year 2003.
Official supervisory An index of the extent to which supervisory authorities have the authority to
power
discipline banks by taking specific actions to prevent and correct problems.
Index ranges from 0 to 14. Higher scores denote greater power. Data refer to
the year 2003.

Source

WDI

Barth et al. (2006)

Barth et al. (2006)

Barth et al. (2006)

Barth et al. (2006)

