                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    HAS SOCIAL SECURITY INFLUENCED FAMILY FORMATION AND FERTILITY
      IN OECD COUNTRIES? AN ECONOMIC AND ECONOMETRIC ANALYSIS

                                             Isaac Ehrlich
                                            Jinyoung Kim

                                        Working Paper 12869
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12869


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2007




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Isaac Ehrlich and Jinyoung Kim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Has Social Security Influenced Family Formation and Fertility in OECD Countries? An Economic
and Econometric Analysis
Isaac Ehrlich and Jinyoung Kim
NBER Working Paper No. 12869
January 2007
JEL No. J1,O1

                                              ABSTRACT

There is growing concern about a decline in the total fertility rate worldwide, but nowhere is the concern
greater than in OECD countries, some of which already face the prospect of population decline as
well. While the trend is largely the result of structural economic and social changes, our paper indicates
that it is partly influenced by the scale of the defined-benefits, pay-as-you-go (PAYG) social security
systems operating in most countries. Through a dynamic, overlapping-generations model where the
generations are linked by parental altruism, we show analytically that social security tax and benefit
rates generate incentives for individuals to reduce not just the fertility rate within families, but also
the incentive to form families, which we capture empirically by the fraction of adults married. We
conduct calibrated simulations as well as regression analyses that measure the quantitative importance
of social security tax rates in lowering both net marriage and total fertility rates. Our results show that
the impact of social security on these variables has been non-trivial. Our calibrated simulations also
enable us to study the effects of changes in the structure of social security on family formation and
fertility.

Isaac Ehrlich
415 Fronczak Hall
University of Buffalo
Box 601520
Buffalo, NY 14260-1520
and NBER
mgtehrl@buffalo.edu

Jinyoung Kim
Department of Economics
Korea University
5-1, Anam-Dong, Sungbuk-Ku
Seoul, Korea 136-701
jinykim@korea.ac.kr
                                           Introduction

       Economists and public-policy makers have been increasingly concerned about the

growing financial vulnerability of defined-benefits, pay-as-you-go (PAYG) pension systems. In

the US, the 2006 report of the Social Security Administration projects that from 2000 to 2050 the

old-age dependency ratio (population in ages 65 and over relative to 20-64) will rise from 20.8 in

2000 to 38.0 in 2050 and that the OASDI expenditures as a share of GDP will rise from 4.15% to

6.26%. Comparable statistics for the 15 EU countries show a considerably larger financial

vulnerability, with the old-age dependency ratio rising from 28.3 in 2000 to 55.9 in 2050 and the

Public Pension Expenditures share of GDP rising from 10.4% in 2000 to 13.3% in 2050 – double

of that in the US. (See CEC, 2000, and EPC, 2001.) Our concern in this paper, however, goes

much beyond the projected increases in the systems’ financial vulnerability. We focus here on

unintended demographic and economic consequences arising from the specific structure of the

PAYG system, which is common to all OECD countries.

       Data from 57 countries show that average annual marriage net of divorce rate per 1000

people age 15 and over fell from 9.72 in 1960 to 6.40 in 1990, and that average total fertility rate

(TFR) fell from 3.82 in 1965 to 2.07 in 1989. In OECD countries the marriage net of divorce rate

fell even more significantly from 9.97 in 1960 to 4.86 in 1990, and TFR fell from 2.80 in 1965 to

1.74 in 1989. These dramatic trends stem from secular trends in basic determinants of family

formation and fertility worldwide. Our theoretical and empirical analyses indicate, however, that

the PAYG social security system operating in most countries have independently contributed to

these trends, and thus, ironically, to the system’s growing financial vulnerability.

       More specifically, controlling for a number of theoretically relevant variables that affect the

incentive to form families and bear children in a panel of 28 OECD countries (see Table 2) over the




                                                  1
period 1960-1992, we find that higher ratios of social security’s pension benefits to GDP, which

approximates the PAYG system’s equilibrium tax rate (PEN), have depressed the rate of marriage

net of divorce − decreasing marriage and increasing divorce − and the total fertility rate. These

effects are stronger in OECD countries relative to other countries in our sample, and they are

generally not observed in countries where social security is a defined-contribution, fully funded

provident fund, rather than an unfunded, defined-benefits PAYG system.

        The theoretical insights we offer to rationalize these effects are based on a model of

endogenous growth where human capital is the engine of growth, family choices include fertility

and investment in children’s education (quantity and “quality” of children) by altruistic parents, and

family formation itself is a choice variable. Theoretically, we focus on the way the scale of the

PAYG system, as represented by equilibrium tax and spending rates, affects these decisions.

        The possible effects of PAYG systems on fertility, typically measured by the total fertility

rate (TFR), were analyzed in several previous studies as well.1 All implicitly reach a common

conclusion, however, which is a central proposition in Ehrlich and Lui (1998): exogenous increases

in PAYG taxes must exert opposite effects on at least one of the parental choice variables. We go

beyond all previous studies by considering the role of net family formation, since families are more

likely to bear children than single households. Consideration of family formation adds to our

understanding of the way social security taxes affect TFR, since changes in the latter may come

about in principle from changes in the percentage of families among all households, as well as from

changes in the within-families fertility rate (FFR).

        Second, we develop our inferences using an “endogenous growth” model which allows for

an economy’s long-term, self-sustaining productivity growth due to human capital accumulation.

This dynamic framework enables us to assess the impact of social security taxes at any given stage




                                                   2
of development, as well as over a “demographic transition” phase of development, which typically

follows an economy’s takeoff from a low development stage of stagnation to a perpetual-growth

regime, and which our model accounts for as well. We can thus study the possible effects of social

security on demographic variables in a panel of countries that are in different stages of development.

       We assess the quantitative impact of exogenous increases in proportional payroll taxes

via both a calibrated simulation analysis using OECD data, and a regression analysis in which we

implement our model using OECD and international panel data. Our findings from these two

estimation methods corroborate one another. Although theoretically we treat social security taxes

as an exogenous policy variable, empirically we allow for their possible endogeneity as well.

       We find that higher tax rates may have generated significant reductions in our key

demographic variables. For example, our calibrated simulations using OECD data suggest that

social security taxes may account for 48.1 % of the fall in TFR in OECD countries between 1965

and 1989. By comparison, similar simulations with US data (see Ehrlich and Kim, 2006) report

that social security taxes account for 26.8 % of the fall in TFR in the US between 1950 and 2000.

                                      I. The Analytical Framework

1. How a Defined-Benefits, PAYG System Works

       There are two basic insurance structures that social security systems, and even employer-

based pension programs, have adopted to provide old-age benefits to workers: defined-

contributions and defined-benefits plans.

       Defined-contributions plans work like pension contracts offered by the insurance

industry: individuals purchase future annuity benefits by making premium contributions – much

like the way they purchase life insurance – and their individual accounts are credited for the

amounts contributed. The ultimate pension benefits depend on the actuarial value of the returns




                                                  3
these contributions yield through investments in alternative investment vehicles. Such systems

may be managed by governments, as in Singapore, or by a regulated private insurance system, as

in many South American countries, where competing pension providers offer workers a choice

of investments in alternative portfolios of government bonds and private capital assets.

       Defined-benefits, PAYG systems which are common to all OECD countries, operate very

differently. The essence of the PAYG setup is that payments to retirees are supported by payroll

taxes applied to the next generation of workers. The benefits are “defined”, set by the political

system in a largely uniform way: there is only a loose connection between the benefits one

receives and the amounts one actually contributes over the labor career. And although total

benefits to retirees must ultimately be balanced by the total contributions coming from their

children’s generation, the personal benefits to recipients do not depend at all on what their own

children contribute, or even whether they have any children.

       The PAYG system can thus induce unintended consequences. Since defined benefits are

independent of contributions made by children, parents are not compensated individually for

raising more or better-educated children. As a result, PAYG payroll taxes induce behavior that is

not socially optimal: They diminish the incentive of individual workers to bear and invest in

children, save for retirement, or generally form families altogether, because they lower the

private rewards from family investments relative to alternative individual pursuits. These insights

are backed up more rigorously in the following sections.

2. The Benchmark Model

       A formal outline of our benchmark model is offered in Appendix 1 (see also our NBER

paper). Here we offer a general discussion of the model, which sets the stage for the simulation

and regression analyses we report in section I.4 and part II of this paper.




                                                  4
       The model recognizes the interaction among three overlapping generations: dependent

children, working young adults, and retired old adults. All household choices, including marriage,

children, and savings are thus made by the young adults aiming to maximize lifetime welfare.

Production per worker in the economy in time t is determined essentially by the level of human

capital possessed by each worker (for analytical simplicity all workers are assumed to be

homogeneous), Ht. In a steady state, there is a proportional relationship between a worker’s

production capacity, or per-capita income, and human capital per worker, so productivity growth

comes strictly from the human capital possessed by the next generation of workers in time t+1,

Ht+1, relative to that of their parents’ generation, Ht in time t (see equation A.1). The rationale is

that human capital – information and knowledge – is the only asset in the economy that is not

subject to diminishing returns, as Frank Knight argued more than a half century ago.2

       Human capital accumulation, in turn, is determined by the willingness of the current

generation of adults who form families to invest a fraction of their production capacity, ht, in the

knowledge of the future generation – their offspring. Parents are motivated essentially by

altruism toward their children (formally, the altruism function is specified by Cj3 in equation

A.7), but since family resources are always limited, a parent’s decisions include a choice of both

the number of children she wishes to bear and raise, nt, and her rate of investment in human

capital per child, ht, as a fraction of production capacity. This intergenerational link is critical,

because if each generation acted in isolation of all past and future generations, all generations

would just replicate the level of human capital they can attain and no growth would be possible.

       A few logical ramifications arise form this formulation:

       A. Family formation. Since most children are born in traditional families, a critical

determinant of fertility and population growth is the proportion of married adults, pt. 3




                                                  5
Movements in this variable are then controlled largely by “net marriage”, or the rate of marriage

net of divorce. These determinants are thus treated as distinct choice variables in our model. We

offer a probabilistic model of search for a marriage mate that takes into account the costs and

benefits of finding a mate and enjoying the superior psychic utility of having a family and

children (Vm), as opposed to staying single (Vs). In this framework, the equilibrium probability

of marriage, or the fraction of married adults, pt becomes a choice variable, which is motivated

by the net welfare gain from forming a family [Vm-Vs]. As we show below, social security taxes

and benefits can influence this choice.

       B. Substitutability of quantity and quality of children. Since children consume a

significant fraction of earning capacity, for those forming a family a critical choice becomes a

possible tradeoff between the quantity of children per parent (n), and investment in the human

capital of each child (h). Indeed, our model indicates that these two variables tend to be

“substitutes” in connection with changes of the implicit unit cost of each. This result is

significant for understanding the opposing movements in these variables over the development

process: economies that take off from a low income, stagnant equilibrium into persistent growth

regimes typically experience continuous accumulation of human capital along with declining

total fertility rates – a phenomenon known as the “demographic transition”. Our model generates

this feature of the development process analytically – for both family formation and family

fertility rate – so the implications we derive concerning the effect of social security on these

variables are independent of the secular trend produced by the demographic transition.

       C. The inefficiency implicit in defined-benefits, PAYG systems. For this system to be in

balance, expected benefits per surviving old adult must equal the expected contributions obtained

from the number of surviving adult workers per beneficiary, or the “Worker Support Ratio”




                                               6
(WSR), which depends on the total fertility rate, TFR=2pn, and which is the product of the

proportion of married adults (p) and the family (two-parent) fertility rate (2n). Given the tax rate

on earnings (θ) and the earnings per adult worker, the higher TFR, the higher would be the

equilibrium benefits per surviving old adult (see equation A.8). It follows that any reduction in

TFR would ultimately lower the equilibrium defined benefits per surviving old adult the PAYG

can sustain, St+1, at any given tax rate (θ) and earnings per worker.

        This is not the case for any individual household, single or married. If an individual

parent has a lower rate of fertility, that parent’s social security benefit is not affected, because the

latter depends on the average TFR in the population, and thus on aggregate behavior, not on the

fertility rate of any individual household. Similarly, if a household is comprised of a single,

childless adult, that person’s old-age benefits are “defined” (fixed) by the system at the same

level as the benefits of a married parent with many children, even though equilibrium defined

benefits in the aggregate do depend on the average fertility rate in the aggregate population. This

creates an inconsistency between the consequences from fertility choices faced by individual

households as opposed to the social security system as a whole, which is inefficient socially as it

can distort socially-optimal fertility and family formation decisions as well.

3. Testable Propositions

        In our benchmark model, we abstract from any inter-temporal or intergenerational

resources allocation within households, assuming that social security provides the only means of

financing old-age consumption. In this case, an exogenous rise in the scale of social security,

represented by a higher equilibrium (balanced-budget) tax rate on earnings, θ, would:

A. unambiguously lower the equilibrium quantity of children per married parents, nt (the family

fertility rate), leaving unchanged parental investments in the human capital of each child, ht. This




                                                   7
proposition implies that any increase in the social security tax lowers the entire dynamic paths of

fertility over the demographic transition: it affects both developing and highly developed

countries, although not necessarily by the same extent;

B. unambiguously lower the equilibrium fraction of married adults in the population.

       The rationale of proposition A is that for young parents who must spend considerable

resources on raising and educating children, a higher balanced-budget tax rate on earnings lowers

their ability to consume at young, relative to old age. Technically, the psychic rate of return to

young parents from investing in quantity and quality of children becomes lower than the

marginal rate of substitution in consumption between young and old age, which generates an

incentive to lower spending on children. In principle, both fertility and human capital investment

(n and h) may need to fall as a result, but since these two variables are ”substitutes”, and given

our operational definition of altruism (see equation A.7), altruistic parents reduce just fertility

without altering their investment in the human capital of each child.

       The rationale for proposition B is similar: an increase in the proportional tax rate imposes

a higher burden on married household who spend resources on raising and educating children,

which single households are entirely exempt from. This, in turn, lowers the net welfare gain from

searching for a mate and being married relative to staying single.

4. Assessing the Quantitative Implications of the Model via Calibrated Simulations

       How important quantitatively are these propositions? One way to measure quantitative

significance is to solve the model explicitly through numerical simulations that are calibrated by

the observed values of the model’s basic parameters, e.g., the average total fertility rate or GDP

per-capita over our sample period, or by applying the optimality conditions of the model to infer




                                                 8
the “missing” values of parameters for which no accurate data exist. The specific numerical

values assigned are detailed in Appendix 2.

       The calibrated simulations enable us to solve for the basic choice variables of the model:

pt, nt, and thus the total fertility rate, 2ptnt, under different assumed values of the tax rates on

social security, θ. Such simulations can be done over the entire demographic transition period,

but to save space we illustrate the results obtained at the growth equilibrium steady state, which

is more applicable to economies in advanced stages of development, such as OECD countries.

       Figure 1 plots the simulated solutions for the three demographic variables of our model as

functions of autonomous variations in equilibrium social security tax rates, ranging from 0 to

12% of GDP. The corresponding values of our demographic variables range from .69 to .43 for

the proportion of married adults (p); from 2.15 to 1.84 for the number of children per parent (n),

and from 2.95 to 1.55 children for TFR. From Figure 1 we can also calculate how much of the

actual change in TFR can be explained by the effect of the increased social security tax rate.

(We cannot do the same calculation for p because data on the variable are not consistently

reported.) The average TFR in OECD countries fell from 2.8 in 1965 to 1.74 in 1989. During

this period, our estimated θ rose from 3.78% to 7.49%. Our simulations ascribe 48.1% of the

actually observed change in TFR to the partial effect of the rise in θ from 1965 to 1989.4

       Our simulations also indicate that the elasticities of the individually controlled

demographic variables (p, n, and TFR=2pn) with respect to a change in the tax rate, θ, get larger

at higher values of θ, i.e., a one percent rise in the tax rate causes larger percentage declines in

the probabilities of marriage and fertility as the tax level rises. This is essentially because under a

concave utility function, the marginal tax burden on parents, as opposed to singles, increases as

the tax level rises. The same pattern of results is found over the transitional development stage as




                                                  9
the economy advances toward a steady state of growth. The implication is that increases in the

scale of social security, as measured by θ, are expected to exert a more detrimental effect on

family formation and fertility in the more advanced OECD countries relative to less developed

economies. This implication, as well as the quantitative results obtained from our simulations

concerning the effect of social security taxes on demographic variables, will also be tested

empirically via our regression analysis.

                                         II. Regression Analysis

       We test our basic propositions against international panel data via a reduced-form

specification of our model in which the dependent variables are the endogenous demographic

variables, and the regressors measure basic parameters, including the social security tax rate, θ.

Although θ is an exogenous variable in our model, we allow for its possible endogeneity in our

regression analysis. For variable definitions and sample statistics, see Appendix 3.

1. The Sample and Variable Construction

       Our social security data are taken from The Cost of Social Security, published by the

International Labour Office (ILO). Data are available in 57 countries over 33 years, 1960-1992,

but in some countries not for all years. We focus mainly on the subset of the data that includes

OECD countries. We compute the theoretical social security tax rate as PEN: the pension portion

of social security benefits relative to GDP, representing aggregate earning capacity. Under a

balanced budget, expected benefits per surviving old recipient π2St+1 must equal expected payroll

taxes collected from a surviving young worker Qt+1 ≡ θ[ptπ1nt( H +Ht+1)] (see equation A.8).

Thus, our empirical tax measure PEN ≡ π2St+1/Qt+1 = θ consistently measures the equilibrium

social security tax rate in our model.




                                                   10
        We use the population’s annual marriage net of divorce rate (NETMARRY) as a flow

counterpart of our family formation (stock) measure (p). Although we do not model divorce

separately, we decompose NETMARRY into a separate MARRY and DIVORCE regressions.

We use the official total fertility rate (TFR) as a proxy for average population fertility (2pn).

        Our basic explanatory variables include PEN and measures of the survival probabilities to

adulthood and to old age, Pi1 and Pi2, (see Appendix 3). Our analysis predicts that both variables

generally increase the incentive to form families and to have children, although a higher Pi1 can

also lower fertility (crude birth rates) within families, since parents do not need to compensate

for the risk of non-survival of newborn children to adulthood. Since our sample includes a

combination of developing and advanced economies, we control for an economy’s development

stage along the transitional dynamic phase by including per-capita GDP (GDPN) as an endogenous

regressor, since our model simulations predicts that over the transitional development phase, both

family formation and fertility would be declining as part of the demographic transition. We also

include in all regressions the GDP share of government spending (G) to separate the effect of our

social security tax from other government taxes and benefits. While we do not have direct

measures of the opportunity costs of bearing children (v), we use female labor force participation

rate (FLFP) as a proxy for the major component of the opportunity costs of raising children, as

well as an indicator of females’ financial independence. Data sources are listed in Appendix 3.

2. Model Specification

        Our basic regression specification is a linear model with country-specific fixed-effects:

(1) L y t ,t + 4 = β0 + β1PENt + β2LPi1t+ β3LPi2t + β4Xt+ ut,

where y t ,t + 4 measures the average value of each of our four endogenous variables over

overlapping 5-year lead periods, from t to t+4; L denotes natural logs; and β0 is a vector of



                                                   11
country-specific dummy variables. The vector (Xt) includes GDPNt, Gt and proxies of other

relevant model parameters.

       The basic idea is to treat the mean realized values of the model’s endogenous variables

over periods of intermediate length as samples of their equilibrium values along the transition

path to a growth steady state, and to test the effects of initial-period changes in our measure of θ,

PEN, on these values (see also Barro and Lee, 2003). The overlapping 5-year lead-period

specification in equation (1) is chosen to guarantee a large enough sample size, but we have also

experimented with 3 and 7 lead-year specifications, which yield similar quantitative results, and

with non-overlapping 5-year periods (see section IV.4). The country dummies in equation (1)

control for missing country-specific institutional factors that affect family formation, fertility,

and other determinants of population dynamics. 5 This fixed-effects specification captures

within-country variations in all regressors.

       Although in equation (1) PENt is entered as a predetermined regressor, empirically it may

be endogenous to our model. This is because equilibrium social security tax rates are set by the

political system, which is influenced by autonomous movements in the demographic variables p

and n, or the population age structure, which affect voters’ interests. Furthermore, GDPNt is in

principle an endogenous variable in our model, since it is determined by human capital

accumulation. To account for the possible endogeneity of both GDPNt and PENt we also employ

a 2SLS regression analysis (see section IV.1).6

       As part of our sensitivity analysis, we introduce PEN in both linear and logarithmic forms.

A Box-Cox optimal transformation analysis generally favors a linear transformation of PEN, and

a log transformation for all other variables in equation (1). Although we report only the results

of optimal transformations, alternative transformations of PEN yield similar elasticity estimates.




                                                  12
                                      III. Empirical Findings

       Table 1 summarizes the estimated effects of our social security tax measure, PEN, on the

basic variables of our model. The dependent variables are the logarithms of the annual rates of

the total fertility rate (LTFR), net marriage in the population age 15 and over (LNETMARRY),

as well as its corresponding determinants – the rates of marriage and divorce (LMARRY,

LDIVORCE) – over a 5-year lead period. For each regression, the first two rows report the

estimated regression coefficients (β), the ratios of these to their estimated standard deviation (an

indication of asymptotic statistical significance) associated with each regressor. For PEN the

third row reports the estimated elasticity, calculated at the sample mean.

       The basic regression specification is (1), with all variables entered in logs except PEN.

(For this reason, the estimated elasticities associated with PEN in Table 1 are computed only at

the mid-sample.) Model (column) 1 presents OLS estimates of the effects of the key regressors in

equation (1). In the case of family formation regressions, model 2 extends model 1 by adding the

deviation of the female/male ratio from 50% (DSEX) as well as the female labor force

participation rate (FLFP) and female-male ratio of schooling years (FSCH). We include these

variables as additional regressors since, as the marriage literature indicates, a higher DSEX and

FLFP tend to lower the likelihood of finding a mate or having a stable marriage, while FSCH

raises it. In the OLS regressions concerning TFR, model 2 includes the latter two regressors as

well, since a stable marriage also increases on the margin the family fertility rate, but we also

add NETMARRY, rather than DSEX, as an additional regressor (see the reasoning below).

       In all regressions, the effect of PEN on the dependent variables is consistent with our

theoretical predictions: in all cases, a higher tax rate lowers both our measures of family

formation and fertility, and the estimated coefficients appear to be statistically significant with no




                                                 13
exception, and in all regression models. The estimated effects of all other regressors are also

generally consistent with our model predictions.

1. Social Security Effects on Family Formation

        The measured PEN effects on the net marriage rate in the population 15 and over are

significant and consistent with our predictions, despite the limitation of NETMARRY as a flow

measure of the fraction of married adults in the population, p, which is the relevant theoretical

variable in our model. Moreover, while a higher PEN reduces marriage, it raises divorce, as

would be expected from the logic of our model, since marriage and divorce have opposite effect

on p. Indeed, PEN has a more pronounced effect on NETMARRY than on MARRY, despite the

fact that a non-working spouse can have an incentive to marry and stay married, at least over a

prescribed number of years, especially when a non-working spouse is legally entitled to collect

pension benefits vested with the working spouse. The estimated effect of PEN is also found to be

distinct from the generally negative impact of the economy’s per-capita income level, GDPN,

reflecting our predicted behavior of p over the transitional development phase.

2. Social Security Effects on Fertility

        The dependent variable, TFR, stands for the average number of children born to all females

age 15-49, averaged over a 5-year lead period. In model 1 the estimated regression coefficients

therefore measure the quantitative impact of PEN and the other regressors on both the average

fertility rate in the population, which is, in principle, a product of the share of the population

married (p) and the number of children per family, or the family fertility rate (FFR=2n). In model 2

we also add NETMARRY as a proxy for the theoretical variable p, in an attempt to separate the

partial effect of p on TFR from the effect of all other regressors on the other component of TFR –

the family fertility rate (2n). This is, of course, an imprecise way of separating the relevant effects,




                                                  14
since NETMARRY is a flow variable while p is a stock variable. Therefore TFR cannot be

expected to be proportional to NETMARRY.7

                      IV. Corroborations and Additional Sensitivity Tests

1. Two-Stage Least Squares (2SLS) Estimates. In part 1 of Table 2 we rerun the regressions in

model 1 of Table 1 for all key dependent variables, treating both our tax rate measure, PENt, and the

level of real GDP per capital, GDPNt as endogenous variables, whenever such treatment is justifies

by Hausman’s tests. To save space, we report, however, only the coefficients and elasticity

estimates (in square brackets) associate with our key variable of interest – PEN. The 2SLS results

strongly corroborate the results of Table 1.

2. PAYG v. Provident-Fund Systems. An important corroborative test of our model is the

comparative effect of PEN in countries where social security operates as a defined-contributions

“provident fund”, rather than a PAYG, defined-benefits system. In provident-fund countries, PEN

represents essentially a compulsory retirement-savings rate rather than a tax. It may alter overall

private savings only to the extent that the former exceeds the voluntary savings rate. But even in this

case, there will be little change in private savings if individuals can borrow against their provident-

fund savings. Indeed, some provident funds permit using individual balances to finance health,

education, and housing needs, which allows savings to adjust to its privately desired level. We thus

expect PEN to exert little impact on family choices in provident-fund, relative to PAYG, countries.

       Our sample includes just three countries having a government-managed provident fund (Fiji,

Malaysia and Singapore). Applying Chow’s test for the equality of regression coefficients in this

subset relative to our PAYG subset, we reject the hypothesis of equal PEN coefficients in all

regressions.8 Moreover, PEN has statistically insignificant effects on all dependent variables except

MARRY when we run separate regressions for provident-funds countries (see Table 2 part 2).




                                                  15
3. OECD v. Non-OECD Countries. Our theoretical simulations indicate that the elasticities of p

and TFR with respect to θ are higher in magnitude when the tax rate levels (PEN) are higher and the

economy is in a more advanced stage of development. To test these implications empirically, we

have separated our sample to OECD and non-OECD countries, since PEN is also considerably

higher in the former subset: In OECD countries, average PEN is 5.65%, while in non OECD

countries it is 2.08%, over the sample period. Consistent with Table 1, the absolute elasticities of

each of the endogenous variables with respect to PEN are over 8 times larger for NETMARRY and

over 10 times larger for TFR in the OECD relative to the non-OECD set (see Table 2 part 3).

4. Overlapping and Non-Overlapping Periods. Tables 1 and 2 report the results of just

overlapping 5-year specifications, where the dependent variables, y t ,t + 4 , and all regressors are

computed over consecutive first periods (t, t+1, etc.). To achieve greater time-independence of our

dependent variables, we also performed regressions based on non-overlapping 5-year periods

(starting at t, t+5, etc.). This specification is disadvantaged by significant declines in the sample

sizes in all regressions. Nevertheless, the results it yields are corroborative and generally consistent

numerically with those of Tables 1 and 2. We thus skip reporting them to save space.

5. Introducing Year (Trend) as an Additional Regressor. As a further sensitivity test, we

introduce chronological time (year) as an additional regressor to control for spurious correlations

between PEN and our dependent variables due to opposite time trends. However, per-capita GDP

(GDPN), which serves as an independent regressor in all of our regressions, is itself highly time-

trended. Adding a separate time trend variable can thus reduce the accuracy of the regression

estimates due to multicollinearity. Nevertheless, the effect of PEN in part 4 of Table 2 remains

statistically significant in all regressions.




                                                  16
                                      Concluding Remarks

       The total fertility rate in the 28 OECD countries in our sample (see the legend in Table 2)

has fallen over our sample period from 2.80 in 1965 to 1.74 in 1989, and the trend is continuing:

TFR reached 1.64 in 2000. The decline in the net marriage rate in the OECD set has been even

more dramatic: it fell from 9.97 in 1960 to 4.86 in 1990 and to 3.17 in 2000. These trends apply

to the 29 non-OECD countries in our sample as well, albeit to a different degree: average TFR

fell from 5.39 in 1965 to 2.81 in 1989 while the net marriage rate was 9.14 in 1960 and 9.48 in

1990. Our theoretical and empirical analysis indicates that the dramatic declines in key

demographic variables owe largely to 2 major influences: the rise in the shadow price of quantity

relative to quality of children, captured by indicators of labor market opportunities for females,

and the autonomous effect of the “demographic transition” associated with the process of

development. Our study indicates, however, that social security’s rising tax rate, PEN, has

exerted an independent and sizeable influence on these trends as well. This inference is backed

up by the following set of corroborating findings:

1. Our regression and calibrated simulation analyses yield consistent qualitative, and even

quantitative, estimates of the impact of social security tax rates on family formation and fertility

for comparable measures of these variables. In elasticity terms, our simulations indicate that a

1% increase in PEN lowers the probability of adult marriage (p) by .231%, the family fertility

rate (FFR=2n) by .075%, and TFR by .306% at the sample-average values of PEN. By our

regression analysis, the corresponding elasticity estimates indicate that a 1% rise in PEN lowers

the net marriage rate by .369% while lowering n and TFR by .119% and .284%, respectively (see

table inside Fig. 1). While the elasticities for p and n are not quite comparable across our

simulations and the regressions, those for TFR are comparable and quite close: .306 versus .284.




                                                17
In terms of the model’s explanatory power the inference is that over the period 1965-1989 (for

which we have panel data on TFR) the rise in PEN accounts for 48.1% of the actual decline in

TFR (see fn. 4) according to our simulations, and for 39.2% according to our regressions. Our

regression results indicate that the rise in PEN from 2.84% in 1960 to 8.04% in 1990 explains an

even larger share - 51.5% - of the actual decline in the net marriage rate (from 9.97 to 4.86) over

the same period. Moreover, while an increase in PEN lowers the rate of marriage, it raises the

rate of divorce, which is a logical derivative of the expected impact on family formation.

2. An important insight of our study is that movements in total fertility rate – the main statistic used

to track fertility changes – is actually a product of two separate determinants: the fraction of the

adult population forming families (p) and the within-family fertility rate (FFR=2n). Our simulations

show that the social-security-induced fall in p accounts for a larger share of the induced decline in

TFR (75%) than the social-security-induced fall in FFR (25%). This is essentially because the

estimated elasticity of p with respect to PEN (.2314) is 3 times higher than that of n (.0747).

3. The estimated elasticities of our demographic variables with respect to our tax rate measure

are much larger in OECD, relative to non-OECD countries (as reported in Table 2). This pattern

is consistent with our theoretical expectations, and it is corroborated by both our calibrated

simulations and our regressions. The level of PEN in OECD countries has been significantly

larger in OECD countries, rising form 2.84% in 1960 to 8.04% in 1990, than in non-OECD

countries, where it rose from a very low initial level of 0.37% in 1960 to 3.91% in 1990, and as

our analysis predicts, the adverse impact of the tax rate increases with its level, as well as with

the economy’s stage of development. Indeed, while in OECD countries, the rise in average PEN

explains 48.1% of the actual decline in TFR between 1965 and 1989, in non-OECD countries the

rise in PEN explains only 5.5% of the actual fall in TFR (from 5.39 in 1965 to 2.81 in 1989).




                                                  18
4. A similar pattern applies if we compare the projected effects of PEN in all OECD countries

relative to its corresponding effects in the US, since the US had a markedly lower average tax

rate over the sample period, 3.6%, relative to that in the OECD countries as a whole, 5.65%. In

another paper (see Ehrlich and Kim, 2006) we estimate, based on calibrated simulations using

US data, that a 1% change in PEN in the US over the sample period would lead to a reduction

of .0459% in p, .0442% in n, and .0900% in TFR, while the corresponding calibrated simulation

estimates using OECD data are substantially higher: .2314, .0747, and .3059, respectively.

5. Another result that is consistent with our analysis in section I.1 is that while in defined-

benefits, PAYG countries, a rise in the equilibrium tax rate has a non-trivial effect on all

demographic variables, in countries where social security is structured as a provident fund a rise

in PEN (representing essentially a forced savings rate) has virtually no effect on NETMARRY

and TFR (see section IV.2).

       Ironically, the financial vulnerability of the defined-benefits, PAYG system in both the

US and other OECD countries is, at least in part, the result of the adverse incentive effects on

family formation and fertility generated by the way the PAYG social security system is

structured, and the financial peril in OECD countries is significantly greater than in non-OECD

countries, and even in the US. The implication is that reforming the structure of social security

from defined-benefits, PAYG system to fully funded provident funds or individual savings

account might have significantly moderating effects on the trends in the key demographic

variables we have investigated in this paper. Moreover, our study implies that alternative ways of

reforming the system - for example, by raising the tax rate further to stave off future deficits -

could actually exacerbate the downward trends in key demographic variables, even if it could

alleviate the financial burden on PAYG systems in the short run.




                                               19
                                             Appendix

A.1 We consider a closed economy with workers of homogeneous capacity and fixed labor
supplies. Workers differ, however, in some idiosyncratic attributes that affect their matching
prospects, which is why in equilibrium not all form families. We limit search for a lifetime mate
to take place at the start of adulthood, after which each worker winds up either “married” or
“single”. Search, consisting of efforts to find and bond with a mate, raises the probability of net
family formation, p, which we assume, for simplicity, to be a prerequisite for having children.
We also assume that the family formation decision and subsequent household choices are based
on rational expectations.

Human capital is the economy’s engine of growth. Its production rule is given by:
(A.1) Ht+1 = A( H +Ht)ht,
where the first component is raw labor, H , ( H +Ht) represents production capacity or real earnings
of an adult worker, with the wage rate, wt normalized at 1. Ht+1 and Ht denote the human capital
stocks of the generations of children and parents, respectively, and ht denotes the fraction of earning
capacity parents invest in their children’s human capital. Parents’ inputs are thus essential for
securing human capital formation in children.

The working young adult aims to maximize expected lifetime utility:
(A.2) W(t) = Γ(λ(pt)) + ptVm*(t) + (1-pt)Vs*(t), where
(A.3) Γ(λ(pt)) = [1/(1−σ)]{[(1-λ(pt)) ( H +Ht)]1−σ−1}.
In equation (A.2), pt denotes the probability of a successful mating, and Vm*(t) and Vs*(t) denote
maximized expected lifetime utilities if a person winds up married (m) or single (s), respectively.
Search for a mate concludes at the start of the adulthood period, and thus reflects the efforts to
achieve a stable marriage as well. The term Γ(λ(pt)) denotes the cost of search in utility terms,
where λ(pt) is the fraction of production capacity spent on search when the young adult is
already in full possession of the earning capacity generated by parents ( H +Ht). The probability
of a successful marriage, p = p(λ), is a continuously increasing and concave function of λ, with
p(1) ≤1. Its inverse function λ(p) is thus increasing and convex, with λ(0)=0. The utility operator
in each period is given by U(C) = [1/(1−σ)][C1−σ−1], with σ>0 to assure concavity.

The young adult thus maximizes the expected utility if married (j=m) or single (j=s):
(A.4) Vj*(t) = max [1/(1−σ)][Cj1(t)1−σ−1]+δπ2[1/(1−σ)]{[Cj2(t+1)1−σ−1]+[Cj3(t+1)1−σ−1]}, where
(A.5) Cj1(t) = ( H +Ht)(1−vnt −htnt −θ); but nt=0 if j=s.
(A.6) Cj2(t+1) = St+1;
(A.7) Cj3(t+1) = B(π1nt)β( H +Ht+1)α; but Cj3=0 if j=s.

In equation (A.5), Cj1(t) and nt represent consumption and number of children of a young parent
(treated as a continuous variable), assumed to be nil if the young adult is single, while v and ht
(∈ [0,1]) denote the unit monetary cost of raising and educating each child as fractions of
earnings capacity, ( H +Ht). The policy variable θ is the PAYG system’s tax rate on earnings, δ is
an inter-temporal discount factor, and π1 and π2 denote probabilities of survival from childhood
to adulthood and from adulthood to old age. We account for survival odds formally because they
affect the demand for children and family formation, and they capture the rationale for any old-
age insurance scheme. Since in the benchmark model social security is the only source of old-age
consumption, Cj2(t+1) in equation (A.6) equals the equilibrium social security benefit, St+1, in
equation (A.8) below.

For married agents, the term Cm3(t+1)=B(π1nt)β( H +Ht+1)α in equation (A.7), with α = 1, defines an
“altruism function” in the context of our OLG setting, whereby the representative parent derives
utility vicariously from the full income and number of surviving offspring, π1nt.9 To ensure that the
utility from altruistic benefits is concave with respect to nt and ht, it is necessary to restrict β(1-σ)
and α(1-σ) to be less than 1. To obtain interior solutions in both fertility and educational investment,
it is also necessary that β>α=1, otherwise quality would dominate quantity of children in a growth-
equilibrium steady state, since quantity always has a higher marginal cost than quality if
investments in education apply equally to all children. For (childless) singles, Cs3(t+1) is zero.

We assume that PAYG social security is a strictly defined-benefits system: all adults, regardless
of marital status, pay the same taxes and enjoy the same defined benefits, which implies,
therefore, that Cs2(t+1)=Cm2(t+1). Since only children born to married agents contribute to social
security, the balanced-budget, defined benefits per recipient are given by:
(A.8) St+1 = pt(π1/π2)ntθ( H +Ht+1).

We use an overlapping-generations (OLG) framework, since this facilitates solving for family
formation in a dynamic context. We recognize three overlapping generations: dependent children,
working young adults, and retired old adults. To focus on demographics, we specify the choice
variables in the basic model as family formation and the quantity and quality (human capital) of
children. We assume that only “married” adults can have children, and do so for altruistic motives.

The dynamic solutions of this complex system have been discussed in related work (Becker et al.,
1990, Ehrlich and Lui, 1991), so the following is just a brief summary. Two stable regimes can be
shown to exist, which also dictate the economy’s development prospects: (a) stagnant equilibrium
regime where the steady state solutions allow for a relatively high fertility level but zero investment
in human capital, (a Malthusian trap); (b) growth equilibrium regime, including a transitional
dynamics phase, which converges on a steady state of perpetual growth. With sufficiently high
values of growth-enhancing parameters (A, B, β, and v), the economy can take off from a stagnant
equilibrium into this growth equilibrium regime, where the marginal rate of human capital
formation, Aht*, is sufficiently greater than 1. Since the economies in our empirical panel all exhibit
persistent positive growth, we focus henceforth on the growth equilibrium regime.

A.2 To quantify the predicted effects of social security on our key demographic variables, we
calibrate the model’s basic parameters using actual OECD data and consensus estimates of a few
of these parameters, based on other studies. We first specify the search-for-a-mate cost function
in equation (3) as λ(pt) = Lpε. Each of the model’s “periods” is assumed to last 25 years. The
average survival probabilities of the population in OECD countries from ages zero to 25 and 50
to 75 are calculated from various issues of the United Nations Demographic Yearbook, averaging
0.9663 and 0.6217, respectively. The average OECD social security tax rate θ, measured as the
ratio of the pension benefits portion of social security to GDP (PEN), is 5.65%. Based on Gruber
(2006), we set the inter-temporal elasticity of substitution to be 2, so σ=0.5. Consistent with
many studies, we take the time preference parameter to be 1.5%, thus setting our discount factor
at δ = (1/1.015)25. The unit cost rate of raising children, v, is calculated from Table 5 in Juster
and Stafford (1991), summarizing the 1975-76 time-diary surveys in the US. v is estimated to be
3.0% of full income.

The remaining parameters, A, β, ε, L, and B are solved by combining the three first-order
conditions concerning h, n, and p at the growth equilibrium steady state and the specified search
cost function, λ = Lpε, with OECD data on the ratio of consumption spending by married relative
to single adults, Cm1/Cs1=(1−vn−hn −θ)/(1−θ), and the average values of estimates of h, n, and p.
Over the sample period used in our regression analysis, 1960-92, average per capita GDP growth
rate (Ah) was 2.92%, average TFR was 2.229, average share of married persons in the
population age 15 and over was 55.78% (calculated from the International Data Base of the US
Census Bureau), and average time spent on search for a mate was λ=0.1, derived as the fraction
of total time spent on social entertainment from Table 5 of Juster and Stafford (1991). Cm1/Cs1
was estimated as 0.71 which is taken from the US 1985 Consumer Expenditure Survey since the
OECD data on this variable is not available to the authors. The solutions yield the following
calibrated parameter values: A=19.1253, β = 1.2794, ε = 1.1524, L = 0.1960, and B = 0.0786.
A.3 Variables used, sources, and mean values over the sample period 1960-1992.
Variable                                     Description                                OECD         Full sample
                                                                                         Mean           Mean
                                                                                      [Std. Dev.]    [Std. Dev.]
PEN                Old-age, survivor, and disability-insurance portion of               0.0565         0.0419
(“Pension”)        social security benefits as a share of GDP (ILO)                     [0.030]        [0.034]
NETMARRY           Current marriage net of divorce rate (UN)                              7.75           8.35
                                                                                         [2.77]         [2.82]
MARRY              Marriage rate: the annual number of marriages per 1000                 9.72          10.06
                   population age 15 and over (UN)                                       [2.32]         [2.53]
DIVORCE            Divorce rate: the annual number of divorces per 1000                   2.03           1.69
                   population age 15 and over (UN)                                       [1.24]         [1.19]
TFR                Total fertility rate: number of children born to an average            2.23           2.81
                   woman over her reproductive years (UN)                                [0.63]         [1.28]
GDPN               Real per-capita income (Summers-Heston)                                8886           6753
                                                                                        [3630]         [3911]
G                  GDP shares of government spending (Summers-Heston)                    14.19          14.69
                                                                                         [4.40]         [5.98]
Pi1                Survival probability of the population from ages zero to               0.97           0.95
                   twenty four (UN)                                                      [0.02]         [0.04]
Pi2                Survival probability from the official qualifying age for              0.63           0.64
                   pension benefits through the following fifteen years2 (UN)            [0.11]         [0.12]
DSEX               Deviation of females’ population share from 50 percent in              1.07           0.93
                   absolute value (WB)                                                   [1.84]         [1.50]
FLFP               Female labor force participation rate (WB)                            40.61          38.34
                                                                                         [11.2]         [12.9]
FSCH               Ratio of average schooling years for females to that for               0.90           0.85
                   males (Barro-Lee)                                                     [0.10]         [0.16]
M2                 Aggregate money supply (WB)                                            0.31           0.69
                                                                                         [0.28]        [11.71]
MATURE             Number of years elapsing from the year when the pension               49.54          39.34
                   benefits program started (SSA)                                        [21.1]         [24.1]
POP65              Population share of the age group 65 and up (UN)                   0.11 [2.73]    0.09 [3.97]
AGE                Population share of the age group 0-14 (UN)                        0.24 [0.05]    0.29 [0.09]
SEX                Population share of the female (UN)                                0.51 [0.02]    0.51 [0.02]
INFLA              Annual inflation rate (Summers-Heston)                             4.99 [2.94]    5.03 [3.01]
PUBED              Share of public education expenditures in GDP                          5.01           4.60
                   (UNESCO)                                                              [1.54]         [1.57]
1. Typically, the official qualifying age for pension benefits is 55 or 60 in developing countries, and 60 or 65 in
developed countries.
2. Data sources: (ILO) International Labor Office, The Cost of Social Security, and Year Book of Labour Statistics,
Geneva, various issues; (UN) United Nations, Demographic Yearbook, various issues; (WB) World Bank, World
Development Indicators, 1998; (Barro-Lee) "International Comparisons of Educational Attainment," J. of Monetary
Economics, 32, 1993; (UNESCO) United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Statistical
Yearbook, various issues; (SSA) Social Security Administration, Social Security Programs Throughout the World,
1995, 97, 99; (Summers-Heston) Summers, R. and Heston, A., “The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An expanded Set
of International Comparisons, 1950-1988”, Quarterly Journal Of Economics, 106, May 1991, updated through 1992.
                                        REFERENCES

Barro, Robert J. and Lee, Jongwha, “IMF Programs: Who Is Chosen and What Are the Effects?”
mimeo, 2003.

Becker, Gary S. and Barro, Robert J., A reformulation of the Economic Theory of fertility”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 103, 1988, 1-25.

Becker, G.S., Murphy, K.M. and Tamura, R, “Human Capital, Fertility, and Economic Growth”,
Journal of Political Economy 98, 1990, S12-38.

Boldrin, Michele, De Nardi, Mariacristina and Jones, Larry E., “Fertility and Social Security,”
NBER Working Paper Series No. 11146, 2005.

Commission of the European Communities, The Future Evolution of Social Protection from a
Long-Term Point of View: Safe and Sustainable Pensions, 2000.

Economic Policy Committee, Budgetary challenges posed by ageing populations: the impact on
public spending on pensions, health and long-term care for the elderly and possible indicators of
the long-term sustainability of public finances, 2001.

Ehrlich, Isaac and Kim, Jinyoung, “Social Security, Demographic Trends, and Economic
Growth: Theory and Evidence From the International Experience,” NBER Working Paper Series
No. 11121, 2005.

Ehrlich, Isaac and Kim, Jinyoung, “Social Security and Demographic Trends: Theory and
Evidence from the International Experience,” working paper, 2006.

Ehrlich, Isaac and Lui, Francis T., “Intergenerational Trade, Longevity, and Economic Growth”,
Journal of Political Economy, 99, 1991: 1029-1059.

Ehrlich, Isaac and Lui, Francis T., “Social Security, the Family, and Economic Growth”, Economic
Inquiry, 1998.

Ehrlich, Isaac and Zhong, Jian-Guo, “Social Security and the Real Economy: An Inquiry into
Some Neglected Issues,” American Economic Review, 88 (2), 1998.

Gruber, Jonathan, “A Tax-Based Estimate of the Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution,” NBER
Working Paper Series No. 11945, January 2006.

Juster, F. Thomas and Stafford Frank P., “The Allocation of Time: Empirical Findings,
Behavioral Models, and Problems of Measurement”, Journal of Economic Literature, 29, 1991.
                                                   ENDNOTES
1
 For example, Becker and Barro (1988) use a static framework that does not allow for human capital investments
and endogenous growth. Ehrlich and Lui (1998) and Ehrlich and Zhong (1998) allow for endogenous growth, but
not for family formation. In most cases, backward altruism by parents towards children is the motive for having
children, but Ehrlich and Lui (1998) allows also for old-age transfers from children to parents. Boldrin, De Nardi
and Jones (2005), in contrast, is based on altruism of children toward parents.
2
 For simplicity, physical capital, formed through savings, is abstracted from this model. In a steady state it is
determined by a constant fraction of income saved, and is thus expected to grow proportionately to human capital.
3
 We abstract from cohabitation and single parenthood on the assumption that married households are the dominant
source of fertility in the population, especially over our sample period used in our empirical work.
4
  From Figure 1 we can calculate how much of the observed change in TFR can be explained by the effect of the
increased social security tax rate, θ. The actual TFR in OECD countries fell from an average of 2.8 in 1965 to 1.74
in 1989. During this period, our measure of the tax rate, θ, rose from 3.78% to 7.49%. At these tax rates, the
projected values of TFR by our simulations are 2.4615 and 2.0132, respectively. Our model thus ascribes to the
increase in the tax rate 48.1% =[1−(2.0132/2.4615)]/[1−(1.74/2.80)] of the actually observed change in TFR.
5
 For example, the marriage or divorce rate statistics depend on the way cohabitation is counted. Population
dynamics can also be affected by different immigration policies. We lack specific data on immigration flows.
6
  Instrumental variables used in our first-stage regressions are: the age of the social security program since initiation
(MATURE), its squared value (MATURESQ), the population share of age groups 0-14 (AGE) and 65 and over
(POP65), the population share of females (SEX), the economy’s inflation rate (INFLA), net export (NX), money
supply (M2), and GDP share of public education expenditures (PUBED). The first five variables capture the impact
of the systems’ maturity, or past and prospective buildups of surpluses in the social security budgets, and the impact
of retiree interest groups relative to younger age cohorts on the political willingness to raise social security benefits
and taxes. INFLA, NX, M2 and PUBED are used to capture the long-term impacts of monetary, trade, and public
educational policies on the GDPN level. Basmann’s test indicates that these variables can indeed serve as
instrumental variables in the first-stage regressions.
7
   Note that in model 2 of the TFR regressions, the estimated PEN effect is -.119 in elasticity terms, while that of
NETMARRY is .255. We can thus project the unconditional effect of PEN on TFR (i.e., without introducing
NETMARRY as a regressor) in model 1 of the TFR regressions as -0.119 + 0.255⋅(-0.369) = -0.213, in elasticity
terms, where -0.369 is the estimated effect of PEN on NETMARRY in model 1 of the NETMARRY regressions.
This estimate (-0.213) is similar to the estimated unconditional elasticity of TFR with respect to PEN in model 1 of
the TFR regression (-0.284). Our results in the NETMARRY and TFR regressions are thus internally consistent.
8
  In these tests we use both our original set of regressors and their interaction terms with a dummy variable
distinguishing provident-fund countries. F-tests were performed on the OLS regression results, since the small sub-
sample of provident-fund countries makes it undesirable to use 2SLS.
9
 Both π1 and π2 raise the rates of return on n and h relative to the inter-temporal rate of substitution in consumption,
because they raise expected psychic benefits from children, as well as material benefits from social security. Under
our general Cobb-Douglas specification of the altruism function, however, ht* remains unchanged while nt* rises as
a result of an upward shift in π1 and π2. The optimal family formation probability, pt* rises in this case, because
higher π1 and π2 increase the gain from children, thus from forming a family.
                                 Table 1. Regression Results: Total Fertility, Net Marriage, Marriage and Divorce Rates
                                                                                                                                                   OLS, Fixed Effects Model
                                   LNETMARRY                                  LMARRY                              LDIVORCE                                LTFR
                            Model 1             Model 2            Model 1             Model 2           Model 1            Model 2            Model 1            Model 2

PEN (β)                      -6.5361            -6.8144            -3.9907             -4.2024           5.5628             5.6654             -5.0351            -2.1003
(β /SD)                       -10.96             -11.35             -11.28              -11.45            5.95               6.53               -12.36              -5.10
Elasticity                   [-0.369]           [-0.385]           [-0.225]            [-0.237]          [0.314]            [0.320]            [-0.284]           [-0.119]
LPi1 (β)                     1.7593             2.0547             -0.2781             0.4600            6.0130              3.6658            -0.6217            -0.7569
(β /SD)                       2.14               2.42               -0.58               0.90              4.67                2.98              -1.05              -1.44
LPi2                         0.1598             0.1613             0.0903              0.0881            -0.0460             0.0055            0.1037             0.0773
                              3.00               3.12               2.92                2.85              -0.55               0.07              3.02               2.56
LGDPN                        -0.5093            -0.5096            -0.1894             -0.2572           0.7558              0.4420            -0.3092            -0.1657
                              -9.81              -8.83              -6.18               -7.45             9.28                5.30              -8.18              -4.39
LG                           -0.3602            -0.2480            -0.1070             -0.1247           0.6594             -0.0087            0.0149             0.1955
                              -4.31              -2.81              -2.21               -2.40             5.03               -0.07              0.24               3.35
LDSEX                        -0.0153            -0.0164            -0.0066             -0.0143           -0.0755            -0.1285
                              -1.49              -1.49              -1.09               -2.11             -4.70              -8.09
LFLFP                                           -0.1654                                0.0478                                1.1619                               -0.2500
                                                 -2.77                                  1.31                                 13.45                                 -6.58
LFSCH                                           0.6218                                 -0.0089                               0.3673                               0.2733
                                                 3.69                                   -0.09                                 1.51                                 2.75
LNETMARRY                                                                                                                                                         0.2550
                                                                                                                                                                  10.24


Adj. R2                      0.7302             0.7700             0.6785              0.7133            0.6939              0.7907            0.7421             0.8344
N                             545                474                593                 520               545                 474               463                403
Notes: All regressions employ a fixed-effects regression model, but the results for country-dummies are suppressed. Rows show the estimated β and β/Sβ for each variable. The
square-bracketed numbers for PEN convert the estimated coefficients into elasticity terms, evaluated at the sample mean. In all regressions the dependent variables are averaged
over a 5-year lead period.
                                                                   Table 2. Additional Sensitivity Tests
                                            LNETMARRY                               LMARRY                             LDIVORCE                                 LTFR
(1) Accounting for Endogeneity via the 2 Stage-Least-Square Estimation Method – OECD Sample
PEN (β)                                           -11.7160                             -6.8146                              7.9342                              -3.9619
(β /SD)                                              -8.25                               -8.00                               4.15                                -10.11
Elasticity                                         [-0.662]                            [-0.385]                             [0.448]                             [-0.224]
(2) Comparing Provident funds v. PAYG systems –Full Sample
[Provident Funds]
PEN                                               -0.0019                              -4.7316                             -0.2532                              0.4393
                                                   -0.00                                 -6.33                               -0.28                               0.68
                                                  [0.000]                              [-0.102]                            [-0.005]                             [0.009]
[Non Provident Funds]
PEN                                               -7.8951                              -5.3907                              5.4874                              -3.8077
                                                   -16.28                               -17.50                               7.13                                -10.97
                                                  [-0.339]                             [-0.232]                             [0.236]                             [-0.164]
(3) OECD v. Non-OECD countries
[OECD]
PEN                                               -6.5361                              -3.9907                              5.5628                              -5.0351
                                                   -10.96                               -11.28                               5.95                                -12.36
                                                  [-0.369]                             [-0.225]                             [0.314]                             [-0.284]
[Non OECD]
PEN                                               -2.0551                              -3.0753                              2.2228                              -1.3249
                                                    -3.47                                -5.92                               1.62                                 -2.08
                                                  [-0.043]                             [-0.064]                             [0.046]                             [-0.028]
(4) Entering YEAR (Trend) as an added regressor
PEN                                               -2.8591                              -2.8649                              3.4318                              -1.4464
                                                    -4.21                                -6.64                               3.01                                 -3.61
                                                  [-0.162]                             [-0.162]                             [0.194]                             [-0.082]
Note: This table shows estimates based on model 1 (OLS) regressions in Table 1. Rows show the estimated β and β/Sβ for each variable. The square-bracketed numbers for PEN
convert the estimated coefficients into elasticity terms, evaluated at the sample mean. Part (1) reports the results of the 2SLS regressions applied to model 1 in Table 1. The 2SLS
regressions for NETMARRY, MARRY, and DIVORCE account for the endogeneity of both PEN and LGDPN since Hausman's test rejects their exogeneity. The 2SLS regression
for TFR accounts for the endogeneity of LGDPN only since Hausman's test rejects the exogeneity of LGDPN, but not of LPEN. OECD countries include Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States (Slovak Republic and Turkey are excluded for lack of data). Non-OECD countries include
Romania, Honduras, Philippines, El Salvador, Thailand, Jamaica, Tunisia, Guatemala, Columbia, Costa Rica, Jordan, Panama, Fiji, Malaysia, Chile, Bulgaria, Mauritius, Brazil, Uruguay,
Cyprus, Yugoslavia, Barbados, Argentina, Singapore, Venezuela, Israel, Hong Kong, East Germany, and Trinidad.
Figure 1. Simulated Steady-State Solutions for Demographic Variables as Functions of Alternative Social Security Tax Rates




                                                                       Impact of Social Security Tax Rate (θ) in Elasticity Terms
                                                                                evaluated at the OECD sample average

                                                                Estimated Impact on the      From Simulations               From Regressions
                                                               dependent variable below          (Figure 1)                     (Table 1)
                                                                Married Adults Share (p)           -0.2314          -0.369 (NETMARRY, Model 1)*
                                                                 Fertility per Parent (n)          -0.0747              -0.119 (TFR, Model 2)*
                                                                Total Fertility Rate (2pn)         -0.3059               -0.284 (TFR, Model 1)


                                                              * These regression elasticities are associated with, or conditional on NETMARRY,
                                                              which is a flow measure of p, thus not directly comparable to the simulation elasticities.
