                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   INTEGRATED INSURANCE DESIGN IN THE PRESENCE OF MULTIPLE MEDICAL
                           TECHNOLOGIES

                                          Dana Goldman
                                         Tomas Philipson

                                       Working Paper 12870
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12870


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2007




This research was sponsored by the National Institute on Aging and the Peter Bing Center for Health
Economics. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Dana Goldman and Tomas Philipson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Integrated Insurance Design in the Presence of Multiple Medical Technologies
Dana Goldman and Tomas Philipson
NBER Working Paper No. 12870
January 2007
JEL No. I1,I10

                                             ABSTRACT

The classic theory of moral hazard concerns the insurance of a single good and predicts that co-insurance
is larger when the elasticity of demand is higher and when small risks are insured. We extend this
analysis to the insurance of multiple goods; for example, the simultaneous insurance of medical services
and prescription drugs. We show that when multiple goods are either complements or substitutes--so
that a change in co-insurance for one service affects the demand of others--the classic moral hazard
results do not hold. For example, the single good model would predict high co-payments for prescription
drugs since drug demand is elastic and of modest financial risk. However, a model of multi-good insurance
suggests such drug coverage may optimally involve zero or even negative co-insurance when it is
a substitute to other services insured such as hospital care or physician services. We summarize some
of the empirical evidence in support of markets adopting optimal integrated pricing structures rather
than individually optimal pricing structures.


Dana Goldman
RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
and NBER
dgoldman@rand.org

Tomas Philipson
Irving B. Harris Graduate School
of Public Policy Studies
The University of Chicago
1155 E 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
t-philipson@uchicago.edu
                Integrated Insurance Design in the Presence of Multiple Medical Technologies


        Moral hazard in the context of health care has focused on tradeoff between the incentives and

risk in the use of medical services. On the one extreme, full insurance leads to over-consumption ex-post,

because prices are below cost of production. On the other extreme, having the right incentives ex-post

through cost-based pricing implies there is too much risk-bearing. Thus, as the argument goes, there is a

tradeoff between risk-sharing and appropriate incentives in providing insurance that effects medical care

use (Mark V. Pauly, 1968; Richard Zeckhauser 1970;). A major implication of the standard theory is that

risk-sharing, or co-pays, should be higher the smaller and more certain the risk—since insurance is less

valuable—and the more elastic the demand for the medical services, since the cost of over-consumption

rises. The RAND Health Insurance Experiment (HIE) demonstrated that elasticities for various types of

health care services differ--inpatient and outpatient care was the least elastic, whereas use of dental and

mental health services were most responsive to changes in co-payments (Joseph P. Newhouse, 1993).

This finding partially explains why virtually every health insurer covers hospital and ambulatory care, but

not necessarily these other services. Even when such services are covered, they often have much greater

cost-sharing.

        The generous adoption of new technologies, such as devices and pharmaceuticals, provides a

puzzle that seems hard to explain with the traditional theory of moral hazard. This is because those

technologies are more price-sensitive and of lower risk than many other medical services that have higher

co-pays. Evidence on the demand for many of the most common classes of pharmaceuticals is quite

elastic (Geoffrey F. Joyce et al, 2002; Dana P. Goldman et al, 2005). In addition there is often little

uncertainty to insure, as demand is predictable for many of the most common drugs that are for chronic

conditions, including treatments for cholesterol, high blood pressure, depression, and diabetes, as well as

the certain demand for many childhood vaccines.

        In this paper, we argue that the standard theory must be extended to explain the generous

adoption of new technologies for which there is certain and highly price-sensitive demand. We argue that


                                                                                                         1
one must recognize that the insurance of multiple goods and services will imply optimally integrated

designs that do not have the same implications for the insurance of the goods separately. The optimally

integrated benefit design differs from the standard single good designs by taking into account cross-price

elasticities between the several services and goods insured. Even a highly elastic demand for prescription

drugs may therefore have low co-pays when drug consumption lowers the use of other medical services.

More precisely, holding other factors constant, if a good insured has many other services insured that are

substitutable, then its co-pay will be lower than traditionally argued as raising its co-pay will lead to

additional use of those other services. By the same argument, if those other services are complimentary,

the co-pay of the initial good will be higher.

        In the next section, we first reformulate the standard theory of single good moral hazard in a

manner that we believe makes more transparent the tradeoff between risk and over-consumption of the

insured good. We then provide its multiple good extension and the role of cross-price substitution effects,

and discuss their effects on optimal risk-sharing. We then discuss the evidence in support of the

importance of such substitution effects as well as conclude by discussing some of the many new

applications raised by optimally integrated benefit designs.

I. A Simple Exposition of Moral Hazard Analysis with One Medical Technology

        Without loss of generality, let there be two future states, one of sickness and one of health. Let x

denote the amount of health care consumed in each state. Let c in [0,1] be the co-payment which is

defined as the percent of medical spending in the sick state paid by the insured. Let U ( x, c ) denote the

expected ex-ante utility of consuming x units of health care when sick at co-pay rate c. For an example of

such an ex-ante expected utility function, consider a person that has the utility function over health care

and alternative consumption y denoted U1 ( x, y ) when sick and U 0 ( y ) when healthy. Given income z

and sickness occurs with probability w, then the ex-ante expected utility is:


         U ( x, c ) = w ⋅ U1 ( x, z − π ( x, c ) − e ( x, c ) ) + (1 − w ) ⋅ U 0 ( z − π ( x, c ) ) .


                                                                                                          2
           Here π ( x, c ) = (1 − c ) w ⋅ p ⋅ x denotes the actuarially-fair premium for the health insurance

expense given health care price of p. Also, the term e ( x, c ) = c ⋅ p ⋅ x represents out-of pocket expenses

at that price. Generally, we only impose modest assumptions on the ex-ante expected utility function U in

the remaining analysis, assumptions that hold for this particular example. In particular, we assume that

U ( x, c ) exhibits a preference for insurance defined as the partial derivative U c ( x, c ) being decreasing.

In other words, holding constant the amount of health care utilized when sick, the individual prefers less

risk (lower co-payments) when faced with uneven spending across health states. But moral hazard

implies that a change in the co-pay leads to a change in health care use (x), and thus the total derivative of

U with respect to c can be positive in which case full insurance is not optimal.

I.A. First Best Benefit Design

           The first best allocation of health care utilization and insurance occurs when both can be chosen

ex-ante without affecting each other. The first best allocation of health care and insurance, denoted

( xF , cF ) therefore   satisfies ( xF , cF ) = arg max U ( x, c ) .   The first-order conditions of this problem
                                                  ( x ,c )

directly implies under a preference for insurance that there is no co-pay under the first best allocation, i.e.,

cF = 0 .     Full insurance occurs because—given health care utilization—a preference for insurance

implies that there is always value in income smoothing.

I.B. Second Best Benefit Design

           The second best design occurs when health care utilization cannot be determined ex-ante but is

induced by the insurance contract. In other words, the insurance determines how much health care

spending there is and therefore the optimal second best insurance must take this effect into account. Given

the co-pay rate c, let the induced health care in each state be denoted by x ( c ) . Formally, the second best

co-pay rate cs is then determined by not only how it affects insurance but also how it induces health care



                                                                                                               3
                                  (
ex-post, i.e. cS = arg max U x ( c ) , c .
                         (c)
                                            )    The necessary first order condition satisfies the condition:


dU dx dU
  ⋅ +    = 0 . This equation exposes the standard moral hazard tradeoff between incentives (first
dx dc dc

term) and risk (second term) in a more simple manner than traditionally exposed1. In particular, fully

insured consumption (c=0) may be undesirable because it insures excessive consumption, and no

insurance (c=1) may be undesirable because it incurs too much financial risk. As this simple condition

                                                                                                        dx
reveals, the first best level of full insurance (c=0) obtains only if demand is inelastic, i.e.,           = 0 . When
                                                                                                        dc

demand is elastic, a marginal increase in the co-pay reduces expected utility by inducing risk ( U c < 0 ) ,

but balances this increase in risk with the reduction in excessive consumption ex-post. The latter effect is

                                                                    dx
negative because increasing co-pays reduces consumption                < 0 and this reduction is beneficial when
                                                                    dc

                                                                             dU
additional consumption has a negative impact on expected utility(               < 0 ), as would be the case when
                                                                             dx

there is over-consumption.

         This formulation captures the basic, single-good balance between incentives and risk induced by

moral hazard. It implies the well known result of moral hazard; namely, that the optimal co-pay should

be higher the lower the financial risk and the more sensitive demand is to the co-pays. We will argue that

when there are multiple goods insured, this basic implication fails to hold.

II. Moral Hazard with Multiple Medical Technologies




1
  It follows immediately that there is a welfare loss induced by moral hazard in the sense that the first best level of
expected utility is higher than the corresponding second-best level. This occurs since the first-best case involves an
unconstrained choice of (x,c) and the second-best case a constrained choice (x(c),c), one that is always feasible in
the unconstrained case, but not necessarily optimal.




                                                                                                                          4
        We now consider the case when there are multiple services or goods being insured. Let there be a

K-dimensional vector x interpreted as the levels of the K number of health services utilized and a vector c

in [0,1]K as the integrated benefit design which specifies the co-pay rates on all those K different services.

We denote the corresponding ex-ante expected utility by U ( x, c ) . Thus there are K goods to be insured


                             (                      )
with demand functions x1 ( c ) ,..., x K ( c ) where the entire vector c may affect each individual demand

function depending on substitution patterns. An example of an ex-ante expected utility function would be

the direct generalization of the single good example as in:


         U ( x, c ) = w ⋅ U1 ( x, z − π ( x, c ) − e ( x, c ) ) + (1 − w ) ⋅ U 0 ( z − π ( x, c ) ) .

                                                                        K
        Here the premium generalizes to π(x, c ) = w ⋅                 ∑ (1 − c )pk     k   x k where pk is the price of the kth
                                                                       k =1


                                                                                                   K
technology and where out-of-pocket co-pay expenses generalize to e(x, c ) =                       ∑c     k   ⋅ p k ⋅ x k . The utility
                                                                                                  k =1


                                                                                                                            ∂U
function is now generalized to satisfy a preference for insurance whenever all the partials                                      are
                                                                                                                            ∂c k

negative for all k.

II.A. First Best Benefit Design with Multiple Medical Technologies

        We now consider the first-best integrated benefit design. It follows immediately from the

necessary first-order conditions that when there is a preference for insurance there is full insurance, that

is, the first-best vector of coinsurance satisfies c F = (0,...,0 ) .                       Note therefore that there is no

discrimination across services in co-pays under first best design; they all are fully covered and there is full

“parity” in health care coverage.

II.B. Second Best Benefit Design with Multiple Medical Technologies

        As before the second best level of the co-pays occurs when they induce consumption ex-post.

Now the first-order conditions (FOC) for the optimal second-best co-payment levels are:

                                                                                                                                    5
          K
                 ∂ U ∂x j ∂ U
         ∑ ∂x
          j =1
                      ⋅     +
                        ∂c k ∂c k
                                  = 0 for all k=1,…,K.
                    j



The second term is still negative as an increase in the co-pay ck raises (undesirable) risk. However, the

first term now differs from the single good case when the goods are gross compliments or substitutes, that

                                   ∂x j
is, the cross price elasticities            are non-zero. The optimal co-pay for a good now must take into
                                   ∂c k

account these substitution patterns across goods. The direct but important implication is that knowing the

demand for the insured good alone is no longer sufficient for designing an optimal benefit plan. More

                                                                                     ∂U
precisely, when insurance leads to ex-post over-consumption (                            < 0 ), then if an insured good has
                                                                                     ∂xk

many other insured services that are substitutable, then its co-pay will be lower as lowering the co-pay

will lead to less use of those other services. On the other hand, if those other services are complimentary,

then co-pay will be higher. Moreover, the more over-consumed the technology is on the margin (size of

∂U
    ) the more its substitutability matters in the optimal design.
∂xk

        To illustrate, we consider the case where there are two goods, drugs (k=D) and hospital care

(k=H) that are substitutes, so greater co-pays for drugs implies more hospital care, under the assumption

that patients with chronic disease who do not take their medications are more likely to be hospitalized.

The optimal second-best co-pay for drugs must now take into account that hospital care rises when it the

co-pay is increased:

                                   ∂ U ∂X D ∂ U ∂ U ∂xH
                                      ⋅    +   +   ⋅    =0                                (1)
                                   ∂xD ∂cD ∂cD ∂xH ∂cD
                                   1442443 1424      3
                                   marginal net benefit of drugs   hospital offset



        The first part of this equation is the single good FOC that equates reduced excessive spending on

drugs in isolation with the harm imposed by more risk. But now we have a second term incorporating the

cross-price effect. This term induces an additional marginal cost (benefit) and thus lowers (raises) the

                                                                                                                         6
optimal co-pay compared to the optimal level for the single good in isolation. When hospital care is

substitutable and excessive—i.e., provided below cost—then there is an additional marginal cost of

raising drug co-pays.

        If the elasticity of drug demand is large and the financial risks from drugs are small, then the

single-good theory implies drug co-pays should be high. However, this fails to hold if there are offsets in

hospital spending due to the increased co-pay for drugs. For example, in the condition above, the FOC

may dictate a zero co-pay, or full drug insurance, even though the own price elasticity of drug demand is

very high. The key distinction between the single-good and multiple good theory arises from the cross-

price elasticities; the drug co-pay falls with the degree of substitutability between drug consumption and

of hospital services.

III. Empirical Importance of Cross-Price Elasticities in the case of Drug Consumption

        As our theory implies that optimal co-pays rise with the degree of substitutability of other

services. It appears that existing evidence generally support substitutability for the case of drugs reducing

patients’ need for other medical services such as hospitalizations and emergency department visits.

Stephen B. Soumerai et al (1991) compare Medicaid patients in New Hampshire—for whom the program

had imposed a three-drug limit per patient for 11 months—with those of New Jersey where no such cap

was introduced. They found a 35% reduction in drug use and a doubling in nursing home admission rates

relative to the control group, although there was no significant differences in hospital admissions. For

patients on psychotropic medications (Stephen B. Soumerai et al, 1994), they find the cap led to a 15% to

49% reduction in the use of these drugs, and a 43% to 57% increase in mental health visits and emergency

mental health services. Susan D. Horn et al (1996) find that formulary limitations in six health

maintenance organizations—a selective form of co-pay increase in which co-pays rise to 100% on certain

drugs—were associated with increased emergency department visits and hospitalizations for five disease

groups: otitis media, atraumatic arthritis, epigastric pain/ulcers, hypertension and asthma.




                                                                                                           7
        These studies contrast with results from others (Richard E. Johnson et al , 1997; Robin Tamblyn

et al 2000), who find that increased co-pays in various settings did not significantly increase outpatient

visits, hospitalizations, or emergency department visits. Martin Gaynor et al (2005), using a sample of

beneficiaries with private insurance, find that higher drug co-payments in a given year lead to increased

inpatient/outpatient spending during the following year. Overall, a $1 increase in drug co-payments

decreases total spending (drug + inpatient + outpatient) by 0.75% in the first year, but increases it by

0.84% in the second year due to increased inpatient and outpatient spending.              However, Frank

R.Lichtenberg (1996a, 1996b) estimates that an increase of 100 prescriptions is associated with a

reduction of 83 deaths, 1.48 hospitalizations, 16.3 hospital days, and 3.36 surgical procedures. While

there is a question of endogeneity—certain diagnosis groups are easily treated with drugs, so physicians

prescribe more drugs for these conditions—the results are consistent with disaggregated studies.

        In sum, the preponderance of evidence suggests strong negative cross-price elasticities between

drugs and other medical spending, at least for patients with chronic disease. The behavioral mechanism is

almost surely compliance (John A.Rizzo and W. Robert Simons, 1997; L. Wei et al, 2002). For example,

Dana P. Goldman       et al   (2006) investigated the relationship between compliance and subsequent

outcomes for patients who had initiated statin therapy in the previous two to five years. They found that

full compliance with cholesterol-lowering therapy reduces use of hospital services by 25% among high

risk patients, demonstrating a substantial cross-price elasticity between drugs and hospital services among

certain chronically-ill populations and for certain drugs. Other studies find similar effects for asthma and

diabetes.

IV. Extensions and Applications

In this section we discuss a few of the many additional issues that are raised by integrated designs that we

believe would be fruitfully addressed in future research.

VI.1 The Welfare Gains of Integrated Designs




                                                                                                          8
The welfare gains from integrated designs need to be better understood to assess its quantitative

magnitude. Consider denoting by z(c) the income paid that would make an individual indifferent between

plan c and no insurance. Now denote by c0 the vector of co-pay rates that are optimal when the

substitution patterns of x(c) are assumed to have zero cross-partials. This would be the traditional benefit

design only taking into account own-good moral hazard effects. The willingness to pay for the second

best plan cS, with the actual substitution patterns, over the non-integrated plan, z(cS)-z(c0), would then be

the welfare gain from benefit design integration. Estimating such welfare gains should be of importance

for future research on the optimal integration of benefits.

VI.2 Integrated Designs and Parity Across Health Services

        There is often discussion of whether there should be “parity” across different categories of health

services, defined as equality in coverage across different types of services, e.g. mental and physical care.

Indeed, advocates of mental health parity many times argue that it will save hospitalizations in the future

and implicitly therefore seem concerned with cross-price elasticities. In our model, such parity concerns a

lack of differentiation in co-pays across goods so that c=(c,….c). Clearly, such a constrained full parity

structure is inferior to the optimal co-pay structure as the same co-pays across goods is feasible, but not

necessarily optimal, under an unconstrained structure. It is clear that demand being elastic is necessary

condition for there to be a welfare loss from parity as when demand is fully inelastic across all goods

optimal insurance is full insurance for all goods; a special case of full parity. Work estimating the welfare

losses of parity along similar lines of the welfare losses of non-integrated designs is needed to better

understand the welfare consequences of parity legislation.

IV.3 Integrated Designs under Public Financing

        Although our discussion concerned different medical services at a given point in time, the time-

tested strategy of reinterpreting goods implies many other applications. One way to interpret the goods

concerns public versus privately financed. In particular, in the US the recent implementation of drug

coverage through Medicare Part D may have important spending implications for other parts of the


                                                                                                           9
program, such as Medicare Part A and B (hospital and physician services). An important area of future

research concerns the optimally integrated public and privately financed designs .. Another way to

interpret the goods are as current and future consumption and thus the integrated designs may differ

depending on patient turnover in the plan.

        As we hope this discussion illustrates, the analysis of optimal integrated benefit design offers

several future avenues of research, should be of major importance for those interested in understanding

how existing plans are structured, how the adopt new technologies that are of great value, and or for those

attempting to understand how to change the designs of existing plans to raise economic efficiency.



References

Gaynor, Martin; Jian Li, and William Vogt. Is drug coverage a free lunch?: Cross-price elasticities and

the design of prescription drug benefits. NBER Working Paper No. 12758, 2006.

Goldman, Dana. P.; Geoffrey F. Joyce, Jose J. Escarce, et al. "Pharmacy Benefits and the Use of Drugs by

the Chronically Ill." JAMA, 2004, 291(19), pp. 2344-50.

Goldman, Dana P.; Geoffrey F. Joyce, Pinar Karaca-Mandic. "Varying Pharmacy Benefits with Clinical

Status: The Case of Cholesterol-Lowering Therapy." American Journal of Managed Care, 2006, 12(1),

pp. 21-28.

Horn, Susan D.; Phoebe D. Sharkey, Diana M. Tracey, Corinne E. Horn, Blair James, and Frederick

Goodwin. Intended and unintended consequences of HMO cost-containment strategies: Results from the

managed care outcomes project. American Journal of Managed Care. March 1996 1996;II(3):253-264.

Johnson, Richard E.; Michael J. Goodman, Mark C. Hornbrook, and Michael B. Eldredge. The effect of

increased prescription drug cost-sharing on medical care utilization and expenses of elderly health

maintenance organization members. Medical Care. Nov 1997;35(11):1119-1131.

Joyce, Geoffrey. F.; Jose J. Escarce, Matthew D. Solomon, and Dana P. Goldman. "Employer Drug

Benefit Plans and Spending on Prescription Drugs." JAMA, 2002, 288(14), pp. 1733-9.



                                                                                                        10
Lichtenberg, Frank R. “Do (more and better) drugs keep people out of hospitals?” American Economic

Review. May 1996;86(2):384-388.

Lichtenberg, Frank R. National Bureau of Economic Research. “The effect of pharmaceutical utilization

and innovation on hospitalization and mortality”. Working Paper 5418.

Newhouse, Joseph P. The Insurance Experiment Group. Free for all? Lessons from the rand health

insurance experiment. A RAND Study. Cambridge and London: Harvard University Press; 1993

Pauly, Mark V. "The Economics of Moral Hazard: Comment." American Economic Review 1968, 58(3),

pp. 531-37.

Pauly, Mark V. and Philip J. Held. "Benign Moral Hazard and the Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of

Insurance Coverage." J Health Econ, 1990, 9(4), pp. 447-61.

Rizzo, John A. and W. Robert Simons. "Variations in Compliance among Hypertensive Patients by

Drug Class: Implications for Health Care Costs." Clinical therapeutics, 1997, 19(6), pp. 1446-

57; discussion 24-5.

Soumerai, Stephen B.; Dennis Ross-Degnan, Jerry Avorn, Thomas J. McLaughlin, and Igor

Choodnovskiy. "Effects of Medicaid Drug-Payment Limits on Admission to Hospitals and Nursing

Homes." The New England journal of medicine, 1991, 325(15), pp. 1072-7.

Soumerai, Stephen B.; Thomas J. McLaughlin, Dennis Ross-Degnan, Christina S. Casteris, and Paola

Bollini. Effects of a limit on medicaid drug-reimbursement benefits on the use of psychotropic agents and

acute mental health services by patients with schizophrenia. The New England journal of medicine. Sep 8

1994;331(10):650-655. Effects of medicaid drug-payment limits on admission to hospitals and nursing

homes. The New England journal of medicine. Oct 10 1991;325(15):1072-1077.

Tamblyn, Robin; Tracey Reid, Nancy Mayo, Peter McLeod, and Michael Churchill-Smith. Using medical

services claims to assess injuries in the elderly: Sensitivity of diagnostic and procedure codes for injury

ascertainment. J Clin Epidemiol. Feb 2000;53(2):183-194.




                                                                                                        11
Wei, L., J. Wang, P. Thompson, S. Wong, A.D. Struthers, and T.M. MacDonald. "Adherence to Statin

Treatment and Readmission of Patients after Myocardial Infarction: A Six Year Follow up Study." Heart

(British Cardiac Society), 2002, 88(3), pp. 229-33.

Zeckhauser, Richard. "Medical Insurance: A Case Study of the Tradeoff between Risk Spreading and

Appropriate Incentives." Journal of Economic Theory, 1970, 2(1), pp. 10-26.




                                                                                                   12
