                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  DOES INFLATION TARGETING MAKE A DIFFERENCE?

                                        Frederic S. Mishkin
                                       Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel

                                        Working Paper 12876
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12876


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2007




We thank Kevin Cowan for valuable discussion and methodological advice. Fabian Gredig, Mauricio
Larrain, and Marcelo Ochoa provided outstanding assistance and ideas to the paper. For valuable comments
we thank Mario Blejer, Agnes Csermely, John Murray, Grant Spencer, Raimundo Soto and participants
at the 2005 Annual Conference of the Central Bank of Chile, the South African Reserve Bank / Bank
of England Center of Central Banking Studies Seminar on Inflation Targeting, the 2006 Annual Seminar
of the Central Bank of Brazil, and at seminars at Ceska Narodni Banka, Bank of England, Magyar
Nemzeti Bank, Norges Bank, and Reserve Bank of New Zealand. Frederic Mishkin's work on this
paper was completed before he became a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System. All remaining errors are ours and the views expressed in the paper do not necessarily represent
those of the Central Bank of Chile or its Board, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
Columbia University or the National Bureau of Economic Research. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2007 by Frederic S. Mishkin and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Inflation Targeting Make a Difference?
Frederic S. Mishkin and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel
NBER Working Paper No. 12876
January 2007
JEL No. E31,E52,E58

                                                ABSTRACT

Yes, as inferred from panel evidence for inflation-targeting countries and a control group of high-achieving
industrial countries that do not target inflation. Our evidence suggests that inflation targeting helps
countries achieve lower inflation in the long run, have smaller inflation response to oil-price and exchange-rate
shocks, strengthen monetary policy independence, improve monetary policy efficiency, and obtain
inflation outcomes closer to target levels. Some benefits of inflation targeting are larger when inflation
targeters have achieved disinflation and are able to make their inflation targets stationary. Despite
these favorable results for inflation targeting, our evidence generally does not suggest that countries
that adopt inflation targeting have attained better monetary policy performance relative to our control
group of highly successful non-inflation targeters. However, inflation targeting does seem to help all
country groups to move toward performance of the control group. The performance attained by industrial-country
inflation targeters generally dominates performance of emerging-economy inflation targeters and is
similar to that of industrial non-inflation targeting countries.

Frederic S. Mishkin
Governor Frederic Mishkin
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
20th Street and Constitution Ave., N.W.
Room B-2052
Stop 47
Washington, DC 20551
and NBER
fsm3@columbia.edu

Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel
Central Bank of Chile
Agustinas 1180
Santiago, Chile
kschmidt@bcentral.cl
    Since New Zealand adopted inflation targeting in 1990, a steadily growing number of industrial
and emerging economies have explicitly adopted an inflation target as their nominal anchor. Eight
industrial countries and thirteen emerging economies had full-fledged inflation targeting in place in
early 2005. Many other emerging economies are planning to adopt inflation targeting in the near
future. This trend has triggered an intensifying debate over whether inflation targeting makes a
difference. Opinions diverge widely over whether central banks are better off after they adopt
inflation (forecast) targeting as an explicit and exclusive anchor for conducting monetary policy.
Analysts are demanding hard evidence that inflation targeting improves macroeconomic
performance relative to countries without explicit inflation targeting.
    Empirical evidence on the direct link between inflation targeting and particular measures of
economic performance generally provides some support for the view that inflation targeting is
associated with an improvement in overall economic performance.1 This conclusion is derived from
the following four results:2
    —Inflation levels, inflation volatility, and interest rates have declined after countries adopted
inflation targeting.
    —Output volatility has not worsened after the adoption of inflation targeting; if anything, it has
improved.
    —Exchange rate pass-through seems to be attenuated by the adoption of inflation targeting.
    —The fall in inflation levels and volatility, interest rates, and output volatility is part of a
worldwide trend in the 1990s, and inflation targeters have not done better in terms of these
variables or in terms of exchange rate pass-through than nontargeting industrialized countries such
as Germany or the United States.
    Although these results suggest that inflation targeting is beneficial, they are less conclusive than
first appears. Ball and Sheridan (2005), in one of the few empirical papers critical of inflation
targeting, argue that inflation targeting does not make a difference in industrial countries. They
claim that the apparent success of inflation targeting countries simply reflects regression toward the
mean: that is, inflation will fall faster in countries that start with high inflation than in countries
with an initially low inflation rate. Since the countries that adopted inflation targeting generally had
higher initial inflation rates, their larger decline in inflation merely reflects a general tendency of all
countries, both targeters and nontargeters, to achieve better inflation and output performance in the
1990s, when inflation targeting was adopted.
    Ball and Sheridan’s findings are heavily disputed by Hyvonen (2004), Vega and Winkelried
(2005), IMF (2005), and Batini and Laxton (forthcoming), who provide evidence—based on using
samples that include emerging countries and different specifications and estimation techniques—
that inflation levels, persistence, and volatility are lower in inflation-targeting countries than in
nontargeters. However, Ball and Sheridan’s paper does raise a serious issue about the empirical
literature on inflation targeting. The adoption of inflation targeting is clearly an endogenous choice,
as is pointed out by Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel (2002) and Gertler (2005). The finding that better
performance is associated with inflation targeting thus may not imply that inflation targeting causes
this better performance.


     1. Roger and Stone (2005) reach this conclusion.
     2. For evidence supporting these first four results, see Bernanke and others (1999), Corbo, Landerretche, and Schmidt-
Hebbel (2002), Neumann and von Hagen (2002), Hu (2003), Truman (2003), and Ball and Sheridan (2005). There is also some
mildly favorable evidence on the impact of inflation targeting on sacrifice ratios. Bernanke and others (1999) do not find that
sacrifice ratios in industrialized countries fell with the adoption of inflation targeting, while Corbo, Landerretche, and
Schmidt-Hebbel (2002) conclude, based on a larger sample of inflation targeters, that inflation targeting did lead to an
improvement in sacrifice ratios. Cohen, Gonzalez, and Powell (2003) also find that inflation targeting leads to nominal
exchange rate movements that are more responsive to real shocks than nominal shocks. This might indicate that inflation
targeting can help the nominal exchange rate act as a shock absorber for the real economy.



                                                                 1
    The fourth result above—namely, that the inflation and output performance of inflation-
targeting countries improves but does not surpass countries like Germany and the United States—
also suggests that what really matters for successful monetary policy is establishing a strong
nominal anchor. While inflation targeting is one way to achieve this, it is not the only way. Germany
was able to create a strong nominal anchor with its monetary targeting procedure (see Bernanke and
Mishkin, 1992; Mishkin and Posen, 1997; Bernanke and others, 1999; Neumann and von Hagen,
2002). In the United States, the strong nominal anchor has been Alan Greenspan (see, for example,
Mishkin, 2000). It is not at all clear that inflation targeting would have improved performance
during the Greenspan era, although it might well do so in the future if the United States is not as
fortunate with choices of Fed chairmen like Greenspan and Bernanke (Mishkin, 2005). Furthermore,
as emphasized in Calvo and Mishkin (2003) and Sims (2005), an inflation target alone is not capable
of establishing a strong nominal anchor if the government pursues irresponsible fiscal policy or
inadequate prudential supervision of the financial system, which might then be prone to a financial
crisis.
    Empirical evidence that focuses on whether inflation targeting strengthens the nominal anchor
may be even more telling about the possible benefits of inflation targeting. Recent research has
found the following additional results:
    —Evidence that the adoption of inflation targeting leads to an immediate fall in inflation
expectations is not strong.3
    —Inflation persistence, however, is lower for countries that have adopted inflation targeting than
for countries that have not.
    —Inflation expectations appear to be more anchored for inflation targeters than nontargeters:
that is, inflation expectations react less to shocks to actual inflation for targeters than nontargeters,
particularly at longer horizons.4
    These results suggest that once inflation targeting has been in place for a while, it does make a
difference by anchoring inflation expectations and thus strengthening the nominal anchor. Inflation
targeting could therefore strengthen the nominal anchor in the United States even beyond what was
achieved under “maestro” Greenspan. Recent theory on optimal monetary policy, sometimes called
the new neoclassical synthesis (Woodford, 2003; Goodfriend and King, 1997), shows that establishing
a strong nominal anchor is a crucial element in successful monetary policy. Consequently, the
evidence on anchoring inflation expectations bolsters the case for the adoption of inflation targeting.
    Our survey of the debate on whether inflation targeting matters indicates that open questions
remain, particularly with regard to other dimensions of comparative macroeconomic performance in
inflation-targeting countries, both over time and in comparison with nontargeting countries. Are the
inflation level and the volatility of inflation and output lower in inflation-targeting countries? Do
monetary policy and macroeconomic performance variables respond differently to shocks under
inflation-targeting than under other monetary policy regimes? Is monetary policy efficient under
inflation-targeting? Are inflation-targeting central banks more accurate in hitting their targets than
nontargeters in maintaining or achieving stable inflation?
    This paper addresses these questions systematically by applying a common methodological
approach, across issues and throughout the paper, based on four methodological choices. First, we
look for empirical evidence in a sample of twenty-one industrial and emerging inflation-targeting
countries before and after their adoption of inflation targeting, and we compare their performance to
a control group of thirteen industrial countries without inflation targeting (termed nontargeters).
The macroeconomic and monetary policy performance of the nontargeters in this control group is
among the best in the world, raising the odds against finding evidence of better performance among
inflation-targeting countries. Second, we distinguish between two types of inflation-targeting
regimes, one in which inflation targets are still converging to the long-run goal for inflation and one


     3. For example, Bernanke and others (1999) and Levin, Natalucci, and Piger (2004) do not find that inflation targeting
leads to an immediate fall in expected inflation, but Johnson (2002, 2003) finds some evidence that expected inflation falls
after the announcement of inflation targets.
     4. Gürkaynak, Levin, and Swanson (forthcoming); Levin, Natalucci, and Piger (2004); Castelnuovo, Nicoletti-Altimari,
and Palenzuela (2003).



                                                               2
in which the inflation target is stationary. This distinction is important because the strength of the
nominal anchor may vary depending on whether inflation targets are stable. Third, we test for
differences in the group behavior of inflation targeters and nontargeters—and for changes between
pre- and post-targeting periods among targeters—making statistical inferences from panel data
estimations, panel vector autoregressive models, and panel impulse responses. Finally, to exploit the
rich available data and identify dynamic patterns, we use a high-frequency sample of quarterly data,
covering the 1989–2004 period and subperiods.
    Section 1 of the paper describes more closely the two samples of inflation targeters and
nontargeters and presents comparative descriptive statistics on their inflation and growth
performance. The following sections test for differences in performance between targeters and
nontargeters and (for targeters) between pre- and post-targeting periods, along four dimensions.
Section 2 revisits the question about differences in inflation behavior among country groups,
extending previous research on the same issue to a country panel and considering alternative
estimation methods and control groups. Section 3 tests for differences in the country groups’ dynamic
response of inflation to oil price and exchange rate shocks and of domestic interest rates to
international interest rate shocks. Section 4 measures differences in macroeconomic performance
(output and inflation volatility) and monetary policy efficiency. Section 5 reports differences between
country groups in meeting inflation targets or objectives. Section 6 offers concluding remarks.


1. DESCRIPTIVE INFLATION AND OUTPUT STATISTICS

    Inflation targeting was started by New Zealand in 1990, with several industrial countries and
emerging economies following in subsequent years. Our sample of inflation-targeting countries
comprises eight industrial countries and thirteen emerging economies that had full-fledged inflation
targeting in place in late 2004.5
    Dating the adoption of inflation targeting is not uncontroversial, particularly in emerging
economies that started a version of inflation targeting termed partial inflation targeting. Under
partial inflation targeting, countries often maintained an additional nominal anchor (typically an
exchange rate band), did not satisfy key preconditions for inflation targeting, and did not put in place
formal features of inflation targeting (such as formalizing monetary policy decisions or publishing an
inflation report with inflation forecasts). In contrast, under full-fledged inflation targeting, the
inflation target is the only nominal anchor (although exchange rate interventions could be present),
and the central bank pursues most formal policy and transparency features observed under best-
practice inflation targeting.
    Here we follow much of the previous literature (for example, Corbo, Landerretche, and Schmidt-
Hebbel, 2002; Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel, 2002; Roger and Stone, 2005) in dating the adoption of
inflation targeting with the start of either partial or full-fledged inflation targeting, in opposition to
work that considers inflation targeting as starting only with full-fledged targeting (for example, IMF,
2005; Batini, and Laxton, forthcoming). For the reasons mentioned above, however, we identify two
distinct post-adoption periods, based on the stationarity of the inflation target itself. During target
convergence, inflation targets are adjusted downward, typically for calendar years, and they are
based on annual or multi-annual announcements. During target stationarity, inflation targets are
fixed at a constant level or range for an indefinite future, although some countries occasionally make
slight adjustments to the target.6 An important advantage of using converging versus stationary
targets to identify relevant post-targeting periods is that this distinction is based on an observable
feature that is precisely dated, whereas the partial/full-fledged dichotomy is based on more
subjective characteristics and dating.


    5. We therefore exclude Finland and Spain, which adopted inflation targeting in 1993 and 1995, respectively, before
adopting the euro in 1999.
    6. Countries that have exceptionally and only marginally adjusted their stationary target levels or ranges include New
Zealand and the United Kingdom.



                                                              3
    Table 1 summarizes the information on inflation-targeting countries for the world population of
inflation targeters. The data sample used in this paper starts with the first quarter of 1989 and
extends through the fourth quarter of 2004. Pre-targeting sample periods range from one year (New
Zealand, the most senior inflation targeter) to twelve years (Iceland, Norway, Hungary, and the
Philippines, the most recent targeters). Target convergence periods also vary significantly in
extension, from no convergence (for example, Australia and Thailand) to eleven years of convergence
(Israel). The length of the stationary-target period is also heterogeneous, extending from one year
(Poland) to twelve years (New Zealand).

                                                         [table 1 here]

   Our most recent data on inflation target levels (or midpoints of target ranges) show little country
variation. For the eight stationary industrial countries, the average inflation target level was 2.2
percent in 2005. Among emerging economies, the average inflation target level that year was 3.0
percent for the subsample of eight inflation targeters with a stationary target and 3.6 percent for the
subsample of inflation targeters that were still converging toward future stationary target levels in
2004.
   Figure 1 depicts inflation targets since the adoption of inflation targeting and twelve-month
consumer price index (CPI) inflation rates for every inflation targeter, based on quarterly data for
1989–2004. Visual inspection of the absolute differences between inflation and target levels suggests
that inflation-targeting countries have been successful in meeting their targets. Section 5 tests this
hypothesis more systematically and compares the finding with a control group of nontargeters.

                                                         [figure 1 here]

    Our control group of nontargeters comprises a selective set of thirteen industrial countries that
are at the international frontier of macroeconomic management and performance: Austria, Belgium,
Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal,
and the United States. In choosing this control group, we reduce the probability of finding evidence
of better comparative performance under inflation targeting, considering that the world population
of twenty-one inflation targeters encompasses a more heterogeneous country set in terms of past
performance, current macroeconomic institutions, and income levels.7
    Figure 2 shows that inflation targeters and nontargeters had very different annual inflation
rates in the late 1980s and early 1990s. 8 However, as time passed and inflation targeting was
adopted in the 1990s, the inflation gap between inflation targeters and nontargeters fell almost
monotonically and was almost closed by 2004. This inflation convergence is largely due to the
massive decline in inflation among inflation-targeting emerging economies (figure 3).

                                                    [figures 2 and 3 here]

    Comparative descriptive statistics on inflation performance confirm these facts (table 2).
Inflation targeters reduced their average inflation rates from 12.6 percent before the adoption of
inflation targeting to 4.4 percent after the adoption. Inflation declined to 6.0 percent in the post-
adoption convergence and then to 2.3 percent after attaining stationary targets. Inflation-targeting
emerging economies have recorded 6.0 percent inflation since adopting inflation targeting, while the
corresponding figure is only 2.2 percent in inflation-targeting industrial countries. The latter figure
is very close to the average 2.1 percent inflation recorded among nontargeters since 1997. We
observe a similar pattern for inflation volatility (measured by the standard deviation of inflation).

     7. Ten of the thirteen countries in the control group joined the euro area in 1999 and therefore do not pursue an
independent monetary policy for a significant part of our 1989–2004 sample period. While this may be a disadvantage, we
think it is of less concern than the problems—and less relevant results—that would arise if our control group was made up of
developing countries.
     8. The country sample of inflation targeters depicted in figure 2 is held fixed, including all years before the adoption of
inflation targeting in each of the twenty-one countries.



                                                                 4
While inflation volatility in industrial inflation targeters is twice the level recorded in nontargeters,
inflation persistence is slightly lower in industrial targeters than in nontargeters. The next section
more systematically tests for significant differences in inflation performance between inflation
targeters and nontargeters, controlling for possible endogeneity of the inflation-targeting regime.

                                                        [table 2 here]

    Comparative descriptive statistics on the volatility and persistence of output growth and the
output gap reflect the following trends (table 3). Emerging inflation targeters—in contrast to
industrial inflation targeters—have achieved a significant reduction in output growth volatility and
output gap volatility. Nontargeters also achieved a significant reduction in both volatility measures
after 1997, to levels that are below those recorded by industrial inflation targeters. However, output
persistence, like inflation persistence, is lower in stationary-target inflation targeters than in
nontargeters after 1997.
                                               [table 3 here]


2. COMPARATIVE INFLATION PERFORMANCE

    Comparing inflation performance in inflation-targeting countries and nontargeting countries has
recently received increased attention (Ball and Sheridan, 2005; Vega and Winkelried, 2005; IMF,
2005). All these works are based only on cross-section evidence, but they differ significantly in the
choice of control groups of nontargeters and in estimation techniques. Not surprisingly, results also
differ significantly, as summarized below. In this section we focus on the comparative performance of
inflation levels, extending the previous literature by considering alternative control groups, a panel
data set, and alternative estimation techniques.
    In line with previous research, we specify inflation as a weighted average of its long-term or
underlying mean and its recent past represented by its lagged value, consistent with a standard
partial-adjustment specification:

π i,t = λπ i,t
           *
                ( )
               + 1 − λ π i,t−1 + εi,t ,                                                                 (1)


where π is the observed twelve-month CPI inflation rate, π* is the unobserved long-term average
twelve-month CPI inflation rate, parameter λ is the weight attached to long-term inflation, and ε is a
stochastic disturbance term. Consistent with a panel sample, subindexes i and t denote country units
and time periods.
    The unobserved long-term inflation rate is allowed to differ between inflation targeters and
nontargeters, according to the following specification based on an inflation-targeting-regime dummy
variable and controlling for country- and time-specific effects:

π i,t
  *
      = βDi,t + α i + δ t ,                                                                             (2)


where D is the inflation-targeting-regime dummy, β is its coefficient, α is a country fixed effect, and δ
is a time fixed effect. For inflation-targeting countries, Di,t is set equal to 0 for periods before
inflation-targeting adoption and 1 for periods of inflation targeting; for nontargeters, Di,t is equal to 0
for all periods.
    Substituting equation 2 into equation 1 yields the following expression:

                  ( )
π i,t = λβDi,t + 1 − λ π i,t−1 + λα i + λδ t + εi,t .                                                   (3)




                                                              5
By subtracting lagged inflation from both sides of equation 3 and taking t and t – 1 as the periods
before and after the inflation-targeting adoption date, we arrive at the following difference-in-
difference cross-section specification, which is used by Ball and Sheridan (2005) and IMF (2005) to
test for inflation performance differences between inflation targeters and nontargeters:

π i,post − π i,pre = γ 1 + γ 2 Di − γ 3 π i,pre + μi ,                                                                     (4)

where πi,post (πi,pre) is average observed inflation in the period after (before) the inflation-targeting
adoption date; γ1, γ2, and γ3 are reduced-form coefficients; and μi is a stochastic disturbance term.
    Table 4 summarizes the cross-section results on comparative inflation performance reported by
the previous literature. Ball and Sheridan (2005) reject any long-term differences between inflation
targeters and nontargeters regarding inflation mean, volatility, and persistence, for a sample of
seven industrial inflation targeters and thirteen industrial nontargeters. They attribute inflation
performance improvement in inflation-targeting industrial countries over time to reversion to the
mean after the low performance of the 1980s, as reflected by their reported significance of lagged
inflation (πi,pre).9

                                                         [table 4 here]

    IMF (2005) comes to the opposite conclusion using a similar ordinary least squares (OLS) cross-
section estimation technique. The treatment and control groups differ radically from those used by
Ball and Sheridan, however: the study compares inflation performance in thirteen developing
inflation targeters to a control group of twenty-two developing countries. They find that inflation
targeting has helped developing inflation targeters reduce annual long-term inflation rates by 4.8
percent and lower long-term inflation volatility by 3.6 percent.
    Finally, Vega and Winkelried (2005) use a matching (propensity score) technique applied to
cross-country data for a treatment sample of twenty-three industrial and developing inflation
targeters and a control group of eighty-six industrial and developing nontargeters. They report that
targeters have lower long-term annual inflation rates ranging from 2.6 percent to 4.8 percent and
lower long-term inflation volatilities by 1.5 percent to 2.0 percent. The similarity of Vega and
Winkelried’s results to those reported in the IMF suggests that sample differences weigh more
heavily than differences in estimation techniques in the results reported by the three cited studies.
    Next we extend the tests for differences in inflation performance reported by previous studies
along three dimensions. We add the time dimension of the data to the cross-country dimension,
focusing on a large panel sample of quarterly data for sixteen years and thirty-four countries. We
check the robustness of our results by reporting results based on different estimation techniques
(OLS and IV estimations). Finally, we report different results by varying the composition of our
inflation-targeting treatment group (separating industrial and emerging-market inflation targeters
and stationary-target and converging-target inflation targeters) and of our nontargeting control
group (considering different combinations of the nontargeting sample and the pre-targeting sample).
    To facilitate comparison with previous studies, we start by estimating equation 4, using
quarterly data from 1989–2004 for our full sample of twenty-one developing and industrial inflation
targeters and thirteen industrial nontargeters. 10 The results suggest that inflation has been 1
percent higher in inflation-targeting countries than in nontargeters, on average, as reflected by the
coefficient of the contemporaneous inflation-targeting dummy variable (table 5). Given the estimated
coefficient on pre-targeting (pre-1997) inflation in inflation targeters (nontargeters), equal to –0.85,
the long-term average difference in inflation between inflation targeters and nontargeters is


     9. Hyvonen (2004) disputes this interpretation by reporting strong evidence for inflation divergence among industrial
countries in previous decades.
     10. For inflation targeters, the pre-and post-adoption periods are identified in table 2. For nontargeters, we follow the
convention of previous studies in using an arbitrary cut-off date that is consistent with the targeters’ average adoption date.
In our sample, this date is the fourth quarter of 1996.



                                                                 6
estimated at 1.2 percent.11 This finding of 1 percent higher inflation in inflation-targeting countries
is estimated conditional on the inclusion of the highly significant pre-targeting (pre-1997) inflation
rate. This estimate is much smaller than the unconditional inflation difference between inflation
targeters and nontargeters for the inflation-targeting (post-1997) period, equal to 2.3 percent (the
difference between 4.37 percent and 2.07 percent reported in table 2).

                                                          [table 5 here]

    Our result stands in contrast with the negative inflation differences between inflation targeters
and nontargeters found by Vega and Winkelried (for developing and industrial countries) and the
IMF (for developing countries only) and the zero differences in Ball and Sheridan (for industrial
countries only). This suggests that differences in results are mostly a reflection of inflation-targeting
and nontargeting country group composition. Of all the reported studies, our sample composition is
the most stringent against finding favorable effects of the inflation-targeting regime, because our
inflation targeters comprise the world population of industrial and developing countries, while our
control group encompasses only high-achieving industrial nontargeters. Not surprisingly, we find a
significantly higher average inflation level in inflation-targeting countries, conditional on their pre-
targeting (or pre-1997) inflation levels.
    We now proceed to extend the above cross-country studies by exploiting both the country and
time dimensions of our full panel sample, using both OLS and instrumental variables (IV) estimation
techniques. We start by focusing on our full treatment sample comprising all inflation targeters, but
considering three different data sets with alternative control groups. Control group 1 includes all
1989–2004 observations for our thirteen nontargeting countries and the pre-targeting observations of
all subsequent inflation targeters, implying a large panel dataset of 1,942 quarterly observations for
the full sample. Control group 2 covers all 1989–2004 observations for our thirteen nontargeting
countries but excludes the pre-targeting observations of all subsequent inflation targeters; this
implies a smaller panel of 1,420 quarterly observations for the full sample. Finally, control group 3
encompasses all pre-targeting observations of all subsequent inflation targeters and excludes
nontargeting countries; this generates a panel of 1,183 observations.
    We turn back to equation 3, which is the relevant specification for our panel sample. In contrast
to equation 4 and the corresponding results reported in table 5, the regressors now include inflation
lagged by one quarter and exclude inflation in the pre-targeting (pre-1997) period. For reference, we
start by reporting pooled OLS results with time dummies, with one for each of the three control
groups (columns 1, 3, and 5 in table 6). All subsequent results on inflation differences between
country groups are conditional on the inclusion of lagged inflation and thus are not directly
comparable to the differences in unconditional inflation means reported in table 2.

                                                          [table 6 here]

    The results for control group 1 (first column in table 6) show that the impact of the inflation-
targeting regime is to reduce inflation by 0.1 percent per year, with a long-term effect (considering
the coefficient estimate of lagged inflation) of –1.9 percent. Recall, however, that we include high pre-
targeting inflation levels among subsequent inflation targeters in control group 1. Dropping this
subsample yields the results reported for control group 2 in column 3, which show no significant
inflation difference between inflation targeters and nontargeters. The estimation presented in
column 5 reinforces these results: inflation targeters’ long-term inflation is a significant 5 percent
lower than their pre-targeting long-term inflation level.
    These OLS results may be biased because of endogeneity of the inflation-targeting regime to
inflation. As shown by our previous research using a cross-section sample of inflation targeters and
nontargeters (Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel, 2002), the adoption of inflation targeting is determined


     11. This result must be qualified, however, because of the omission of country fixed effects and the possible endogeneity of
the inflation-targeting-regime dummy, addressed below.



                                                                  7
by country-specific variables, including central bank independence, the fiscal surplus, and initial
inflation.
    Given the lack of adequate instruments for the inflation-targeting regime variable for our full
panel sample, we estimate a parsimonious first-stage specification for the inflation-targeting dummy
as a function of its own lag and average pre-targeting (pre-1997) inflation for inflation targeters
(nontargeters).12 The results for various panel samples of inflation targeters and nontargeters show
that both variables are useful instruments of the inflation-targeting-regime dummy; we therefore
use them in our subsequent IV estimations.13
    Returning to table 6, we report IV results for the preceding specification of the inflation
difference in columns 2, 4, and 6.14 This exercise confirms the qualitative results of columns 1, 3, and
5. When we use control group 1 (which includes the inflation targeters’ pre-targeting observations
since 1989), inflation is lower among inflation targeters. The corresponding estimations for control
group 2 show that this result vanishes, yielding no significant difference. With control group 3,
however, the lower inflation among inflation targeters is magnified.
    We find for control groups 1 and 3 that both the contemporaneous and long-term effects of the
inflation-targeting dummy on inflation differentials in inflation-targeting countries is larger for the
IV estimations than for the OLS estimations (comparing columns 1 and 2 and columns 5 and 6). This
suggests that the absolute size of the inflation-targeting dummy coefficient is biased downward in
the OLS estimations, because it fails to take into account the endogeneity of inflation targeting to
inflation. When we use IV, the estimated effect of inflation targeting is to lower long-run annual
inflation by 4.8 percent (compared to control group 1) and by 5 percent (compared to control group 3).
However, there is no significant inflation difference between inflation targeters and nontargeters
(control group 2).
    To explore whether these results for our full treatment sample (including all industrial and
emerging-market inflation targeters) are robust to considering different subsamples of inflation
targeters, we divide the full treatment sample first into industrial and emerging-market inflation
targeters and then into converging-target and stationary-target inflation targeters. Tables 7 and 8
report the corresponding results for our three control groups, using only IV panel estimation
techniques. As above, we infer that estimated inflation differences between inflation targeters and
nontargeters depend largely on which control group is used. However, they also vary significantly
with treatment groups—that is, across different subsamples of inflation targeters.

                                                     [tables 7 and 8 here]

    The results for industrial inflation targeters show that inflation is numerically, but not
significantly, lower in industrial inflation targeters than in control groups 1 and 3 (results in
columns 1 and 5 of table 7). While this result may be surprising, recall that our econometric results
are conditional on including the highly significant lagged inflation variable. In contrast, we find
weak evidence (significant at the 10 percent level) that inflation in industrial inflation targeters is
significantly lower than in nontargeters for control group 2—by 0.06 percent on impact and by 1.1
percent in the long run. Considering its weak significance, this result is similar to Ball and
Sheridan’s (2005) finding of no significant inflation difference for industrial countries, based on OLS
cross-section results.



     12. Some determinants of an inflation-targeting regime (like central bank independence measures) included in the
Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel cross-section probit estimation for inflation targeting are not available for time series, while
other determinants (such as the ratio of fiscal balance to GDP and trade openness measures) were found to be insignificant in
our current panel data sample.
     13. Results of the first-stage regressions are available on request.
     14. We use time dummies in all IV specifications. For control groups 1 and 3, we also use country-specific dummies (fixed
effects). We use a within-estimation technique to eliminate the bias that may arise from the correlation between the fixed
effects and the regressors owing to the lags of the dependent variable. Finally, we do not use fixed effects for control group 2,
since the inflation-targeting dummy would be perfectly correlated with the fixed effects. We therefore apply a standard pooled
IV procedure to control for endogeneity in control group 2.



                                                                  8
    The results for emerging inflation targeters point to a considerable gain in inflation. Compared
with control groups 1 and 3, emerging inflation targeters record a large and significant reduction of
inflation (table 7, columns 2 and 6), which is close to 0.8 percent on impact and 7.0 percent in the
long term However, when compared with nontargeters only (control group 2 in column 4), emerging
inflation targeters do not record inflation gains.
    The results for converging-target and stationary-target inflation targeters also confirm that the
choice of treatment and control groups is crucial (see table 8). Our general result on control groups is
upheld: inflation differences tend to favor inflation targeters only in comparison with control groups
1 and 3. Inflation differences in favor of inflation targeters are found to be highly significant in
converging inflation targeters and not significant in stationary targeters.
    The evidence on the comparative inflation performance of inflation targeters and nontargeters
reported both here and in the previous literature thus shows that the effect of inflation targeting on
inflation can go either way. Our findings suggest that the source of these differences lies in the use of
heterogeneous control groups. The failure to use panel data techniques in previous studies prevents
the separation of control groups across countries and time. By exploiting both the cross-section and
time dimensions of our sample, we found that the largest difference in inflation performance between
inflation targeters and nontargeters occurs when the treatment group is compared with its own pre-
targeting experience. This effect declines when nontargeting experiences are added to the control
group, but it is still statistically significant. When the control group is restricted to nontargeting
countries, however, we find no systematic, significant difference in inflation between inflation
targeters and nontargeters.
    Further disaggregation of the treatment group into industrial and emerging inflation targeters,
and into converging-target and stationary-target inflation targeters, yields mixed results. They
confirm that results are highly dependent on the choice of control groups. They also suggest that
emerging and converging-target inflation targeters record the largest gains in inflation reduction.
Finally, industrial inflation targeters exhibit a statistically weak reduction in inflation relative to
nontargeting industrial countries.


3. INFLATION AND POLICY RESPONSE TO SHOCKS

    If inflation targeting improves the credibility of monetary policy and the anchoring of inflation
expectations, then we would expect that inflation would respond less to oil price shocks under
inflation targeting and there would be less of a pass-through effect from exchange rate shocks. As a
result of increased credibility and reduced devaluation to inflation pass-through, inflation targeting
may also reinforce monetary policy independence (that is, it may weaken the reaction of domestic
interest rates to shocks in foreign rates).
    We therefore want to assess whether inflation targeters differ from nontargeters—and whether
targeters differ pre- and post-targeting—in the response of inflation to shocks in oil prices and the
exchange rate and the response of domestic interest rates to innovations in international interest
rates. To test for differences, we adopt a comparative analysis of impulse response functions in
different country samples, depending on whether a country has inflation targeting in place (in the
spirit of the difference-in-differences approach). However, instead of using traditional country vector
autoregressive (VAR) models, we use a panel VAR that allows us to use the larger data set on
inflation targeters and nontargeters employed in this paper.
    Our approach to assessing the impact of inflation targeting on the responses described above is
based on the analysis and comparison of aggregated impulse response functions in the following five
groups of countries and periods: inflation targeters before the adoption of inflation targets; inflation
targeters after the adoption of inflation targeting; inflation targeters after achieving stationary
targets; nontargeters before 1997; and nontargeters after 1997. The first group—namely, inflation
targeters in the period before they implemented inflation targeting—is characterized by a
heterogeneous sample period, since it starts at the beginning of our sample (first quarter of 1989) but
ends according to the date of adoption of inflation targeting in each country. The second group



                                                     9
presents the opposite situation, in which the sample period is heterogeneous at the beginning but
ends at the same period (fourth quarter of 2004). The third group, which is made up of inflation
targeters that have achieved stationary targets, is a subsample of the full inflation-targeting group.
The results for this subsample might differ from the full sample because the convergence period from
the adoption of inflation targeting to a stationary target may not be characterized by high credibility.
The full benefits of inflation targeting in achieving a strong nominal anchor might only be obtained
after inflation targets become stationary. The fourth and fifth groups both encompass our sample of
countries without inflation targeting, but they differ in their sample period.
    Once we have estimated the responses to shocks for each group (as described below), we compare
those responses between different pairs of groups. Specifically, we are looking for significant
differences (that is, statistically different from zero) between the responses before and after the
adoption of inflation targeting in inflation targeters (group 1 versus group 2), before the adoption of
inflation targeting and after the achievement of a stationary target (group 1 versus group 3), before
and after 1997 in nontargeters (group 4 versus group 5), after inflation targeting in inflation
targeters and after 1997 in nontargeters (group 2 versus group 5), and after the achievement of a
stationary target and after 1997 in nontargeters (group 3 versus group 5). We also split our
treatment group sample (inflation targeters) into industrial and emerging economies to check for
possible differences in their performance.
    We use panel VAR techniques to estimate the impulse response functions for each group
described above. This technique combines a traditional VAR approach with panel data. It allows us
to exploit our rich information set and gain efficiency in the estimation. This methodology also allows
for unobserved country heterogeneity and facilitates the exposition and analysis of aggregate
results.15 To our knowledge, this technique has not been used in studies of inflation targeting.
    Following Love and Zicchino (2002), we allow for individual heterogeneity by introducing fixed
effects. Since fixed effects are correlated with the regressors due to lags of the dependent variable,
we use forward mean differencing (the Helmert procedure) to remove the mean of all the future
observations available for each country. This technique supports the use of lagged regressors as
instruments and estimates the coefficients by system generalized method of moments (GMM).
Finally, we identify the responses to innovations in the system using the Choleski decomposition of
the variance-covariance matrix of residuals, and we apply bootstrap methods to construct their
confidence intervals. Since we cannot assume independence among our samples, we also use
bootstrap methods to construct confidence intervals for differences in impulse response functions
instead of simply taking their differences.16
    Our VAR system contains the following six variables (in this order): international oil price,
international interest rate, output gap, inflation, interest rate, and nominal exchange rate. As is
usual in any VAR estimation, the most exogenous variables enter first in the VAR. Since the model
yields similar impulse response functions using two or more lags, we selected a lag order of two for
reasons of parsimony.
    We start by discussing the impulse responses of inflation to oil price shocks (figures 4, 5, and 6)
and exchange rate shocks (figures 7, 8, and 9), and end with the impulse responses of domestic to
international interest rates (figures 10, 11, and 12).17 Each figure shows the dynamic response of one
selected variable to a shock in another variable of the system. For example, the first cell (first row
and first column) of figure 4 depicts the dynamic response of domestic inflation to an international
oil price shock in inflation-targeting countries before they adopted inflation targeting. The response




    15. For applied studies using panel VAR estimation, see Holtz-Eakin, Newey, and Rosen, 1988; Love and Zicchino, 2002;
Miniane and Rogers, 2003.
    16. If we were simply to assume sample independence, the corresponding confidence intervals for differences would be
narrower.
    17. We estimated impulse responses for other shocks (including inflation and output gap responses to interest rate shocks
and interest rate responses to exchange-rate shocks) and tested for their differences across country groups, but the results
were not relevant.



                                                               10
of domestic inflation to an oil price shock equivalent to one standard deviation is 0.18 percent in
quarter 0 (contemporaneous effect) and peaks at 0.40 percent in quarter 2 (after the shock).18
    Each row of cells in the figure focuses on a different comparison between the dynamic response of
two sample groups. The first three rows report before-and-after comparisons—rows 1 and 2 for
inflation targeters before and after they adopted inflation targeting, and row 3 for nontargeters
before and after 1997. Rows 4 and 5 report comparisons across country groups: inflation targeters
after adopting inflation targeting or after achieving a stationary target, respectively, are compared to
nontargeters after 1997. For instance, the first row of figure 4 compares the response of inflation
targeters before they adopted inflation targeting (first column) to the response of inflation targeters
after they did so (second column). The third column reports the difference between the preceding
responses—that is, the response in the second column minus the response in the first column.

                                                 [figures 4, 5, and 6 here]

    The (positive) response of inflation to oil price shocks is smaller in inflation targeters after
adopting inflation targeting and after achieving stationarity than before the adoption of inflation
targeting (first and second rows of figure 4, respectively). These differences are not statistically
different from zero, however, as reflected by the confidence intervals in column three. The opposite
result is observed for nontargeters (third row, figure 4). The reaction of inflation to oil prices in
nontargeters is larger after 1997 than before 1997, and this difference is statistically different from
zero starting in the second quarter after the oil price shock. When we compare all inflation targeters
with nontargeters after 1997 (fourth row, figure 4) and stationary inflation targeters with
nontargeters after 1997 (fifth row, figure 4), we find that both inflation targeters and stationary
inflation targeters react slightly more than nontargeters to oil price shocks on impact and in the first
quarter after the shock, but less in the following quarters. While the differences are generally not
statistically significant, the short-term response to an oil price shock in inflation-targeting countries
is somewhat larger than in nontargeters, but it is smaller from the third quarter onward.
    To take into account the sample heterogeneity in our full treatment group of inflation targeters,
we divide the group first into industrial and emerging-market inflation targeters and then further
into inflation targeters before the start of inflation targeting and stationary-target inflation
targeters. Figures 5 and 6 depict the response of inflation to a shock in oil prices, separately for
industrial and emerging inflation targeters. The first row of each figure reports the comparison of
inflation targeters before they adopted inflation targeting and after they achieved a stationary
target; this is equivalent to the before-and-after comparison reported for all inflation targeters in the
second row of figure 4. In rows 2 and 3 of each figure, we report comparisons across country groups
(inflation targeters after they adopted inflation targeting and nontargeters in row 2 and inflation
targeters after they achieved a stationary target and nontargeters in row 3); this is equivalent to the
comparisons reported for all inflation targeters in rows 4 and 5 of figure 4, respectively.
    In both industrial and emerging economies, inflation responds less to oil price shocks under a
stationary target than before the adoption of inflation targeting (first rows of figures 5 and 6), but
the differences are not statistically significant. However, the inflation response to an oil price shock
is larger in industrial inflation targeters with a stationary target than in emerging-market inflation
targeters with a stationary target. While the inflation reaction is positive and significant during the
seven quarters after the oil price shock in industrial stationary inflation targeters, it is significant
only until the first quarter in emerging-market stationary inflation targeters.
    We now turn to the comparison of inflation targeters and nontargeters (the second and third
rows of figures 5 and 6). In all inflation-targeting treatment groups, inflation responds less to oil
price shocks than it does in nontargeters (after 1997), and this difference is significant by the sixth
quarter, at the latest. In the case of emerging-market stationary inflation targeters, this difference is
larger, earlier, and more significant than in the other inflation-targeting treatment groups: it is

     18. The three shocks considered in this section—namely, shocks to the international price of oil, the domestic interest
rate, and the international interest rate—are measured as one standard deviation of the residual of the corresponding
equation.



                                                              11
significant from the fourth to the sixth quarters (last row in figure 6). This last result shows that the
performance in emerging stationary inflation targeters is the main force behind the results found for
the full sample of inflation targeters (figure 4).
    This comparative evidence on the inflation consequence of oil price shocks leads us to two main
conclusions. First, inflation targeting helps all inflation targeters to reduce the domestic inflation
response to an oil price shock relative to their own pre-targeting experience, although this reduction
is not statistically different from zero. Second, in all inflation-targeting treatment groups, the
inflation response to oil price shocks is smaller than in nontargeting countries after 1997. The
difference in favor of inflation targeters is statistically significant, on average, at later quarters,
reflecting smaller and less persistent effects of an oil shock on domestic inflation in inflation-
targeting than in nontargeting countries. This result is particularly strong in emerging-market
stationary inflation targeters, where the response of inflation to an oil price shock is the smallest and
least persistent of all our subsamples.
    The response of inflation to innovations in the exchange rate provides a measure of the dynamics
of devaluation-inflation pass-through. The positive response of inflation to exchange rate
depreciation shocks is not much different before and after the adoption of inflation targeting in the
full sample of inflation targeters (first row, figure 7). However, stationary-target inflation targeters
show a larger decline in the response of inflation to exchange rate shocks, and this reduction is
statistically significant in the first and second quarters after the shock. We observe a smaller
response of inflation to exchange rate shocks in nontargeters after 1997 than in all inflation
targeters and in stationary inflation targeters (fourth and fifth rows, figure 7). This result is
statistically different from zero until the fourth quarter after the shock.

                                         [figures 7, 8, and 9 here]

    Next, we separate our treatment group into industrial and emerging inflation targeters (figures 8
and 9). Industrial inflation targeters (after inflation targeting) and industrial stationary inflation
targeters exhibit a significantly smaller inflation response to exchange rate shocks than either
emerging-market inflation targeters (after inflation targeting) or emerging stationary inflation
targeters. Both industrial treatment groups (that is, all inflation targeters and stationary inflation
targeters) display pass-through coefficients that are close to zero and insignificant in most periods.
Both emerging-market treatment groups, in turn, register pass-through coefficients that are positive
and significant at least until the fourth quarter after the shock. In industrial inflation targeters, the
adoption of both inflation targeting and stationary-target inflation targeting has not made any
difference to their pass-through coefficients, in comparison with both their own pre-targeting
experience and in comparison with nontargeters after 1997 (figure 8). In emerging-market
economies, however, the comparisons yield very different results (figure 9). Short-term pass-through
effects declined after the adoption of stationary targets in emerging economies, and the difference is
significant in the first quarter after the exchange rate shock. Nevertheless, this reduction has not
been sufficient to bring pass-through coefficients down to zero, as occurred among nontargeters after
1997. In fact, emerging-market inflation targeters and stationary inflation targeters exhibit much
larger pass-through effects than nontargeters, and the differences are significant from quarters one
through four (for all inflation targeters) and quarters one through six (for stationary inflation
targeters).
    We reach two conclusions from our comparison of the dynamics of pass-through effects from
exchange rate shocks to domestic inflation. First, the adoption of inflation targeting has helped
reduce the short-term pass-through somewhat under stationary-target inflation targeting, relative to
the sample’s own pre-targeting experience. This result, however, is entirely driven by emerging-
market inflation targeters, where the pass-through coefficients fell somewhat after the countries
achieved a stationary target but remain positive and significantly different from zero. Pass-through
effects have been close to zero in industrial inflation targeters before and after inflation targeting
and in nontargeters. Second, when comparing all inflation targeters and all stationary-target
inflation targeters to nontargeters after 1997, the pass-through effects are significantly larger in



                                                     12
both groups of targeters than in the nontargeters. This result is due to emerging-market inflation
targeters, which exhibit much larger pass-through coefficients than nontargeters after 1997—and
the differences are statistically significant from quarters one through five, on average. In contrast,
industrial inflation targeters and nontargeters do not exhibit any significant differences in pass-
through performance.
    Finally, we consider the issue of comparative monetary independence, reflected by the response
of domestic interest rates to shocks in international interest rates. In the pre-targeting period of
inflation-targeting countries, the response of domestic interest rates to a shock in the international
interest rate is very large, rises over time, and is statistically significant from impact through
quarter six (first cell, figure 10). The positive response of the domestic interest rate to international
interest rate shocks falls substantially in inflation targeters after they adopt inflation targeting and
after they achieve stationary inflation targeting. In both cases, the decline in interest rate sensitivity
is very large and statistically different from zero. Among nontargeters, interest rates react more
strongly to international interest rates after 1997 than before, which may reflect the inclusion of a
large number of euro area members in our control group. This difference is statistically significant
only for the first two quarters after the shock. Interest rate sensitivity to foreign interest rate shocks
is larger in inflation targeters and in stationary inflation targeters than in nontargeters after 1997;
this difference is statistically different from zero in the case of all inflation targeters. This suggests
that in the period of convergence, inflation targeting is not sufficient to achieve the level of monetary
independence attained by nontargeters. However, interest rates in stationary inflation targeters
respond to international interest rates at a similar magnitude as in nontargeters, since the
difference in their impulse response functions is not statistically different from zero. Monetary
independence under stationary inflation targeting has thus converged to the levels observed among
nontargeters.

                                        [figures 10, 11, and 12 here]

    Our next task is to disaggregate industrial and emerging inflation targeters, since these two
groups exhibit large and significant differences in monetary independence (see figures 11 and 12).
The contrast in the domestic interest rate reaction to foreign interest rate shocks is striking in the
pre-targeting period. While the response is negative and significant in the first quarters after the
shock in the industrial pre-targeting experience, the response is positive, huge, increasing, and
statistically significant in emerging-market countries. This points to a significant lack of monetary
independence in the latter group before they adopted inflation targeting.
    The results are quite different after the adoption of inflation targeting. In industrial stationary
inflation targeters, the domestic interest rate sensitivity turns positive and is significantly larger in
the first four quarters after the shock than it was before inflation targeting. This makes industrial
inflation targeters more similar to nontargeters: there is no statistical difference in monetary
independence between industrial inflation targeters (and industrial stationary inflation targeters)
and nontargeters after 1997. In emerging inflation targeters, however, the adoption of inflation
targeting massively reduces their interest rate sensitivity to foreign interest rate shocks. The size of
the interest rate response declines by one order of magnitude after the start of inflation targeting,
but it remains positive and significant from quarters one through six. Emerging-market inflation
targeters attain a further reduction in interest rate sensitivity on achieving a stationary target: the
response is now barely positive and only significant in quarters two to four after the foreign interest
rate shock. Comparing emerging inflation targeters with post-1997 nontargeters yields a larger
interest rate sensitivity (that is, significantly different from zero in quarters three to six) in the
former group. Once emerging-market economies reach their stationary targets, their interest
sensitivity declines further to levels that are numerically smaller but statistically not different from
those observed among nontargeters after 1997.
    We conclude two points from our comparisons of dynamic responses of domestic interest rates to
a shock in the international interest rate, which serves as a measure of monetary independence.
First, the adoption of inflation targeting brought down interest rate sensitivity estimates for the full



                                                     13
sample of inflation-targeting countries. However, this aggregate result hides two opposite changes.
In industrial countries, interest rate sensitivity increased from negative to positive and significant
with the adoption of inflation targeting. In contrast, in emerging-market inflation targeters, interest
rate sensitivity declined from huge before inflation targeting to moderate during converging-target
inflation targeting and to small under stationary-target inflation targeting. Second, inflation
targeters are more similar to nontargeters as a result of these changes. While the sensitivity of
interest rates to foreign interest rate shocks is slightly larger in industrial stationary inflation
targeters than in nontargeters, and slightly smaller in emerging-market stationary inflation
targeters than in nontargeters, the differences are not statistically significant. Our measure of
monetary independence thus reflects a convergence of inflation-targeting countries that have
achieved stationary targets to the levels exhibited by nontargeters.


4. INFLATION VOLATILITY, OUTPUT VOLATILITY, AND MONETARY POLICY
EFFICIENCY

    One way of gauging macroeconomic performance is to focus on the stability of inflation and real
growth. The evidence reported in tables 2 and 3 shows that standard deviations of inflation and the
output gap are larger in inflation targeters than in nontargeters. One possible explanation is that
nontargeters are hit by smaller shocks. Alternatively, nontargeters’ central banks may be more
efficient at implementing policies to meet their stabilization objectives. In this section, we compute
performance measures to identify the contribution of different monetary policy strategies to the
observed differences in macroeconomic performance between inflation targeters and nontargeters.
Following Cecchetti and Krause (2002) and Cecchetti, Flores-Lagunes, and Krause (2006), we
estimate an inflation and output variability efficiency frontier that allows us to derive measures of
economic performance and monetary policy efficiency.
    The performance of monetary policy can be assessed using the inflation and output variability
trade-off faced by the policymaker. This trade-off allows us to construct an efficiency frontier known
as the Taylor curve (Taylor, 1979). The inflation-output variability frontier is understood by
considering an economy that is hit by two types of disturbances: aggregate demand and aggregate
supply shocks. Aggregate supply shocks move output and inflation in opposite directions, forcing the
monetary authority to face a trade-off between inflation and output variability. The position of the
efficiency frontier therefore depends on the intensity of aggregate supply shocks: the smaller the
shocks, the closer is the frontier to the origin (see figure 13).

                                             [figure 13 here]

    The efficiency frontier is also an indicator of the degree of optimality of monetary policy. When
monetary policy is suboptimal, the economy will exhibit large output and inflation volatility and will
be located at a significant distance from the frontier. Movements toward the efficiency frontier
indicate improved monetary policy (figure 13). These features of the efficiency frontier allow us to
construct measures of economic and monetary policy performance to examine the contribution of
policy efficiency and the variability of shocks to the observed differences in macroeconomic
performance between different samples of nontargeters and inflation targeters.
    We closely follow the methodology derived by Cecchetti, Flores-Lagunes, and Krause (2006). We
do not apply their method to individual countries, however, but rather to inflation-targeting and
nontargeting country groups. We start by obtaining a measure of an economy’s performance in terms
of output and inflation variability. Specifically, we derive a standard conventional central bank
objective, which is to minimize the following loss function determined by quadratic inflation and
output deviations:




                                                    14
       (           ) + (1 − λ )(y − y ) ,
                    2                                     2
L = λ π t − π t*                          t
                                                      *
                                                      t
                                                                                                           (5)

where πt is the inflation rate, πt* is the inflation target or objective, yt is the log level of output, yt* is
the target or trend level of output, and λ is the policymaker’s weight attached to inflation. Hence our
measure of macroeconomic performance, L, is a weighted average of observed variability of inflation
and output with respect to their target levels.
    The difference between the observed performance measures of nontargeters (LNIT) and inflation
targeters (LIT) reflects differences in macroeconomic outcomes. If ΔL = LNIT – LIT is negative, then
nontargeters present a better macroeconomic performance than inflation targeters. We similarly
interpret the comparison of inflation targeters before and after they adopted inflation targeting. If
ΔL = Lpost-IT – Lpre-IT is negative, then inflation targeters recorded a performance gain after the
adoption of inflation targeting.
    This change in performance can reflect either a change in the position of the efficiency frontier
(that is, a better performance is explained only by smaller supply shocks) or a change in monetary
policy efficiency or both. The change in performance due to the change in the size of shocks is derived
from the following combination of the optimal variances of output and inflation:


      (            ) + (1 − λ )(y − y ) ,
                   2                                      2
S = λ π t − π t*                          t       t
                                                      *
                                                                                                           (6)



        (           ) and (y − y ) are the deviations of inflation and output from their targets under
                        2                         2
where π t − π t*                  t
                                              *
                                              t

an optimal policy, respectively. S is the measure of supply shocks variability. Therefore, the smaller
the variability of the disturbances that hit the economy, the closer is the efficiency frontier to the
origin and the smaller is the latter measure. For example, a negative difference of this measure
between nontargeters and inflation targeters, ΔS = SNIT – SIT, indicates that the shocks hitting
nontargeters are smaller. Alternatively, a negative value of ΔS = Spost-IT – Spre-IT implies that inflation
targeters face smaller shocks after the adoption of inflation targeting.
    Finally, we evaluate the efficiency of monetary policy by measuring how close actual performance
is to performance under optimal policy (that is, the distance to the efficiency frontier). We label this
measure E and define it as follows:

      ⎡
          (            ) − (π − π ) ⎤⎥⎦ + (1 − λ )⎡⎢⎣(y − y ) − (y − y ) ⎤⎥⎦ .
                        2                     2                       2                2
E = λ ⎢ π t − π t*            t
                                      *
                                      t                       t
                                                                  *
                                                                  t            t
                                                                                   *
                                                                                   t
                                                                                                           (7)
      ⎣

Hence, the smaller the value of E, the closer monetary performance is to optimal policy. Differences
in policy efficiency between nontargeters and targeters are obtained by computing ΔE = ENIT – EIT; a
negative value of ΔE implies that nontargeters’ policy is more efficient. Similarly, the change in
policy efficiency of inflation targeters over time is computed as ΔE = Epost-IT – Epre-IT, which is
negative if inflation targeters improved their policy efficiency.
    Computation of these performance measures requires empirical estimates of the output-inflation
variability frontier. We first need to derive a policy reaction function from minimization of the loss
function, subject to the constraints imposed by the structure of the economy. Given this solution and
a value for the weight of inflation in the policymaker’s loss function (λ), we are able to plot a point on
the efficiency frontier. Varying the weight assigned to the variability of inflation allows us to trace
the entire efficiency frontier. We proceed in two main steps: we estimate a simple dynamic aggregate
demand and supply model, and we then use this estimate to construct the efficiency frontier.
    We consider a simple dynamic panel aggregate demand and supply model similar to the one used
in Rudebusch and Svensson (1999). The model consists of the following two equations:




                                                                          15
         p                 p                    p                      p                        p

yi,t = ∑ φ1,jii,t− j + ∑ φ1, p+ j yi,t− j + ∑ φ1, 2 p+ j π i,t− j + ∑ φ1, 3 p+ j pxi,t− j + ∑ φ1, 4 p+ j oilt− j + v1,i + ε1,i,t ;    (8)
       j=1             j=1
                            ( )             j=1
                                                 ( )                i= j
                                                                         ( )                i= j
                                                                                                 ( )

         p                     p                    p                      p

π i,t = ∑ φ1, j yi,t− j + ∑ φ1, p+ j π i,t− j + ∑ φ1, 2 p+ j pxi,t− j + ∑ φ1, 3 p+ j oilt− j + v2,i + ε 2,i,t .                       (9)
        j=1               j=1
                               ( )              i= j
                                                     ( )                i= j
                                                                             ( )

The first equation reflects an aggregate demand function, where detrended output (yi,t) for country i
at time t is explained by p own lags, p lags of the nominal interest rate (ii,t), and inflation deviations
from targets or objectives (πi,t). We also include p lags of two exogenous variables, the deviation of the
oil price from trend (oilt) and external price inflation (pxi,t), as well as a country fixed effect (v1,t).19
The second equation represents a Phillips curve, in which inflation deviations from its target or
objective are a function of p own lags, p lags of detrended output, p lags of the deviation of the oil
price from trend, p lags of the deviation of external inflation from trend, and a country fixed effect.
Finally, ε1,i,t and ε2,i,t represent the error terms. We estimate both equations for a group of countries
(for example, nontargeters and targeters) using the generalized method of moments (GMM) for
dynamic panels (Arellano and Bond, 1991).
    Having estimated the dynamics of the economy, we proceed to obtain the optimal monetary
policy function. The central bank selects a path for the interest rate from the minimization of its loss
function subject to the dynamics of the economy:


         () ⎡
                       (           ) + (1 − λ )(y − y ) ⎤⎥⎦ = Ê (Y′ ΛY ),
                                   2                            2
min Ê L = Ê ⎢ π t − π t*                                    *
                                                                                                                                     (10)
            ⎣                                           t   t                  t   t



subject to

Yt = BYt-1 + cit−1 + DX t−1 + vt ,                                                                                                   (11)

where Yt = (it–1, yt, yt–1, πt, πt–1)′, Xt = (pxt, oilt)′, vt = (0, ε1,t, 0, ε2,t, 0)′, B and D are matrices of the
estimated coefficients of the aggregate demand and supply equations, Λ is a matrix of the weights
attached to output and inflation variability, and Ê is the expectation conditional on information
available at time t. The solution to this optimal control problem yields an optimal path for the
interest rate:

it = ΓYt + Ψ ,                                                                                                                       (12)

where Γ = –(c′Hc)–1c′HB with H = Λ + (B + cΓ)′H(B + cΓ), and ψ is a constant term that depends on
B, c and D. Using this result, we calculate the optimal variances of output and inflation, obtaining a
point on the efficiency frontier for each value of λ.
    With the estimated efficiency frontier at hand, we determine the optimal variances of inflation
and output that are required to compute performance measures. We calculate the ratio of the
observed volatilities of output and inflation and then identify the point on the frontier that implies
this variability ratio. This is similar to performing a homothetic shift of the frontier so that it passes
through the data point determined by the observed variances of output and inflation.
    Consistent with our measures in the other sections of the paper, here our measures of inflation
volatility are based on the deviation of CPI inflation from the inflation target for inflation targeters
and from a Hodrick-Prescott (HP) trend for nontargeters. For both county groups, output volatility is
based on the output gap or deviation from an HP trend.


     19. External inflation is defined as the sum of the annualized nominal exchange rate devaluation and the annual
inflation rate of the United States.



                                                                           16
    We are now able to compute the performance measures presented above in order to disentangle
the contribution of changes in monetary policy efficiency and supply shocks to the observed
differences in macroeconomic performance between different country groups. As in other sections of
the paper, we compare the performance between five groups of countries: inflation targeters before
and after the adoption of inflation targeting; inflation targeters before they adopted inflation
targeting and after they achieved a stationary target; nontargeters before and after the mean
inflation-targeting adoption date (first quarter of 1997); inflation targeters vis-à-vis nontargeters
after the first quarter of 1997; and stationary inflation targeters versus nontargeters after the first
quarter of 1997. As above, we also present results for all inflation targeters and for industrial and
emerging inflation targeters.
    Table 9 reports the estimated comparative measures of economic performance, L, monetary
policy efficiency, E, and the variability of supply shocks, S, for each pair of country groups. Figures
14 through 26 depict actual performance points, L, and efficiency frontiers consistent with E for each
pair of country groups. We follow Cecchetti, Flores-Lagunes, and Krause (2006) in using a value of
λ—that is, the weight attached to inflation deviations in the loss function—equal to 0.80. This value
is consistent with the empirical estimates for inflation-targeting and nontargeting countries reported
by Cecchetti and Ehrmann (2002) and Corbo, Landerretche, and Schmidt-Hebbel (2002).

                                              [table 9 here]

    Row 1a of table 9 reports the estimated measures for all inflation targeters, before and after the
adoption of inflation targeting. Figure 14 depicts the corresponding positions or observed
combinations of output and inflation variability, as well as the efficiency frontiers observed before
and after inflation-targeting adoption. Macroeconomic performance improved between these periods,
as inflation and output volatility shrank. This is reflected by the inward shift of observed points or
positions before and after inflation-targeting adoption in figure 14. The corresponding performance
gain is reflected by a negative value of ΔL = L2 – L1, at –3.817, in row 1a. The latter improvement
disaggregates into a gain in efficiency, ΔE = E2 – E1 (by –0.882, equivalent to a 23.1 percent
contribution to the overall performance gain), which is reflected in a movement closer to the
efficiency frontier, and a reduction in the variability of shocks hitting the economy, ΔS = S2 – S1 (by
–2.935, equivalent to a 76.9 percent contribution), which is reflected in a shift of the efficiency
frontier. Another way to confirm the contribution of shocks and policy efficiency to the initial and
final positions, L1 and L2, is to quantitatively decompose the latter position, summarized in the
second line of row 1a in table 9. Efficiency (E1) explains 35.3 percent of pre-targeting performance
(L1), a share that rises to 45.7 percent after the adoption of inflation targeting.

                                             [figure 14 here]

    Rows 2a and 2b report the corresponding before-and-after comparisons for industrial and
emerging inflation targeters. The variability of inflation and output is much larger in emerging than
in industrial inflation targeters both before and after adoption of inflation targeting. For example,
position L2 (after the adoption of inflation targeting) reflects a combination of inflation and output
variability of 6.657 for emerging inflation targeters, versus 1.752 for industrial inflation targeters.
Similar differences are observed in the efficiency frontier positions of industrial and emerging
inflation targeters: the former are much closer to the origin than the latter (compare figures 15 and
16). In both country groups, however, macroeconomic performance improved with the adoption of
inflation targeting. Industrial inflation targeters observed a small improvement, with ΔL equaling –
0.199. This change results from two counteracting processes: a reduction in policy efficiency that
deteriorated macroeconomic performance (lowering the observed gain by 194.3 percent) and a
reduction in the variability of shocks that shifted the efficiency frontier significantly inward (which
explains 294.3 percent of the performance gain). In contrast, emerging inflation targeters
experienced a much larger macroeconomic improvement following the adoption of inflation targeting




                                                    17
(ΔL is –5.206). This reflects both increased policy efficiency (contributing 42.5 percent) and a lower
exposure to shocks (contributing 57.5 percent).

                                          [figures 15 and 16 here]

    The next comparison is between pre-targeting and stationary-targeting performance (rows 2a,
2b, and 2c in table 9 and figures 17, 18, and 19). We find that inflation targeters reap a much larger
improvement in macroeconomic performance once they achieve stationary inflation targets. The
efficiency frontier position of stationary targeters has shifted much closer to the origin than was the
case for all inflation targeters (both converging and stationary) discussed above (figure 17).
Moreover, the relative contribution of efficiency improvements to the performance gain when
adopting stationary inflation targeting is larger (34.2 percent) than the corresponding contribution of
efficiency improvements when adopting inflation targeting in general (23.1 percent). As in the case of
the full inflation-targeting sample, emerging stationary inflation targeters register a much larger
gain than industrial stationary inflation targeters (rows 2b and 2c of table 9 and figures 18 and 19).
The benefits reaped by emerging economies, however, are much larger for the sample of stationary
targeters than for the full sample.

                                       [figures 17, 18, and 19 here]

    The third comparison is for nontargeters before and after the first quarter of 1997 (see row 3 in
table 9 and figure 20). As in our previous comparisons, nontargeters record an improvement in
macroeconomic performance in the later period. The reduction in their output and inflation
volatility, however, is more than fully explained by a decrease in the size of shocks, while monetary
policy efficiency deteriorated. This pattern parallels that seen for industrial targeters above.
Therefore, both inflation-targeting and nontargeting industrial economies display a common feature:
supply shocks weakened significantly after the adoption of inflation targeting or after 1997, which
explains more than 100 percent of their observed macroeconomic performance gains. This stands in
contrast to emerging inflation targeters, where both weaker supply shocks and improved policy
efficiency contributed to their (much larger) performance gains.

                                              [figure 20 here]

    Next we compare inflation targeters after the adoption of inflation targeting and nontargeters
after 1997. We use the performance changes over time observed for our treatment and control groups
separately to compare macroeconomic performance across our treatment and control groups. We
compare the performance of all inflation targeters (including both converging and stationary
inflation targeters) and nontargeters (rows 4a, 4b, and 4c in table 9 and figures 21, 22, and 23) and of
stationary inflation targeters and nontargeters (rows 5a, 5b, and 5c in table 9 and figures 24, 25, and
26). A general result is that the full sample of inflation targeters (both converging and stationary
targeters) exhibit actual performance levels, efficiency frontier positions, and policy efficiency levels
that are worse than those of nontargeters. However, stationary inflation targeters are much closer to
the performance and efficiency levels of nontargeters than is the full sample. The difference in
performance between nontargeters and stationary targeters (–1.435; see row 5a) is primarily due to
larger shocks in stationary inflation targeters (explaining 64.4 percent of the performance difference)
and, to a lesser degree, to less efficient policy among inflation targeters (explaining 35.6 percent).

                                       [figures 21, 22, and 23 here]
                                       [figures 24, 25, and 26 here]

   When we disaggregate the inflation targeters into emerging and industrial countries, we find
that the difference between nontargeters and inflation targeters is largely due to a significantly
worse performance by emerging economies. Emerging inflation targeters (both converging and



                                                     18
stationary) not only exhibit larger supply shocks, but are also further away from their efficiency
frontiers (figure 23). However, the large difference between nontargeters and all emerging inflation
targeters (ΔL equals –6.086; row 4c), declines by half once emerging inflation targeters attain
stationary inflation targets (ΔL is –2.976; row 5c).
    Industrial inflation targeters are much closer in performance to our control group of
nontargeters, and the difference narrows further when we compare stationary industrial inflation
targeters to nontargeters (row 5b and figure 25). The relatively small difference in performance (ΔL
is –0.787) is due mainly to the supply shocks faced by industrial stationary inflation targeters
(explaining 67.5 percent of the difference) and less to less efficient policy (explaining 32.5 percent of
the difference).
    Based on the evidence in this section, we conclude that countries adopting inflation targeting
have substantially improved the efficiency of their monetary policy. Furthermore, the gains in
efficiency are larger for stationary inflation targeters than for inflation targeters in general.
Relevant differences in performance levels and gains are apparent when disaggregating inflation
targeters into industrial and emerging economies. Observed macroeconomic performance is much
better in industrial inflation targeters than in emerging inflation targeters both before and after the
adoption of inflation targeting (or stationary inflation targeting). However, the improvement that
comes with the adoption of inflation targeting is much larger in emerging economies than in
industrial countries. Convergence toward stationary inflation targeting is particularly beneficial to
emerging economies. These countries record major reductions in output and inflation volatility after
adopting stationary inflation targeting, both because they face smaller supply shocks and because
they improve their monetary policy efficiency. In contrast, industrial inflation targeters improve
their macroeconomic performance only because they face smaller supply shocks; their monetary
policy efficiency levels (which were already high before the adoption of inflation targeting, compared
with emerging countries) actually deteriorate somewhat after the adoption of inflation targeting.
    The likely source of the overall macroeconomic improvement that comes with inflation targeting
is the credibility that inflation targeters gain when they finally achieve sufficient disinflation to
stabilize their inflation targets. Increased credibility helps shift monetary policy outcomes closer to
the efficiency frontier. This is particularly the case of emerging countries, where the pre-targeting
gap between actual and desirable macroeconomic performance is the largest and where pre-targeting
credibility is weak.
    Although inflation targeting improves monetary performance over time, our control group of
nontargeters still exhibits better macroeconomic performance and higher levels of monetary policy
efficiency than our different treatment groups of inflation targeters. The differences between
industrial nontargeters and emerging inflation targeters have narrowed massively under inflation
targeting, but they remain large. Nontargeters also display better macroeconomic performance than
industrial inflation targeters, but this difference is small and has narrowed under inflation
targeting. Most of the remaining performance differences between industrial inflation targeters and
nontargeters—in favor of the latter—stems from the smaller supply shocks faced by nontargeters,
while monetary policy is only marginally more efficient in nontargeters than in industrial inflation
targeters.




5. INFLATION ACCURACY

    How accurate are inflation-targeting central banks in hitting their official targets? And how does
their accuracy compare to the success of nontargeting countries in achieving a stable inflation rate?
The first question is addressed by Calderón and Schmidt-Hebbel (2003), Albagli and Schmidt-Hebbel
(2005), and Roger and Stone (2005). The first two of these studies also identify the determinants of
success in hitting inflation targets, showing that institutional variables (such as central bank




                                                     19
independence) and credibility measures (including investment risk measures and country risk
spreads) are significant factors in reducing target misses among inflation targeters.
    We address the second question in this section. Our results are tentative because they involve
comparing easily measured deviations of actual inflation from target levels in inflation-targeting
countries with the deviations of actual inflation from inflation objectives in nontargeting countries,
which are not easily measured since they are not announced in nontargeting countries. We construct
proxies for implicit inflation objectives in the form of inflation trends obtained using the Hodrick-
Prescott filter. These proxies are likely to underestimate the true measures of inflation deviations in
nontargeting countries because the HP-filtered trend could react excessively to temporary inflation
deviations. The size of the potential bias is likely to be inversely correlated with the degree of
smoothing applied by the HP filter. We therefore conduct robustness tests of our results along two
dimensions: the assumption about inflation deviations in inflation-targeting countries and the
degree of HP smoothing of the actual inflation series.
    For the first dimension, we compute two measures of inflation deviations for inflation-targeting
countries. The first inflation deviation measure (ID1) computes the deviation of actual inflation from
actual inflation targets, while the second inflation deviation measure (ID2) provides the deviation of
actual inflation from HP trends for inflation-targeting countries, to maximize comparability with our
measure of inflation deviation for nontargeting countries. All measures are absolute values of
inflation deviations.
    We report on both measures for several country groups and for the full 1989—2004 period and
subperiods in table 10 and figure 27. For ID1, the median absolute inflation deviation is 1.03 percent
for inflation targeters and 0.54 percent for nontargeters. For ID2, the median absolute inflation
deviation is lower for inflation targeters, at 0.84 percent, and unchanged for nontargeters, at 0.54
percent. The inflation deviation measure based on actual inflation targets (ID1) for inflation
targeters is systematically larger than the one based on HP-filtered inflation trends (ID2) across all
subgroups of inflation-targeting countries. This suggests that the use of HP-filtered inflation trends
as a proxy for implicit inflation objectives for nontargeters and for inflation targeters during the pre-
targeting period may, in fact, bias downward the inflation deviation measures in inflation targeters
and thus bias upward the reported differences of deviations between inflation targeters and
nontargeters.

                                               [table 10 and figure 27 here]

    Figure 27 depicts the time pattern of median absolute inflation deviations for inflation targeters
and nontargeters, using both measures. Nontargeters exhibit systematically lower inflation
deviations than inflation targeters. However, inflation targeters’ median inflation deviations show a
negative trend in 1989–2004, whereas the median inflation deviations of nontargeters are
stationary.20
    Our subsamples of inflation targeters display large differences in hitting targets. According to
the ID1 measure, the median absolute inflation deviation is 0.77 percent in industrial economies,
versus 1.28 percent in emerging economies (table 10). The difference is even larger when we divide
inflation targeting experiences according to periods of converging targets, when median absolute
inflation deviations are 1.49 percent, and stationary targets, when deviations decline by half to reach
0.77 percent. As expected, the largest difference is observed between two very heterogeneous
nontargeting experiences: before the adoption of inflation targeting (or before 1997 for nontargeters),
median absolute inflation deviations were 1.12 percent among inflation targeters and 0.36 percent
among nontargeters.
    However, the latter prima facie evidence of poorer inflation accuracy in inflation-targeting
countries is far from conclusive. Many large inflation-target misses could be explained by
idiosyncratic country or time-period shocks, and these could be correlated with the adoption of
inflation targeting, particularly in emerging economies. We thus test for significant differences in

    20. We reject the presence of nonstationarity in all series at the 1 percent percent confidence level using the augmented
Dickey-Fuller and Phillips-Perron unit root tests.



                                                               20
inflation deviations between inflation targeters and nontargeters, controlling for potential
determinants of inflation shocks.
    Following previous work on differences in inflation deviations among inflation targeters
(Calderón and Schmidt-Hebbel, 2003; Albagli and Schmidt-Hebbel, 2005), we specify the following
panel data specification for the absolute value of deviations of inflation (⎮πi,t – π*i,t⎮):

                r
π i,t − π i,t
          *
              = ∑ φ j π i,t − π i,t
                                *
                                    + αITi,t + X i,tβ + ci + ei,t ,                                                    (13)
               j=1



as a function of its own lag, a vector of relevant inflation-shock controls (Xit), a dummy variable (ITit)
that takes a value of one if the country has an inflation-targeting regime in place and zero otherwise,
and country- and time-specific effects. The inflation deviation is defined as the absolute value of the
difference between the twelve-month CPI inflation rate (πi,t) and the annual inflation target (π*i,t).
The vector of control variables comprises two domestic shocks (absolute nominal exchange rate
shocks and the output gap or the absolute deviation of output growth from trend) and two external
shocks (the lagged absolute deviation of the Federal funds rate from trend and the absolute deviation
of the international oil price from trend).
    We estimate our model for absolute inflation deviations in equation 13 using an unbalanced
panel sample of twenty-one inflation-targeting and twelve nontargeting countries, with quarterly
observations for 1989–2004.21 As in preceding sections, we consider two alternative control groups:
control group 1 includes the full nontargeting sample of both industrial nontargeting countries and
the pre-targeting observations of all subsequent inflation targeters, while control group 2
encompasses only the industrial nontargeting countries. Furthermore, we control for possible
endogeneity of the choice of the inflation-targeting regime (the inflation-targeting dummy variable)
and the two domestic shocks, using as instruments the variables listed at the bottom of tables 11 and
12 and making use of panel data IV estimation. For control group 1, we obtain the fixed-effects
estimator, but we are unable to estimate a fixed-effects model for control group 2 owing to the
presence of time-invariant variables. To tackle this problem, we follow Plümper and Troeger (2004),
who obtain a modified Hausman-Taylor IV estimator to compute the coefficients of time-invariant
variables.22

                                                      [tables 11 and 12 here]

    The results are reported in table 11 (using the ID1 measure as the dependent variable) and table
12 (using the ID2 measure as the dependent variable). Each table presents results for the two
alternative nontargeting control groups and for alternative inflation-targeting dummies (one for all
inflation-targeting country experiences and others that capture a heterogeneous effect of inflation
targeting for converging and stationary inflation-targeting periods and for emerging and industrial
inflation-targeting countries).
    Inflation deviations exhibit systematic persistence, as reflected by the significant coefficient of
the lagged dependent variable. Its point estimate is close to 0.5 across the ten results reported in
tables 11 and 12, which shows that the long-term effects of all other variables are close to twice their
contemporaneous effects. All control variables exhibit the expected positive signs, and most are
significant at conventional levels.



     21. To avoid endogeneity problems with the Federal funds rate variable, we excluded the United States from our
standard control group of thirteen nontargeting countries.
     22. This procedure can be summarized in three steps. First, we estimate a panel fixed-effects model excluding time-
invariant right-hand-side variables. Second, we regress the fixed-effects vector on the time-invariant explanatory variables
and obtain its unexplained part. Finally, we estimate a pooled IV model including all explanatory time-variant and time-
invariant variables, as well as the unexplained part of the fixed-effects vector. Using Monte Carlo experiments, Plümper and
Troeger (2004) find that their estimation technique performs better than pooled OLS and random-effects models in the
estimation of the coefficients of time-invariant variables.



                                                                      21
     Our variable of interest—namely, the inflation-targeting dummy—exhibits a robust negative
coefficient across all regressions, but it is only significant when we use the first control group. For
example, the first column of table 11 reports that the contemporaneous effect of inflation targeting is
to reduce absolute inflation deviations by 0.18 percent, when using the ID1 measure and the full
sample of nontargeting country experiences (control group 1). Moreover, the contemporaneous
impact of inflation targeting on absolute inflation deviations rises in magnitude from –0.18 to a long-
term effect of –0.40 percent, that is, 0.18 percent / (1–0.54). The effect of inflation targeting increases
to –0.45 percent, but it is insignificant when we exclude pre-targeting experiences in inflation-
targeting countries (column 2). The latter result is the relevant one for comparing inflation-targeting
experiences to those of countries that never had inflation targeting in place.
     The result in column 1, based on ID1, increases to –0.27 percent when we use the ID2 measure,
as reported in column 1 of table 12. This confirms that inflation target deviations from actual targets
lead to higher deviations than those measured as deviations from HP-filtered trends. It suggests that
comparing actual deviations from observable targets in inflation-targeting countries with HP-filter-
inferred deviations from unobservable inflation objectives in nontargeting countries leads to an
upward bias in inflation targeters’ deviations relative to nontargeters’ deviations. The reported
coefficients for the inflation-targeting regime based on the ID1 measures are thus likely to be lower-
bound estimates, while those based on the ID2 measure might be closer to the unobservable regime
difference.
     Columns 3, 4, and 5 in tables 11 and 12 report coefficients for separate inflation-targeting
dummy variables for converging-target and stationary-target inflation-targeting periods and for
emerging and industrial inflation targeters. For both cases, the coefficients exhibit the expected
negative sign, but they vary in significance and magnitude. The results in column 3 show that
converging inflation targeters exhibit about 0.24 percent lower absolute deviations of inflation, while
the results for stationary inflation targeters vary from –0.13 percent to –0.26 percent. When we
restrict the control group to the nontargeting countries that never had inflation targeting in place,
the results remain negative but lose statistical significance (see column 4). Column 5 presents the
coefficients that capture separate effects of inflation targeting on emerging and industrial economies.
Only emerging countries show a significantly lower inflation deviation than that observed in control
group 1. When we use the ID2 measure, however, the results suggest that both emerging and
industrial inflation targeters observe lower absolute inflation deviations (of similar magnitude) than
those observed in control group 1.
     To check the robustness of our results to the underlying assumptions on the Hodrick-Prescott
filtering procedure to obtain inflation trends as proxies for inflation objectives, we ran the
regressions reported in column 1 of tables 11 and 12 on alternative absolute inflation deviation
series based on different values of the HP filter smoothing parameter used in obtaining trend
inflation series. 23 Figure 28 depicts the estimated coefficient of the inflation-targeting dummy
variable for alternative smoothing parameter values ranging from 100 to 10,000. The figure suggests
that the inflation-targeting coefficient estimates of –0.18 and –0.27 in column 1 of tables 11 and 12
are robust to wide ranges of alternative HP smoothing parameters.

                                                     [figure 28 here]

    We conclude the following from the results reported in this section. Prima facie, inflation
deviations from inflation targets or trends are larger in inflation-targeting than in nontargeting
countries. However, this evidence is based on simple sample statistics that do not control for country-
and time-specific shocks that affect inflation deviations and that could be correlated with inflation-
targeting experiences (across countries and over time). When we control for the latter shocks, our
econometric findings point toward a much more differentiated performance regarding inflation
accuracy under inflation targeting. First, when comparing all inflation targeters (and also the
emerging/industrial and converging/stationary subsamples) to all nontargeting experiences

    23. The coefficient used in all HP-filtered trends discussed in this paper is the standard lambda equal to 1,600 for
quarterly data.



                                                            22
(including nontargeting countries and pre-targeting experiences, represented by control group 1),
inflation deviations are smaller in inflation-targeting than in nontargeting countries. The point
estimates for the inflation-targeting gain in inflation deviations ranges from 0.18 percent to 0.45
percent (and roughly twice the latter range for the long-term inflation-targeting gain) for the full
experience of inflation-targeting countries and periods. However, this result is not robust to using
the alternative control group 2, comprising only nontargeting countries. While inflation deviations
are still smaller in inflation-targeting countries, the corresponding coefficients are no longer
significantly different from zero. When we use our preferred inflation deviation measure, ID2, and
disaggregate all inflation targeters into different subgroups, we find that inflation targeting lowers
absolute inflation deviations by similar amounts in emerging and industrial targeters and in
converging and stationary targeters.


6. CONCLUSIONS

    A steadily growing number of industrial and emerging countries have explicitly adopted an
inflation target as their nominal anchor. Eight industrial countries and thirteen emerging economies
had full-fledged inflation targeting in place in early 2005. Many other emerging economies are
planning to adopt inflation targeting in the near future. This paper has explored whether inflation
targeting makes a difference after central banks adopt the regime as an explicit and exclusive anchor
for conducting monetary policy.
    Previous empirical evidence on the direct link between inflation targeting and particular
measures of economic performance provides some support for the view that inflation targeting is
associated with an improvement in overall economic performance. However, the ongoing debate on
whether inflation targeting matters indicates that open questions remain, particularly on the
comparative macroeconomic performance in inflation targeting countries, both over time and relative
to nontargeting countries. Are inflation levels and inflation and output volatilities lower in inflation-
targeting countries? Do monetary policy and macroeconomic performance variables respond
differently to shocks under inflation targeting? Is monetary policy more efficient under inflation
targeting? Are inflation-targeting central banks more accurate in hitting their targets than
nontargeting countries are in maintaining or achieving stable inflation?
    We have addressed these questions by systematically applying a common methodological
approach, across issues and throughout the paper. We have looked for empirical evidence in the
world sample of twenty-one industrial and emerging-economy inflation-targeting countries, before
and after their adoption of inflation targeting, and compared their performance to a control group of
thirteen industrial nontargeters. We have distinguished between two types of inflation-targeting
regimes, one in which inflation targets are still converging to the long-run goal for inflation and one
in which the inflation target is stationary. We have tested for differences in group behavior of
inflation targeters and nontargeters and for changes between pre- and post-targeting changes among
inflation targeters, making statistical inferences from panel data estimations, panel vector
autoregressive models, and panel impulse responses. Finally, to exploit the rich available data and
identify dynamic patterns, we have used a high-frequency sample of quarterly data, covering 1989–
2004 and subperiods.
    Comparative descriptive statistics on inflation performance confirm that inflation targeters
reduced their average inflation rates from 12.6 percent before the adoption of inflation targeting to
4.4 percent thereafter. Inflation declined to 6.0 percent in the post-adoption convergence period and
then to 2.3 percent after the achievement of stationary targets. Emerging-economy inflation
targeters recorded an average 6.0 percent inflation after they adopted inflation targeting, while the
corresponding figure is only 2.2 percent for industrial-economy inflation targeters. The latter figure
is very close to the average 2.1 percent inflation recorded among nontargeters since 1997. A similar
pattern is observed for inflation volatility. Inflation volatility in industrial inflation targeters is twice
the level recorded in nontargeters, but inflation persistence is slightly lower in industrial inflation
targeters than in nontargeters. Emerging inflation targeters, in turn, achieved a significant



                                                       23
reduction in output growth volatility and output gap volatility under inflation targeting.
Nontargeters also achieved a significant reduction in both volatility measures after 1997, to levels
that are below those recorded by industrial inflation targeters. However, output persistence, like
inflation persistence, is lower in stationary-target inflation targeters than in nontargeters.
    Moving beyond unconditional inflation comparison, we follow previous research by testing for
systematic differences in inflation levels between inflation-targeting and nontargeting countries,
controlling for past inflation. The evidence on the comparative inflation performance of inflation
targeters and nontargeters reported both here and in the previous literature shows that the effect of
inflation targeting on inflation can go either way. Our findings suggest that the source of such
differences lies in the use of heterogeneous control groups. The absence of panel data techniques in
the earlier literature prevents the disaggregation of control groups across countries and time.
    We have extended the earlier research, exploiting both the cross-section and time dimensions of
our sample. We find that the largest difference in inflation performance is observed when the
treatment group is compared to its own pre-targeting experience. When nontargeting countries are
added to the control group, this effect declines but is still statistically significant. However, when we
restrict the control group to nontargeting countries, we find no systematic, significant difference in
inflation between inflation targeters and nontargeters. Further disaggregation of the treatment
group into industrial and emerging inflation targeters and into converging-target and stationary-
target inflation targeters yields mixed results. They confirm that results are highly dependent on the
choice of control groups. They also suggest that emerging-economy and converging-target inflation
targeters record the largest gains in inflation reduction. Industrial inflation targeters exhibit a
statistically weak reduction in inflation in comparison with industrial nontargeting countries.
    If inflation targeting improves the credibility of monetary policy and strengthens the anchoring
of inflation expectations, we would expect inflation targeting to reduce inflation’s response to oil
price shocks and lessen the pass-through effect from exchange rate shocks. As a result of increased
credibility and reduced devaluation to inflation pass-through, inflation targeting may also
strengthen monetary policy independence (that is, weaken the reaction of domestic interest rates to
foreign interest rate shocks). We have therefore assessed whether inflation targeters differ from
nontargeters—and whether post-targeting differs from pre-targeting among inflation targeters—in
the response of inflation to shocks in oil prices and the exchange rate and the response of domestic
interest rates to innovations in international interest rates. Our results are as follows.
    We reach two conclusions on the inflation consequence of oil price shocks. First, inflation
targeting helps all inflation targeters reduce the domestic inflation response to an oil price shock
relative to their own pre-targeting experience, although this reduction is not statistically different
from zero. Second, in all inflation-targeting treatment groups, the inflation response to oil price
shocks is smaller than in nontargeting countries after 1997. The difference in favor of inflation
targeters is statistically significant, on average, for later quarters, because the effects of an oil shock
on domestic inflation are smaller and less persistent in inflation-targeting countries than in
nontargeters. Surprisingly, this result is particularly strong in emerging-market stationary-target
inflation targeters, where the response of inflation to the oil price is the smallest and least
persistent.
    We also present two conclusions based on our comparison of the dynamics of the pass-through
effects from exchange rate shocks to domestic inflation. First, the adoption of inflation targeting
helped reduce the short-term pass-through under stationary-target inflation targeting, vis-à-vis their
own pre-targeting experience. This result, however, is entirely driven by emerging-market inflation
targeters, where pass-through coefficients fell somewhat after a stationary target was achieved but
remained positive and significantly different from zero. In industrial inflation targeters and
nontargeters, the pass-through effects were close to zero before and after inflation targeting (or
before and after 1997, in the case of nontargeters). Second, when we compare all inflation targeters
and all stationary inflation targeters to nontargeters after 1997, the pass-through coefficients are
significantly larger in the former groups than in the latter. This result is due to emerging-market
inflation targeters, which exhibit much larger pass-through coefficients than nontargeters after
1997; the differences are statistically significant from quarters 1 through 5, on average. In contrast,



                                                      24
industrial inflation targeters and nontargeters do not exhibit any significant differences in pass-
through performance.
    To measure monetary independence, we compared the dynamic responses of domestic interest
rates to a shock in the international interest rate, and we again arrived at two conclusions. First, the
adoption of inflation targeting has brought down interest sensitivity estimates for the full group of
inflation-targeting countries. This aggregate result hides two opposing changes, however. The
adoption of inflation targeting in industrial countries has increased interest rate sensitivity from
negative to positive and significant. In contrast, in emerging-market inflation targeters, interest
sensitivity has declined from huge before inflation targeting to moderate during converging-target
inflation targeting and to small under stationary-target inflation targeting. Second, these changes
made inflation targeters more similar to nontargeters. While interest rate sensitivity to foreign rate
shocks is slightly larger in industrial stationary inflation targeters than in nontargeters and slightly
smaller in emerging-market stationary inflation targeters than in nontargeters, the differences are
not statistically significant. Our measures of monetary independence thus reveal a convergence of
inflation-targeting countries that have achieved stationary targets to the levels exhibited by
nontargeters.
    Next we investigated the potential gains associated with inflation targeting in terms of
improving macroeconomic performance (that is, the reduction in inflation and output volatilities),
which can be attributed to smaller supply shocks and more efficient monetary policy. The
comparative results for inflation-targeting countries over time (that is, before and after the adoption
of inflation targeting) and relative to nontargeting countries are as follows. Adopting inflation
targeting led to substantial improvement in the efficiency of monetary policy; these gains are larger
for stationary inflation targeters than for inflation targeters in general. Observed macroeconomic
performance is much better in industrial inflation targeters than in emerging inflation targeters,
both before and after the adoption of inflation targeting (or stationary inflation targeting). However,
emerging economies recorded a much greater improvement following the adoption of inflation
targeting than industrial countries. Emerging economies registered major reductions in output and
inflation volatility after adopting stationary inflation targeting, both because they faced smaller
supply shocks and because they improved their monetary policy efficiency. In contrast to emerging
inflation targeters, industrial targeters improved their macroeconomic performance only because
they faced smaller supply shocks; their monetary policy efficiency levels (which were already high
before the adoption of inflation targeting, compared with emerging countries) actually deteriorated
somewhat after the adoption of inflation targeting.
    Although inflation targeting improves monetary performance over time, our control group of
nontargeters still exhibits better macroeconomic performance and higher levels of monetary policy
efficiency than our different treatment groups of inflation targeters. The differences between
industrial nontargeters and emerging inflation targeters narrowed massively under inflation
targeting, but they still remain large after the achievement of stationary inflation targeting.
Nontargeters also exhibited better macroeconomic performance than industrial inflation targeters,
but this difference was small and narrowed under inflation targeting. Most of the remaining
performance difference between industrial inflation targeters and nontargeters—in favor of the
latter—is explained by the smaller supply shocks faced by nontargeters, while monetary policy
efficiency is only marginally better in nontargeters than in industrial inflation targeters.
    We ended our research by comparing the success of inflation-targeting central banks in hitting
their official targets (or maintaining inflation levels close to their inflation trends) to the success of
nontargeting central banks in maintaining inflation levels close to their inflation trends. Prima facie,
inflation deviations from inflation targets or trends are larger in inflation-targeting than in
nontargeting countries. However, this evidence is based on simple sample statistics that do not
control for country- and time-specific shocks that affect inflation deviations and that could be
correlated with inflation-targeting experiences (across countries and over time). When we control for
such shocks, our findings point to a more differentiated performance regarding inflation accuracy
under inflation targeting. First, when comparing the full sample of inflation targeters (and also the
emerging/industrial and converging/stationary subsamples) to all nontargeting experiences



                                                     25
(including nontargeting countries and pre-targeting experiences), inflation deviations are
significantly smaller in inflation-targeting than in nontargeting experiences. This result is not
robust, however, when the control group includes only nontargeting countries. Inflation deviations
are still numerically smaller in inflation-targeting countries relative to nontargeting countries, but
the differences are not statistically significant from zero. This holds for both the aggregate treatment
group comprising all inflation targeters and the different inflation-targeting subgroups (emerging
and industrial targeters and converging and stationary targeters): inflation deviations are
numerically lower than in nontargeting countries, but the difference is not statistically significant.
    We conclude that our evidence supports inflation targeting. Inflation targeting seems to help
countries achieve lower inflation in the long run, reduce their response to oil price and exchange rate
shocks, strengthen monetary policy independence, improve monetary policy efficiency, and obtain
inflation outcomes that are closer to target levels. Furthermore, some benefits of inflation targeting
increase when inflation targeters achieve disinflation and are able to implement a stationary
inflation target. This may suggest that the credibility of an inflation-targeting regime improves once
it becomes a stationary regime.
    Inflation targeting thus seems to be the natural monetary regime choice, especially for emerging-
market economies, where the gains from inflation targeting are found to be the largest. Not
surprisingly, a large number of developing countries are currently planning to adopt inflation
targeting in the near future.
    Despite the favorable results attained by inflation-targeting countries over time, our evidence
generally does not suggest that countries that adopt inflation targeting have improved their
monetary policy performance beyond that of our control group of nontargeters, all of which are
industrial countries with a successful monetary policy. However, inflation targeting does seem to
help countries converge toward the performance of our very demanding control group, particularly
during the mature phase of stationary targeting.
    Indeed, obtaining a strong nominal anchor is the key to successful monetary policy. Our evidence
suggests that some industrial countries have been able to obtain a strong nominal anchor without
resorting to inflation targeting. The Federal Reserve’s policies under Alan Greenspan, for example,
may not have been very different or any better if the Federal Reserve had adopted inflation targeting
(Mishkin, 2005). It is therefore not entirely surprising that we did not find much evidence that
inflation targeters do better than our control group of industrialized nontargeters.
    Nevertheless, the adoption of inflation targeting can have advantages even for industrial
countries. Industrialized countries that have not adopted inflation targeting face four problems (see
Bernanke and others, 1999; Mishkin, 2005). First, the strong nominal anchor that produced a
successful monetary policy is often based on individuals, and their replacements may not be strongly
committed to the nominal anchor. Second, the focus on the long run exhibited by successful
nontargeters may weaken in the future. Third, the lack of transparency about the goals of monetary
policy increases uncertainty. Fourth, the lack of accountability in the absence of inflation targeting
could undermine central bank independence in the future, thereby weakening the nominal anchor.
Inflation targeting has the potential to ensure that the successful monetary policy performance of
our control group of industrial nontargeters in recent years continues in the future.




                                                    26
                                          REFERENCES

Albagli, E., and K. Schmidt-Hebbel. 2005. “By How Much and Why Do Inflation Targeters Miss
   Their Targets?” Santiago: Central Bank of Chile.
Arellano, M., and S. Bond. 1991. “Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data: Monte Carlo Evidence
   and an Application to Employment Equations.” Review of Economic Studies 58(2): 277–97.
Ball, L., and N. Sheridan. 2005. “Does Inflation Targeting Matter?” In The Inflation Targeting
   Debate, edited by B. S. Bernanke and M. Woodford, 249–76. University of Chicago Press for the
   National Bureau of Economic Research.
Batini, N., and D. Laxton. Forthcoming. “Under What Conditions Can Inflation Targeting Be
   Adopted? The Experience of Emerging Markets?” In Monetary Policy under Inflation Targeting,
   edited by F. Mishkin and K. Schmidt-Hebbel. Santiago: Central Bank of Chile.
Bernanke, B. S., T. Laubach, F. S. Mishkin, and A. S. Posen. 1999. Inflation Targeting: Lessons from
   the International Experience. Princeton University Press.
Bernanke, B. S., and F. S. Mishkin. 1992. “Central Bank Behavior and the Strategy of Monetary
   Policy: Observations from Six Industrialized Countries.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1992,
   edited by O. Blanchard and S. Fischer, 183–228. MIT Press.
Calderón, C., and K. Schmidt-Hebbel. 2003. “Macroeconomic Policies and Performance in Latin
   America.” Journal of International Money and Finance 22(7): 895–923.
Calvo, G., and F. S. Mishkin. 2003. “The Mirage of Exchange Rate Regimes for Emerging Market
   Countries.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 17(4): 99–118.
Castelnuovo, E., S. Nicoletti-Altimari, and D. Rodríguez Palenzuela. 2003. “Definition of Price
   Stability, Range, and Point Targets: The Anchoring of Long-Term Inflation Expectations.” In
   Background Studies for the ECB’s Evaluation of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, edited by O. Issing,
   43–90. Frankfurt: European Central Bank.
Cecchetti, S., and M. Ehrmann. 2001. “Does Inflation Targeting Increase Output Volatility? An
   International Comparison of Policymakers’ Preferences and Outcomes.” In Monetary Policy:
   Rules and Transmission Mechanisms, edited by N. Loayza and K. Schmidt-Hebbel, 247–74.
   Santiago: Central Bank of Chile.
Cecchetti, S., A. Flores-Lagunes, and S. Krause. 2006. “Has Monetary Policy Become More Efficient?
   A Cross-Country Analysis.” Economic Journal 116(511):408–33.
Cecchetti, S., and S. Krause. 2002. “Central Bank Structure, Policy Efficiency, and Macroeconomic
   Performance: Exploring Empirical Relationships.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review
   (July): 47–60.
Chari, V. V., L. J. Christiano, and M. Eichenbaum. 1998. “Expectation Traps and Discretion.”
   Journal of Economic Theory 81(2): 462–92.
Clarida, R., J. Galí, and M. Gertler. 1999. “The Science of Monetary Policy.” Journal of Economic
   Literature 34(4): 1661–707.
Cohen, V., M. Gonzalez, and A. Powell. 2003. “A New Test for the Success of Inflation Targeting.”
   Business School working paper series. Universidad Torcuato Di Tella.
Corbo, V., O. Landerretche, and K. Schmidt-Hebbel. 2002. “Does Inflation Targeting Make a
   Difference?” In Inflation Targeting: Design, Performance, Challenges, edited by N. Loayza and R.
   Soto, 221–69. Santiago: Central Bank of Chile.
Gertler, M. 2005. Comment on L. Ball and N. Sheridan, “Does Inflation Targeting Matter?” In The
   Inflation Targeting Debate, edited by B. S. Bernanke and M. Woodford, 276–81. University of
   Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Goodfriend, M., and R. G. King. 1997. “The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the Role of Monetary
   Policy.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, edited by B. S. Bernanke and J. Rotemberg,
   231–83. MIT Press.
Gürkaynak, R., A. Levin, A. Marder, and E. Swanson. Forthcoming. “Inflation Targeting and the
   Anchoring of Inflation Expectations in the Western Hemisphere” In Monetary Policy under




                                                  27
   Inflation Targeting, edited by F. Mishkin and K. Schmidt-Hebbel. Santiago: Central Bank of
   Chile.
Holtz-Eakin, D., W. Newey, and H. S. Rosen. 1988. “Estimating Vector Autoregressions with Panel
   Data.” Econometrica 56(6): 1371–95.
Hu, Y. 2003. “Empirical Investigations of Inflation Targeting.” Working paper 03-6. Washington:
   Institute for International Economics.
Hyvonen, M. 2004. “Inflation Convergence across Countries.” Discussion paper 2004-04. Sydney:
   Reserve Bank of Australia.
IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2005. World Economic Outlook. Washington.
Johnson, D. R. 2002. “The Effect of Inflation Targeting on the Behavior of Expected Inflation:
   Evidence from an Eleven-Country Panel.” Journal of Monetary Economics 49(8): 1493–519.
———. 2003. “The Effect of Inflation Targets on the Level of Expected Inflation in Five Countries.”
   Review of Economics and Statistics 55(4): 1076–81.
Levin, A., F. M. Natalucci, and J. M. Piger. 2004. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Inflation
   Targeting.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review (July): 51–80.
Love, I., and L. Zicchino. 2002. “Financial Development and Dynamic Investment Behavior.” Policy
   research working paper 2913. Washington: World Bank.
Miniane, J., and J. H. Rogers. 2003. “Capital Controls and the International Transmission of U.S
   Money Shocks.” International finance discussion paper 778. Washington: Board of Governors of
   the Federal Reserve System.
Mishkin, F. S. 2000. “What Should Central Banks Do?” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review
   82(6): 1–13.
———. 2005. “The Fed after Greenspan.” Eastern Economic Journal 31(3): 317–32.
Mishkin, F. S., and A. S. Posen. 1997. “Inflation Targeting: Lessons from Four Countries.” Economic
   Policy Review 3(3): 9–110. Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Mishkin, F. S., and K. Schmidt-Hebbel. 2002. “One Decade of Inflation Targeting in the World: What
   Do We Know and What Do We Need to Know?” In Inflation Targeting: Design, Performance,
   Challenges, edited by N. Loayza and R. Soto, 171–219. Santiago: Central Bank of Chile.
Neumann, M. J. M., and J. von Hagen. 2002. “Does Inflation Targeting Matter?” Federal Reserve
   Bank of St. Louis Review (July/August): 127–48.
Plumper, T., and V. Troeger. 2004. “The Estimation of Time-Invariant Variables in Panel Analysis
   with Unit Fixed Effects.” University of Essex.
Roger, S., and M. Stone. 2005. “On Target? The International Experience with Achieving Inflation
   Targets.” Working paper 05-163. Washington: International Monetary Fund.
Rudebusch, G., and L. Svensson. 1999. “Policy Rules for Inflation Targeting.” In Monetary Policy
   Rules, edited by J. B. Taylor. University of Chicago Press.
Sims, Christopher. 2005. “Limits to Inflation Targeting.” In The Inflation Targeting Debate, edited
   by B. S. Bernanke and M. Woodford, 283–308. University of Chicago Press for the National
   Bureau of Economic Research.
Taylor, J. B. 1979. “Estimation and Control of a Macroeconomic Model with Rational Expectations.”
   Econometrica 47(5): 1267–86.
Truman, E. M. 2003. Inflation Targeting in the World Economy. Washington: Institute for
   International Economics.
Vega, M., and D. Winkelried. 2005. “Inflation Targeting and Inflation Behavior: A Successful Story?”
   Macroeconomics working paper 0502026. EconWPA.
Woodford, M. 2003. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton
   University Press.




                                                  28
Table 1. Inflation-Targeting Periods and 2005 Target Levels in Twenty-One Inflation-
Targeting Countries

                                                  Inflation-targeting period               2005
                             Pre-targeting      Converging-      Stationary-target inflation target
   Country                    period          target period          period            level (%)
   Industrial
Economies
     Australia              1989:1–1994:2                         1994:3–2004:4            2–3
     Canada                 1989:1–1990:4         1991:1–         1995:1–2004:4            1–3
                                                 1994:4
     Iceland                1989:1–2000:4         2001:1–         2003:1–2004:4            2.5
                                                 2002:4
     New Zealand            1989:1–1989:4         1990:1–         1993:1–2004:4            1–3
                                                 1992:4
     Norway                 1989:1–2000:4                         2001:1–2004:4             2.5
     Sweden                 1989:1–1994:4                         1995:1–2004:4          2 (+/–1)
     Switzerland            1989:1–1999:4                         2000:1–2004:4             <2
     United Kingdom         1989:1–1991:4                         1992:1–2004:4              2
     Group average                                                                          2.2

   Emerging
Economies
     Brazil                 1989:1–1998:4         1999:1–                              4.5 (+/–2.5)
                                                 2004:4
     Chile                  1989:1–1990:4         1991:1–         2001:1–2004:4            2–4
                                                 2000:4
     Colombia               1989:1–1998:4         1999:1–                               5 (+/–0.5)
                                                 2004:4
     Czech Republic         1989:1–1997:4         1998:1–                                3 (+/–1)
                                                 2004:4
     Hungary                1989:1–2000:4         2001:1–                               3.5 (+/–1)
                                                 2004:4
     Israel                 1989:1–1991:4         1992:1–         2003:1–2004:4            1–3
                                                 2002:4
     Korea                  1989:1–1997:4         1998:1–         1999:1–2004:4          2.5–3.5
                                                 1998:4
     Mexico                 1989:1–1998:4         1999:1–         2003:1–2004:4          3 (+/–1)
                                                 2002:4
     Peru                   1989:1–1993:4         1994:1–         2002:1–2004:4         2.5 (+/–1)
                                                 2001:4
     Philippines            1989:1–2000:4         2001:1–                                  5–6
                                                 2004:4
     Poland                 1989:1–1997:4         1998:1–         2004:1–2004:4         2.5 (+/–1)
                                                 2003:4
     South Africa           1989:1–1999:4                         2001:1–2004:4            3–6
     Thailand               1989:1–1999:4                         2000:1–2004:4           0–3.5
     Group average, eight stationary-target countries                                      3.0
     Group average, five converging-target countries                                       3.6


    Source: Authors’ calculations, based on data from central bank websites.




                                                    29
    Table 2. Descriptive Statistics on Inflation Levels, Volatility, and Persistence of
Inflation Targeters and Nontargeters, 1989–2004a
    Sample group and statistic                            Pre-targeting            Post-targeting
                                                            periodb                 periodc
    Nontargeting countries
      Mean                                                      4.01                    2.07
      Standard deviation                                        1.37                    0.79
      Persistence                                               0.91                    0.83
    All inflation-targeting countries
      Mean                                                     12.63                    4.37
      Standard deviation                                        3.91                    2.63
      Persistence                                               0.83                    0.81
    Industrial inflation-targeting countries
      Mean                                                      4.73                    2.24
      Standard deviation                                        2.16                    1.40
      Persistence                                               0.79                    0.76
    Emerging inflation-targeting countries
      Mean                                                     18.56                    5.97
      Standard deviation                                        5.23                    3.55
      Persistence                                               0.87                    0.85
    Converging-target           inflation-targeting
countries
      Mean                                                       —                      6.04
      Standard deviation                                         —                      3.11
      Persistence                                                —                      0.78
    Stationary-target           inflation-targeting
countries
      Mean                                                       —                      2.32
      Standard deviation                                         —                      1.29
      Persistence                                                —                      0.71
    Source: Authors’ calculations, based on data from International Monetary Fund, International
Financial Statistics.
    a. Persistence is measured as the estimated coefficient of an AR(1) equation for inflation.
    b. For nontargeters, the corresponding period is 1989–96.
    c. For nontargeters, the corresponding period is 1997–2004.




                                                 30
   Table 3. Descriptive Statistics on GDP Growth and Output Gap Volatility and
Persistence of Targeters and Nontargeters, 1989–2004a
   Sample group and statistic                            Pre-targeting            Post-targeting
                                                           periodb                 periodc
   Nontargeting countries
     Standard deviation of GDP growth                          4.01                    2.07
     Standard deviation of output gap                          1.37                    0.79
     Persistence of GDP growth                                 0.73                    0.74
     Persistence of output gap                                 0.71                    0.68
   All inflation-targeting countries
     Standard deviation of GDP growth                          3.04                    2.23
     Standard deviation of output gap                          1.87                    1.36
     Persistence of GDP growth                                 0.75                    0.74
     Persistence of output gap                                 0.65                    0.75
   Industrial inflation-targeting countries
     Standard deviation of GDP growth                          2.01                    2.15
     Standard deviation of output gap                          1.36                    1.29
     Persistence of GDP growth                                 0.75                    0.74
     Persistence of output gap                                 0.69                    0.72
   Emerging inflation-targeting countries
     Standard deviation of GDP growth                          3.81                    2.30
     Standard deviation of output gap                          2.26                    1.41
     Persistence of GDP growth                                 0.75                    0.76
     Persistence of output gap                                 0.63                    0.78
   Converging-target           inflation-targeting
countries
     Standard deviation of GDP growth                           —                      2.43
     Standard deviation of output gap                           —                      1.50
     Persistence of GDP growth                                  —                      0.68
     Persistence of output gap                                  —                      0.76
   Stationary-target           inflation-targeting
countries
     Standard deviation of GDP growth                           —                      1.52
     Standard deviation of output gap                           —                      1.15
     Persistence of GDP growth                                  —                      0.55
     Persistence of output gap                                  —                      0.61
   Source: Authors’ calculations, based on data from International Monetary Fund, International
Financial Statistics.
   a. Persistence is measured as the estimated coefficient of an AR(1) equation for inflation.
   b. For nontargeters, the corresponding period is 1989–96.
   c. For nontargeters, the corresponding period is 1997–2004.




                                                31
   Table 4. Difference in Inflation between Inflation Targeters and Nontargeters in
Previous Literature

                                                                                     Differenc    Differenc
                                                                                  e in long -  e in long -
                                                                    Difference       term         term
                                                       Estimatio in long-term      inflation    inflation
    Study                      Sample               n technique inflation level   volatility   persistence
Ball and Sheridan Targeters:     7      industrial     Cross-          Zero            Zero         Zero
  (2005)            economies;      nontargeters: section, OLS
                    13 industrial economies
IMF (2005)        Targeters:    13       emerging      Cross-          4.8%           3.6%          n.a.
                    economies;      nontargeters: section, OLS
                    22 emerging economies
Vega          and Targeters: 23 industrial and         Cross-        2.6–4.8%       1.5–2.0%      Ambiguo
  Winkelried        emerging           economies; section,                                         us
  (2005)            nontargeters: 86 industrial propensity
                    and emerging economies         score
                                                   matching

   Source: references cited herein.



   Table 5. Inflation Difference between Targeters and Nontargeters: Cross-Section OLS
Estimationa
   Explanatory variable                          Coefficient
   Inflation-targeting dummy                        1.007
                                                   (0.093)*
   Pre-targeting (pre-1997) inflation               –0.850
                                                (0.000)***
   Constant                                         1.468
                                                  (0.002)**

   R2                                               0.973
   No. observations                                  34
   No. countries                                     34
   Source: Author’s estimations.
   * Statistically significant at the 10 percent level.
   ** Statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
   *** Statistically significant at the 1 percent level.
   a. P values are reported in parentheses.




                                                      32
       Table 6. Difference in Inflation between Inflation Targeters and Nontargeters: Panel
   Samplea
                                  Control group 1          Control group 2         Control group 3
                                 Pooled       Panel   Pooled OLS       Pooled    Pooled        Panel
                                OLS           IV                        IV      OLS            IV
Explanatory variable               (1)          (2)        (3)            (4)      (5)           (6)
   Inflation-targeting           –0.115          –       –0.010        –0.010    –0.338       –0.491
dummy                                       0.457
                               (0.047)**      (0.000     (0.827)       (0.827) (0.001)**      (0.002)
                                             )***                                 *           ***
   Lagged inflation               0.939        0.904      0.908         0.908     0.932        0.901
                                 (0.000)*     (0.000   (0.000)***      (0.000) (0.000)**      (0.000)
                                  **         )***                      ***        *           ***
   Constant                       0.596        0.660      0.568         0.160     0.590        1.023
                                (0.004)*      (0.002   (0.009)***      (0.465)  (0.082)*      (0.003)
                                             )***

   No. observations                   1942         1942       1420          1420       1183          1183
   No. countries                       34           34         34            34          21           21
       Source: Author’s estimations.
       * Statistically significant at the 10 percent level.
       ** Statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
       *** Statistically significant at the 1 percent level.
       a. Control group 1 includes all nontargeters and pre-targeters; control group 2 includes all
   nontargeters; control group 3 includes pre-targeters. Control group 2 regressions cannot be
   estimated using panel data techniques since country fixed effects are perfectly collinear with
   inflation targeting. Instruments used in control group 1 and 3 are the lagged inflation-targeting
   dummy and initial inflation; the instrument used in control group 2 is initial inflation. Time
   dummies are included for every quarter, and p values are reported in parentheses.




                                                    33
     Table 7. Difference in Inflation between Inflation Targeters and Nontargeters,
 Disaggregated by Industrial and Emerging Targetersa
                                      Control group 1        Control group 2        Control group 3
                                         (Panel IV)             (Pooled IV)           (Panel IV)
                                   Industr      Emergi     Indust       Emergi    Indust      Emergi
                                    ial          ng        rial         ng       rial         ng
                               Economies Economies Economies Economies Economies Economies
   Explanatory variable               (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)         (6)
   Inflation-targeting              –0.071       –0.806    –0.061        0.103    –0.142      –0.745
dummy
                                   (0.579)       (0.000)   (0.098)      (0.118)  (0.490)      (0.002)
                                                 ***        *                                 ***
   Lagged inflation                  0.889        0.892     0.947        0.902     0.878       0.884
                                   (0.000)       (0.000)   (0.000)      (0.000)  (0.000)      (0.000)
                                   ***           ***       ***          ***      ***          ***
   Constant                          0.940        0.953    –0.070        0.196     1.497       0.824
                                   (0.000)       (0.000)   (0.652)      (0.404)  (0.002)      (0.096)
                                   ***           ***                             ***          ***
Summary statistic
   No. observations                  1590         1613      1080         1099       831         854
   No. countries                      34           33         22          25        21          20
     Source: Author’s estimations.
     * Statistically significant at the 10 percent level.
     ** Statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
     *** Statistically significant at the 1 percent level.
     a. Control group 1 includes all nontargeters and pre-targeters; control group 2 includes all
 nontargeters; control group 3 includes pre-targeters. Control group 2 regressions cannot be
 estimated using panel data techniques since country fixed effects are perfectly collinear with
 inflation targeting. Instruments used in control group 1 and 3 are the lagged inflation-targeting
 dummy and initial inflation; the instrument used in control group 2 is initial inflation. Time
 dummies are included for every quarter, and p values are reported in parentheses.




                                                    34
     Table 8. Difference in Inflation between Inflation Targeters and Nontargeters,
 Disaggregated by Stationary and Converging Targetersa
                                Control group 1           Control group 2          Control group 3
                                   (Panel IV)               (Pooled IV)               (Panel IV)
                            Stationa      Convergi     Station     Convergi     Station     Convergi
                        ry targeters ng targeters      ary     ng targeters     ary      ng targeters
                                                    targeters                targeters
   Explanatory variable        (1)            (2)        (3)           (4)        (5)           (6)
   Inflation-targeting       –0.197        –0.858       0.020        0.021      –0.148        –0.929
dummy
                            (0.093)*      (0.000)**    (0.607)      (0.750)     (0.462)     (0.001)**
                                            *                                                  *
   Lagged inflation           0.905         0.893       0.950        0.909       0.900         0.887
                           (0.000)**      (0.000)**    (0.000)     (0.000)**    (0.000)     (0.000)**
                              *             *          ***           *          ***            *
   Constant                  –0.085         0.864      –0.097        0.557       0.055         1.122
                             (0.698)      (0.002)**    (0.560)     (0.011)**    (0.901)       (0.138)
                                            *

   No. observations                1636          1567       1118        1050        877          808
   No. countries                     34           34         24          27          21           21
     Source: Author’s estimations.
     * Statistically significant at the 10 percent level.
     ** Statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
     *** Statistically significant at the 1 percent level.
     a. Control group 1 includes all nontargeters and pre-targeters; control group 2 includes all
 nontargeters; control group 3 includes pre-targeters. Control group 2 regressions cannot be
 estimated using panel data techniques since country fixed effects are perfectly collinear with
 inflation targeting. Instruments used in control group 1 and 3 are the lagged inflation-targeting
 dummy and initial inflation; the instrument used in control group 2 is initial inflation. Time
 dummies are included for every quarter, and p values are reported in parentheses.




                                                 35
Table 9. Changes in Performance and Policy Efficiency over Time and between Targeters
and Nontargeters
Sample Group 1                                  Sample Group 2                                   Change
                                                                                                      E
                                                                                           L2 –    2–     S2 –
                        L1       E1      S1                        L2      E2      S2       L1     E1      S1
 1a. Targeters         8.302    2.931   5.371   Targeters after   4.485   2.048   2.436   –3.817      – –2.935
 before targeting                               targeting                                         0.882
 (as % of L)                    35.3    64.7    (as % of L)               45.7    54.3                2   76.9
                                                                                                   3.1
 1b. Industrial        1.952    0.398   1.553   Industrial        1.752   0.786   0.966   –0.199      0. –0.587
 targeters before                               targeters after                                    388
 targeting                                      targeting
 (as % of L)                    20.4    79.6    (as % of L)               44.9    55.1                 – 294.3
                                                                                                   194.3
 1c. Emerging          11.863   5.308   6.555   Emerging          6.657   3.098   3.559   –5.206       – –2.995
 targeters before                               targeters after                                    2.211
 targeting                                      targeting
 (as % of L)                    44.7    55.3    (as % of L)               46.5    53.5                 4   57.5
                                                                                                    2.5
 2a. Targeters         8.302    2.931   5.371   Stationary        2.007   0.780   1.227   –6.296       – –4.145
 before targeting                               targeters                                          2.151
 (as % of L)                    35.3    64.7    (as % of L)               38.9    61.1                 3   65.8
                                                                                                    4.2
 2b. Industrial        1.952    0.398   1.553   Industrial        1.358   0.524   0.834   –0.593       0. –0.719
 targeters before                               stationary                                          126
 targeting                                      targeters
 (as % of L)                     20.4    79.6   (as % of L)               38.6     61.4            –21.3 121.3
 2c. Emerging          11.863   5.308   6.555   Emerging          3.547   1.850   1.697   –8.316     –   –4.857
 targeters before                               stationary                                         3.459
 targeting                                      targeters
 (as % of L)                     44.7    55.3   (as % of L)               52.1     47.9            41.6   58.4
3. Nontargeters        0.869    0.129   0.740   Nontargeters      0.571   0.268   0.303   –0.298   0.139 –0.437
before 1997                                     after 1997
 (as % of L)                     14.9    85.1   (as % of L)               47.0     53.0            –46.9 146.9
 4a. Targeters after   4.485    2.048   2.436   Nontargeters      0.571   0.268   0.303   –3.913     –   –2.134
 targeting                                      after 1997                                         1.780
 (as % of L)                     45.7    54.3   (as % of L)               47.0     53.0            45.5   54.5
 4b. Industrial        1.752    0.786   0.966   Nontargeters      0.571   0.268   0.303   –1.181     –   –0.663
 targeters after                                after 1997                                         0.517
 targeting
 (as % of L)                     44.9    55.1   (as % of L)               47.0     53.0            43.8   56.2
 4c. Emerging          6.657    3.098   3.559   Nontargeters      0.571   0.268   0.303   –6.086     –   –3.257
 targeters after                                after 1997                                         2.829
 targeting
 (as % of L)                     46.5    53.5   (as % of L)               47.0     53.0            46.5   53.5
 5a. Stationary        2.007    0.780   1.227   Nontargeters      0.571   0.268   0.303   –1.435     –   –0.924
 targeters                                      after 1997                                         0.511
 (as % of L)                     38.9    61.1   (as % of L)               47.0     53.0            35.6   64.4
 5b. Industrial        1.358    0.524   0.834   Nontargeters      0.571   0.268   0.303   –0.787   –0.3   –0.5
 stationary                                     after 1997
 targeters
 (as % of L)                     38.6    61.4   (as % of L)               47.0     53.0            32.5   67.5
 5c. Emerging          3.547    1.850   1.697   Nontargeters      0.571   0.268   0.303   –2.976     –   –1.395
 stationary                                     after 1997                                         1.581
 targeters
 (as % of L)                    52.1    47.9    (as % of L)               47.0    53.0             53.1   46.9

    Source: Author’s estimations.


                                                    36
Table 10. Absolute Deviation of the Inflation Rate from Target or Trend in Inflation
Targeters and Nontargetersa
                                                    ID1                              ID2
                                                 Percentile                       Percentile
     Sample group                           25       50        75          25         50         75
                                           0.4      1.0       1.9
     Inflation Targeters                  6        3         9            0.33       0.84       1.74
                                           0.4      0.7       1.3
        Industrial Economies (7)          0        7         9            0.23       0.50       1.13
                                           0.4      1.2       2.4
        Emerging Economies (14)           9        8         2            0.50       1.14       2.00
                                           0.3      0.7       1.4
        Stationary (16)                   8        7         6            0.24       0.56       1.16
                                           0.6      1.4       2.7
        Converging (14)                   3        9         7            0.70       1.42       2.17
                                           0.2      0.5       1.2
     Nontargeters                         4        4         0            0.24       0.54       1.20
                                           0.1      0.3       0.6
        Always nontargeters (13)          8        6         7            0.18       0.36       0.67
        Targeters before targeting         0.4      1.1       2.3
    (21)                                  1        2         8            0.41       1.12       2.38
    Source: Author's calculations, based on data from Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development, Main Economic Indicators; IMF; and central banks.
    a. For inflation-targeting countries, ID1 is defined as the absolute deviation of actual inflation
from inflation targets, and ID2 is the absolute deviation of actual inflation from its HP trend. For
nontargeting countries, ID1 and ID2 are defined as the absolute deviation of actual inflation from its
HP trend. Number of countries is in parentheses.




                                                   37
    Table 11. Inflation Deviation from Target or Trend in Targeting and Nontargeting Countries: ID1a
                                                 Control      Control         Control        Control        Control
                                              group 1       group 2         group 1        group 2        group 1
 Explanatory variable                               (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)
     Abs [Deviation from target (t–1)]             0.537       0.490           0.537          0.511           0.537
                                               (0.000)***  (0.000)***       0.000)***     (0.000)***     (0.000)***
     Inflation-targeting dummy                    –0.181      –0.447
                                                 (0.063)*     (0.275)
     Abs [NER depreciation]                        0.047       0.013           0.048          0.021           0.047
                                               (0.000)***    (0.039)**     (0.000)***     (0.007)***     (0.000)***
     Abs [Output gap (t–1)]                        0.033       0.035           0.038          0.075           0.029
                                                  (0.443)     (0.393)         (0.394)        (0.245)         (0.503)
     Abs [Oil gap]                                 0.003       0.002           0.003          0.002           0.003
                                                 (0.069)*     (0.123)        (0.075)*        (0.192)        (0.062)*
     Abs [Fed funds rate (t–4)]                    0.033       0.020           0.035          0.030           0.034
                                                (0.014)**     (0.197)      (0.009)***       (0.063)*       (0.011)**
     Stationary targeters                                                     –0.133         –0.348
                                                                              (0.257)        (0.489)
     Converging targeters                                                     –0.232         –0.118
                                                                             (0.065)*        (0.924)
     Emerging targeters                                                                                      –0.245
                                                                                                           (0.039)**
     Industrial targeters                                                                                    –0.077
                                                                                                             (0.610)
     Constant                                     –0.105       1.063          –0.123          0.629          –0.111
                                                  (0.358)    (0.012)**        (0.288)        (0.496)         (0.333)
     No. observations                              1861        1375            1865           1391            1861
     No. countries                                   33          33              33             33              33
    Source: Author’s estimations.
    * Statistically significant at the 10 percent level.
    ** Statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
    *** Statistically significant at the 1 percent level.
    a. The dependent variable is absolute inflation deviation, given by our ID1 measure. For inflation-targeting
countries, ID1 is defined as the absolute deviation of actual inflation from inflation targets; for nontargeting
countries, ID1 is defined as the absolute deviation of actual inflation from its HP trend. The regressions are based
on panel IV estimations. The instrument set includes lagged values of inflation deviation from target, an inflation-
targeting dummy, nominal exchange rate depreciation, the output gap, and contemporaneous observations of the oil
gap and the Federal funds rate. Control group 1 includes all nontargeters and pre-targeters; control group 2 includes
only all nontargeters. P values are reported in parentheses.




                                                           38
    Table 12. Inflation Deviation from Target or Trend in Targeting and Nontargeting Countries: ID2a
                                                  Control       Control        Control      Control         Control
                                               group 1        group 2        group 1      group 2         group 1
     Explanatory variable                           (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)              (5)
     Abs [Deviation from target (t–1)]             0.527         0.502          0.528        0.451            0.527
                                              (0.000)***    (0.000)***     (0.000)***   (0.000)***        (0.000)***
     Inflation-targeting dummy                    –0.270        –0.205
                                              (0.002)***        (0.668)
     Abs [NER depreciation]                        0.038         0.005          0.038        0.007            0.038
                                              (0.000)***    (0.309)         (0.000)***   (0.212)          (0.000)***
     Abs [Output gap (t–1)]                        0.091         0.121          0.091        0.134            0.091
                                              (0.021)**     (0.002)***      (0.026)**    (0.005)***        (0.023)**
     Abs [Oil gap]                                 0.003         0.002          0.003        0.002            0.003
                                              (0.033)**      (0.078)*       (0.033)**    (0.133)           (0.032)**
     Abs [Fed funds rate (t–4)]                    0.026         0.005          0.026        0.010            0.026
                                              (0.034)**      (0.716)        (0.031)**                      (0.033)**
     Stationary targeters                                                      –0.264       –0.408
                                                                            (0.012)**       (0.408)
     Converging targeters                                                      –0.258       –0.121
                                                                            (0.023)**       (0.907)
     Emerging targeters                                                                                      –0.280
                                                                                                          (0.008)***
     Industrial targeters                                                                                    –0.252
                                                                                                            (0.061)*
     Constant                                     –0.051         0.684         –0.060        0.730           –0.052
                                                  (0.615)       (0.177)        (0.562)      (0.390)          (0.608)
     No. observations                              1861          1390           1865         1391             1861
     No. country                                     33            33             33          33               33
    Source: Author’s estimations.
    * Statistically significant at the 10 percent level.
    ** Statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
    *** Statistically significant at the 1 percent level.
    a. The dependent variable is absolute inflation deviation, given by our ID2 measure. For both inflation-targeting
and nontargeting countries, ID2 is defined as the absolute deviation of actual inflation from its HP trend. The
regressions are based on panel IV estimations. The instrument set includes lagged values of inflation deviation from
target, an inflation-targeting dummy, nominal exchange rate depreciation, the output gap, and contemporaneous
observations of the oil gap and the Federal funds rate. Control group 1 includes all nontargeters and pre-targeters;
control group 2 includes only all nontargeters. P values are reported in parentheses.




                                                           39
Figure 1. Annual Inflation Rates and Targets in Inflation-Targeting Countries, 1990–2004
                       Australia                                                               Brazil                                                                    Canada
                                   Annual inflation rate          Inf lation target                     Annual inflation rate          Inflation target                              Annual inflation rate            Inflation target

                                                                                      8
                                                                                                                                                          20                                                                             6



                                                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                      5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4

                                                                                                                                                          10

                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                          5


                                                                          -1                                                                     0                                                                          0
                    1989q1 1991q2 1993q3 1995q4 1998q1 2000q2 2002q3 2004q4                1989q1 1991q2 1993q3 1995q4 1998q1 2000q2 2002q3 2004q4                    1989q1 1991q2 1993q3 1995q4 1998q1 2000q2 2002q3 2004q4




                         Chile                                                                Colombia                                                                 Czech Republic
                                  Annual inflation rate         Inflation target                          Annual inflation rate         Inflation target                              Annual inflation rate           Inflation target


                                                                                     30                                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                                                                            30


                                                                                                                                                            25
                                                                                     20                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                            20


                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                     10                                                                                                                                                  5

                                                                                                                                                            10


                                                                          0                                                                      5                                                                          0
                    1989q1 1991q2 1993q3 1995q4 1998q1 2000q2 2002q3 2004q4                1989q1 1991q2 1993q3 1995q4 1998q1 2000q2 2002q3 2004q4                    1989q1 1991q2 1993q3 1995q4 1998q1 2000q2 2002q3 2004q4




                       Hungary                                                                 Iceland                                                                     Israel
                                   Annual inflation rate          Inflation target                        Annual inflation rate          Inflation target                            Annual inflation rate            Inflation target



                                                                                      30
                                                                                                                                                              20                                                                         20

                                                                                      25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10
                                                                                      15                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                      5

                                                                          0                                                                       0                                                                         -5
                    1989q1 1991q2 1993q3 1995q4 1998q1 2000q2 2002q3 2004q4                 1989q1 1991q2 1993q3 1995q4 1998q1 2000q2 2002q3 2004q4                   1989q1 1991q2 1993q3 1995q4 1998q1 2000q2 2002q3 2004q4




                         Korea                                                                 Mexico                                                                   New Zealand
                               Annual inflation rate         Inflation target                          Annual inflation rate          Inflation target                            Annual inf lation rate          Inflation target


                                                                                      10                                                                        40

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         7
                                                                                      8
                                                                                                                                                                30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                      6
                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                      4

                                                                                                                                                                10                                                                       1
                                                                                      2


                                                                          0                                                                                                                                                  -1
                                                                                                                                                 0
                    1989q1 1991q2 1993q3 1995q4 1998q1 2000q2 2002q3 2004q4                                                                                            1989q1 1991q2 1993q3 1995q4 1998q1 2000q2 2002q3 2004q4
                                                                                           1989q1 1991q2 1993q3 1995q4 1998q1 2000q2 2002q3 2004q4




                        Norway                                                                  Peru                                                                        Philippines
                                                                                                                                                                              Annual inf lation rate          Inflation target
                              Annual inflation rate         Inflation target                        Annual inflation rate         Inf lation target


                                                                                      6                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                          60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         18
                                                                                                                                                          50                                                                             16
                                                                                      4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         14
                                                                                                                                                          40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                      2                                                                   30                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         8
                                                                                                                                                          20                                                                             6
                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                           -2                                                                    0                                                                         0
                     1989q1 1991q2 1993q3 1995q4 1998q1 2000q2 2002q3 2004q4               1989q1 1991q2 1993q3 1995q4 1998q1 2000q2 2002q3 2004q4                   1989q1 1991q2 1993q3 1995q4 1998q1 2000q2 2002q3 2004q4




                        Poland                                                               South Africa                                                                Sweden
                             Annual inflation rate         Inf lation target                        Annual inf lation rate        Inflation target                             Annual inflation rate           Inflation target


                                                                                   80                                                                                                                                                    11

                                                                                   70                                                                       15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         9
                                                                                   60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         7
                                                                                   50
                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                   40                                                                                                                                                    5

                                                                                   30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                            5
                                                                                   20

                                                                                   10                                                                                                                                                    1

                                                                          0                                                                      0                                                                          -1
                    1989q1 1991q2 1993q3 1995q4 1998q1 2000q2 2002q3 2004q4                1989q1 1991q2 1993q3 1995q4 1998q1 2000q2 2002q3 2004q4                    1989q1 1991q2 1993q3 1995q4 1998q1 2000q2 2002q3 2004q4




                     Switzerland                                                               Thailand                                                                  United Kingdom
                             Annual inflation rate         Inflation target                          Annual inflation rate         Inflation target                              Annual inflation rate           Inflation target


                                                                                      7                                                                                                                                                       8
                                                                                                                                                                9

                                                                                      5                                                                         7                                                                             6


                                                                                                                                                                5
                                                                                      3                                                                                                                                                       4

                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                      1                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                1


                                                                          -1                                                                      -1                                                                         0
                    1989q1 1991q2 1993q3 1995q4 1998q1 2000q2 2002q3 2004q4                 1989q1 1991q2 1993q3 1995q4 1998q1 2000q2 2002q3 2004q4                    1989q1 1991q2 1993q3 1995q4 1998q1 2000q2 2002q3 2004q4




   Source: authors’ calculations, based on data from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics
and central bank websites.

                                                                                                                                  40
Figure 2. Average Annual CPI Inflation Rates in Inflation Targeters and Nontargeters,
1989–2004a



                 16



                 14
                                                                                                          Inflation targeters

                                                                                                          Nontargeters
                 12



                 10



                 8



                 6



                 4



                 2



                 0
                      1989   1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000      2001      2002     2003   2004




   Source: authors’ calculations, based on data from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics
(IFS).
   a. Annual averages of inflation for twenty-one inflation-targeting countries and thirteen
nontargeting countries, identified in the text. Inflation are averages of four-quarterly twelve-month
CPI inflation rates for the corresponding year.




                                                                         41
Figure 3. Average Annual CPI Inflation Rates in Industrial and Emerging Inflation
Targeters, 1989–2004a



                            25


                                                                                                                        Industrial targeters

                                                                                                                        Emerging targeters
                            20




                            15




                            10




                             5




                             0
                                 1989    1990   1991   1992   1993   1994    1995   1996   1997   1998   1999    2000   2001     2002      2003   2004




      Source: authors’ calculations based on data from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics (IFS).
      a. Annual averages of inflation rates for nine industrial and twelve emerging inflation-targeting countries, identified in the text. Inflation rates are averages of
four-quarterly twelve-month CPI inflation rates for the corresponding year.




                                                                                      42
Figure 4. Response of Inflation to an Oil Price Shock: All Inflation Targeters

A. Inflation targeters
                       Before inflation targeting                                                         After inflation targeting                                                  Difference


      0.8                                                                           0.8                                                                    0.8
      0.6                                                                           0.6                                                                    0.6
      0.4                                                                           0.4                                                                    0.4
      0.2                                                                           0.2                                                                    0.2
      0.0                                                                           0.0                                                                    0.0
     -0.2                                                                           -0.2                                                                   -0.2
     -0.4                                                                           -0.4                                                                   -0.4
     -0.6                                                                           -0.6                                                                   -0.6
            0          1          2        3       4            5       6                  0          1          2        3       4        5       6              0          1       2         3        4         5       6




                       Before inflation targeting                                                     After stationary targeting                                                     Difference


      0.8                                                                           0.8                                                                     0.8
      0.6                                                                           0.6                                                                     0.6
      0.4                                                                           0.4                                                                     0.4
      0.2                                                                           0.2                                                                     0.2
      0.0                                                                           0.0                                                                     0.0
     -0.2                                                                           -0.2                                                                   -0.2
     -0.4                                                                           -0.4                                                                   -0.4
     -0.6                                                                           -0.6                                                                   -0.6
            0          1          2        3        4           5       6                  0          1          2        3       4        5       6               0         1       2          3         4       5       6




B. Nontargeters
                                      Before 1997                                                                    After 1997                                                          Difference


            0.6                                                                            0.6                                                                    0.6
            0.5                                                                            0.5                                                                    0.5
            0.4                                                                            0.4                                                                    0.4
            0.3                                                                            0.3                                                                    0.3
            0.2                                                                            0.2                                                                    0.2
            0.1                                                                            0.1                                                                    0.1
            0.0                                                                            0.0                                                                    0.0
        -0.1                                                                           -0.1                                                                   -0.1
                   0        1         2        3        4           5       6                     0         1        2        3       4        5       6                 0       1       2          3         4       5       6




C. Inflation targeters versus nontargeters
                           Targeters after inflation targeting                                                  Nontargeters after 1997                                                      Difference

            0.6                                                                            0.6                                                                    0.6

            0.4                                                                            0.4                                                                    0.4

            0.2                                                                            0.2                                                                    0.2

            0.0                                                                            0.0                                                                    0.0

            -0.2                                                                           -0.2                                                                   -0.2
                   0          1        2       3        4           5       6                     0         1        2        3       4        5       6                 0       1       2          3         4       5       6



                       Targeters after stationary targeting                                                     Nontargeters after 1997
                                                                                                                                                                                             Difference

             0.6                                                                            0.6                                                                    0.6
             0.5                                                                            0.5                                                                    0.5
             0.4                                                                            0.4                                                                    0.4
             0.3                                                                            0.3                                                                    0.3
             0.2                                                                            0.2                                                                    0.2
             0.1                                                                            0.1                                                                    0.1
             0.0                                                                            0.0                                                                    0.0
            -0.1                                                                           -0.1                                                                   -0.1
            -0.2                                                                           -0.2                                                                   -0.2
            -0.3                                                                           -0.3                                                                   -0.3
                   0          1        2       3            4       5           6                 0         1         2       3       4        5       6                 0       1       2          3         4       5       6




Source: Author’s estimations.



                                                                                                                                      43
Figure 5. Response of Inflation to an Oil Price Shock: Industrial Inflation Targeters
        Industrial targeters before inflation targeting               Industrial targeters after stationary targeting                      Difference


  0.6                                                          0.6                                                          0.6

  0.4                                                          0.4                                                          0.4

  0.2                                                          0.2                                                          0.2

  0.0                                                          0.0                                                          0.0

 -0.2                                                          -0.2                                                         -0.2

 -0.4                                                          -0.4                                                         -0.4
         0       1        2       3       4        5       6          0       1         2      3       4        5       6          0   1   2         3      4   5   6




          Industrial targeters after inflation targeting                           Nontargeters after 1997                                     Difference


                                                                0.6                                                          0.6
  0.6

                                                                0.4                                                          0.4
  0.4

  0.2                                                           0.2                                                          0.2


  0.0                                                           0.0                                                          0.0


  -0.2                                                         -0.2                                                         -0.2
         0        1       2       3       4        5       6          0        1        2       3       4       5       6          0   1   2         3      4   5   6




         Industrial targeters after stationary targeting                           Nontargeters after 1997                                     Difference


  0.6                                                           0.6                                                          0.6
  0.5                                                           0.5                                                          0.5
  0.4                                                           0.4                                                          0.4
  0.3                                                           0.3                                                          0.3
                                                                                                                             0.2
  0.2                                                           0.2
                                                                                                                             0.1
  0.1                                                           0.1
                                                                                                                             0.0
  0.0                                                           0.0
                                                                                                                            -0.1
 -0.1                                                          -0.1                                                         -0.2
 -0.2                                                          -0.2                                                         -0.3
 -0.3                                                          -0.3                                                                0   1   2         3      4   5   6
         0       1        2       3        4        5      6          0        1        2       3       4       5       6




Source: Author’s estimations.




                                                                                                     44
Figure 6. Response of Inflation to an Oil Price Shock: Emerging Inflation Targeters

        Emerging targeters before inflation targeting                                                                                  Difference
                                                                    Emerging targeters after stationary targeting

  0.6                                                                                                                   0.6
                                                             0.6
  0.4                                                                                                                   0.4
                                                             0.4
  0.2                                                        0.2                                                        0.2
  0.0                                                        0.0                                                        0.0
 -0.2                                                        -0.2                                                       -0.2
 -0.4                                                        -0.4                                                       -0.4
 -0.6                                                        -0.6                                                       -0.6
 -0.8                                                        -0.8                                                       -0.8
        0       1       2       3       4        5       6          0       1         2       3      4      5       6          0   1   2     3      4   5   6




         Emerging targeters after inflation targeting                           Nontargeters after 1997                                Difference


  0.6                                                        0.6                                                        0.6


  0.4                                                        0.4                                                        0.4


  0.2                                                        0.2                                                        0.2


  0.0                                                        0.0                                                        0.0


 -0.2                                                        -0.2                                                       -0.2
            0    1       2       3       4       5       6          0       1         2       3      4      5       6          0   1   2     3      4   5   6




         Emerging targeters after stationary targeting                           Nontargeters after 1997                               Difference


  0.6                                                         0.6                                                       0.6
  0.5                                                         0.5                                                       0.5
  0.4                                                         0.4                                                       0.4
  0.3                                                         0.3                                                       0.3
  0.2                                                         0.2                                                       0.2
  0.1                                                         0.1                                                       0.1
  0.0                                                         0.0                                                        0.0
  -0.1                                                       -0.1                                                       -0.1
  -0.2                                                       -0.2                                                       -0.2
  -0.3                                                       -0.3                                                       -0.3
         0       1       2       3       4       5       6           0       1        2       3      4      5       6          0   1   2     3      4   5   6




    Source: Author’s estimations.




                                                                                                   45
Figure 7. Response of Inflation to an Exchange Rate Shock: All Inflation Targeters

A. Inflation targeters

                         Before inflation targeting                                              After inflation targeting                                                 Difference


        0.8                                                                0.8                                                                   0.8
        0.6                                                                0.6                                                                   0.6
        0.4                                                                0.4                                                                   0.4
        0.2                                                                0.2                                                                   0.2
        0.0                                                                0.0                                                                   0.0
       -0.2                                                                -0.2                                                                  -0.2
       -0.4                                                                -0.4                                                                  -0.4
       -0.6                                                                -0.6                                                                  -0.6
              0          1       2       3       4         5       6              0          1         2       3        4        5       6              0          1       2       3        4       5       6




                         Before inflation targeting                                          After stationary targeting                                                    Difference


        0.8                                                                 0.8                                                                   0.8
        0.6                                                                 0.6                                                                   0.6
        0.4                                                                 0.4                                                                   0.4
        0.2                                                                 0.2                                                                   0.2
        0.0                                                                 0.0                                                                   0.0
       -0.2                                                                -0.2                                                                  -0.2
       -0.4                                                                -0.4                                                                  -0.4
       -0.6                                                                -0.6                                                                  -0.6
              0          1       2       3       4         5       6               0         1         2       3        4        5       6              0          1       2       3        4       5       6




B. Nontargeters
                                     Before 1997                                                                                                                               Difference
                                                                                                           After 1997
              0.2                                                                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                  0.2
              0.1                                                                                                                                       0.1
                                                                                  0.1
              0.0                                                                                                                                       0.0
                                                                                  0.0
              -0.1                                                                -0.1                                                                  -0.1

              -0.2                                                                -0.2                                                                  -0.2

              -0.3                                                                -0.3                                                                  -0.3
                     0       1       2       3        4        5       6                 0         1       2       3         4       5       6                 0       1       2        3       4       5       6




C. Inflation targeters versus nontargeters
                     Targeters after inflation targeting                                         Nontargeters after 1997                                                   Difference


        0.6                                                                 0.6                                                                  0.6
        0.4                                                                 0.4                                                                  0.4
        0.2                                                                 0.2                                                                  0.2
        0.0                                                                 0.0                                                                  0.0
       -0.2                                                                -0.2                                                                  -0.2
       -0.4                                                                -0.4                                                                  -0.4
       -0.6                                                                -0.6                                                                  -0.6
              0          1       2       3       4         5       6               0         1         2       3        4        5       6              0          1       2       3        4       5       6




                     Targeters after stationary targeting                                        Nontargeters after 1997                                                   Difference

        0.6                                                                 0.6                                                                   0.6
        0.4                                                                 0.4                                                                   0.4
        0.2                                                                 0.2                                                                   0.2
        0.0                                                                 0.0                                                                   0.0
       -0.2                                                                -0.2                                                                  -0.2
       -0.4                                                                -0.4                                                                  -0.4
       -0.6                                                                -0.6                                                                  -0.6
              0          1       2       3       4         5       6               0         1         2       3        4        5       6              0          1       2       3        4       5       6



Source: Author’s estimations.



                                                                                                                       46
Figure 8. Response of Inflation to an Exchange Rate Shock: Industrial Inflation Targeters

        Industrial targeters before inflation targeting              Industrial targeters after stationary targeting                      Difference


  0.4                                                         0.4                                                          0.4

  0.2                                                         0.2                                                          0.2

  0.0                                                         0.0                                                          0.0

 -0.2                                                         -0.2                                                         -0.2

 -0.4                                                         -0.4                                                         -0.4
        0        1       2       3        4       5       6          0       1         2      3       4        5       6          0   1   2     3      4   5   6




         Industrial targeters after inflation targeting                          Nontargeters after 1997                                  Difference


  0.6                                                         0.6                                                           0.6
  0.4                                                         0.4                                                           0.4

  0.2                                                         0.2                                                           0.2

  0.0                                                         0.0                                                           0.0
                                                                                                                           -0.2
 -0.2                                                         -0.2
                                                                                                                           -0.4
 -0.4                                                         -0.4
                                                                                                                           -0.6
 -0.6                                                         -0.6                                                                0   1   2     3      4   5   6
        0        1       2        3       4        5      6          0       1        2       3       4       5        6




        Industrial targeters after stationary targeting                          Nontargeters after 1997                                  Difference


  0.6                                                         0.6                                                           0.6
  0.4                                                         0.4                                                           0.4

  0.2                                                         0.2                                                           0.2
                                                                                                                            0.0
  0.0                                                         0.0
                                                                                                                           -0.2
 -0.2                                                         -0.2
                                                                                                                           -0.4
 -0.4                                                         -0.4
                                                                                                                           -0.6
 -0.6                                                         -0.6                                                                0   1   2     3      4   5   6
        0        1       2        3       4        5      6          0       1        2       3       4       5        6



    Source: Author’s estimations.




                                                                                                    47
Figure 9. Response of Inflation to an Exchange Rate Shock: Emerging Inflation Targeters

        Emerging targeters before inflation targeting              Emerging targeters after stationary targeting                      Difference


 1.1                                                         1.1                                                        1.1

 0.8                                                         0.8                                                        0.8

 0.5                                                         0.5                                                        0.5

 0.2                                                         0.2                                                        0.2

 -0.1                                                       -0.1                                                       -0.1

 -0.4                                                       -0.4                                                       -0.4

 -0.7                                                       -0.7                                                       -0.7
        0       1       2       3        4       5      6          0       1        2       3      4       5       6          0   1   2      3     4   5   6




         Emerging targeters after inflation targeting                          Nontargeters after 1997                                Difference


 0.6                                                         0.6                                                        0.6
 0.4                                                         0.4                                                        0.4

 0.2                                                         0.2                                                        0.2

 0.0                                                         0.0                                                        0.0

 -0.2                                                       -0.2                                                       -0.2

 -0.4                                                       -0.4                                                       -0.4

 -0.6                                                       -0.6                                                       -0.6
        0       1       2       3        4       5      6          0       1        2       3      4       5       6          0   1   2      3     4   5   6




        Emerging targeters after stationary targeting                          Nontargeters after 1997                                Difference


 0.6                                                        0.6                                                        0.6
 0.4                                                        0.4                                                        0.4
 0.2                                                        0.2                                                        0.2
 0.0                                                        0.0                                                        0.0

 -0.2                                                       -0.2                                                       -0.2

 -0.4                                                       -0.4                                                       -0.4

 -0.6                                                       -0.6                                                       -0.6
        0       1       2       3       4       5       6          0       1        2       3      4       5       6          0   1   2     3      4   5   6




    Source: Author’s estimations.




                                                                                                 48
Figure 10. Response of the Domestic Interest Rate to an International Interest Rate
Shock: All Inflation Targeters

A. Inflation targeters
                     Before inflation targeting                                After inflation targeting                               Difference


      2.5                                                       2.5                                                     2.5


      1.0                                                       1.0                                                     1.0


     -0.5                                                       -0.5                                                    -0.5


     -2.0                                                       -2.0                                                    -2.0
            0       1        2       3        4        5    6          0   1         2       3        4         5   6          0   1   2         3      4   5   6




                        Before inflation targeting                             After stationary targeting                                  Difference


      2.5                                                        2.5                                                     2.5


      1.0                                                        1.0                                                     1.0


      -0.5                                                      -0.5                                                    -0.5


      -2.0                                                      -2.0                                                    -2.0
             0       1        2       3        4        5   6          0   1         2        3       4         5   6          0   1   2         3      4   5   6


B. Nontargeters
                             Before 1997                                              After 1997                                           Difference

      0.4                                                        0.4                                                     0.4
      0.3                                                        0.3                                                     0.3
      0.2                                                        0.2                                                     0.2
      0.1                                                        0.1                                                     0.1
      0.0                                                        0.0                                                     0.0
     -0.1                                                       -0.1                                                    -0.1
     -0.2                                                                                                               -0.2
                                                                -0.2
     -0.3                                                                                                               -0.3
                                                                -0.3
            0       1        2        3       4        5    6                                                                  0   1   2         3      4   5   6
                                                                       0   1         2        3       4         5   6



C. Inflation targeters versus nontargeters
                 Targeters after inflation targeting                           Nontargeters after 1997                                 Difference

      0.8                                                       0.8                                                     0.8
      0.6                                                       0.6                                                     0.6
      0.4                                                       0.4                                                     0.4
      0.2                                                       0.2                                                     0.2
      0.0                                                       0.0                                                     0.0
     -0.2                                                       -0.2                                                    -0.2
     -0.4                                                       -0.4                                                    -0.4
     -0.6                                                       -0.6                                                    -0.6
            0       1        2        3       4        5    6          0   1         2       3        4         5   6          0   1   2         3      4   5   6




                 Targeters after stationary targeting                          Nontargeters after 1997                                 Difference


      0.5                                                        0.5                                                     0.5
      0.4                                                        0.4                                                     0.4
      0.3                                                        0.3                                                     0.3
      0.2                                                        0.2                                                     0.2
      0.1                                                        0.1                                                     0.1
      0.0                                                        0.0                                                     0.0
     -0.1                                                       -0.1                                                    -0.1
     -0.2                                                       -0.2                                                    -0.2
     -0.3                                                       -0.3                                                    -0.3
            0       1        2        3       4        5    6          0   1         2        3       4         5   6          0   1   2         3      4   5   6




   Source: Author’s estimations.



                                                                                                           49
Figure 11. Response of the Domestic Interest Rate to to an International Interest Rate
Shock: Industrial Inflation Targeters

        Industrial targeters before inflation targeting              Industrial targeters after stationary targeting                      Difference


  0.8                                                          0.8                                                          0.8
  0.6                                                          0.6                                                          0.6
  0.4                                                          0.4                                                          0.4
  0.2                                                          0.2                                                          0.2
  0.0                                                          0.0                                                          0.0
 -0.2                                                         -0.2                                                         -0.2
 -0.4                                                         -0.4                                                         -0.4
 -0.6                                                         -0.6                                                         -0.6
        0        1       2       3       4        5       6          0       1         2      3       4        5       6          0   1   2     3      4   5   6




        Industrial targeters after inflation targeting                           Nontargeters after 1997                                  Difference


  0.8                                                         0.8                                                           0.8
  0.6                                                         0.6                                                           0.6
  0.4                                                         0.4                                                           0.4
  0.2                                                         0.2                                                           0.2
  0.0                                                         0.0                                                           0.0
 -0.2                                                         -0.2                                                         -0.2
 -0.4                                                         -0.4                                                         -0.4
 -0.6                                                         -0.6                                                         -0.6
        0       1       2        3       4        5       6          0       1        2       3       4       5        6          0   1   2     3      4   5   6




        Industrial targeters after stationary targeting                          Nontargeters after 1997                                  Difference


  0.5                                                          0.5                                                          0.5
  0.4                                                          0.4                                                          0.4
  0.3                                                          0.3                                                          0.3
  0.2                                                          0.2                                                          0.2
  0.1                                                          0.1                                                          0.1
  0.0                                                          0.0                                                          0.0
 -0.1                                                         -0.1                                                         -0.1
 -0.2                                                         -0.2                                                         -0.2
 -0.3                                                         -0.3                                                         -0.3
        0       1        2       3       4        5       6          0       1         2      3       4       5        6          0   1   2     3      4   5   6




    Source: Author’s estimations.




                                                                                                   50
Figure 12. Response of the Domestic Interest Rate to to an International Interest Rate
Shock: Emerging Inflation Targeters

        Emerging targeters before inflation targeting              Emerging targeters after stationary targeting                      Difference


  2.4                                                       2.4                                                        2.4

  1.6                                                       1.6                                                        1.6

  0.8                                                       0.8                                                        0.8

  0.0                                                       0.0                                                        0.0

                                                                                                                       -0.8
 -0.8                                                       -0.8
                                                                                                                       -1.6
 -1.6                                                       -1.6
                                                                                                                       -2.4
 -2.4                                                       -2.4                                                              0   1   2         3      4   5   6
        0       1       2       3       4       5       6          0       1        2       3      4       5       6




        Emerging targeters after inflation targeting                           Nontargeters after 1997                                    Difference


  0.8                                                        0.8                                                        0.8
  0.6                                                        0.6                                                        0.6
  0.4                                                        0.4                                                        0.4
  0.2                                                        0.2                                                        0.2
  0.0                                                        0.0                                                        0.0

 -0.2                                                       -0.2                                                       -0.2

 -0.4                                                       -0.4                                                       -0.4

 -0.6                                                       -0.6                                                       -0.6
        0       1       2       3       4       5       6          0       1        2       3      4       5       6          0   1   2         3      4   5   6




        Emerging targeters after stationary targeting                          Nontargeters after 1997
                                                                                                                                      Difference

  0.5                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                        0.5

  0.3                                                       0.3                                                         0.3

  0.1                                                       0.1                                                         0.1


 -0.1                                                       -0.1                                                       -0.1


 -0.3                                                       -0.3                                                       -0.3
        0       1       2       3       4       5       6          0       1        2       3      4       5       6          0   1   2         3      4   5   6




    Source: Author’s estimations.




                                                                                                 51
Figure 13. Monetary Policy Efficiency Frontier and Performance Point

                      Variability of output




                                                                    Observed point


                                                    Gain in efficiency




                                                                                Efficiency frontier
                                              Smaller shocks




                                                                                     Variability of inflation

   Source: Authors.




                                                               52
Figure 14. Estimated Efficiency Frontiers and Observed Performance Points: All
Targeters before and after Inflation Targeting

                Output variability
                     8.0


                     7.0
                                           Targeters after targeting,
                                           efficiency frontier
                     6.0
                                                                                    Targeters before
                                                                                    targeting, observed
                     5.0                                                            point


                     4.0
                                                 Targeters after
                                                 targeting, observed
                     3.0
                                                 point

                                                                              Targeters before
                     2.0
                                                                              targetting, efficiency
                                                                              frontier
                     1.0


                     0.0
                           0.0       2.0              4.0               6.0                8.0                   10.0
                                                                                         Inflation Variability



   Source: Author’s estimations.




                                                            53
Figure 15. Estimated Efficiency Frontiers and Observed Performance Points: Industrial
Targeters before and after Inflation Targeting

                 Output variability
                        5.0
                                            Industrial targeters after
                        4.5                 targeting, efficiency frontier


                        4.0


                        3.5


                        3.0


                        2.5                          Industrial targeters     Industrial targeters
                                                     before targeting,        before targeting,
                                                     efficiency frontier      observed point
                        2.0


                        1.5


                        1.0                                                  Industrial targeters
                                                                             after targeting,
                        0.5                                                  observed point


                        0.0
                              0.0     0.5      1.0                 1.5            2.0                  2.5
                                                                                 Inflation Variability

   Source: Author’s estimations.




                                                     54
Figure 16. Estimated Efficiency Frontiers and Observed Performance Points: Emerging
Targeters before and after Inflation Targeting
                 Output variability
                      8.0
                                                    Emerging targeters after
                                                    targeting, efficiency frontier
                      7.0                                                                 Emerging targeters before
                                                                                          targeting, observed point

                      6.0


                      5.0


                      4.0                                                       Emerging targeters after
                                                                                targeting, observed point

                      3.0


                      2.0
                                                                                 Emerging targeters before
                                                                                 targeting, efficiency frontier
                      1.0


                      0.0
                            0.0       2.0          4.0           6.0          8.0           10.0          12.0             14.0

                                                                                                   Inflation Variability
   Source: Author’s estimations.

Figure 17. Estimated Efficiency Frontiers and Observed Performance Points: All
Targeters before Inflation Targeting and Stationary-Target Targeters

                 Output variability
                      5.0
                                                                                          Targeters before
                      4.5                                                                 targeting, observed
                                                                                          point
                      4.0              Stationary targeters,
                                       efficiency frontier
                      3.5


                      3.0


                      2.5


                      2.0
                                                                                       Targeters before
                                                                                       targeting, efficiency
                      1.5
                                                                                       frontier

                      1.0
                                                  Stationary targeters,
                      0.5                         observed point


                      0.0
                            0.0             2.0                4.0               6.0                8.0                10.0
                                                                                                   Inflation Variability

   Source: Author’s estimations.



                                                                       55
Figure 18. Estimated Efficiency Frontiers and Observed Performance Points: Industrial
Targeters before Inflation Targeting and Industrial Stationary-Target Targeters

                 Output variability
                      5.0


                      4.5


                      4.0
                                  Industrial stationary
                                  targeters, efficiency
                      3.5
                                  frontier

                      3.0                                                Industrial targeters before
                                                                         targeting, efficiency frontier
                      2.5


                      2.0


                      1.5                                   Industrial stationary
                                                                                           Industrial targeters
                                                            targeters, observed
                                                                                           before targeting,
                      1.0                                   point
                                                                                           observed point

                      0.5


                      0.0
                            0.0               0.5         1.0              1.5                2.0                   2.5

                                                                                            Inflation Variability

   Source: Author’s estimations.




                                                                56
Figure 19. Estimated Efficiency Frontiers and Observed Performance Points: Emerging
Targeters before Inflation Targeting and Emerging Stationary-Target Targeters

                  Output variability
                     8.0

                                                                                        Emerging targeters before
                     7.0                Emerging stationary                             targeting, observed point
                                        targeters, efficiency
                                        frontier
                     6.0


                     5.0


                     4.0
                                                                           Emerging targeters before
                                                                           targeting, efficiency frontier
                     3.0
                                             Emerging stationary
                                             targeters, observed
                     2.0                     point


                     1.0


                     0.0
                           0.0         2.0         4.0          6.0        8.0          10.0           12.0          14.0
                                                                                               Inflation Variability


Source: Author’s estimations.




                                                                      57
Figure 20. Estimated Efficiency Frontiers and Observed Performance Points:
Nontargeters before and after 1997

                  Output variability
                      8.0


                      7.0


                      6.0


                                                                    Nontargeters before
                      5.0                                           1997, efficiency frontier


                      4.0


                      3.0         Nontargeters after                                               Nontargeters
                                  1997, efficiency                                                 before 1997,
                                  frontier                                                         observed point
                      2.0                                           Nontargeters after
                                                                    1997, observed
                                                                    point
                      1.0


                      0.0
                            0.0         0.1            0.2   0.3           0.4           0.5           0.6              0.7

                                                                                                Inflation Variability
Source: Author’s estimations.




                                                                   58
Figure 21. Estimated Efficiency Frontiers and Observed Performance Points: All
Targeters and Nontargeters after 1997

                    Output variability
                       8.0


                       7.0                                           Targeters, efficiency
                                                                     frontier

                       6.0


                       5.0


                       4.0            Nontargeters,
                                      efficiency frontier
                                                                                              Targeters,
                       3.0                                                                    observed point


                       2.0

                                         Nontargeters,
                       1.0               observed point


                       0.0
                             0.0             1.0            2.0         3.0            4.0          5.0             6.0

                                                                                                Inflation Variability

   Source: Author’s estimations.

Figure 22. Estimated Efficiency Frontiers and Observed Performance Points: Industrial
Targeters and Nontargeters after 1997

                 Output variability
                    6.0




                    5.0
                                      Nontargeters,
                                      efficiency frontier
                    4.0


                                                                      Industrial targeters,
                    3.0                                               efficiency frontier




                    2.0
                                                                                                 Industrial targeters,
                                                                                                 observed point

                    1.0                             Nontargeters,
                                                    observed point


                    0.0
                          0.0                      0.5                  1.0                   1.5                        2.0
                                                                                                Inflation Variability

   Source: Author’s estimations.




                                                                       59
Figure 23. Estimated Efficiency Frontiers and Observed Performance Points: Emerging
Targeters and Nontargeters after 1997

                  Output variability
                     10.0


                      9.0
                                                                       Emerging targeters,
                      8.0                                              efficiency frontier


                      7.0


                      6.0


                      5.0

                                  Nontargeters,                                              Emerging targeters,
                      4.0
                                  efficiency frontier                                        observed point

                      3.0


                      2.0
                                      Nontargeters,
                                      observed point
                      1.0


                      0.0
                            0.0        1.0         2.0       3.0      4.0       5.0          6.0         7.0            8.0

                                                                                                Inflation Variability

   Source: Author’s estimations.

Figure 24. Estimated Efficiency Frontiers and Observed Performance Points: Stationary
Targeters and Nontargeters after 1997
                 Output variability
                   5.0


                   4.5


                   4.0                                                 Stationary targeters,
                                                                       efficiency frontier
                   3.5


                   3.0                 Nontargeters,
                                       efficiency frontier
                   2.5

                   2.0

                                                                                               Stationary targeters,
                   1.5                                                                         observed point
                                               Nontargeters,
                   1.0                         observed point

                   0.5


                   0.0
                         0.0                 0.5                1.0           1.5                  2.0                   2.5

                                                                                                Inflation Variability

   Source: Author’s estimations.




                                                                      60
Figure 25. Estimated Efficiency Frontiers and Observed Performance Points: Industrial
Stationary Targeters and Nontargeters after 1997

               Output variability
                   6.0




                   5.0



                                          Nontargeters,
                   4.0                    efficiency frontier


                                                                       Industrial stationary targeters,
                   3.0
                                                                       efficiency frontier



                   2.0

                                                                                          Industrial stationary
                                                                                          targeters, observed point
                   1.0
                                                 Nontargeters,
                                                 observed point

                   0.0
                         0.0        0.2          0.4            0.6   0.8        1.0         1.2          1.4         1.6
                                                                                                Inflation Variability


   Source: Author’s estimations.




                                                                      61
Figure 26. Estimated Efficiency Frontiers and Observed Performance Points: Emerging
Stationary Targeters and Nontargeters after 1997

                  Output variability
                      6.0




                      5.0
                                                                Emerging stationary targeters,
                                                                efficiency frontier


                      4.0

                                  Nontargeters,
                                  efficiency frontier
                      3.0


                                                                                          Emerging stationary
                      2.0                                                                 targeters, observed point




                      1.0                Nontargeters,
                                         observed point


                      0.0
                            0.0        0.5     1.0        1.5      2.0       2.5       3.0       3.5        4.0        4.5
                                                                                                 Inflation Variability


Source: Author’s estimations.




                                                                     62
Figure 27. Median Absolute Deviations of Inflation Rate from Inflation Target or from
Trend in Inflation Targeters and Nontargeters, 1989–2004a

   A. First inflation deviation measure (ID1)

                                            A. First inflation deviation measure (ID1)

                       3



                      2.5                                                                 Inflation targeters
                                                                                          Non targeters


                       2



                      1.5



                       1



                      0.5



                       0
                       1989q1 1990q3 1992q1 1993q3 1995q1 1996q3 1998q1 1999q3 2001q1 2002q3 2004q1




   B. Second inflation deviation measure (ID2)

                                          B. Second inflation deviation measure (ID2)

                      2.5


                                                                                         Inflation targeters
                        2                                                                Non targeters




                      1.5




                        1




                      0.5




                        0
                        1989q1 1990q3 1992q1 1993q3 1995q1 1996q3 1998q1 1999q3 2001q1 2002q3 2004q1




   Source: Author's calculations, based on data from Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development, Main Economic Indicators; IMF; and central banks.

   a. See the text for definitions of inflation deviation measures ID1 and ID2.


                                                               63
Figure 28. Estimated Coefficient of Inflation Targeting for Alternative Values of the HP
Filter Smoothing Parametera

   A. First inflation deviation measure (ID1)


                       0



                     -0.1



                     -0.2



                     -0.3



                     -0.4
                                   2000         4000           6000          8000         10000
                                                 Smoothing parameter

                             +Std. dev./–Std. dev.           Inflation targeting coefficient


   B. Second inflation deviation measure (ID2)




                     -0.05



                     -0.15



                     -0.25



                     -0.35



                     -0.45
                                    2000         4000          6000          8000         10000
                                                 Smoothing parameter

                                +Std. dev./–Std. dev.         Inflation targeting coefficient

   Source: Author’s estimations.

   a. The reported coefficients correspond to the IT dummy coefficients from the regressions
reported in column 1 of tables 11 and 12.




                                                        64
