                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            BEHAVIORAL LAW AND ECONOMICS

                                           Christine Jolls

                                       Working Paper 12879
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12879


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2007




This paper was prepared for the Economic Institutions and Behavioral Economics Conference held
in Helsinki in June of 2004. Thanks to Peter Diamond for inviting me to participate in the conference;
to Peter Diamond, Steven Shavell, Cass Sunstein and conference participants, especially discussants
Ian Ayres and Christoph Engel, for very helpful comments; and to Pat Robertson and David Young
for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Christine Jolls. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Behavioral Law and Economics
Christine Jolls
NBER Working Paper No. 12879
January 2007
JEL No. A12,B00,D30,D61,D63,D91,J70,K00,K12,K13,K41

                                            ABSTRACT

Behavioral economics has been a growing force in many fields of applied economics, including public
economics, labor economics, health economics, and law and economics. This paper describes and
assesses the current state of behavioral law and economics. Law and economics had a critical (though
underrecognized) early point of contact with behavioral economics through the foundational debate
in both fields over the Coase theorem and the endowment effect. In law and economics today, both
the endowment effect and other features of behavioral economics feature prominently and have been
applied in many important legal domains. The paper concludes with reference to a new emphasis
in behavioral law and economics on "debiasing through law" - using existing or proposed legal structures
in an attempt to reduce people's departures from the traditional economic assumption of unbounded
rationality.

Christine Jolls
Yale Law School
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
christine.jolls@yale.edu
1.     Introduction

       Many topics within economics relate to law. A large body of work in public economics,

for instance, examines the effects of legally-mandated government programs such as disability

and unemployment insurance (Katz and Meyer 1990; Gruber 1994; Cutler and Gruber 1996;

Autor and Duggan 2003); work on the labor market examines the effects of many types of

antidiscrimination laws (Heckman and Payner 1989; Donohue and Heckman 1991; Acemoglu

and Angrist 2001; Jolls 2004a); and recent corporate governance research studies the

consequences of corporate and securities law on stock returns and volatility (Gompers, Ishii and

Metrick 2003; Ferrell 2003; Greenstone, Oyer and Vissing-Jorgensen 2006). But, while all of

these topics relate to law in some way, neither “law and economics” nor “behavioral law and

economics” embraces them as genuinely central areas of inquiry. Thus an important threshold

question for the present work involves how to characterize the domains of both “law and

economics” and “behavioral law and economics.”

       Amid the broad span of economic topics relating to law in some way, a few distinctive

features help to demarcate work that is typically regarded as within law and economics. One

distinguishing feature is that much of this work focuses on various areas of law that were not

much studied by economists prior to the advent of law and economics; these areas include tort

law, contract law, property law, and rules governing the litigation process. A second feature of

work within law and economics is that it often (controversially) employs the normative criterion

of “wealth maximization” (R. Posner 1979) rather than that of social welfare maximization – not,

for the most part, on the view that society should pursue the maximization of wealth rather than

social welfare, but instead because law and economics generally favors addressing distributional

issues that bear on social welfare solely through the tax system (Shavell 1981). Finally, a third



                                                 1
distinguishing feature of much work within law and economics is its sustained interest in

explaining and predicting the content, rather than just the effects, of legal rules. While a large

body of work in economics studies the effects of law (as noted above), outside of work

associated with law and economics only political economy has generally given central emphasis

to analyzing the content of law, and then only from a particular perspective. 1

        Given this rough sketch of “law and economics,” what then is “behavioral law and

economics”?      Behavioral law and economics involves both the development and the

incorporation within law and economics of behavioral insights drawn from various fields of

psychology. As has been widely recognized since the early work by Allais (1952) and Ellsberg

(1961), some of the foundational assumptions of traditional economic analysis may reflect an

unrealistic picture of human behavior. Not surprisingly, models based on these assumptions

sometimes yield erroneous predictions. Behavioral law and economics attempts to improve the

predictive power of law and economics by building in more realistic accounts of actors’

behavior.

        The present paper describes some of the central attributes and applications of behavioral

law and economics to date; it also outlines an emerging focus in behavioral law and economics

on prospects for “debiasing” individuals through the structure of legal rules (Jolls and Sunstein

2006). Through the vehicle of “debiasing through law,” behavioral law and economics may

open up a new space within law and economics between, on the one hand, unremitting adherence

to traditional economic assumptions and, on the other hand, broad structuring or restructuring of



1
  The three features of law and economics identified in the text are not meant to demarcate the intrinsic
essence of the field; instead the claim is that these features characterize much of the existing work
generally regarded as law and economics.



                                                     2
legal regimes on the assumption that people are inevitably and permanently bound to deviate

from traditional economic assumptions.

       The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 traces the development and refinement of one

of the central insights of behavioral economics – that people frequently exhibit an endowment

effect – both outside and within the field of behavioral law and economics. Section 3 moves to a

general overview of the features of human decision making that have informed behavioral law

and economics, emphasizing points of departure from work in other areas of behavioral

economics.   Section 4 describes a series of illustrative applications of behavioral law and

economics analysis. Section 5 introduces the concept of debiasing through law, and section 6

concludes.



2.     The Endowment Effect in Behavioral Economics and Behavioral Law and
       Economics

       Early on, law and economics had a central point of contact with behavioral economics.

The point of contact was the foundational debate over the Coase theorem and the “endowment

effect” – the tendency of people to refuse to give up entitlements they hold even though they

would not have bought those entitlements initially (Thaler 1980:43-47). This early point of

contact between law and economics and behavioral economics helped to lay the ground for a rich

literature down the road on the endowment effect in both behavioral economics and behavioral

law and economics.




                                                 3
       2.1    The Coase Theorem

       An unquestioned centerpiece of law and economics is the Coase theorem (Coase 1960).

This theorem posits that allocating legal rights to one party or another will not affect outcomes if

transaction costs are sufficiently low; thus, for instance, whether the law gives a factory the right

to emit pollution next to a laundry or, instead, says the laundry has a right to be free of pollution

will not matter to the ultimate outcome (pollution or no pollution) as long as transaction costs are

sufficiently low. The reason for this result is that, with low transaction costs, the parties should

be expected bargain to the efficient outcome under either legal regime. The Coase theorem is

central to law and economics because of (among other things) the theorem’s claim about the

domain within which normative analysis of legal rules – whether rule A is preferable to rule B or

the reverse – is actually relevant.

       The Coase theorem has also played a central, albeit a rather different, role in the field of

behavioral economics.      More than fifteen years ago, Daniel Kahneman, Jack Knetsch and

Richard Thaler (1990) reported the results of a set of experiments designed to provide a careful

empirical assessment of the Coase theorem. In one round of experiments, each subject was

given an assigned value for a “token” (the amount for which the subject could redeem the token

for cash at the end of the experiment), and half of the subjects were awarded tokens. When

subjects subsequently had the opportunity to trade tokens for money or (for those not awarded

tokens) money for tokens, subjects behaved precisely in accordance with the Coase theorem.

Exactly half of the tokens changed hands, as theory would predict (given random assignment of

the tokens in relation to the specified values). The initial allocation of tokens proved irrelevant.

These findings are a striking vindication of the Coase theorem.




                                                   4
        Having thus established that transaction costs in the experimental setting were

sufficiently low to vindicate the Coase theorem, Kahneman, Knetsch and Thaler went on to study

subjects’ behavior when the good to be traded was not tokens but, rather, Cornell University

mugs that the subjects would retain after the experiment (rather than redeeming for an assigned

amount of cash).      In direct contravention of the Coase theorem, the initial assignment of

entitlements to the mug mattered dramatically; those initially given mugs rarely sold them, while

those not initially given mugs seldom bought them. Following Thaler (1980:44), Kahneman,

Knetsch and Thaler referred to this effect as the “endowment effect” – the refusal to give up an

entitlement one holds initially even though one would not have been willing to pay to acquire

that entitlement had one not held it initially.2 In the presence of the endowment effect, the Coase

theorem’s prediction of equivalent outcomes regardless of the initial entitlement no longer holds.

This conclusion has obvious importance for the design of legal rules.



        2.2   The Endowment Effect Within Law and Economics

        A central task of law and economics is to assess the desirability of actual and proposed

legal rules. The endowment effect both preserves a larger scope for such normative economic

analysis – because the Coase theorem and the associated claim of irrelevance of legal rules no

longer hold – and profoundly unsettles the bases for such analysis.

        The reason that the endowment effect so unsettles the bases for normative economic

analysis of law is that in the presence of this effect the value attached to a legal entitlement will

sometimes vary depending on the initial assignment of the entitlement. Normative analysis will


2
 A recent article by Plott and Zeiler (2005) addresses the effect of experimental design on the existence
and degree of the endowment effect.



                                                     5
then often become indeterminant, as multiple rules may maximize the desired objective (whether

wealth or social welfare) depending on the starting allocation of entitlements (Kelman 1979:676-

78). As Cass Sunstein and Richard Thaler (2003:1190) recently observed, in the presence of the

endowment effect a “cost-benefit study cannot be based on willingness to pay (WTP), because

WTP will be a function of the default rule.” Thus, the cost-benefit study “must be a more open-

ended (and inevitably somewhat subjective) assessment of the welfare consequences.” 3 The

conventional normative economic analysis feasible without the endowment effect often cannot

survive in the presence of this effect.

       One possible approach to normative analysis when the value of an entitlement varies

depending on the initial assignment of the entitlement is to base legal policy choices not on the

joint wealth or welfare of the parties directly in question – because the answer to the question of

which rule maximizes their joint wealth or welfare may turn on the initial rule choice – but rather

on the third-party effects of the competing rules. Thus, for instance, if it is unclear whether a

particular workplace rule is or is not optimal for employers and employees (because employees

will value the entitlement granted by the rule at more than its value with the rule in place but less

than its value otherwise), but the rule will create important benefits for employees’ families, then

perhaps the rule should be adopted.

       An alternative approach to normative analysis with varying entitlement values depending

on the initial assignment of the entitlement is to make a judgment about which preferences – the

ones with legal rule A or the ones with legal rule B – deserve greater deference. Sunstein and



3
  Sunstein and Thaler’s discussion is addressed to both the endowment effect and other factors that
produce an effect of the law’s structure on people’s background preferences. The focus of the discussion
here is the endowment effect.



                                                     6
Thaler (2003:1190-91) offer some support for this view in the context of default terms in

employee savings plans. Referring to research showing that employees are much more likely to

enroll in a savings plan if enrollment is the default term and employees must affirmatively opt

out to be excluded than if non-enrollment is the default term and employees must take

affirmative steps to enroll, Sunstein and Thaler make the normative argument that the enrollment

outcome is “highly likely” to be better under automatic enrollment than under a default term of

non-enrollment because it turns out that very few employees drop out if automatically enrolled.

They readily acknowledge that “[s]ome readers might think that our reliance on [employees’]

behavior as an indication of welfare is inconsistent” with the basic point about indeterminacy of

preferences, “[b]ut in fact, there is no inconsistency” because “it is reasonable to think that if, on

reflection, workers realized that they had been ‘tricked’ into saving too much, they might take

the effort to opt out.” Sunstein and Thaler draw an analogy to rules calling for mandatory

cooling-off periods before consumer purchases: “The premise of such rules is that people are

more likely to make good choices when they have had time to think carefully and without a

salesperson present.” In other words, according to Sunstein and Thaler, we have reason to think

that the revealed preferences of the automatically enrolled employee, or the consumer at the end

of a cooling-off period, are a more appropriate basis for normative judgment than the revealed

preferences of the employee who does not choose to enroll under a default term of non-

enrollment, or the consumer before the cooling-off period. We will see similar issues, along with

some prospect for avoiding the “inevitably subjective” determinations confronted by Sunstein

and Thaler, in the discussion of bounded willpower in section 3.2 below.




                                                    7
       2.3    The Importance of Context

       Particularly in light of the central relevance of the endowment effect to normative

economic analysis of law, it is appropriate to emphasize the important role of context in whether

this effect occurs. An early literature in law and economics is responsible for helping to shape

understandings of when the endowment effect will and will not occur.

       Prior to the Cornell University “mugs experiments” described above, a series of law and

economics articles had demonstrated a set of domains in which the Coase theorem was in fact

empirically robust. Hoffman and Spitzer’s (1982, 1986) experiments showed that in both large

and small groups the predictions of the theorem were vindicated. Likewise, Schwab (1988)

found that ultimate allocation of entitlements did not turn on their initial allocation.

       All of these experiments, however, shared with the tokens experiment discussed above

the feature that subjects’ value of each possible outcome was directly specified in dollar terms by

the experimenter. Thus, the law and economics work from the 1980s showed that if people are

told specifically what each outcome is worth to them, they will generally find their way to a

value-maximizing outcome, so long as transaction costs are sufficiently low. However, the later

“mugs experiments” demonstrated that this result tends to collapse when actors are not instructed

as to the value of outcomes to them. Viewed in light of the later work, the law and economics

papers from the 1980s are best understood as showing some of the important limits on when the

endowment effect will be observed and, more generally, the central role of context in influencing

the occurrence or nonoccurrence of this effect. The work by Plott and Zeiler (2005) provides an

important recent lens on the role of context in determining the existence and degree of the

endowment effect.




                                                    8
       Within behavioral law and economics, recent work has refined the basic point about the

importance of context. Korobkin (1998), for instance, raised the important question of whether

the endowment effect would obtain in the allocation to either prospective sellers or prospective

buyers of contract law default rights, such as the right of sellers to withhold goods or services

after unanticipated natural disasters or other similar events versus the right of buyers to demand

goods or services in those circumstances. (For instance, if a theatre owner has promised to allow

its theatre to be used by another party on a specific date, but the theatre then burns down before

that date, does the theatre owner have the right not to provide the theatre, or does the other party

have the right to collect damages for the harm it suffered because the theatre proved

unavailable?) Such contact law entitlements do not attach – and indeed are irrelevant – until and

unless a contract is ultimately agreed to, and thus Korobkin noted that it was unclear whether the

initial allocation of the entitlements through contract law default rules would create the sort of

sense of ownership or possession that in turn would generate an endowment effect.

       Korobkin’s experiments support the operation of the endowment effect in this context.

He finds that if contract law allocates an entitlement to party A unless party A agrees to waive it,

then a contract between that party and party B is more likely to award party A that entitlement

than if contract law initially allocates the entitlement to party B – even with seemingly low

transaction costs. Thus, Korobkin concludes, the endowment effect, and not the Coase theorem,

provides the best account of the effects of contract law default rights.        The deepening of

knowledge about when the endowment effect does and does not occur – across contract settings

and elsewhere – will help refine our understanding of the scope of this effect and, as a direct

consequence, the validity of and limits on conventional normative economic analysis of law.




                                                   9
3.     The Modern Domain of Behavioral Law and Economics

       Although the endowment effect has played a central role in behavioral law and

economics, other features of behavioral economics are important as well. Following Thaler

(1996), it is useful for purposes of behavioral law and economics analysis to view human actors

as departing from traditional economic assumptions in three distinct ways: human actors exhibit

bounded rationality, bounded willpower, and bounded self-interest.        All three concepts are

defined in the brief discussion below. As described below, bounded rationality consists in part

of judgment errors, and along with the usual types of such errors discussed in the existing

literature in behavioral economics, behavioral law and economics has recently emphasized a

separate form of judgment error – implicit bias in how members of racial and other groups are

perceived by individuals who consciously disavow any sort of prejudiced attitude; this form of

judgment error provides the starting part for the discussion below.



       3.1     Bounded Rationality

       Departures from traditional economic assumptions of unbounded rationality may be

divided into two main categories, judgment errors and departures from expected utility theory.



             3.1.1 Judgment Errors

       Across a wide range of contexts, actual judgments show systematic differences from

unbiased forecasts. Within this category of judgment errors, behavioral law and economics has

recently emphasized errors in the form of implicit bias in people’s perceptions of racial and other

group members.




                                                  10
       Implicit Racial and Other Group-Based Bias. Perhaps the most elementary definition

of the word “bias” is that a person believes, either consciously or implicitly, that members of

a racial or other group are somehow less worthy than other individuals. An enormous

literature in modern social psychology explores the cognitive, motivational, and other aspects

of implicit, or unconscious, forms of racial or other group-based bias.        This literature,

however, has not featured significantly in most fields of behavioral economics. But a clear

contrast is behavioral law and economics, which has recently given significant emphasis to

the possibility and effects of implicit racial or other group-based bias.

       The behavioral law and economics literature in this area has worked against the backdrop

of a heavily Beckerian approach to discrimination. Seminal law and economics works on

discrimination envision such behavior as in significant part a rational response to discriminatory

“tastes” that disfavor association with particular group members (e.g., R. Posner 1989). The idea

of implicit bias, by contrast, suggests that discriminatory behavior often stems not from taste-

based preferences that individuals are consciously acting to satisfy, but instead from implicit

attitudes afflicting individuals who seriously and sincerely disclaim all forms of prejudice, and

who would regard their implicitly biased judgments as “errors.” A number of recent works in

behavioral law and economics have begun to explore the implications for the analysis of

discrimination law of various types of implicit bias (e.g., Gulati and Yelnowsky 2006; Jolls and

Sunstein 2006).

       While social psychologists have identified diverse means of assessing and measuring

implicit bias against members of racial and other groups (e.g., Gaertner and McLaughlin 1983;

Greenwald, McGhee and Schwartz 1998), a particular measure, known as the Implicit

Association Test (IAT), has had particular influence. In the IAT, individuals are asked to



                                                   11
categorize words or pictures into four groups, two of which are racial or other groups (such as

“black” and “white”), and the other two of which are the categories “pleasant” and “unpleasant.”

Groups are paired, so that respondents are instructed to press one key on the computer for either

“black” or “unpleasant” and a different key for either “white” or “pleasant” (a stereotype-

consistent pairing); or are instructed instead to press one key on the computer for either “black”

or “pleasant” and a different key for either “white” or “unpleasant” (a stereotype-inconsistent

pairing). Implicit bias is defined as faster categorization when the “black” and “unpleasant”

categories are paired than when the “black” and “pleasant” categories are paired. The IAT

reveals significant evidence of implicit bias, including among those who assiduously deny any

prejudice (Greenwald, McGhee and Schwartz 1998; Nosek, Banaji and Greenwald 2002).

       An important question raised by the results on the IAT is whether implicit bias as

measured by the test is correlated with individuals’ actual behavior toward members of other

groups. Studies including McConnell and Leibold (2001) and Dovidio, Kawakami and Gaertner

(2002) find that scores on the IAT and similar tests show correlations with third parties’ ratings

of the degree of general friendliness shown by individuals toward members of other groups.

Other connections between IAT scores and actual behavior are an active area of research.

       Although implicit racial or other group-based bias is not conventionally grouped with

other forms of bounded rationality within behavioral economics, the fit may be more natural than

has typically been supposed. Such implicit bias may often result from the way in which the

characteristic of race or other group membership operates as a sort of “heuristic” – a form of

mental short-cut. (The concept of a heuristic is discussed more fully just below.) Indeed, recent

psychology research emphasizes that heuristics often work through a process of “attribute

substitution,” in which people answer a hard question by substituting an easier one (Kahneman



                                                 12
and Frederick 2002). For instance, people might resolve a question of probability not by

investigating statistics, but by asking whether a relevant incident comes easily to mind (Tversky

and Kahneman 1973). The same process can operate to produce implicit bias against racial or

other groups. Section 5.1 below describes an example of how implicit bias has been analyzed

within behavioral law and economics.

        The “Heuristics and Biases” Literature. Judgment errors may arise not only from

implicit bias against racial or other group members, but also from other biases studied within

the so-called “heuristics and biases” literature within behavioral economics. Three types of

judgment errors from this literature have received particularly sustained attention within

behavioral law and economics.

        One such judgment error is optimism bias, in which individuals believe that their own

probability of facing a bad outcome is lower than it actually is. As a familiar illustration, most

people think that their chances of having an auto accident are significantly lower than the

average person’s chances of experiencing this event (e.g., DeJoy 1989), although of course these

beliefs cannot all be correct; if everyone were below “average,” then the average would be

lower. 4 There is also evidence that people underestimate their absolute as well as relative (to



4
  As described in Jolls (1998), an interesting subtlety here is that if the question is whether one’s
probability of experiencing a bad event is below the average probability of experiencing that event (as
distinguished from the average person’s probability of experiencing that event), then it is possible for
most people to be below average. To illustrate, suppose that for 80% of the population the probability of
being involved in an auto accident is 10%, and for 20% it is 60%. Then the average probability of being
involved in an auto accident is 20% (.1 x .8 .6 x .2 = .2). So for 80% of the population, the probability of
being involved in an auto accident (10%) is below the average probability (20%). But the average person
has a 10% chance of being involved in an auto accident, and it would be impossible for more than half of
the population to have a probability below this. The natural interpretation of most studies of optimism
bias would seem to be that they request a comparison with the average person’s probability, rather than
with the average probability; the average probability would often be quite difficult to compute and not
within the grasp of most subjects. Moreover, at least one study has dealt explicitly with the issue raised



                                                      13
other individuals) probability of negative events such as auto accidents (Arnould and Grabowski

1981:34-35; Camerer and Kunreuther 1989:566). Optimism bias is probably highly adaptive as a

general matter; by thinking that things will turn out well, people may often increase the chance

that they will turn out well. Section 4.1 below describes an application of optimism bias in the

behavioral law and economics literature.

       A second judgment error prominent in behavioral law and economics is self-serving bias.

Whenever there is room for disagreement about a matter to be decided by two or more parties –

and of course there often is in litigation as well as elsewhere – individuals will tend to interpret

information in a direction that serves their own interests. In a compelling field study, Babcock,

Wang and Loewenstein (1996) find that union and school board presidents asked to identify

“comparable” school districts for purposes of labor negotiations identified different lists of

districts depending on their respective self-interests. While the average teacher salary in districts

viewed as comparable by union presidents was $27,633, the same average was $26,922 in

districts viewed as comparable by school board presidents. As Babcock, Wang and Loewenstein

observe, this difference was more than large enough to produce teacher strikes based on the size

of past salary disagreements leading to strikes. Section 4.2 below discusses an application of

self-serving bias in the behavioral law and economics literature.

       A third judgment error extensively discussed in behavioral law and economics is the

hindsight bias, in which decision makers attach excessively high probabilities to events simply

because they ended up occurring. In one striking study, neuropsychologists were presented with

a list of patient symptoms and then asked to assess the probability that the patient had each of



here and has found significant evidence of optimism bias even using the average probability benchmark
(Weinstein 1980:809-12).



                                                   14
three conditions (alcohol withdrawal, Alzheimer’s disease, and brain damage secondary to

alcohol abuse). While the mean probabilities for physicians who were not informed of the

patient’s actual condition were 37%, 26% and 37% respectively for the three conditions,

physicians who were informed of the patient’s actual condition routinely said they would have

attached much higher probabilities to that condition (Arkes, Faust, Guilmette and Hart 1988).

Even when, as in the study, people are specifically instructed to give the probabilities they would

have assigned had they been the one making the diagnosis, people seem to have difficulty putting

aside events they know to have occurred. As highlighted in section 4.3 below, the hindsight bias

has clear relevance to the legal system because that system is pervasively in the business of

adjudicating likelihoods and foreseeability after an accident or other event has occurred.



             3.1.2 Departures from Expected Utility Theory

       Boundedly rational individuals not only make judgment errors but also deviate from the

precepts of expected utility theory. While this theory is a foundational aspect of traditional

economic analysis, Kahneman and Tversky’s (1979) “prospect theory” offers a leading

alternative to expected utility theory. Within behavioral law and economics, the feature of

prospect theory that emphasizes the distinction between gains and losses relative to an

endowment point has received by far the most attention; the relevant work on the endowment

effect was discussed in some detail in section 2 above.



       3.2     Bounded Willpower

       We often observe individuals choosing to spend rather than save, consume desserts over

salads, and go to the movies instead of the gym despite all of their best intentions (Schelling



                                                  15
1984; Laibson 1997). Why do people fail to follow through on the plans they make? Behavioral

economics has emphasized the concept of bounded willpower, which has a long pedigree in

economics (Strotz 1955-56). This concept has featured in behavioral law and economics as well,

as illustrated in section 4.4 below.

       Much work in law and economics is normatively-oriented, and this feature of the work

brings to the fore a set of normative questions about bounded willpower – much in the way that

normative questions have been prominent in law and economics discussions of the endowment

effect (pp. 5-7 above). With respect to bounded willpower, the central normative question

concerns how to view a decision to spend rather than save, to consume desserts rather than

salads, or to go to the gym rather than the movies. Why should (if they should) the preferences

of the self who wishes to save, eat salad, or go to the gym rather than the self who wishes to

spend, eat dessert, or watch movies be used as the benchmark in performing normative analysis?

       One possible answer, partially reminiscent of a strand of the endowment effect discussion

above, is that saving, eating salad, or going to the gym creates desirable third-party effects that

are absent with spending, eating dessert, or watching movies. Another possible answer, also

with an analogue in the earlier discussion, is that the preferences of the self who wishes to save,

eat salad, or go to the gym reflect a considered judgment about the matter in question – the

rightness of which, however, it is not possible always to keep before one’s mind (Elster

1979:52). Of course, each of these two types of judgments about the relative merits of different

preferences may be contentions in at least some settings.




                                                  16
       3.3   Bounded Self-Interest

       In principle, traditional economic analysis is capacious with respect to the range of

admissible preferences. Preferences that give significant weight to fairness, for instance, can be

included in the analysis (Kaplow and Shavell 2002:431-34). In practice, however, much of

traditional law and economics posits a relatively narrow set of ends that individuals are imagined

to pursue.

       Contrary to this conventional approach, bounded self-interest within behavioral

economics emphasizes that many people care about both giving and receiving fair treatment in a

range of settings (Rabin 1993). As Thaler and Dawes (1992:19-20) observe:

       In the rural areas around Ithaca it is common for farmers to put some fresh
       produce on a table by the road. There is a cash box on the table, and customers
       are expected to put money in the box in return for the vegetables they take. The
       box has just a small slit, so money can only be put in, not taken out. Also, the
       box is attached to the table, so no one can (easily) make off with the money. We
       think that the farmers who use this system have just about the right model of
       human nature. They feel that enough people will volunteer to pay for the fresh
       corn to make it worthwhile to put it out there.

       Of course, a central question raised by bounded self-interest is what counts as “fair”

treatment. Behavioral economics suggests that people will judge outcomes as unfair if they

depart substantially from the terms of a “reference transaction” – a transaction that defines the

benchmark for the parties’ interactions (Kahneman, Knetsch and Thaler 1986a). In the basic

version of the well-known ultimatum game, for instance, where parties divide a sum of money

with no reason to think one party is particularly more deserving than the other, the “reference

transaction” is something like an equal split; substantial departures from this benchmark are

viewed as unfair and, accordingly, are punished by parties who receive offers of such treatment

(Guth, Schmittberger and Schwarze 1982; Kahneman, Knetsch and Thaler 1986b). Section 4.5




                                                 17
below illustrates how this conception of bounded self-interest has been applied within behavioral

law and economics.



4.      Illustrative Applications of Behavioral Law and Economics

        The present section offers a set of illustrative applications of behavioral law and

economics. The discussion seeks to illustrate what has become essentially “normal science”

within the literature in behavioral law and economics to date: identification of a departure from

unbounded rationality, willpower or self-interest, followed by either an account of existing law

or a proposed legal reform that takes as a fixed point the identified departure from unbounded

rationality, willpower or self-interest. Section 5 shifts the focus to a new approach within

behavioral law and economics, one that emphasizes the potential for responding to some bounds

on human behavior not by taking people’s natural tendencies as given and shaping law around

them but, instead, by attempting to reduce or eliminate such human tendencies through the legal

structure – the approach of “debiasing through law” (Jolls and Sunstein 2006a).

        Recent surveys on behavioral law and economics by Guthrie (2003), Korobkin (2003),

and Rachlinski (2003) have examined existing legally-oriented work on bounded rationality,

devoting extensive attention to both judgment errors and departures from expected utility

theory. 5   The present section, by contrast, focuses on a limited number of applications of




5
  While work on bounded willpower and bounded self-interest within behavioral law and economics has
not recently been surveyed, examples of behavioral law and economics work on bounded willpower
include Weiss (1991), Jolls (1997), and Camerer, Issacharoff, Loewenstein, O’Donoghue and Rabin
(2003), while examples of behavioral law and economics work on bounded self-interest include
Greenfield (2002), Jolls (2002), and Bar-Gill and Ben-Shahar (2004).



                                                  18
bounded rationality, willpower and self-interest, attempting to give a fuller picture of some of the

relevant work in these areas.



          4.1    “Distributive Legal Rules” 6

          As noted in the introduction, one distinctive feature of law and economics is its frequent

focus on wealth maximization – giving legal entitlements to those most willing to pay for them,

without regard for distributional considerations – rather than social welfare maximization as the

criterion for normative analysis. Many law and economics scholars object to “distributive legal

rules” – non-wealth-maximizing legal rules chosen for their distributive consequences – because

they believe that distributional issues are best left solely to the tax system (Kaplow and Shavell

1994).

          A leading law and economics argument in favor of addressing distributional issues

through the tax system rather than through non-tax legal rules is the argument that any desired

distributional consequence can be achieved at lower cost through the tax system than through

distributive legal rules. Of course, pursuit of distributional objectives through the tax system is

not costless; higher taxes on the wealthy will tend to distort work incentives.          But under

traditional economic assumptions precisely the same is true of distributive legal rules: “[U]sing

legal rules to redistribute income distorts work incentives fully as much as the income tax system

– because the distortion is caused by the redistribution itself . . . .” (Kaplow and Shavell

1994:667-68). Thus, for example, under traditional economic analysis a thirty percent marginal

tax rate, together with a non-wealth-maximizing legal rule that transfers an average of one



6
    This subsection is an abridged version of Jolls (1998).



                                                         19
percent of high earners’ income to the poor, creates the same distortion in work incentives as a

thirty-one percent marginal tax rate coupled with a wealth-maximizing legal rule. However, the

former regime also entails costs due to the non-wealth-maximizing legal rule. (For instance,

under a distributive legal rule governing accidents, potential defendants may be excessively

cautious and thus may be discouraged from engaging in socially valuable activities.) Thus,

whatever the desired distributive consequences, under traditional economic analysis they can

always be achieved at lower cost by choosing the wealth-maximizing legal rule and adjusting

distributive effects through the tax system than by choosing a non-wealth-maximizing rule

because of its distributive properties (Shavell 1981).

        A basic premise about human behavior underlies this analysis. Work incentives are

assumed to be distorted by the same amount as a result of a probabilistic, non-tax mode of

redistribution, such as the law governing accidents, as they are as a result of a tax. Thus, for

example, if high-income individuals face a .02 probability of incurring tort liability for an

accident, then a distributive legal rule that imposes $500,000 extra in damages (beyond what a

wealth-maximizing rule would call for) would distort work incentives by the same amount as a

tax of $10,000, assuming risk-neutrality. 7

        Why would distributive tort liability and taxes have the same effects on work incentives?

“[W]hen an individual . . . contemplates earning additional income by working harder, his total

marginal expected payments [out of that income] equal the sum of his marginal tax payment and

the expected marginal cost on account of accidents.” (Kaplow and Shavell 1994:671.) The




7
  Of course, risk-averse actors may choose to purchase insurance against tort liability; see Jolls (1998) for
a discussion of the role of insurance in this analysis.



                                                       20
expected costs of the two forms of redistribution are the same, and thus behavior is affected in

the same way. At least that is the assumption that traditional economic analysis makes.

       Is this assumption valid? From a behavioral economics perspective, it is not clear that an

individual would typically experience the same disincentive to work as a result of a more

generous (to victims) tort-law regime as would be experienced as a result of a higher level of

taxation. 8 The discussion here will highlight one important reason, related to the phenomenon of

optimism bias noted in section 3 above, that behavioral law and economics suggests work

incentives may be distorted less by distributive tort liability – which operates probabilistically

rather than deterministically – than by taxes. Other reasons for different effects of the two

regimes, based on different contextual factors across the regimes, are discussed in Jolls (1998).

       As just noted, a salient feature of distributive tort liability is the uncertainty of its

application to any given actor. The effect of such liability “tends to be limited to those few who

become parties to lawsuits” (Kaplow and Shavell 1994:675.) While one knows that one will

have to pay taxes every year, one knows that one is quite likely not to become involved in an

accident. To be sure, the possibility of uncertain or randomized taxation has received some

discussion in the public finance literature. Even supporters of this approach, however, suggest

that it is unrealistic from a practical perspective (Stiglitz 1987:1012-13).

       Bounded rationality in the form of optimism bias – the tendency to think negative events

are less likely to happen to oneself than they actually are – suggests that uncertain events are

often processed systematically differently from certain events. Section 3.1.1 above referred to

the general body of evidence suggesting the prevalence of optimism bias; there are also empirical


8
  However, as emphasized in Jolls (1998), only empirical evidence that we do not yet have can
definitively resolve the question.



                                                   21
studies suggesting that people offer unrealistically optimistic assessments in areas directly

related to the effects of distributive tort liability. For instance, most people think that they are

less likely than the average person to be sued (Weinstein 1980:810). Likewise, people think that

they are less likely than the average person to cause an auto accident (Svenson, Fischhoff and

MacGregor 1985; DeJoy 1989). They also think that their own probability of being caught and

penalized for drunk driving is lower than the average driver’s probability of being apprehended

for such behavior (Guppy 1993).

        What does optimism bias with respect to the probability of the negative event of tort

liability imply for the distortionary effects of distributive tort liability as opposed to taxes?

People will tend to underestimate the probability that they will be hit with liability under

distributive tort liability; therefore, their perceived cost of the rule will be lower. As a result,

their work incentives will tend to suffer a lesser degree of distortion than under a tax yielding the

same amount of revenue for the government. For instance, in the numerical example from

above, risk-neutral individuals may not attach an expected cost of $10,000 to a .02 (objective)

probability of having to pay $500,000 extra in damages under distributive tort liability; they may

tend to underestimate the probability that they will incur liability – and thus they may tend to

underestimate the expected cost of liability – as a result of optimism bias. 9




9
  Note that underestimation of the probability of liability would affect not only the distortion of work
incentives from a distributive (and thus, by the definition given above, non-wealth-maximizing) legal
rule, but also the determination of what the wealth-maximizing legal rule would be. If potential
tortfeasors underestimate the probability of liability, then optimal deterrence would require greater
generosity to tort victims than the wealth-maximizing legal rule without underestimation of probabilities
would involve. But the newly-generous rule would not be "distributive" in the relevant sense, since it
would not be sacrificing wealth-maximization to achieve distributive goals. The focus of the present
discussion, as stated above, is on legal rules that pursue distributive consequences at the expense of
wealth-maximization.



                                                     22
       Of course, optimism bias is not the only phenomenon that affects how people assess the

likelihood of uncertain events. In some cases people may tend to overestimate rather than

underestimate the probability of a negative event because the risk in question is highly salient or

otherwise available to them – for instance, contamination from a hazardous waste dump (Kuran

and Sunstein 1999:691-97). However, the overestimation phenomenon seems relatively unlikely

to affect the assessment of distributive tort liability, at least insofar as individuals rather than

firms are concerned.      Consider, for instance, the quintessential event that can expose an

individual to tort liability: the auto accident. As noted above, people appear to underestimate the

probability that they will be involved in an auto accident (relative to the actual probability); this

presumably results from a combination of underestimation of the general probability of an

accident (Lichtenstein, Slovic, Fischhoff, Layman and Combs 1978:564) and further

underestimation of people’s own probability relative to the average person’s (Svenson, Fischhoff

and MacGregor 1985; DeJoy 1989). The situation would probably be different, of course, for an

event such as contamination from a hazardous waste dump, the probability of which might be

overestimated due to its availability; but highly available events tend to involve firm, not

individual, liability. It is difficult to come up with examples of events giving rise to individual

liability the probability of which is likely to be overestimated rather than (as suggested above)

underestimated. And with underestimation of the probability of liability, work incentives will

typically be distorted less by distributive legal rules than by taxes.



       4.2    Discovery Rules in Litigation

       The introduction noted that an important aspect of work in law and economics is analysis

of various areas of law that were not previously studied by economists. One such area concerns



                                                    23
the rules governing the litigation process. When someone believes that a law has been violated,

how does the legal system go about deciding the legitimacy of that claim? The American system

relies centrally upon an adversary approach, under which competing sides are represented by

legal counsel who argue in favor of their respective positions.

       Of course, maximally effective advocacy for a position often requires one to obtain

information under the control of one’s opponent, and thus the American legal system contains a

set of rules governing when and how one side in a legal dispute may obtain (“discover”)

information from the other side. Since 1993 these rules have required opposing parties to

disclose significant information even without a request by the other party (Issacharoff and

Loewenstein 1995). Under conventional economic analysis this approach should increase the

convergence of parties’ expectations and, thus, the rate at which they settle disputes out of court

(e.g., Shavell 2004:427).

       The phenomenon of self-serving bias described in section 3.1.1 above, however, suggests

that individuals often interpret information differently depending on the direction of their own

self-interest. Experimental work by Loewenstein, Issacharoff, Camerer and Babcock (1993),

Babcock, Loewenstein, Issacharoff and Camerer (1995), and Loewenstein and Moore (2004) has

examined self-serving bias in the specific context of litigation. In the first paper in the series,

Loewenstein, Issacharoff, Camerer and Babcock found that parties assigned to the role of

plaintiff or defendant interpreted the very same facts differently depending on their assigned

role; subjects assigned to the plaintiff role offered higher estimates of the likely outcome at trial

than subjects assigned to the defendant role even though they both received identical information

about the case. Moreover, the authors found that subjects who exhibited the highest levels of

self-serving bias were also least likely to succeed in negotiating out-of-court settlements. This



                                                   24
work provided opening evidence of the role of self-serving bias in shaping the effect of

information disclosure on the rate at which legal disputes are settled.

        The initial study just described could not rule out the possibility that the relationship

between the degree of self-serving bias and the frequency of settlement was non-causal, for it is

possible that an unmeasured factor influenced both the degree of self-serving bias and the

frequency of settlement. In a follow-up study, however, Babcock, Loewenstein, Issacharoff and

Camerer (1995) provided strong evidence that the relationship was in fact causal. They found

that parties who were not informed of their roles until after reading case materials and offering

their estimates of the likely outcome at trial both failed to exhibit statistically significant degrees

of self-serving bias and settled at significantly greater rates than parties who were informed of

their roles before reading the case materials. The timing of exposure to the case materials

matters because “[s]elf-serving interpretations are likely to occur at the point when information

about roles is assimilated,” for the simple reason that it “is easier to process information in a

biased way than it is to change an unbiased estimate once it has been made” (Babcock,

Loewenstein, Issacharoff and Camerer 1995:1339). The recent study by Loewenstein and Moore

(2004) underlines the fact that self-serving bias will operate when there is some degree of

ambiguity about the proper or best interpretation of a set of information, as will frequently be the

case in litigation.

        The prospect that litigants will interpret at least some information in a self-serving

fashion means that the exchange of information in litigation may cause a divergence rather than

convergence of parties’ expectations.        Relying in part on this argument, Issacharoff and

Loewenstein (1995) suggest that mandatory disclosure rules in litigation may be undesirable. As

they describe, self-serving bias undermines the conventional wisdom that “a full exchange of the



                                                    25
information in the possession of the parties is likely to facilitate settlement by enabling each

party to form a more accurate, and generally therefore a more convergent, estimate of the likely

outcome of the case” (R. Posner 1992:557, quoted in Issacharoff and Loewenstein 1995:773).

Consistent with Issacharoff and Loewenstein’s argument, a set of amendments in 2000

significantly cut back – although they did not completely eliminate – the mandatory disclosure

rules noted above (192 Federal Rules Decisions 340, 385-87).



       4.3    The “Business Judgment” Rule in Corporate Law

       The third distinctive feature of law and economics discussed in the introduction

concerned the field’s interest in explaining and predicting the content of law – what the law

allows and what it prohibits. First-generation law and economics scholars emphasized the idea

that laws may be efficient solutions to the problems of organizing society; law and economics

has also emphasized – as has the field of political economy – that laws may come about because

of the rent-seeking activities of politically powerful actors (Stigler 1971).

       Behavioral law and economics has extended this conventional account of the content of

legal rules in two important ways. The first, which is the focus of the discussion in this section,

is that in many cases incorporation of insights about bounded rationality, willpower and self-

interest is needed for a satisfactory understanding of law’s efficiency properties. A law may be

efficient in part because of the way in which it accounts for one of the three bounds on human

behavior, as the discussion below illustrates. The second extension of the conventional law and

economics account of the content of law is the expansion of behavioral law and economics

beyond the two familiar categories from the traditional account – the category of law-as-

efficiency-enhancing and the category of law-as-the product-of-conventional-rent-seeking.



                                                   26
Section 4.5 below discusses and illustrates this second extension developed by behavioral law

and economics.

       A prominent behavioral law and economics work seeking to understand and explain the

efficiency of the content of law is Rachlinski (1998). Rachlinski examines a number of areas of

law, including corporate law.      A central rule of American corporate law is the “business

judgment” rule, according to which corporate officers and directors who are informed about a

corporation’s activities and who approve or acquiesce in these activities have generally fulfilled

their duties to the corporation as long as they have a rational belief that such activities are in the

interests of the corporation. This highly deferential standard of liability makes it difficult to find

legal fault for the decisions of corporate officers and directors.

       Rachlinski suggests that the business judgment rule may be corporate law’s sensible

response to the problem of hindsight bias. As described above, hindsight bias suggests that the

sorts of decisions routinely made by the legal system, adjudicating likelihoods and foreseeability

after a negative event has materialized, will often be biased toward excessively high estimates –

and thus in favor of holding actors responsible – simply because the negative event materialized.

But under the business judgment rule, officers and directors will not be held liable for decisions

that turn out badly – “even if these decisions seem negligent in hindsight” (Rachlinski

1998:620). Hindsight bias suggests that things will often seem negligent in hindsight, once a

negative outcome has materialized and is known, so the business judgment rule insulates officers

and directors from the risk of such hindsight-influenced liability determinations. In the absence

of the business judgment rule, Rachlinski argues, officers and directors would fail to make the

risk-neutral business decisions desired by investors who can limit their overall investment risk

through diversification; “[e]nsuring that managers effectively represent this concern and do not



                                                    27
avoid business decisions that have a high expected payoff but also carry a high degree of risk is a

central problem of corporate governance” (Rachlinski 1998:622). In this respect, hindsight bias

can help to explain the efficiency of the content of law governing corporate officers and

directors.



           4.4   Rules Governing Contract Renegotiation 10

           The behavioral law and economics applications discussed thus far have involved bounded

rationality, but other applications have drawn on the other two bounds on human behavior. This

subsection describes an application of the concept of bounded willpower within behavioral law

and economics.

           As discussed above, an individual with bounded willpower will often have difficulty

sticking to even the best-laid plans. With respect to decisions about consumption versus saving,

for instance, individuals who earnestly plan to save a substantial amount of next year’s salary for

retirement may tend, once next year arrives, to save far less than planned. If the failure to stick

to the initial plan is understood in advance, then individuals may seek to precommit themselves

to their initial plan. An obvious potential means of achieving such precommitment is a contract

between the individual suffering from bounded willpower and a bank or other savings institution;

but the efficacy of this approach from the standpoint of the individual at the time of

contemplating such a contract depends critically on whether contracts are, or can be made,

nonrenegotiable.        Down the road it will always be in the parties’ mutual interest to renegotiate

the initial contract, for at later points the individual will be better off if the individual can



10
     This subsection is an abridged version of Jolls (1997).



                                                         28
consume more and save less than what the original contract called for, and thus at that point there

is a surplus from renegotiation to be divided between the parties. Only if renegotiation is

impossible can the parties avoid the effects of bounded willpower and achieve commitment to

the initial plan.

        The obvious question is then whether contract law allows nonrenegotiable contracts.

Certainly the default rule of contract law is that renegotiated agreements are enforceable. The

primary exception to enforcement of such agreements concerns renegotiated agreements coerced

by one party’s threat to breach the original contract if renegotiation does not occur. 11 But in the

model discussed here, renegotiation is truly welfare-enhancing – at the time at which it occurs –

for both parties relative to the original contract, so the coercion concern does not apply, and thus

the default rule would allow enforcement of the renegotiated agreement.

        Does contract law allow the parties to supplement the default rules governing

renegotiation with additional terms of their own? Perhaps surprisingly, the answer to this

question is generally “no.”         Justice Cardozo’s 1919 opinion in Beatty v. Guggenheim

Exploration Co. provides a classic example of the rule and its underlying rationale: “Those who

make a contract, may unmake it. The clause which forbids a change, may be changed like any

other . . . . ‘Every such agreement is ended by the new one which contradicts it.’ . . . What is

excluded by one act, is restored by another. You may put it out by the door, it is back through



11
   As Richard Posner explained in a 1990 judicial opinion: “[T]here is often an interval in the life of a
contract during which one party is at the mercy of the other. A may have ordered a machine from B that
A wants to place in operation on a given date [and] may have made commitments to his customers that it
would be costly to renege on. As the date of scheduled delivery approaches, B may be tempted to
demand that A agree to renegotiate the contract price, knowing that A will incur heavy expenses if B fails
to deliver on time. A can always refuse to renegotiate, relying instead on his right to sue B for breach of
contract if B fails to make delivery by the agreed date. But legal remedies are always costly and
uncertain.” (United States v. Stump Home Specialties, Inc., 905 F.2d 1117, 1121-22.)



                                                      29
the window. Whenever two men contract, no limitation self-imposed can destroy their power to

contract again.” (122 N.E. 378, 387-88.)

           While existing contract law thus prohibits enforcement of contractual agreements not to

renegotiate, a natural question is whether a contrary rule would be of any effect. Any clause

limiting or prohibiting renegotiation will be effective only if some party to the contract has an

incentive to enforce the clause. Jolls (1997) provides discussion of circumstances in which this

will be the case. Consistent with the discussion here, the law has started to move away from the

formalistic principle described above and in some instances now permits parties by contract to

remove their future power to renegotiate their original contract orally (although written

renegotiated agreements are still always enforceable) (Uniform Commercial Code sec. 2-209).



           4.5   The Content of Consumer Protection Law 12

           A final illustration of behavioral law and economics reveals the way that work in this

area has expanded upon the traditional law and economics notion that law’s content reflects

either efficiency or conventional rent-seeking. The notion that laws emerge from these two

considerations would probably strike most citizens as odd. Instead, most members of society –

which is to say most of the people who are entitled to elect legislators – believe that the primary

purpose of the law is to codify “right” and “wrong.” Can this idea be formalized, drawing in part

on the notion of bounded self-interest from section 3.3 above?

           Consider the case of consumer protection law, which imposes bans on certain market

transactions including (in many jurisdictions) “usurious” lending and some forms of price



12
     This subsection is an abridged version of section III of Jolls, Sunstein and Thaler (1998).



                                                         30
gouging (see, e.g., Uniform Consumer Credit Code sec. 2.201). What accounts for these laws,

which impose constraints on gain-producing transactions for ordinary commodities such as

television sets and lumber? The bans seem difficult to justify on efficiency grounds; rules

prohibiting mutually beneficial exchanges without obvious externalities are not generally thought

to have a large claim to efficiency. The laws also do not generally seem well explained in terms

of conventional rent seeking by a politically powerful faction. 13

        By contrast, laws banning usurious lending and price gouging when such activities are

prevalent are a straightforward prediction of the theory of bounded self-interest described above.

(The analysis here assumes that self-interested legislators are responsive to citizens’ or other

actors’ fairness-based demands for the content of law. 14 )            In the case of such bans, the

transaction in question is a significant departure from the usual terms of trade in the market for

the good in question – that is, a significant departure from the “reference transaction.” The

account above of bounded self-interest suggests that if trades are occurring frequently in a given

jurisdiction at terms far from those of the reference transaction, there will be strong pressure for

a law banning such trades. Note that the prediction is not that all high prices (ones that make it

difficult or impossible for some people to afford things they might want) will be banned; the


13
   Although it may be possible to offer efficiency or conventional rent-seeking explanations for certain
sorts of laws banning economic transactions (E. Posner 1995), there does not seem to be a general theory
or set of theories that can explain all or even most of these laws on traditional grounds.
14
   Thus, like traditional economic analysis, the behavioral law and economics approach described here
views legislators as maximizers interested in their own reelection; legislators interested in their own
reelection will be responsive to the preferences and judgments of their constituents and those of powerful
interest groups. If constituents believe that a certain practice is unfair, and should be banned, self-
interested legislators will respond, even if they do not share these views. Likewise, if a mobilized group
holds such views, then legislators’ response will be affected, in much the same way as if the group sought
legislation to serve a narrowly defined financial self-interest, as posited by the traditional economic
account. “Fairness entrepreneurs” may play a role, mobilizing public judgments to serve their (selfish or
nonselfish) interests. Of course, it is also possible that legislators themselves act on their own personal
conceptions of fairness.



                                                      31
prediction is that transactions at terms far from the terms on which those transactions generally

occur in the marketplace will be banned.

        Consider this example:

        A store has been sold out of the popular Cabbage Patch dolls for a month. A
        week before Christmas a single doll is discovered in a store room. The managers
        know that many customers would like to buy the doll. They announce over the
        store’s public address system that the doll will be sold by auction to the customer
        who offers to pay the most. (Kahneman, Knetsch and Thaler 1986a:735.)

Nearly three-quarters of the respondents judged this action to be either somewhat unfair or very

unfair, though, of course, an economic analysis would judge the auction the most efficient

method of assuring that the doll goes to the person who values it most. Although the auction is

efficient, it represents a departure from the “reference transaction,” under which the doll is sold

at its usual price.

        As in the doll example, if money is loaned to individuals at a rate of interest significantly

greater than the rate at which similarly-sized loans are made to other customers, then the lender’s

behavior may be viewed as unfair. Likewise, because lumber generally tends to sell for a

particular price, sales at far higher prices in the wake of (say) a hurricane, which drives demand

sky high, are thought unfair. How then should popular items be rationed? Subjects in one study

asked whether a football team should allocate its few remaining tickets to a key game through an

auction thought that this approach would be unfair, while allocation based on who waited in line

longest was the preferred solution (Kahneman, Knetsch and Thaler 1986b:S287-88). Of course,

waiting in line for scarce goods is precisely what happens with laws against price gouging.

Thus, pervasive fairness norms appear to shape attitudes (and hence possibly law) on both usury

and price gouging. While “[c]onventional economic analyses assume as a matter of course that

excess demand for a good creates an opportunity for suppliers to raise prices” and that “[t]he



                                                   32
profit-seeking adjustments that clear the market are . . . as natural as water finding its level – and

as ethically neutral,” “[t]he lay public does not share this indifference” (Kahneman, Knetsch and

Thaler 1986a:735).

       Note that the behavioral law and economics analysis does not imply that these views of

fairness are necessarily rational or compelling. Many of those who think “usurious” lenders are

“unfair” might not have thought through the implications of their views (for example, that paying

an outrageous price for a loan may be better than paying an infinite price, or that a loan to a

riskier borrower is a product different in kind from a loan to a safer borrower). Still, if such

views are widespread, they may underlie certain patterns in the content of law, such as the legal

restrictions on usury and price gouging. The claim here is a positive one about the content of the

law we observe, not a prescriptive or normative one about the shape practices or rules should

take. As a positive matter, behavioral law and economics predicts that if trades are occurring

with some frequency on terms far from those of the reference transaction, then legal rules will

often ban trades on such terms.

       Of course, further inquiry would be needed to offer a definitive explanation for the full

pattern of usury and price gouging laws we observe. Usury seems to be broadly prohibited, so

one is not faced with the question of why we observe bans in some states but not others. The

same cannot be said of price gouging, which is prohibited only in certain states. Price gouging

appears to be prohibited primarily by states that have recently experienced (or whose neighbors

have recently experienced) natural disasters; but more in-depth research would be required to

determine if this pattern comprehensively bears out.




                                                   33
5.     Debiasing Through Law

       The applications described in section 4 illustrate the usual approach in behavioral law and

economics work to date:       the analysis identifies a departure from unbounded rationality,

willpower or self-interest and then offers either a proposed legal reform or an account of existing

law that takes as a fixed point the identified departure from unbounded rationality, willpower or

self-interest. This approach might be said to focus on designing legal rules and institutions so

that legal outcomes do not fall prey to problems of bounded rationality, willpower or self-interest

– a strategy of insulation of those outcomes from such bounds on human behavior.

       A quite different possibility, focused most heavily on the case of judgment errors by

boundedly rational actors, is that legal policy may respond best to such errors not by structuring

rules and institutions to protect legal outcomes from the effects of the errors (which themselves

are taken as a given), but instead by operating directly on the errors and attempting to help

people either to reduce or to eliminate them. Legal policy in this category may be termed

“debiasing through law”; the law is used to reduce the degree of biased behavior actors exhibit

(Jolls and Sunstein 2006a). The primary emphasis is on judgment errors rather than either other

aspects of bounded rationality or bounded willpower or self-interest, for the simple reason that

those alternative forms of human behavior cannot uncontroversially be viewed as “biases” in

need of debiasing.     (Recall, for instance, the normative complexities discussed above in

connection with both the endowment effect and bounded willpower. And clearly it would not

generally be desirable to “debias” boundedly self-interested actors.) As described below, the

basic promise of strategies for debiasing through law is that these strategies will often provide a

middle ground between unyielding adherence to the assumptions of traditional economics, on the




                                                  34
one hand, and the usual behavioral law and economics approach of accepting departures from

those assumptions as a given, on the other.



       5.1   Debiasing Through Substantive and Procedural Law

       The idea of debiasing through law draws on a substantial existing psychology literature

on the debiasing of individuals after a demonstration of the existence of a given judgment error

(e.g., Fischhoff 1982; Weinstein and Klein 2002). Those who have investigated debiasing in

experimental settings, however, have generally not explored the possibility of achieving

debiasing through law.     A few behavioral law and economics papers have examined the

possibility of debiasing through the procedural rules governing adjudication by judges or juries;

a well-known example builds on the studies described in section 4.2 above of self-serving bias in

litigation and shows how requiring litigants to consider reasons the adjudicator might rule

against them eliminates their self-serving bias (Babcock, Loewenstein and Issacharoff 1997).

However, the potential promise of debiasing through law is far broader, for it is not only the

procedures by which law is applied in adjudicative settings but the actual substance of law that

may be employed to achieve debiasing.

       Consider an example of debiasing through law developed by Jolls (2006), drawing on the

work on implicit racial or other group-based bias described in 1.3.1.1 above. Might substantive

rules governing employment discrimination play a role in debiasing individuals who exhibit such

bias? Empirical studies suggest that implicit racial or other group-based bias is profoundly

influenced by environmental stimuli.     Individuals who view pictures of Tiger Woods and

Timothy McVeigh before submitting to testing of implicit racial bias, for example, exhibit

substantially less bias than individuals not exposed to the pictures of Woods and McVeigh



                                                 35
(Dasgupta and Greenwald 2001).         This study and, more broadly, the large social science

literature on debiasing in response to implicit racial or other group-based bias (e.g., Macrae,

Bodenhausen and Milne 1995; Dasgupta and Asgari 2004) have an intriguing practical

counterpart in the ongoing controversies at many universities and the U.S. Capitol over the

frequent pattern of largely or exclusively white, male portraits adorning classrooms and

ceremonial spaces (Gewertz 2003; Stolberg 2003). In the employment context, it may not be

irrelevant to the degree of implicit racial or other group-based bias found in employment

decisionmakers whether, for instance, the walls of the workplace feature sexually explicit

depictions of women – the source of frequent sexual harassment lawsuits – or instead feature

more positive, affirming images of women. Employment discrimination law’s policing of what

can and cannot be featured in the workplace environment, described in detail in Jolls (2006), is

thus an illustration of debiasing through substantive law.

       It is important to emphasize the limits of the domain of this analysis of employment

discrimination law as a mechanism for achieving “debiasing” in the sense in which the term is

used here. In some cases racial or other group-based bias may reflect genuine tastes rather than,

as discussed above, a divergence of implicit attitudes and behavior from non-discriminatory

tastes. Of course, the features of employment discrimination law just referenced might still be

desirable, and would certainly remain applicable, in the case of consciously discriminatory

tastes, but they would no longer illustrate a form of debiasing through law in the sense used here

because no form of judgment error would be under correction in the first place.15




15
  For further discussion of normative issues in debiasing through law, see Jolls and Sunstein (2006a,
2006b).



                                                   36
       5.2   General Typology of Strategies for Debiasing Through Law

       The example of debiasing through employment discrimination law and the earlier

example from Babcock, Issacharoff and Loewenstein’s work of debiasing through restructuring

the adjudicative process together illustrate the basic distinction between debiasing through

substantive law and debiasing through procedural rules. Figure 1 generalizes the point by

mapping the terrain of strategies for debiasing through law more fully. The column division

marks the line between procedural rules governing the adjudicative process and substantive rules

regulating actions taken outside of the adjudicative process. The row division marks the line

between debiasing actors in their capacity as participants in the adjudicative process and

debiasing actors in their capacity as decision makers outside of the adjudicative process. The

upper left box in this matrix represents the type of debiasing through law on which the prior

work on such debiasing has focused: the rules in question are procedural rules governing the

adjudicative process, and the actors targeted are individuals in their capacity as participants in

the adjudicative process (Babcock, Loewenstein and Issacharoff 1997; Peters 1999).

       Moving counterclockwise, the lower left box in the matrix is marked with an “X”

because procedural rules governing the adjudicative process do not have any obvious role in

debiasing actors outside of the adjudicative process – although they these rules certainly may

affect such actors’ behavior in various ways by influencing what would happen in the event of

future litigation. The lower right box in the matrix represents the category of debiasing through

law emphasized in Jolls (2006) and Jolls and Sunstein (2006a, 2006b): the rules in question are

substantive rules regulating actions taken outside of the adjudicative process, and the actors

targeted are decision makers outside of the adjudicative process.




                                                 37
                 Figure 1: Typology of Strategies for Debiasing Through Law

                                                                   Type of Law

                                               Procedural rules            Substantive rules
                                               governing the               regulating actions taken
                                               adjudicative process        outside of the
                                                                           adjudicative process

                       Debiasing actors in     Debiasing through           “Hybrid” debiasing
                       their capacity as       procedural rules
                       participants in the
                       adjudicative process
 Role of Actor

                       Debiasing actors in                                 Debiasing through
                       their capacity as                                   substantive law
                       decision makers
                       outside of the
                       adjudicative process


       Finally, the upper right corner of the matrix represents a hybrid category that warrants

brief discussion, in part to demarcate it from the category (just discussed) of debiasing through

substantive law. In this hybrid category, it is substantive, rather than procedural, law that is

structured to achieve debiasing, but the judgment error that this debiasing effort targets is one

that arises within, rather than outside of, the adjudicative process.         For example, Ward

Farnsworth’s (2003) work on self-serving bias suggests that such bias on the part of employment

discrimination litigants (actors in their capacity as participants in an adjudicative process) might

be reduced by restructuring employment discrimination standards (substantive rules regulating

action outside of the adjudicative process) to increase the reliance of such standards on objective

facts as opposed to subjective or normative judgments. This type of debiasing through law

operates through reform of substantive law rather than procedural rules, but the actions to be




                                                  38
debiased are those of litigants within the adjudicative process. In the case of debiasing through

substantive law, by contrast, both the legal rules through which debiasing occurs and the

capacities in which actors are targeted for debiasing are distinct from the context of the

adjudicative process.



7.     Conclusion

       In Richard Thaler’s view, the ultimate sign of success for behavioral economics will be

that what is now behavioral economics will become simply “economics.” The same observation

applies to behavioral law and economics. But a potential barrier to reaching this outcome has

been the frequency with which behavioral law and economics has recommended paternalistically

overriding people’s ability to make choices (Rachlinski 2003). For instance, as described in

section 4.3 above, a prominent behavioral law and economics article praises the wisdom of the

“business judgment” rule in corporate law notwithstanding the fact that this rule removes from

the hands of judges and juries the power to hold corporate actors liable under the ordinary legal

standard of negligence. Debiasing through law, discussed in section 5, holds the potential to be a

path out of the perennial law and economics dilemma over paternalistic restrictions on choice

because debiasing through law strategies can recognize human limitations while at the same time

avoiding the step of removing choices from people’s hands. Because debiasing through law

cannot be applied in every context, however, future work in behavioral law and economics

should also seek to refine and strengthen analyses concerned with structuring legal rules in light

of the remaining (post-debiasing) departures from traditional economic assumptions of

unbounded rationality, willpower and self-interest.




                                                 39
References

        Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua D. Angrist. 2001. “Consequences of Employment
Protection? The Case of the Americans with Disabilities Act,” Journal of Political Economy,
109:915-57.
       Allais, Maurice. 1952. Traite d’Economie Pure. Paris: Impr. Nationale. Translated and
edited by Maurice Allais and Ole Hagen as “The Foundations of a Positive Theory of Choice
Involving Risk and a Criticism of the Postulates and Axioms of the American School,” in
Expected Utility Hypotheses and the Allais Paradox: Contemporary Discussions of Decisions
Under Uncertainty, 27-145 (Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel Publishing, 1979).
       Arkes, Hal R., David Faust, Thomas J. Guilmette and Kathleen Hart. 1988. “Eliminating
the Hindsight Bias,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 73:305-07.
      Arnould, Richard J. and Henry Grabowski. 1981. “Auto Safety Regulation: An Analysis
of Market Failure,” Bell Journal of Economics, 12:27-48.
      Autor, David and Mark Duggan. 2003. “The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline
in Unemployment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118:157-206.
      Babcock, Linda, George Loewenstein and Samuel Issacharoff. 1997. “Creating
Convergence: Debiasing Biased Litigants,” Law and Social Inquiry, 22:913-26.
      Babcock, Linda, George Loewenstein, Samuel Issacharoff and Colin
Camerer. 1995. “Biased Judgments of Fairness in Bargaining,” American Economic Review,
85:1337-43.
       Babcock, Linda, Xianghong Wang and George Loewenstein. 1996. “Choosing the Wrong
Pond: Social Comparisons in Negotiations that Reflect a Self-Serving Bias,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 111:1-19.
       Bar-Gill, Oren and Omri Ben-Shahar. 2003. “Threatening an ‘Irrational’ Breach of
Contract,” Supreme Court Economic Review, 11:143-70.
       Camerer, Colin F., Samuel Issacharoff, George Loewenstein, Ted O’Donoghue and
Matthew Rabin. 2003. “Regulation for Conservatives: Behavioral Economics and the Case for
‘Asymmetric Paternalism,’” in Symposium: Preferences and Rational Choice: New Perspectives
and Legal Implications, University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 151:1211-54.
       Camerer, Colin F. and Howard Kunreuther. 1989. “Decision Processes for Low
Probability Events: Policy Implications,” Journal of Policy Analysis & Management, 8:565-92.
          Coase, Ronald H. 1960. “The Problem of Social Cost,” Journal of Law and Economics,
3:1-44.
       Cutler, David, M. and Jonathan Gruber. 1996. “Does Public Insurance Crowd Out Private
Insurance?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111:391-430.
       Dasgupta, Nilanjana and Anthony G. Greenwald. 2001. “On the Malleability of
Automatic Attitudes: Combating Automatic Prejudice With Images of Admired and Disliked
Individuals,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81:800-14.



                                                40
       Dasgupta, Nilanjana and Shaki Asgari. 2004. “Seeing Is Believing: Exposure to
Counterstereotypic Women Leaders and Its Effect on the Malleability of Automatic Gender
Stereotypes,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 40:642-58.
       DeJoy, David M. 1989. “The Optimism Bias and Traffic Accident Risk Perception,”
Accident Analysis and Prevention, 21:333-40.
        Donohue, John J. III and James Heckman. 1991. “Continuous versus Episodic Change:
The Impact of Civil Rights Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 29:1603-43.
       Dovidio, John F., Kerry Kawakami and Samuel L. Gaertner. 2002. “Implicit and Explicit
Prejudice and Interracial Interaction,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82:62-68.
      Ellsberg, Daniel. 1961. “Risk, Ambiguity, and the Savage Axioms,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 75:643-69.
       Elster, Jon. 1979. Ulysses and the Sirens: Studies in Rationality and Irrationality (New
York: Cambridge University Press).
      Farnsworth, Ward. 2003. “The Legal Regulation of Self-Serving Bias,” U.C. Davis Law
Review, 37:567-603.
       Ferrell, Allen. 2003. “Mandated Disclosure and Stock Returns: Evidence from the Over-
the-Counter Market” (mimeo).
       Fischhoff, Baruch. 1982. “Debiasing,” in Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and
Biases, ed. Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic and Amos Tversky, 422-44 (New York: Cambridge
University Press).
      Gaertner, Samuel L. and John P. McLaughlin. 1983. “Racial Stereotypes: Associations
and Ascriptions of Positive and Negative Characteristics,” Social Psychology, 46:23-30.
       Gewertz, Ken. 2003. “Adding Some Color to Harvard Portraits,” Harvard University
Gazette (May 1):11.
       Gompers, Paul A., Joy L. Ishii and Andrew Metrick. 2003. “Corporate Governance and
Equity Prices,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118:107-55.
      Greenfield, Kent. 2002. “Using Behavioral Economics to Show the Power and Efficiency
of Corporate Law as Regulatory Tool,” in Symposium: Corporations Theory and Corporate
Governance Law, U.C. Davis Law Review, 25:581-644.
       Greenstone, Michael, Paul Oyer and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2006. “Mandated
Disclosure, Stock Returns, and the 1964 Securities Acts Amendments,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 121:399-460.
       Greenwald, Anthony G., Debbie E. McGhee and Jordan L.K. Schwartz. 1998.
“Measuring Individual Differences in Implicit Cognition: The Implicit Association Test,”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74:1464-80.
      Gruber, Jonathan. 1994. “The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits,” American
Economic Review, 84:622-41.



                                                41
       Gulati, Mitu and Michael Yelnosky. 2006. Behavioral Analyses of Workplace
Discrimination (Dordrecht, Holland: Kluwer Academic Publishers, forthcoming).
        Guppy, Andrew. 1993. “Subjective Probability of Accident and Apprehension in Relation
to Self-Other Bias, Age, and Reported Behavior,” Accident Analysis and Prevention, 25:375-82.
       Guth, Werner, Rolf Schmittberger and Bernd Schwarze. 1982. “An Experimental
Analysis of Ultimatum Bargaining,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 3:367-88.
       Guthrie, Chris. 2003. “Prospect Theory, Risk Preference, and the Law,” in Symposium:
Empirical Legal Realism: A New Social Scientific Assessment of Law and Human Behavior,
Northwestern University Law Review, 97:1115-63.
       Heckman, James J. and Brook S. Payner. 1989. “Determining the Impact of Federal
Antidiscrimination Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks: A Study of South Carolina,”
American Economic Review, 79:138-77.
      Hoffman, Elizabeth and Matthew Spitzer. 1982. “The Coase Theorem: Some
Experimental Tests,” Journal of Law and Economics, 25:73-98.
      Hoffman, Elizabeth and Matthew Spitzer. 1986. “Experimental Tests of the Coase
Theorem with Large Bargaining Groups,” Journal of Legal Studies, 15:149-71.
      Issacharoff, Samuel and George Loewenstein. 1995. “Unintended Consequences of
Mandatory Disclosure,” Texas Law Review, 73:753-86.
       Jolls, Christine. 1997. “Contracts as Bilateral Commitments: A New Perspective on
Contract Modification,” Journal of Legal Studies, 26:203-37.
       Jolls, Christine. 1998. “Behavioral Economic Analysis of Redistributive Legal Rules,” in
Symposium: The Legal Implications of Psychology: Human Behavior, Behavioral Economics,
and the Law, Vanderbilt Law Review, 51:1653-77.
      Jolls, Christine. 2002. “Fairness, Minimum Wage Law, and Employee Benefits,” in
Symposium: Research Conference on Behavioral Law and Economics in the Workplace, New
York University Law Review, 77:47-70.
      Jolls, Christine. 2004. “Identifying the Effects of the Americans with Disabilities Act
Using State-Law Variation: Preliminary Evidence on Educational Participation Effects,”
American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings), 94:447-53.
       Jolls, Christine. 2006. “Antidiscrimination Law’s Effects on Implicit Bias,” in Behavioral
Analyses of Workplace Discrimination, ed. Mitu Gulati and Michael Yelnosky (Dordrecht,
Holland: Kluwer Academic Publishers, forthcoming).
      Jolls, Christine, Cass R. Sunstein and Richard Thaler. 1998. “A Behavioral Approach to
Law and Economics,” Stanford Law Review, 50:1471-1550.
       Jolls, Christine and Cass R. Sunstein. 2006a. “Debiasing Through Law,” Journal of Legal
Studies, 35:199-241.
      Jolls, Christine and Cass R. Sunstein. 2006b. “The Law of Implicit Bias,” California Law
Review, 94:969-96.



                                                 42
       Kahneman, Daniel and Shane Frederick. 2002. “Representativeness Revisited: Attribute
Substitution in Intuitive Judgment,” in Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive
Judgment, ed. Thomas Gilovich, Dale Griffin and Daniel Kahneman, 49-81 (New York:
Cambridge University Press).
       Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch and Richard H. Thaler. 1986a. “Fairness as a
Constraint on Profit Seeking: Entitlements in the Market,” American Economic Review, 76:728-
41.
     Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch and Richard H. Thaler. 1986b. “Fairness and the
Assumptions of Economics,” Journal of Business, 59:S285-300.
       Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch and Richard H. Thaler. 1990. “Experimental Tests of
the Endowment Effect and the Coase Theorem,” Journal of Political Economy, 98:1325-48.
       Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky. 1979. “Prospect Theory:           An Analysis of
Decision Under Risk,” Econometrica, 47:263-91.
       Kaplow, Louis and Steven Shavell. 1994. “Why the Legal System is Less Efficient Than
the Income Tax in Redistributing Income,” Journal of Legal Studies, 23:667-81.
      Kaplow, Louis and Steven Shavell. 2002. Fairness versus Welfare (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press).
      Katz, Lawrence F. and Bruce Meyer. 1990. “Unemployment Insurance, Recall
Expectations, and Unemployment Outcomes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105:973-1002.
      Kelman, Mark. 1979. “Consumption Theory, Production Theory, and Ideology in the
Coase Theorem,” Southern California Law Review, 52:669-98.
      Korobkin, Russell. 1998. “The Status Quo Bias and Contract Default Rules,” Cornell
Law Review, 83:608-87.
       Korobkin, Russell. 2003. “The Endowment Effect and Legal Analysis,” in Symposium:
Empirical Legal Realism: A New Social Scientific Assessment of Law and Human Behavior,
Northwestern University Law Review, 97:1227-93.
       Kuran, Timur and Cass Sunstein. 1999. “Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation,”
Stanford Law Review, 51:683-768.
      Laibson, David. 1997. “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 112:443-77.
       Lichtenstein, Sarah, Paul Slovic, Baruch Fischhoff, Mark Layman and Barbara Combs.
1978. “Judged Frequency of Lethal Events,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Learning and Memory, 4:551-78.
      Loewenstein, George and Don A. Moore. 2004. “When Ignorance Is Bliss: Information
Exchange and Inefficiency in Bargaining,” Journal of Legal Studies, 33:37-58.
       Loewenstein, George, Samuel Issacharoff, Colin Camerer and Linda Babcock. 1993.
“Self-Serving Assessments of Fairness and Pretrial Bargaining,” Journal of Legal Studies,
22:135-59.



                                              43
        Macrae, C. Neil, Galen V. Bodenhausen and Alan B. Milne. 1995. “The Dissection of
Selection in Person Perception: Inhibitory Processes in Social Stereotyping,” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 69:397-407.
       McConnell, Allen R. and Jill M. Leibold. 2001. “Relations Among the Implicit
Association Test, Discriminatory Behavior, and Explicit Measure of Racial Attitudes,” Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 37:435-42.
       Nosek, Brian A., Mahzarin R. Banaji & Anthony G. Greenwald. 2002. “Harvesting
Implicit Group Attitudes and Beliefs from a Demonstration Website,” Group Dynamics: Theory,
Research, and Practice, 6:101-15.
        Plott, Charles R. & Kathryn Zeiler. 2005. “The Willingness to Pay–Willingness to Accept
Gap, the ‘Endowment Effect,’ Subject Misconceptions, and Experimental Procedures for
Eliciting Valuations,” American Economic Review, 95:530-45.
       Posner, Eric. A. 1995. “Contract Law in the Welfare State: A Defense of the
Unconscionability Doctrine, Usury Laws, and Related Limitations on the Freedom to Contract,”
Journal of Legal Studies, 24:283-319.
       Posner, Richard A. 1979. “Utilitarianism, Economics, and Legal Theory,” Journal of
Legal Studies, 8:103-40.
       Posner, Richard A. 1989. “An Economic Analysis of Sex Discrimination Laws,”
University of Chicago Law Review, 56:1311-36.
       Posner, Richard A. 1992. Economic Analysis of Law, 4th ed. (Boston: Little Brown).
      Rabin, Matthew. 1993. “Incorporating Fairness into Game Theory and Economics,”
American Economic Review, 83:1281-1302.
       Rachlinski, Jeffrey J. 1998. “A Positive Psychological Theory of Judging in Hindsight,”
University of Chicago Law Review, 65:571-625.
      Rachlinski, Jeffrey J. 2003. “The Uncertain Psychological Case for Paternalism,” in
Symposium: Empirical Legal Realism: A New Social Scientific Assessment of Law and Human
Behavior, Northwestern University Law Review, 97:1165-1225.
      Schelling, Thomas C. 1984. “The Intimate Contest for Self-Command,” in Choice and
Consequence (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press).
       Schwab, Stewart. 1988. “A Coasean Experiment on Contract Presumptions,” Journal of
Legal Studies, 17:237-68.
      Shavell, Steven. 1981. “A Note on Efficiency vs. Distributional Equity in Legal
Rulemaking: Should Distributional Equity Matter Given Optimal Income Taxation?” American
Economic Review, 71:414-18.
      Shavell, Steven. 2004. Foundations of Economic Analysis of Law (Cambridge, Mass.:
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press).
      Stigler, George J. 1971. “The Theory of Economic Regulation,” Bell Journal of
Economics and Management Science, 2:3-21.



                                                44
       Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1987. “Pareto Efficient and Optimal Taxation and the New Welfare
Economics” in Handbook of Public Economics, ed. Alan Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, 2:991-
1042 (Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers).
       Stolberg, Sheryl Gay. 2003. “Face Value at the Capitol: Senator Wants to ‘Promote Some
Diversity’ in Congressional Artwork,” New York Times (Aug. 13):E1.
     Strotz, Robert H. 1955-56. “Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility
Maximization,” Review of Economic Studies, 23:165-80.
     Sunstein, Cass R. and Richard H. Thaler. 2003. “Libertarian Paternalism Is Not an
Oxymoron,” University of Chicago Law Review, 70:1159-1202.
       Svenson, Ola, Baruch Fischhoff and Donald MacGregor. 1985. “Perceived Driving
Safety and Seatbelt Usage,” Accident Analysis & Prevention, 17:119-33.
      Thaler, Richard H. 1996. “Doing Economics Without Homo Economicus,” in
Foundations of Research in Economics: How Do Economists Do Economics?, ed. Steven G.
Medema and Warren J. Samuels, 227-37 (Brookfield, VT: Edward Elgar Publishing Company).
      Thaler, Richard H. 1980. “Toward A Positive Theory of Consumer Choice,” Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization, 1:39-60.
        Thaler, Richard H. and Robyn M. Dawes. 1992. “Cooperation,” in Richard H. Thaler,
The Winner’s Curse: Paradoxes and Anomalies of Economic Life, 6-20 (New York: The Free
Press).
      Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman. 1973. “Availability: A Heuristic for Judging
Frequency and Probability,” Cognitive Psychology 5:207-32.
      Weinstein, Neil D. 1980. “Unrealistic Optimism About Future Life Events,” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 39:806-20.
       Weinstein, Neil D. and William M. Klein. 2002. “Resistance of Personal Risk
Perceptions to Debiasing Interventions,” in Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive
Judgment, ed. Thomas Gilovich, Dale Griffin and Daniel Kahneman, 313-23 (New York:
Cambridge University Press).
      Weiss, Deborah M. 1991. “Paternalistic Pension Policy: Psychological Evidence and
Economic Theory,” University of Chicago Law Review, 58:1275-1319.




                                               45
