                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                WOMEN, WORK, AND CULTURE

                                           Raquel Fernandez

                                         Working Paper 12888
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12888


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2007




The material in this paper constituted the basis for my Marshall Lecture at the European Economic
Association, Vienna 2006. I wish to thank Liz Potamites for excellent research assistance and an anonymous
referee for helpful suggestions. I wish to thank the NSF for financial support This research was completed
while I was a Visiting Scholar at the Russell Sage Foundation. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Raquel Fernandez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Women, Work, and Culture
Raquel Fernandez
NBER Working Paper No. 12888
February 2007
JEL No. J12,J21,Z1

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper discusses some recent advances in the area of culture and economics and examines the
effect of culture on a key economic outcome: female labor supply. To separate the effect of market
variables and institutions from culture, I use an epidemiological approach, studying second-generation
American women. I use both female LFP and attitudes in the women's country of ancestry as cultural
proxies and show that both cultural proxies have quantitatively significant effects on women's work
outcomes. The paper concludes with some suggestions for future empirical and theoretical research
topics in this area.

Raquel Fernandez
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
raquel.fernandez@nyu.edu
1       Introduction
Despite the fact that, for simplicity, we often model the economy as consisting
of Robinson Crusoe on his island, most of us would agree with the ancient
Greeks that man is a social animal. In what ways, however, if any, do we need
to consider the social nature of man in order to study economic questions?
This is the issue I (partially) address in this lecture by examining the role of
culture in economics.
    A definition of culture is often too broad to be very useful for analyti-
cal purposes. For instance, we may think of culture as a body of shared
knowledge, understanding, and practice. For the purposes of what I will
be discussing, a working definition that may prove more useful is to think of
diﬀerences in culture as systematic variation in beliefs and preferences across
time, space, or social groups. Note that there is nothing in this definition
that considers culture as either irrational or static. Indeed, in some situa-
tions it may be useful to think about culture as the choice of equilibrium in
a environment with multiple equilibria (this has been the traditional way to
conceptualize it) or to model the evolution of culture as the intergenerational
updating of beliefs in light of past experience.1
    Do we believe that culture matters to economic outcomes? I think that,
at some vague level, most economists would probably agree that preferences
and beliefs are endogenous and hence likely to vary across environments.
Whether culture plays a quantitatively important role in explaining eco-
nomic outcomes, however, is another question and here I think that, overall,
economists would tend to be skeptical. This skepticism stems, in large part,
from the absence of rigorous empirical work linking culture and economics.
In fact, until fairly recently, the role of culture in explaining economic phe-
nomena has been largely ignored by modern economics. When faced with
variation in economic outcomes, across countries or individuals, the tradi-
tional strategy has been to explain this variation with diﬀerences in policies,
institutions, and technology. In such an exercise, the distributions of agents’
preferences and beliefs are taken as given (except in a rational expectations
sense) and invariant to the environment. To seek to explain variation in out-
comes with diﬀerences in beliefs or preferences is seen as unscientific.2 And,
in large part for good reason. There is no scientific rigor in invoking diﬀer-
    1
    See Fernández (2007).
    2
    The Stigler-Becker (1977) dictum—“de gustibus non est disputandum”—has in this sense
cast a long shadow in economics.


                                           1
ences in unobserables as a theoretical explanation. At the empirical level,
running, say, cross-country regressions with a few (mismeasured) aggregate
macro variables and calling the residual "culture" is equally unpersuasive.
    Over the last few years a new body of work has emerged that has at-
tempted to provide evidence on the eﬀect of culture on economic outcomes.
This evidence is of varying quality, conducted with various methodologies,
and on a diverse set of questions. It ranges from the relationship of trust
with outcomes such as trade (Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2005)) or trade
union membership (Algan and Cahuc (2006a)), to the relationship of culture
to eﬀort (Ichino and Maggi (2000)), the links between religion and growth
(Barro and McLeary (2003), Tabellini (2005)), as well as historical work on
culture and institutions (Greif (1994, 2005)) or Jewish culture and occupa-
tional choice (Botticini and Eckstein (2005)). I will not attempt to give a
survey of this work here (see Fernández (2006) for a partial review of this
literature), but rather restrict the main focus of this paper to discussing
and presenting evidence about the importance of culture for a key economic
variable: women’s participation in the formal labor market.
    There are probably few transformations over the 20th century as radical
as the change in women’s role. As shown in Figure 1 for the United States,
married female labor force participation was around 2% in 1880 and increased
to around 73% in 2000.3 The reasons given for this increase are varied
and to some extent dependent on the time period: the rise of the service
sector, the diﬀusion of technology that allowed housework to become less
time and energy consuming, and the wider availability of contraception (the
pill) that allowed women to control their fertility are among the hypotheses
entertained.4
    A diﬀerent hypothesis is that the gradual increase in women’s labor force
participation resulted in large part from the slow evolution in cultural beliefs
about the appropriate role of woman in society. Indeed, as shown in the
poll data presented in Figure 2, the percentage of individuals in the US who
stated that they approve of a wife working if her husband can support her
rose from 18 % in 1936 to over 80% in 1998. This evolution in attitudes may
both have influenced and have been influenced by changes in female LFP over
   3
      Calculations by author using U.S. Census data from 1880-2000. White married women,
25-45 born in the U.S., non-farm, non-group quarters with spouse present.
    4
      See, for example, Goldin (1990), Goldin and Katz (2002), and Greenwood, Seshadri,
and Yorukoglu (2005). See, for example, del Boca and Locatelli (2006) for a useful survey
of the determinants of female labor force participation.


                                           2
time. For example, Fernández, Fogli, and Olivetti (2004) show using a wide
variety of data sets that men whose mothers worked while they were growing
up tend to be married to women who also work. This result holds even
after controlling for a large set of socio-economic indicators and its eﬀect
on women’s work behavior is quantitatively important: having a working
mother increased the probability that a man’s wife worked by 32 percentage
points (from 39% to 71%). They interpreted this as evidence that preference
transmission may have played an important role in the change in female
labor supply in that men brought up by a working mother either preferred a
working spouse or were themselves preferred by women who wanted to work.
They also presented some evidence for the intertemporal consequences of
this preference transmission for female labor supply. They showed that US
states with idiosyncratically higher mobilization rates during World War II
had a higher percentage of working mothers and hence a greater proportion
of men brought up by working women. According to their argument, over
time these states should present an "echo" eﬀect with, ceteris paribus, more
working women a generation later. As shown by Fernández et al, this eﬀect
is indeed present for the right cohort of women (those born in 1930-35) and
not for those born earlier. Thus, this work points to the possibility that
changes in attitudes brought about by changes in individual experience may
have been important contributors to changes in female labor supply over
time.5
    While the evidence discussed above is supportive of the hypothesis that
individual attitudes towards work matter and that these are influenced in a
systematic fashion, it is easier to identify diﬀerences in culture with diﬀer-
ences in preferences/beliefs over time periods or countries rather than with
variation across US states at a point in time.6 The work that I will present
here will rely instead on the fact that there exists important variation in the
amount that women work across countries. This is in fact true today, as
in the past. As shown in Figure 3, female LFP in 2003 in OECD countries
ranged from a low of slightly over 20% in Turkey to a high of 81 percent
in Iceland. Is this variation mostly a consequence of diﬀerences in purely
economic variables and institutions or do diﬀerences in culture play an im-
   5
      For the relationship between work and culture, see also Reimers (1985), Antecol (2000),
Levine (1993), Vella (1994), and Pencavel (1998).
    6
      See Potamites (2006) for a quantitative analysis of Black vs White female labor supply
in the US that concludes that economic factors are unable to explain the large diﬀerential
in work behavior.


                                             3
portant role? This is the question that this paper will explore.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the epidemiological
approach to studying culture. This approach uses the strategy of analyzing
outcomes for immigrants or their descendants as a way to separate the influ-
ence of markets and institutions from that of culture. Section 3 summarizes
and extends some of the earlier research on female labor supply and culture
by Fernández and Fogli (2006a) (henceforth denoted FF (2006a)). This work
is based on the use of quantitative outcomes in the country of ancestry as
proxies for culture. Section 4 introduces new work that explores the use
of the cross-country variation in answers to surveys as a proxy for culture
in understanding the work behavior of the descendants of immigrants in the
US. Section 5 discusses some future avenues for empirical and theoretical
research on culture and concludes.


2       The Epidemiological Approach
The main problem faced in any analysis of culture and its eﬀects on eco-
nomic outcomes is to isolate its influence from those due to purely economic
variables (prices, income, etc.). As discussed previously, a cross-country
analysis of, say, female LFP, that attempted to control for some macroeco-
nomic diﬀerences and associated the coeﬃcient on the country dummies with
the eﬀect of culture would not be very convincing. The new literature in this
field has met this challenge in diﬀerent ways. Case studies (e.g. Botticini
and Eckstein (2005)) are one direction. Using answers to attitudinal surveys
to explain cross-country outcomes is another approach. In that case, how-
ever, the problem is that variation in how individuals across countries answer
these survey questions may reflect as much economic factors as they do cul-
tural diﬀerences. Thus, this approach has required the use of instruments
for culture which are diﬃcult to obtain and has met with variable success.7
    The research presented here follows a diﬀerent strategy, that I have termed
elsewhere (Fernández (2006)) the "epidemiological approach". It relies on
    7
    Religion, for example, has been used as an instrument for individual responses to
various survey questions by Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2006). It is noteworthy,
however, that in none of these exercises is religion likely to be a proper instrument. In
their (2005) paper on trust and trade, on the other hand, the authors make innovative use
of the genetic distance between indigenous populations as a proxy for the level of trust
between populations.



                                           4
examining immigrants (or, better yet, descendants of immigrants) to a coun-
try to isolate the eﬀect of culture from other factors, thus exploiting the
diﬀerential portability of culture relative to markets and institutions. The
basic idea is simple: the descendants of immigrants to, say, the US, share
by construction the same markets and institutions. They do not necessarily
share, however, the same culture. In particular, they may have, to some
extent, inherited their parents’ culture, i.e., their preferences and beliefs.
Hence by studying work outcomes for women born in one country but whose
parents were born in a diﬀerent country, we may be able to pick up diﬀerences
in cultural heritages while maintaining constant economic and institutional
factors.
    The epidemiological strategy has its own set of problems. Immigrants
may be subject to many shocks (language, discrimination, greater uncer-
tainty, etc.) which could cause them to deviate from their traditional be-
havior. Culture, furthermore, is socially constructed: to be replicated, the
behavior may require the incentives provided by a larger social body such
as a neighborhood, school, or ethnic network. Furthermore, immigrants are
unlikely to be a representative sample of their home-country’s population.
Their beliefs, preferences, and unobserved diﬀerences in their economic cir-
cumstances may diﬀer significantly from the country average. Lastly, over
time, assimilation to the dominant culture will presumably weaken the force
of the original culture. This problem would be more severe for the descen-
dants of immigrants but, on the other hand, the shocks associated with recent
immigration should no longer be relevant for this group and this seems like
a more important source of concern.
    It should be noted that all the factors mentioned above introduce a bias
towards finding culture to be insignificant.8 Thus, on the whole, compar-
isons of behavior or outcomes across diﬀerent immigrant groups are a very
demanding test of the importance of culture. In epidemiology, when diﬀer-
ences across groups remain, one must be careful not to conclude that genetics
is determinative when the underlying cause may be cultural; in economics,
when significant diﬀerences are not observed, one must be careful not to rule
out cultural forces.9
   8
     The sole exception is a selection argument which can always be constructed, but as
we argue further on, this is highly implausible.
   9
     In epidemiology, researchers study immigrants to examine whether observed cross-
country diﬀerences in, say, heart disease, are genetic or environmental. In these analyses,
culture is considered as part of the environment. Non-convergence of immigrant and native


                                            5
    The first paper to my knowledge to use this approach in economics is
Carroll, Rhee, and Rhee (1994). The authors were interested in determin-
ing whether some of the large observed cross-country diﬀerences in savings
rate were cultural in origin. In order to analyze this question, they studied
the savings behavior of immigrants in Canada. They found that culture—
dummies for the region for the immigrant’s home country—does not help
explain diﬀerences in saving rates. As the authors acknowledge, however,
their conclusions must be viewed as tentative due to data restrictions. In
particular, they could control only for broad regions of origin, wealth is im-
perfectly measured, and remittances are not observed. Furthermore, it may
be that saving or low consumption serves as a diﬀerent signal in the country
of origin than it does in Canada and that, divorced from their original social
environment, the incentives to save are diﬀerent.
    Fernández and Fogli (2006a) also use the epidemiological approach to
study the eﬀect of culture on women’s work and fertility outcomes. Central
to our approach is the use of a quantitative variable related to the outcome
we are studying as a proxy for culture. In particular, in Fernández and Fogli
(2006a,b) we used past values of female labor force participation (LFP) and
total fertility rates (TFR) in the country of ancestry as cultural proxies for
work and fertility respectively. The argument for using these variables is
as follows. Consider, for example, the value of female LFP in a country.
This aggregate variable reflects the market work decisions of women and
hence depends on individual characteristics (married, with children, etc.),
and the economic and institutional environment (e.g., wages, probability of
finding a job, or availability of day care). The aggregate variable is also
likely to depend on women’s preferences and beliefs, broadly defined, i.e., on
culture. In particular, it may depend on how a woman conceives of her role
in the household, whether she thinks her children will benefit or suﬀer from
having a working mother, or how she is treated by friends and neighbors as
a result of her choice. Now, if cross-country diﬀerences in the value of this
aggregate variable have explanatory power for why, in the US, women from
one ancestry work more than women from another ancestry after controlling
for their individual economic attributes, only the cultural contribution to
this variable can be responsible. The economic and institutional conditions
heart disease rates, however, does not allow one to concude that genetics is responsible.
The persistence of culture and its portability (e.g., diet) implies that it could be the
underlying cause of these diﬀerences.



                                           6
of the country of ancestry should no longer be relevant for second-generation
American women (as neither the country nor even the time period is the
same), whereas the preferences and beliefs embodied in these variables may
still matter if parents and/or neighborhood transmitted them to the next
generation.
     We think that the approach discussed above is superior to the alternative
of using a dummy variable for the woman’s country of ancestry. The latter
suﬀers from the disadvantage of not being explicit as to why it may matter
to be of Mexican, say, relative to Finnish, ancestry. The choice of a specific
quantitative variable also makes it easier to formulate alternative hypothe-
ses about what may be responsible for the correlation between the cultural
proxy and the economic outcome of interest and to test the most relevant
alternatives.


3     Female LFP as a Cultural Proxy
In this section I extend the work of FF (2006a). Instead of using past values
of female LFP in the women’s country of ancestry, I use instead future (from
the point of view of the women in the sample) values of female LFP. If
culture is, on the whole, evolving slowly, then this variable should also have
explanatory power for individual women’s labor supply.

3.1     Data Sets and Sample Selection
To construct the sample, I follow the same procedure as in FF (2006a). In
that paper we used the 1970 US Census to form a sample of second-generation
American women who are married and between the ages of 30-40 years old.10
We used 1970 as it is the last year in which the census asked individuals
explicitly where their parents were born. We assigned country-of-ancestry
by the father’s birthplace as the census does not provide the country of birth
of an individual’s mother when both parents were born outside U.S..
   10
      We used the 1% 1970 Form 2 Metro Sample of the U.S. census. We excluded women
living in farms or working in agricultural occupations, as well as those living in group
quarters (e.g., prisons, and other group living arrangements such as rooming houses and
military barracks). In 1970, about 11% of married women, age 30-40, have fathers who
were born outside the US.




                                           7
    For our work cultural proxy we used the 1950 value of female LFP in
the country of ancestry from the International Labor Organization (ILO).11
As the women in our sample are 30-40 in 1970 and were born in U.S., their
parents must have been in the US by 1930-1940, depending on the precise age
of the woman. Thus, on the one hand, it could be argued that the values of
the culture proxy variables around 1930-1940 or even a decade or two earlier
would best reflect the culture of the country of ancestry. On the other hand,
one could argue that the values that parents and society transmit are best
reflected in what the counterparts of these women are doing in the country
of ancestry in 1970. Data limitations, in any case, did not permit us to use
years prior to 1950 since values for neither variable are available for more
than a handful of countries prior to that year.
    We concluded our selection by eliminating from our sample all women
whose fathers were born in countries that became centrally planned economies
around World War II.12 The rationale for doing this is that the parents of
the women in our sample must have been in the US by 1940. Hence, the
parents did not live through the profound transformations in the economies,
institutions, and cultures that these countries experienced over that period,
and using data from the 1950s and later would thus not capture the correct
culture for these individuals. We also excluded Russia since the revolution
was in 1917 and the parents may or may not have been there for any sub-
stantial length of time thereafter.13 Lastly, solely in order to be able to make
meaningful comparisons across averages of women by country of ancestry, we
also eliminated those countries with fewer than 15 observations. Since our
regressions are all run at the individual level, including these small numbers
of observations does not aﬀect our results. Our final sample consisted of
6,774 women and 25 countries of ancestry. These are reported in Table 3.1.
    In FF (2006a) we found that female LFP in 1950 in a woman’s country
  11
      Female LFP is the rate of economically active population for women over 10 years of
age. The active population includes persons in “paid” or “unpaid” employment, mem-
bers of the armed forces (including temporary members), and the unemployed (including
first-time job seekers). “Unpaid” employment includes employers, own-account workers
and members of producers’ cooperatives, unpaid family workers, persons engaged in the
production of economic goods and services for own and household consumption, and ap-
prentices who receive pay.
   12
      We eliminated Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Yu-
goslavia, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania.
   13
      For robustness, we have also run our regressions with Russia and our results are
unaﬀected.


                                           8
of ancestry had explanatory power for her market labor supply in the US in
1970. If culture is, on the whole, a relatively slow moving variable, it should
be possible to use female LFP from other decades and find similar results. In
this section I examine whether female LFP in a woman’s country of ancestry
in 1990 has explanatory power for women’s work outcomes in the US in
1970.14 Aside from its independent interest, this will also be complementary
to the work in section 4 which examines whether the cross-country variation
in responses to survey questions in 1990 helps explain women’s work decisions
in the US in 1970.15

3.2     Female LFP in 1990
To study women’s labor outcomes, I use the number of hours worked in the
previous year which in the 1970 census is reported in intervals.16 I assign
the midpoint of each chosen interval. In 1970 the women in my sample
were working on average 10.2 hours a week (with a standard deviation of
16.3 hours). Averaged across country of ancestry, these women worked 10.7
hours a week, but with a much lower standard deviation (2.6 hours). In 1990,
across the 25 countries in our sample, female LFP averaged 35.7 percent with
a standard deviation of 10.7 percent. They ranged from a low of 13.8% for
Syria to a high of 54.9% for China. Figure 4 plots average hours worked in
1970 in the US by country of ancestry against female LFP in 1990 in that
country.
    We estimate the following model:

                      Zisj = β 0 + β 1 Xi + β 2 Zej + fs + εisj ,
                                       0
                                                                                      (1)

where Zisj is the work decision of woman i who resides in the Standard
Metropolitan Statistical Area (SMSA) s and is of ancestry j.17 Xi includes a
  14
     The correlation between female LFP in 1950 and that in 1990 across the 25 countries
in out sample is 0.52, i..e, relatively high but far from 1.
  15
     We use 1990 as the questions we are interested in were only asked as of that year.
  16
     The number of hours worked in the previous week are recorded in eight intervals: 1-14
hours, 15-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40, 41-48, 49-59, 60+. All other observations are coded as
N/A and treated as zeros in this work.
  17
     An SMSA is an area consisting of a large population center and adjacent communities
(usually counties) that have a high degree of economic and social interaction with that
center. A total of 117 SMSAs (including not residing in an SMSA) are identified in the
data.


                                            9
set of individual characteristics which varies with the specification considered,
fs is a full set of dummies for the metropolitan area of residence, and Zej is the
proxy for culture—our variable of interest—which is assigned by the country of
father’s birthplace. Since the key variable on the right-hand side only varies
by country of ancestry, all the standard errors we report are corrected for
clustering at the country-of-ancestry level.
    Table 3.2 shows the main results from using 1990 female LFP as our
cultural proxy.       In the first column, the number of hours worked by in-
dividual i is regressed on female LFP in 1990 in the country of ancestry
and the woman’s metropolitan area of residence. The coeﬃcient on the
cultural variable is positive and strongly significant, indicating that women
whose parents were born in countries where women participated less in the
workforce in 1990 tend to work less themselves in the US in 1970.18
    Although my strategy is to exploit the diﬀerence in the portability of
culture relative to markets and institutions, there may very well be inter-
generational persistence in economic variables that come from purely eco-
nomic factors. In particular, since I cannot directly control for diﬀerences
in parental attributes such as education, income, or wealth, which may then
independently aﬀect a daughter’s work outcomes, I next include a woman’s
education level in the regression. This variable seems by far the most impor-
tant one to control for since it directly aﬀects the relative price of working
at home relative to the market and may well be influenced by borrowing
constraints and hence parents’ characteristics. Of course, by controlling
for education we are also eliminating the indirect influence of culture on a
woman’s work outcome since a woman who wants to work will be more likely
to value obtaining a higher level of education.
    Column 2 presents the regression results from including a series of indi-
vidual characteristics, in particular the woman’s age (and its square) and a
set of dummy variables to capture her level of education (below high school
[omitted], high school degree [High School], some college, and at least a col-
lege degree [College +]). As shown, women with a college education tend
to work more than others. The direct eﬀect of culture remains of the same
magnitude and statistical significance.
  18
    Thus, for selection to be responsible for these results, it would require (given identical
distributions of preferences and beliefs across countries, i.e., given the absence of cultural
diﬀerences across countries) for women who have a high taste for work to select into
immigration from high female LFP countries and women with low taste for work to select
from low female LFP countries. This seems rather implausible.


                                             10
    Next I include several characteristics of a woman’s husband in the re-
gression analysis. Once again, culture may aﬀect a woman’s choice of hus-
band and one might expect that a woman that wanted to work may be less
concerned with her husband’s income level and more concerned with other
idiosyncratic features. On the other hand, the forces that push towards
assortative mating may lead more educated women to marry more educated
and higher income men, which may then negatively influence the number of
hours they work.
    The third column presents the results for what we call the “full specifi-
cation” in which we also include the following characteristics of a woman’s
husband: his age (as given by 10 diﬀerent age-range dummies), his education
(as captured by the same four dummy variables as for the woman), and his
total income.19 As can be seen from the regression results, the husband’s
characteristics are important determinants of a woman’s labor supply: a
woman whose husband has at least a college degree, everything else equal,
works on average 5 hours less per week than a woman whose husband did
not complete high school, almost half the mean labor supply of the women
in our sample. Marriage to a man with $10,000 more income over the mean
is associated, on average, with a woman working almost three fewer hours
a week. The eﬀect of culture remains positive and statistically significant
at the 1% level, with the coeﬃcient increasing significantly in magnitude (as
do the coeﬃcients on female education). The latter indicates that there is
a positive correlation between a woman’s education and her husband’s edu-
cation and total income as well as between these characteristics and female
LFP in her country of origin.20 When we do not control for the husband’s
characteristics, the woman’s education picks up both the positive eﬀect of
her cultural heritage and the negative eﬀect of her husband’s income and ed-
ucation. Similarly, when we omit the husband’s characteristics, the culture
proxy also picks up the negative eﬀect of women from higher LFP countries
tending to marry men with higher education and income.
    In the full specification an increase in the level of female LFP in 1990 by
one standard deviation (across countries) is associated with an increase of
0.87 hours per week, about an 8% increase over the average for that period.
It also accounts for about one third of the variation in hours worked per week
  19
     Income is given by the total pre-tax personal income from all sources for the previous
calendar year and is measured in tens of thousands of dollars.
  20
     This same eﬀect was present when we used female LFP in 1950 as our cultural proxy.



                                            11
in the US across country of ancestry.
    The last column in table 3.2 explores the eﬀect of including the total
fertility rate in 1950 (TFR 1950) in the full specification. Note that while
fertility is negatively correlated with labor supply, the correlation between
TFR 1950 and female LFP 1990 is far from -1 (it is -0.45). As shown in
column 4, TFR 1950 enters negatively whereas female LFP remains positive
and significant though with a lower coeﬃcient as a result of the negative
correlation between the two cultural proxies. This suggests that the fertility
variable may also be capturing independent cultural attitudes towards family
size, which are not determined solely by cultural attitudes towards women’s
work.

3.3    Robustness
The results are robust to various alternative specifications. As shown in the
first column of table 3.3, using cross-country female LFP for a narrower age
group (women 30-34 years old) yields similar results. A one standard devia-
tion increase in this variable is associated with 0.92 increase in hours worked
per week in 1970. It is likewise robust to excluding countries that have large
population sizes in our sample (Italy, Mexico, or Canada), including Russia,
or excluding China.
    A main concern in FF (2006a) was whether the existence of a variable
such as unobserved human capital could explain our results without resorting
to culture, as such a variable could also be transmitted intergenerationally.
As shown in columns 2 and 3 of table 3.3, our results our robust to including
a rather crude measure of cross-country diﬀerences in human capital—GDP
per capita in 1990.21 Although the variable is positive and significant in
the full specification when our cultural proxy is not included, it becomes
insignificant once it is included whereas the magnitude of the cultural proxy
does not change. If we use instead per capital GDP in 1950, which may be
a better measure of the human capital the women’s parents might have been
expected to have, the sign of this variable turns from positive and significant
when the cultural proxy is omitted, to negative and significant once it is
included. The coeﬃcient on female LFP 1990 increases indicating that it
is positively correlated with GDP in 1950. The eﬀect of a one standard
  21
    The sample size is smaller as we do not not have GDP 1990 figures for Cuba.   We
used the World Development Indicators of the World Bank



                                        12
deviation increase in female LFP in 1990 is correspondingly larger: it leads
to an increase of 1.2 hours worked per week.
     There are many other ways in which to measure human capital. While
it is beyond the scope of this paper to include these additional checks here,
it is important to note that in FF (2006a) the cultural proxy—female LFP in
1950—is shown to be robust to a large variety of alternative measures. In par-
ticular, we used the 1940 Census to measure the average years of education
of immigrants from the diﬀerent countries in our sample (from individuals
who belonged to the age group of the parents of the women in our 1970
sample). We also measured years of parental education directly using the
General Social Survey, albeit for a much smaller sample of women and coun-
tries. Lastly, we also included Hanushek and Kimko’s (2000) measures of
quality of education across countries in both of the exercises. Our results
were robust to all these measures of human capital. Perhaps most convinc-
ingly of all, we constructed measures of wage rates for all the women who
worked and showed that, in an otherwise standard Mincer specification of a
log wage regression, female LFP in 1950 had no explanatory power. Thus,
it is unlikely that our results are driven by unobserved human capital as, in
that case, one would expect the cultural proxy to also have some power to
explain wages.22


4      Attitudes in 1990 as a Cultural Proxy
An alternative to capturing culture by using country-of-ancestry variables re-
lated to the economic outcome of interest is to examine attitudes directly. As
discussed previously, the problem with using individual attitudes as an indi-
cator of culture is the potential for reverse causality, i.e., the possibility that
individual attitudes are primarily determined by economic circumstances.23
In that case, an instrument is required for the cultural component expressed
in attitudes (e.g., religion in Guiso et al (2006) or regional literacy rates and
indicators of political institutions in Tabellini (2005)). This problem, how-
ever, is avoided if we use the attitudes of individuals from a diﬀerent time
and place. In particular, we can use the attitudes towards women’s work ex-
pressed by individuals in the woman’s country of ancestry. These attitudes
  22
     We also used a Heckman selection model in which the husband’s characteristics were
used to control for selection into the work force and obtained similar results.
  23
     This is the problem in, for example, Algan and Cahuc (2006b).


                                          13
are potentially aﬀected by a woman’s material circumstances—her economic
and institutional environment—as well as by her own preferences and be-
liefs. If these attitudes are able to help explain the work behavior of second-
generation American women it should be only because the belief/preference
component of the attitudes has explanatory power since the economic and
institutional environment (and time period as well) has changed.24

4.1     Marginal Eﬀects from the WVS
We obtained attitudes towards work from the World Value Survey (WVS).
The WVS consists of nationally representative surveys conducted by a net-
work of social scientists from universities around the world. Data is available
from the from the first four waves 1981, 1990-1991, 1995-1996 and 1999-2001.
More than 80 independent countries have been surveyed in at least one wave.
We used the second wave (1990-91) which covered 43 countries and which
included questions that reveal attitudes towards women’s work. We focus
on two questions that we think are particular useful. Individuals were asked
whether they strongly agreed, agreed, disagreed or strongly disagreed with
each of the statements below:

       1. Being a housewife is just as fulfilling as working for pay.
       2. Having a job is the best way for a woman to be an independent
       person.

    This questions were answered by individuals that belong to 18 countries
of our Census sample (17 countries in the case of second question).25 These
countries are overwhelmingly European (the exceptions are only 3: Mexico,
China, and Japan), hence we chose to focus our analysis on the European
  24
     Algan and Cahuc (2006a) use attitudes of individuals in the US to proxy for the
attitudes of individuals from diﬀerent European countries. They do not use the epidemi-
ological approach, however, since they are attempting to explain cross-European aggregate
outcomes such as trade union density. Thus, they face the usual problem that these aggre-
gate outcomes could be driven by cross-country diﬀerences in economic and institutional
environment.
  25
     Canadians were also asked these questions, but as noted in Guiso, Sapienza, and
Zingales (2003), there are problems with the representativeness of the Canadian sample
that year. In particular, the authors note that the religious aﬃliations do not match
the proportions observed in other data sources and hence we follow the authors and omit
Canada from the sample.


                                           14
sample. Our sample therefore consists of 14 or 15 countries, depending on
the question. These questions were answered by 1617 individuals on average
from each country (with a high of 4147 from Spain and a low of 588 from
Finland). Individuals are weighted so that, at the country level, the sample
is representative and, across countries, each country has equal number of
observations.
    Column 7 in Table 3.1 gives the percentage of individuals from each coun-
try that either "agreed" or "strongly agreed" with the housework statement
(i.e. these individuals are coded as 1); column 8 gives the percentage that
either "disagreed" or "strongly disagreed" with the job statement. Hence,
in each case, the greater the fraction coded as one, the higher the percentage
of people in that country that have what may be considered as more conser-
vative or traditional views on women’s role. On average across countries,
59.8% of individuals thought that being a housewife was as fulfilling as work-
ing for pay and 27.2% of individuals disagreed that a job was the best way
for a woman to be an independent person. The standard deviation across
countries was, respectively, 8.06% for the housework statement and 7.46%
for the job statement.
    Figure 5 shows the percentage that are coded one in the job statement
relative to the housework statement by country. As can be clearly seen,
on the whole countries that had relatively high fractions of their population
disagreeing with the statement that a job is best for independence also had
higher fractions that agreed that housework is as fulfilling as working for
pay.26 Across countries, the correlation across questions in the fraction
coded as 1 was .44. Across individuals, the correlation in the answers to the
two questions was surprisingly low: 0.19.
    In order to measure how countries varied in their cultural attitudes to-
wards women’s work, we ran an individual level probit regression on the
answers to the two statements (coded zero-one as described previously). In
addition to a country dummy (our primary variable of interest), we con-
trolled for age (and its square), sex, and marital status. Observations were
  26
     An outlier in this respect is the Netherlands which has fairly "conservative" views
about whether a job is best for independence but less so with respect to finding housework
fulfilling. It should be noted, in any case, that the extent to which a particular answer
may be considered conservative itself is likely to have changed over time. That housework
is considered fulfilling may now be considered a radical statement—a reinterpretation of
woman’s work—rather than a conservative view reflecting the thought that woman’s place
is in the home.


                                           15
clustered at the country level. In all cases, the omitted country was the
Netherlands. For both statements, the country dummies were individually
highly significant. The values of the marginal eﬀects vary from -.076 to .242
for the housework statement (with an average value of .034, standard devi-
ation of 0.083) and from -.190 to 0 for the job statement (with an average
value of -.139 and a standard deviation of 0.054). A number such as 0.24 for
Turkey implies that an individual from Turkey is 24% more likely to declare
that housework is fulfilling than a comparable individual from the Nether-
lands. The country marginal eﬀects for the two statements are denoted by
the variable names housework and job respectively.
    We also ran individual level probit regressions which, in addition to
the aforementioned demographic characteristics, included dummies both for
household income deciles and for 8 town size categories ranging from 2,000
people or less to 500,000 people or more. We obtained very similar results
and so do not report them here.27
    Before proceeding, it is of interest to know how well the attitudes of
individuals in the country of ancestry correlate with the attitudes of second-
generation Americans from that ancestry. One cannot use the WVS Ameri-
can survey to answer this question since it does not ask an individual her/his
ancestry. We rely instead on the General Social Survey which in 1988 and
1994 asked individuals these two questions. Unfortunately, the sample of
second-generation Americans in the GSS is very small, so we use instead
the response to a question about one’s ethnicity to assign an ancestry to
individuals. This has the drawback, however, that some immigrant groups
have been in the US longer than others and that individuals are likely to
have more than one ethnicity. Performing a similar exercise to that in the
WVS for the GSS, we find that the correlation between the marginal eﬀects
for country of ancestry and for the ethnicity of individuals in the US to be
high for the job statement (0.79) but surprisingly low for the housework one
(0.05). This may be a result of several factors: the very small number of rep-
resentatives from several countries, the fact that individuals in the US could
also answer "neither" to agreeing or not with the statement, and the smaller
number of countries represented (11). As mentioned previously, it may also
be that, particularly in the US in the mid 90s, it is no longer necessarily a
conservative statement to think that being a housewife is just as fulfilling as
  27
   The number of countries is reduced as these additional controls are not available for
Sweden, Finland, and Turkey.


                                          16
having a job.

4.2    Results
We now turn to an analysis of the explanatory power of the new cultural
proxies for the hours worked of second-generation American women in 1970.
I perform an analysis similar to that of section 3, except that instead of using
the values of female LFP to capture culture, we use the country marginal
eﬀects obtained in the exercises above. The sample consists of 4660 individ-
uals from 15 countries when we use the cultural proxy associated with the
housework statement or 4618 individuals from 14 countries when we use the
cultural proxy associated with the job statement. On average, the women in
the sample worked 9.7 hours a week with a standard deviation of 15.9 hours;
across ancestries, the average is 9.9 hours a week with a standard deviation of
1.5 hours. Figures 6a and 6b show the plot of housework and job by country,
respectively, against average hours worked in the US in 1970 by women from
that country of ancestry.
    The first three columns of tables 4.1a show the results from an OLS
regression on hours worked on housework and a series of control variables.
As shown in the first column, controlling solely for SMSA, the housework
variable enters negative and significantly. Thus, individuals whose country of
ancestry is more "conservative" tend to work less. This remain true when the
woman’s age and education levels are included in the second column as well
as when her husband’s education and total income are included in the third
column. It is interesting to note that the magnitude of the cultural eﬀect
decreases slightly when the husband’s characteristics are included whereas
the woman’s education becomes positive and significant. This points to
the fact that the spouses’ education levels are positively correlated (and
the woman’s education is positively correlated with her husband’s income)
so that when the man’s characteristics are not included, the statistically
insignificant coeﬃcients on the woman’s education levels reflect the positive
eﬀect of her own education on her labor supply as well as the negative eﬀects
of her husband’s education and income. This points to the importance of
taking into account assortative matching when studying female labor supply
during this time period. The cultural proxy becomes less negative since
women from more conservative countries of ancestry tend to be married to
men who have higher education and income and thus, when we do not control
for these characteristics, the impact of the cultural proxy appears stronger.

                                      17
A similar pattern to the one discussed above is present when we use instead
Job as our cultural proxy, as can be seen in tables 4.1b.
    Across the tables, our cultural proxies have a significant quantitative
impact. Using the full specification (i.e., column 3), we find that a standard
deviation increase in the cultural proxy is associated with a decrease of 0.55
to 0.62 hours worked, depending on the proxy used. As women were working
on average 9.9 hours a week, this is a decrease of about 6%.
    Column 4 in tables 4.1a,b use female LFP in 1950 as the cultural proxy. A
standard deviation increase in female LFP 1950 is associated with an increase
of 0.69 to 0.85 hours worked per week in 1970, depending on the sample
used (which changes slightly across tables). Column 5 shows that both
cultural proxies—the ones measured by attitudes and the one measured by
participation outcomes—have explanatory value when they are simultaneously
included.28 Lastly, column 6 shows that similar results obtain when the
sample is broadened to include the non-European countries.

4.3     Robustness
Our results are robust to excluding countries with many observations (e.g.
Italy), extending the sample to include the non-European countries as noted
previously. or including per capita GDP measures from various years.
    We also ran a probit for a woman’s labor force participation. The mar-
ginal eﬀects are reported in table 4.2 It is interesting to note that whereas the
housework variable is significant in explaining the individual women’s LFP
decision, as is the original cultural proxy of female LFP in 1950, the cultural
proxy constructed from women’s answers to whether a job is the best way for
a woman to be an independent person is insignificant in this outcome (and
thus not shown). I am not sure why this is the case. The magnitude of the
eﬀect is a 2.1 percentage points decrease in the probability of participating
in the labor force associated with a standard deviation increase in housework
and the same increase associated with a standard deviation increase in the
1950 value of female LFP. As on average 34% of this sample was in the labor
force, this is about a 6% increase over the mean.
  28
   The correlation between female LFP 1950 and housework ranges from 0.41 to -0.12,
depending on whether Turkey is included or not; with job it is -0.21 (for this variable
Turkey is never included as the survey question was not asked).




                                          18
5     Concluding Remarks
Much work remains to be done in the field of economics and culture. I
think that the epidemiological approach could be usefully extended to study
questions such as the eﬀect of culture on altruism, education, occupational
choice, discrimination, entrepreneurship, redistribution, environmental and
management practices, or savings behavior, to name but a few areas. Take,
for example, the labor-leisure tradeoﬀ. Figure 7 shows the relationship be-
tween hours worked in the US by second-generation American men in 1970
and hours worked in manufacturing across country of ancestry in 1990.29
As one can see, there is a positive correlation between these variables. To
explore whether this is due to culture will require, as in the work above,
examining whether it is driven by direct economic intergenerational trans-
mission (e.g., in education), geographic patterns, etc..
     It would be useful to explore more deeply the intergenerational prefer-
ence/belief transmission mechanism. Knowles and Postlewaite (2005), for
example, use the PSID to show that parents with high-savings behavior tend
to have children who also demonstrate high-savings behavior. In particular,
the parental savings residual in a standard life-cycle regression model has
explanatory power for children’s savings residual. The authors argue that
this is suggestive of preference transmission and it would be of interest to
explore this link in other contexts.
     Experimental work can also shed light on the relationship between cul-
ture and economic outcomes. For example, Henrich et al (2001) show that,
across societies, there exist marked diﬀerences in how individuals play the
ultimatum, public good, and dictator games. They speculate that this vari-
ation may have to do with whether individuals routinely engage in work that
requires a high degree of cooperation with others relative to work done more
independently, but this hypothesis needs to be more rigorously examined.
     This paper focusses exclusively on work showing that culture matters
for economic outcomes since without convincing empirical evidence there is
little reason for economists to be concerned with this topic. There are many
other important theoretical and empirical questions that also need to be
explored. In general, we would like to understand, for example, how culture
propagates and evolves. What is the relative importance of family versus
  29
     I used manufacturing so as to provide a measure of hours worked in roughly comparable
activities.



                                           19
other institutions as cultural transmission mechanisms? To what extent is
cultural transmission purposeful (optimizing on the part of an individual or
group in society) and to what extent is it involuntary?30 When and why
does culture change abruptly whereas at other times it proceeds glacially?
    The relationship between technology and culture also needs to be inves-
tigated as the former is endogenous, despite the convenient simplification of
treating it as a primitive in much work in economics. The extent to which
societies put resources into developing technology that “liberates” individu-
als from household work, to give but one example, depends on things such
as whether slavery exists or whether women expect to work in the market or
at home.
    In theoretical work, it would probably be useful to move past understand-
ing culture simply as an equilibrium selection mechanism, though work such
as that by Mailath and Postlewaite (2003) who study how behavior that
looks like social norms may arise in dynamic matching model with multiple
equilibria is very interesting. They show that in addition to an equilibrium
in which there is assortative matching on wealth, under some circumstances
there may also be an equilibrium with imperfectly assortative matching that
depends as well on non-economic characteristics such as whether one has blue
eyes. This equilibrium is sustained because individuals know that this char-
acteristic has a probability of being inherited by their children and hence may
yield them higher utility than marrying someone with slightly higher wealth.
Hence, to an outside observer, it might therefore appear that in this soci-
ety people had an intrinsic preference for blue eyes although this inference
would be incorrect. However, as discussed in Fernández (2006), one may
conjecture that what sustains these equilibria over time–what makes these
cultural traits less fragile to perturbations–is that this behavior is eventu-
ally embodied in individual preferences and beliefs in the form of a "taste"
for blue eyes or in a belief about the inherent superiority of such a feature.
Evolutionary models may also be useful to understand the parameters under
which this happens as well as models that examine identity formation.31
    Lastly, culture is bound to aﬀect the nature of institutions. As elab-
orated on in Greif (1994), diﬀerences in cultural beliefs (collectivist versus
individualist), for example, were reflected in the diﬀerent ways in which in
  30
     See Bisin and Verdier (2000) for a model with optimizing cultural transmission on the
part of parents and Fernández et al (2004) for a model where preferences and beliefs are
simply inherited.
  31
     See, for example, Bowles and Gintis (2003) and Akerlof and Kranton (2000)..

                                           20
the 11th century Genoese traders and Maghrebi traders set up their trading
institutions, leading to very diﬀerent economic development paths thereafter.
My hypothesis is that the reverse causality is also likely to hold. That is, not
only does culture aﬀect institutions but also institutions aﬀect the dynamic
evolution of culture.32
    It should be noted (and this may help explain some of the resistance in
the economics profession for thinking about culture) that from a theoretical
perspective the endogeneity of preferences and beliefs raises diﬃcult ques-
tions for welfare analysis. How should we evaluate policies once we recognize
that preferences can change? While this is indeed a problematic question
for welfare economics, I would like to conclude by emphasizing the positive
counterpart of this conundrum. As economists we sometimes have diﬃculty
justifying having a voice in the public sphere. Is it our task to simply in-
form people about the strictly economic consequences of diﬀerent policies and
then let society decide? Is the passion with which people argue about choices
simply rhetorical flourish in a world with pure economic self interest? To
recognize instead that man is an animal that is (perhaps uniquely) capable
of reflecting upon, and hence changing, his preferences and beliefs, greatly
enriches our view of ourselves and the world and within it the potential role
of economic discourse. In the words of A.O. Hirschman, “de valoribus est
disputandum.”
  32
    A study of cross-country diﬀerences in the adoption and elimination of slavery and
subsequent racist attitudes may be an illuminating way to study this question, but to my
knowledge this has not been done.




                                          21
References
 [1] Akerlof, G. and R. Kranton, (2000) "Economics and Identity," Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 115(3), 715-733.
 [2] Algan, Y. and P. Cahuc, (2006a), “Minimum Wage: the Price of Dis-
     trust,” Working Paper.
 [3] Algan, Y. and P. Cahuc (2006b), ‘The root of low Employment in Eu-
     rope: family culture?, in J. Frenkel and C. Pissarides (eds.) NBER
     Macroeconomic Annual.
 [4] Antecol, H. (2000), “An Examination of Cross-Country Diﬀerences in
     the Gender Gap in Labor Force Participation Rates,” Labour Economics
     7, 409-426.
 [5] Barro, R., and R. McCleary (2003), “Religion and Economic Growth,”
     American Sociological Review 68, 760-781.
 [6] Bisin, A., and T. Verdier (2000), “Beyond the Melting Pot: Cultural
     Transmission, Marriage, and the Evolution of Ethnic and Religious
     Traits,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(3), 955-988.
 [7] Botticini, M. and Z. Eckstein (2005), “Jewish Occupational Selection:
     Education, Restrictions, or Minorities?” Journal of Economic History
     65(4), 922-948.
 [8] Bowles, S. and H. Gintis (2003), "The Origins of Human Cooperation,"
     in Peter Hammerstein (ed.) Genetic and Cultural Evolution of Cooper-
     ation, MIT Press.
 [9] Carroll, C., B. Rhee, and C. Rhee (1994), “Are There Cultural Eﬀects
     on Saving? Some Cross-Sectional Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
     nomics 109(3), 685-699.
[10] Del Boca, D. and M. Locatelli, (2006) “The Determinants of Mother-
     hood and Work Status: A Survey,” IZA Discussion Paper.
[11] Fernández, R.(2006), “Culture and Economics," in the New Palgrave
     Dictionary of Economics, 2nd edition, edited by Steven N. Durlauf and
     Lawrence E. Blume, Palgrave Macmillan (Basingstoke and New York),
     forthcoming.

                                    22
[12] Fernández, R.(2007), “The Evolution of Culture and the Dynamics of
     Female Labor Force Participation,” work in progress.

[13] Fernández, R., and A. Fogli (2006a), “Culture: An Empirical Investiga-
     tion of Beliefs, Work, and Fertility,” NBER Working Paper No. 11268.

[14] Fernández, R., and A. Fogli (2006b), “Fertility: The Role of Culture
     and Family Experience,” Journal of the European Economic Association,
     4(2).

[15] Fernández, R., A. Fogli, and C. Olivetti (2004), “Mothers and Sons:
     Preference Formation and Female Labor Force Dynamics,” Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 119(4), 1249-1299.

[16] Goldin, C. (1990), Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic His-
     tory of American Women, New York: Oxford University Press.

[17] Goldin, C. and L. Katz (2002), “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contracep-
     tives and Women’s Career and Marriage Decisions,” Journal of Political
     Economy 110(4), 730-770.

[18] Greenwood, J., A. Seshadri, and M. Yorukoglu (2005), "Engines of Lib-
     eration," Review of Economic Studies 72(1) 109-133.

[19] Greif, A. (1994), “Cultural Beliefs, and the Organization of Society: a
     Historical and Theoretical Reflection on Collectivist and Individualist
     Societies,“ Journal of Political Economy 102(5) 912-950.

[20] Greif, A. (2005), Institutions: Theory and History. Comparative and
     Historical Institutional Analysis, Cambridge University Press.

[21] Guiso, L., P. Sapienza and L. Zingales (2003), “People’s Opium? Reli-
     gion and Economic Attitudes,” Journal of Monetary Economics 50(1),
     225-282.

[22] Guiso, L., P. Sapienza and L. Zingales (2005), “Cultural Biases in Eco-
     nomic Exchange,” NBER Working Paper # 11005.

[23] Guiso, L., P. Sapienza and L. Zingales (2006), “Does Culture Aﬀect
     Economic Outcomes,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(2), 23-48.



                                    23
[24] Hanushek, E. and D. Kimko (2000), “Schooling, Labor-Force Quality,
     and the Growth of Nations,” American Economic Review, 1184-1208.

[25] Henrich, J., R. Boyd, S. Bowles, C. Camerer, E. Fehr, H. Gintis, and
     R. McElreath (2001), "In Search of Homo Economicus: Behavioral
     Experiments in 15 Small-Scale Societies," American Economic Review
     91(2), 73-78.

[26] ILO (1998), Current International Recommendations on Labour Statis-
     tics, Geneva.

[27] Levine, D. (1993), “The Eﬀect of Non-Traditional Attitudes on Married
     Women’s Labor Supply,” Journal of Economic Psychology 14, 665-679.

[28] Ichino, A. and G. Maggi (2000), “Work Environment and Individual
     Background: Explaining Regional Shirking Diﬀerentials in a Large Ital-
     ian Firm,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(3), 1057-1090.

[29] Knowles, J. and A. Postlewaite (2005), “Wealth Inequality and Parental
     Transmission of Savings Behavior” Working Paper.

[30] Mailath, G. and A. Postlewaite (2003), “The Social Context of Economic
     Decisions,” Journal of the European Economic Association 1(2-3), 354-
     362.

[31] Pencavel, J. (1998), “The Market Work Behavior and Wages of Women,
     1975-94,” Journal of Human Resources 38(4), 771-804.

[32] Potamites, E. (2006), "Why Do Black Women Work More? A Com-
     parison of White and Black Married Women’s Labor Supply," Working
     Paper.

[33] Reimers, C. (1985), “Cultural Diﬀerences in Labor Force Participation
     Among Married Women,” American Economic Review Papers and Pro-
     ceedings 75(2), 251-255.

[34] Stigler, G., and G. Becker (1977), “De Gustibus Non Est Disputandum,”
     American Economic Review 67(2), 76-90.

[35] Tabellini, G. (2005), “Culture and Institutions: Economic Development
     in the Regions of Europe,” CESifo Working Paper No. 1492.

                                    24
[36] Vella, F. (1994), “Gender Roles and Human Capital Investment: The
     Relationship between Traditional Attitudes and Female Labour Force
     Performance,” Economica 61, 191-211.




                                  25
Table 3.1


Country             Obs.        Hours         Female LFP        Female 30-34       GDP per capita      % Agree House-        % Disagree Job Best
                                Worked           1990            LFP 1990             1990             work is Fulfilling    Way for Independence

Austria              270          9.96           36.01              64.77              23040                 0.63                     0.26
Belgium               24          6.58           31.18              73.65              23049                 0.67                     0.30
Denmark               80         12.20           51.40              90.97              23953                 0.55                     0.20
U.K.                498           9.43           41.16              64.47              21872                 0.60                     0.32
Finland               54         11.07           47.26              84.00              22359                 0.54                     0.23
France               66           9.74           36.84              74.65              21972                 0.60                     0.21
Germany              616         10.82           40.50              71.37              21015                 0.50                     0.25
Ireland              465          7.42           23.57              46.75              15587                 0.72                     0.39
Italy               1909          9.77           30.68              62.26              21863                 0.56                     0.26
Netherlands          101          9.55           35.54              60.72              23137                 0.56                     0.45
Norway              141          10.49           44.59              78.29              25641                 0.53                     0.25
Portugal             100         11.83           40.21              77.66              14183                 0.49                     0.20
Spain                65           8.71           27.49              56.19              17432                 0.60                     0.22
Sweden              187           9.93           50.99              90.27              22257                 0.62                     0.26
Turkey               42          10.63           30.34              42.77               5487                 0.79
Canada               720         10.41           46.18              75.92              22887
China                 53         13.27           54.88              91.93               1596
Cuba                 17          15.24           32.68              67.73
Greece               197          9.47           28.83              57.53              14561
Japan                148         16.84           40.59              55.96              23580
Lebanon              27          10.50           16.16              29.03               2296
Mexico               839         10.87           21.93              40.01               7627
Philippines           67         14.53           28.96              49.35               3877
Switzerland           50         12.78           41.07              60.34              30504
Syria                38           5.09           13.80              25.65               2592

Average            270.96        10.69           35.71              63.69             17181.96               0.60                     0.27
Std. Dev           414.12        2.57            10.68              18.06             8616.48                0.08                     0.07

Sources: 1% 1970 Form 2 Metro Sample of the U.S. Census, 1% 1990 General Sample of the U.S. Census, ILO, Economically Active Population
1950-2010, (Geneva, 1997). GDP is in PPP constant international dollars in 2000, from the World Bank's WDI. Column 7 is the percentage in
each country that agrees with the statement "Being a housewife is just as fulfilling as working for pay." Column 8 is the percentage that disagrees
with the statement "Having a job is the best way for a woman to be an independent person." Source is WVS 1990.
Table 3.2


                                     Dependent variable is Hours Worked
                                 (i)               (ii)             (iii)                            (iv)

Female                         0.056**               0.056**                0.081**               0.068**
LFP 1990                       (0.020)               (0.021)                (0.016)               (0.016)

High School                                          0.502                  2.203**               2.117**
                                                     (0.501)                (0.561)               (0.552)

Some College                                         -0.163                 3.256**               3.194**
                                                     (1.038)                (1.007)               (0.989)

College +                                            0.787+                 6.068**               5.994**
                                                     (0.439)                (0.472)               (0.463)

Husband                                                                     -1.737*               -1.786*
High School                                                                 (0.718)               (0.717)

Husband                                                                     -1.342                -1.378+
Some College                                                                (0.823)               (0.824)

Husband                                                                     -4.998**              -5.049**
College +                                                                   (0.466)               (0.470)

Husband                                                                     -2.849**              -2.864**
Total Income                                                                (0.304)               (0.303)

TFR 1950                                                                                          -0.185+
                                                                                                  (0.111)

Observations                   6774                  6774                   6774                  6774
Adjusted R-squared             0.0180                0.0241                 0.0534                0.0534

+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. SMSA fixed effects in all specifications. Age and age squared
for wife and age range dummies for husband in all specifications with demographics. Robust standard errors in parentheses
account for clustering at country level. Income is measured in units of $10,000. All specifications include a constant.
Table 3.3


                                    Dependent variable is Hours Worked
                                   (i)         (ii)           (iii)                   (iv)             (v)

Female 30-34                     0.051**
LFP 1990                         (0.012)

GDP per capita                                    1.078**          0.511
1990                                              (0.308)          (0.312)

GDP per capita                                                                      1.546+           -2.283+
1950                                                                                (0.816)          (1.330)

Female                                                             0.061**                           0.114**
LFP 1990                                                           (0.018)                           (0.030)

High School                      2.196**          2.172**          2.156**          2.319**          2.189**
                                 (0.565)          (0.573)          (0.560)          (0.590)          (0.556)

Some College                     3.301**          3.392**          3.285**          3.460**          3.226**
                                 (0.984)          (1.007)          (0.996)          (1.044)          (1.007)

College +                        6.110**          6.224**          6.117**          6.296**          6.026**
                                 (0.474)          (0.491)          (0.468)          (0.539)          (0.465)

Husband                          -1.722*          -1.757*          -1.777*          -1.649*          -1.731*
High School                      (0.728)          (0.728)          (0.721)          (0.761)          (0.723)

Husband                          -1.331           -1.486+          -1.516+          -1.263           -1.336
Some College                     (0.829)          (0.810)          (0.804)          (0.847)          (0.824)

Husband                          -4.971**         -5.011**         -5.042**         -4.910**         -4.985**
College +                        (0.470)          (0.476)          (0.476)          (0.478)          (0.465)

Husband                          -2.843**         -2.847**         -2.855**         -2.825**         -2.842**
Total Income                     (0.304)          (0.302)          (0.302)          (0.311)          (0.304)

Observations                     6774             6757             6757             6774             6774
Adjusted R-squared               0.0532           0.0526           0.0530           0.0520           0.0535

+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. SMSA fixed effects in all specifications. Age and age squared
for wife and age range dummies for husband in all specifications with demographics. Robust standard errors in parentheses
account for clustering at country level. Income and GDP pc are in units of $10,000. All specifications include a constant.
Table 4.1a


                                     Dependent variable is Hours Worked
                                     (i)     (ii)       (iii)     (iv)                  (v)          (vi)

Housework                       -9.973** -9.685** -7.428**                          -7.314** -6.568*
                                (2.454) (2.089) (2.527)                             (1.580) (3.280)

Female                                                                 0.081** 0.080**
LFP 1950                                                               (0.014) (0.015)

High School                                  0.064        1.629*       1.488+       1.567+       2.125**
                                             (0.637)      (0.807)      (0.845)      (0.805)      (0.678)

Some College                                 -1.208       2.173*       1.912*       2.045*       3.182**
                                             (0.868)      (0.943)      (0.973)      (0.929)      (1.177)

College+                                     0.661        5.697** 5.489** 5.577** 6.314**
                                             (0.737)      (0.655) (0.646) (0.638) (0.593)

Husband                                                   -1.681+      -1.755+      -1.718+      -1.382
High School                                               (0.968)      (0.957)      (0.964)      (0.868)

Husband                                                   -1.438       -1.543       -1.478       -1.518+
Some College                                              (1.015)      (1.003)      (1.010)      (0.886)

Husband                                                   -4.549** -4.690** -4.629** -4.897**
College +                                                 (0.607) (0.607) (0.603) (0.580)

Husband                                                   -3.025** -3.050** -3.041** -2.730**
Total Income                                              (0.317) (0.320) (0.318) (0.386)


Observations                    4660         4660         4660         4660         4660         5708
Adjusted R-squared              0.0162       0.0262       0.0592       0.0594       0.0600       0.0533

+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. SMSA fixed effects in all specifications. Age and age squared
for wife and age range dummies for husband in all specifications with demographics. Robust standard errors in parentheses
account for clustering at country level. Income is measured in units of $10,000. All specifications include a constant.
Table 4.1b


                                        Dependent variable is Hours Worked
                                    (i)       (ii)        (iii)      (iv)                    (v)           (vi)

Job                           -15.281** -14.099** -10.187*                              -8.406+        -14.708**
                              (5.158)   (4.465)   (4.771)                               (4.865)        (3.933)

Female                                                                    0.086**       0.078**
LFP 1950                                                                  (0.015)       (0.015)

High School                                  0.019         1.549+         1.457+        1.499+         2.022**
                                             (0.641)       (0.820)        (0.849)       (0.817)        (0.658)

Some College                                 -1.307        2.033*         1.836+        1.918*         2.992*
                                             (0.908)       (0.992)        (0.988)       (0.976)        (1.195)

College +                                    0.686         5.623**        5.467**       5.525**        6.128**
                                             (0.723)       (0.653)        (0.645)       (0.642)        (0.520)

Husband                                                    -1.628+        -1.703+       -1.668+        -1.366
High School                                                (0.988)        (0.973)       (0.982)        (0.880)

Husband                                                    -1.460         -1.568        -1.516         -1.545+
Some College                                               (1.010)        (1.000)       (1.006)        (0.892)

Husband                                                    -4.465**       -4.598**      -4.544**       -4.836**
College +                                                  (0.607)        (0.601)       (0.599)        (0.594)

Husband                                                    -3.002**       -3.025**      -3.015**       -2.700**
Total Income                                               (0.323)        (0.324)       (0.325)        (0.387)


Observations                  4618           4618          4618           4618          4618           5666
Adjusted R-squared            0.0164         0.0261        0.0585         0.0589        0.0591         0.0533

+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. SMSA fixed effects in all specifications. Age and age squared
for wife and age range dummies for husband in all specifications with demographics. Robust standard errors in parentheses
account for clustering at country level. Income is measured in units of $10,000. All specifications include a constant.
           Table 4.2

                            Marginal Effects from Probit on Labor Force Participation
                                                   (i)               (ii)                              (iii)

           Female                                     0.002**                                       0.002**
           LFP 1950                                   (0.000)                                       (0.001)

           Housework                                                         -0.253**              -0.250**
                                                                              (0.092)               (0.082)

           High School                                 0.047*                 0.051*                0.050*
                                                       (0.022)                (0.020)               (0.021)

           Some College                               0.093**                0.101**                0.098**
                                                      (0.030)                (0.030)                (0.030)

           College +                                  0.238**                0.244**                0.241**
                                                      (0.030)                 (0.029)               (0.029)

           Husband                                    -0.068**               -0.066**              -0.067**
           High School                                 (0.020)                (0.020)               (0.021)

           Husband                                     -0.035                 -0.032                -0.034
           Some College                                (0.023)                (0.023)               (0.023)

           Husband                                    -0.143**               -0.140**              -0.142**
           College +                                   (0.013)                (0.012)               (0.013)

           Husband                                    -0.122**               -0.120**              -0.121**
           Total Income                                (0.014)                (0.014)               (0.014)

           Observations                                 4603                   4603                   4603
           Log Pseudo Likelihood                       -2781                  -2781                  -2779
           Pseudo R-squared                            0.0633                 0.0636                 0.0641

+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. SMSA fixed effects in all specifications. Age and age squared
for wife and age range dummies for husband in all specifications with demographics. Robust standard errors in parentheses
account for clustering at country level. Income is measured in units of $10,000. All specifications include a constant.
                                                          Figure 1

                     Fraction who agree with Wife working if Husband can support her

             1
       0.9
       0.8
       0.7
       0.6
       0.5
       0.4
       0.3
       0.2
       0.1
             0
             1930           1940          1950          1960            1970       1980         1990          2000
                                                                Year

Source: 1936-1938 and 1969 numbers are from the Gallup Poll (1972), 1945 is from Benjamin I. Page and Robert
Y. Shapiro, The Rational Public, University of Chicago Press, 1992; pp. 101,403–404. 1972 onwards are from the
General Social Survey.




                                                          Figure 2
                              Married Female Labor Force Participation in the U.S.

            0.8


            0.7


            0.6


            0.5
      LFP




            0.4


            0.3


            0.2


            0.1


             0
              1870   1880   1890   1900   1910   1920    1930    1940    1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000




Source: U.S. Census data 1880-2000. White, married (spouse present) women born in the U.S. 25-44 years old who
report being in the labor force.
                                                                                         Tu




                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                         10
                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                   30
                                                                                                                        40
                                                                                                                             50
                                                                                                                                  60
                                                                                                                                       70
                                                                                                                                            80
                                                                                                                                                 90
                                                                                            r
                                                                                         M ke
                                                                                           ex y
                                                                                               ic
                                                                                            I o
                                                                                         G tal
                                                                                           re y
                                                                                         Po ece
                                                                                             la
                                                                                                n
                                                                                      H Spa d
                                                                                         un i
                                                                                            ga n
                                                                                          K o ry
                                                                             Sl Lu Be re
                                                                               ov xe lg a
                                                                                 a k m i um
                                                                                          b
                                                                                      Re ou
                                                                              Cz          pu rg
                                                                                ec
                                                                                   h Ire blic
                                                                                      Re la
                                                                                          pu nd
                                                                                         Fr bli
                                                                                            an c
                                                                                     G Jap ce
                                                                                        er a
                                                                                       P o ma n
                                                                                          rt n y
                                                                                                                                                                                                Figure 3




                                                                                         Au uga
                                                                                 N Au str l
                                                                               U eth str ia
                                                                                 ni e a
                                                                                   t e rl lia
                                                                                       d an
                                                                                          S ds
                                                                                N
                                                                             U e F tat
                                                                              ni w in es

Source: OECD Factbook 2006: Economic, Environmental and Social Statistics.
                                                                                te Z la
                                                                                  d ea nd
                                                                                      Ki la
                                                                                         ng n
                                                                                                 d
                                                                                        Ca dom
                                                                                     D n
                                                                                 S w e n ad
                                                                                      itz ma a
                                                                                          er rk
                                                                                                                                                      Female Labor Force Participation (2003)




                                                                                        N l an
                                                                                          o d
                                                                                       Swrwa
                                                                                            e y
                                                                                        Ic de
                                                                                           el n
                                                                                              an
                                                                                                 d
                                                                          Figure 4


 Average Hours Worked per week in U.S. 1970   Labor Force Participation and Culture
                                                                                                        Japan
                                        16


                                                                                                Cuba
                                14



                                                                                     Philippines


                                                                                                                         China
                                                                                                       Switzerland
                          12




                                                                                                                     Denmark
                                                                                                       Portugal

                                                                                                              Finland
                                                                        Mexico                        Germany
                                                                                         Turkey
                  10




                                                            Lebanon                                        Norway
                                                                                                             Canada
                                                                                                Austria           Sweden
                                                                                          Italy  France
                                                                                      Greece Netherlands
                                                                                                       England
                                                                                     Spain
             8




                                                                           Ireland

                                                                                             Belgium
      6




                                                    Syria
4




                                              2.5                       3             3.5                                 4
                                                                      Log Female LFP 1990
                                                                    Figure 5
                                                                                     Ireland



                   .7
% agree that housework is fulfilling
                                                                   Belgium
                         .65



                                                         Austria
                                                       Sweden

                                            Spain                       England
                                           France
               .6




                                                         Italy                                     Netherlands
                            Denmark
    .55




                                                  Finland
                                                       Norway


                                                     Germany
                   .5




                                       Portugal


                                          .2           .25        .3         .35          .4         .45
                                                  % disagree that a job is best for independence
                                        Source: World Value Survey 1990
                                                                                        Figure 6a

                                                              Housework vs Average Hours Worked
                                        12
Average Hours Worked per week in U.S. 1970

                                               Portugal
                                                                  Finland


                                             Germany
                                                                                                                                        Turkey
                                                            Norway
                          10




                                                                                     Austria
                                                                                       Sweden
                                                                      Italy      France
                                                                 Netherlands
                                                                           England

                                                                               Spain
             8




                                                                                                            Ireland


                                                                                             Belgium
6




                                              -.1                         0                      .1                                .2
                                                                     Housework: Marginal Effect from WVS Probit
                                              WVS question: Being a housewife is just as fulfilling as working for pay, WVS 1990




                                                                                        Figure 6b

                                                                     Job vs Average Hours Worked
                                        12
Average Hours Worked per week in U.S. 1970




                                 Portugal
                                                       Finland


                                                            Germany
                                                             Norway
                          10




                                                                   Austria
                                                                  Sweden
                                                France             Italy
                                                                                                                                   Netherlands
                                                                                   England

                                                    Spain
             8




                                                                                                            Ireland


                                                                              Belgium
6




                                              -.2                     -.15                  -.1              -.05                                0
                                                                             Job: Marginal Effect WVS Probit
                                              WVS question: A job is the best way for a woman to be independent, WVS 1990
                                                                      Figure 7
                                     44

                                                                                 Ireland
                                     43
                                                                                           England         Switzerland
                                                                      Japan
  Average Manufacturing Hours 1990




                                     42
                                                                                           Portugal
                                                                                                                  Greece

                                     41



                                     40                                Sweden            Netherlands
                                                                                    Germany

                                     39                          Norway

                                                            Finland
                                     38
                                                                                                            y = 0.93x + 2.35
                                                    Spain                                                       R2 = 0.44
                                     37



                                     36
                                          38   39           40            41               42         43         44            45
                                                       Hours Worked in 1970 in U.S. by Father's Birthplace


Source: Hours in U.S. from 1970 Census. 30-40 year old married men born in the U.S.. Average manufacturing
hours in 1990 from http://laborsta.ilo.org/. Switzerland average is from 1987.
