                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE LABOR MARKET IMPACTS OF YOUTH TRAINING IN THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC:
              EVIDENCE FROM A RANDOMIZED EVALUATION

                                             David Card
                                           Pablo Ibarraran
                                         Ferdinando Regalia
                                            David Rosas
                                            Yuri Soares

                                        Working Paper 12883
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12883


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2007




We are grateful to the Secretaria de Estado de Trabajo (SET) of the Dominican Republic for making
the required information available and for helpful discussions. All conclusions in this paper are solely
the responsibility of the authors. This document is not an official publication of the Inter-American
Development Bank. Opinions and judgments expressed in this study do not necessarily reflect the
view of Bank Management or member countries. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by David Card, Pablo Ibarraran, Ferdinando Regalia, David Rosas, and Yuri Soares. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Labor Market Impacts of Youth Training in the Dominican Republic: Evidence from
a Randomized Evaluation
David Card, Pablo Ibarraran, Ferdinando Regalia, David Rosas, and Yuri Soares
NBER Working Paper No. 12883
February 2007
JEL No. J24

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper summarizes the findings from the first randomized evaluation of a job training program
in Latin America. Between 2001 and 2005 the government of the Dominican Republic operated a
subsidized training program for low-income youth in urban areas. The program featured several weeks
of classroom instruction followed by an internship at a private sector firm. A random sample of eligible
applicants was selected to undergo training, and information was gathered 10-14 months after graduation
on both trainees and control group members. Although previous non-experimental evaluations of similar
programs in Latin America have suggested a positive impact on employment, we find no evidence
of such an effect. There is a marginally significant impact on hourly wages, and on the probability
of health insurance coverage, conditional on employment. Finally, we develop an operational definition
of the impact of training on "employability" in the context of a dynamic model with state dependence
and unobserved heterogeneity. Consistent with our main results, we find no significant impact of the
training program on the subsequent employability of trainees.

David Card                                         David Rosas
Department of Economics                            1300 New York Avenue
549 Evans Hall, #3880                              Washington DC 20577
UC Berkeley                                        davidro@iadb.org
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER                                           Yuri Soares
card@econ.berkeley.edu                             1300 New York Avenue
                                                   Washington DC 20577
Pablo Ibarraran                                    yuris@iadb.org
Inter-American Development Bank
1300 New York Avenue
Stop B0700
Washington, DC 20577
pibarraran@iadb.org

Ferdinando Regalia
Inter-American Development Bank
1300 New York Avenue
Washington, DC 20577
ferdinandor@iadb.org
1. Introduction

        During the 1990s the Inter-American Development Bank financed a series of

innovative training programs throughout Latin America targeted at less-educated youth –

a group that faces considerable barriers to labor market success in developing and

developed economies.1 Drawing on lessons from the Job Training Partnership Act in the

U.S. and the Youth Training Scheme in Britain, the programs combined classroom

training with a subsequent internship period of on-the-job work experience.2 Unlike

earlier training schemes in the region, the programs also placed a heavy emphasis on the

private sector, both as a provider of training and as a demander of trainees. Private

training contractors were encouraged to participate in the provision of training through a

competitive bidding process.          Proposals for training programs had to be backed by

commitments from local employers to offer internships of at least two months duration.

        Among the IABD-sponsored programs, the Juventud y Empleo (JE) program in

the Dominican Republic was unique in incorporating a randomized design to allow for a

highly credible evaluation of the program’s effects. This paper summarizes the impacts

of JE on a wide range of labor market outcomes, including employment, hours of work,

and hourly wages. We also use a simple dynamic model of labor market transitions to

estimate the impacts of JE on the “employability” of trainees, and on their ability to find

and hold jobs with health insurance coverage.




1
  See Heckman, Lalonde, and Smith (1999) for a general overview of training programs, and Betcherman,
Olivas and Das (2004) for a recent summary that includes some evaluations of developing country training
programs.
2
  The Job Training Partnership Act program is described extensively by Heckman, Lalonde and Smith
(1999). Dolton, Makepeace and Treble (1994) describe the Youth Training Scheme.
         Our analysis is based on a sample of program participants from the second cohort

of the JE program who received training in early 2004.3 Baseline data were collected

from a registration form completed by program applicants prior to randomization.                          A

follow-up survey was administered in the period from May to July of 2005, 10 to 14

months after most trainees had finished their initial course work. Simple experimental

comparisons between the people who received treatment and those in the control group

suggest a negligible impact on employment, although there is some indication of a

possibly larger impact in certain regions of the country. The lack of an overall effect is

confirmed by our dynamic models, which show very small effects on employment

transition rates. In contrast to the small effects on the likelihood of work, we estimate

that JE increased the average monthly earnings of participants by about 10%, although

the effects are imprecisely estimated and only marginally significant.

         A brief literature review follows this introduction, focusing on previous findings

for similar programs, particularly in Latin America. The specifics of the program are

presented in section 3. The data and basic statistics are described in section 4. Section 5

presents the results, and conclusions are presented in Section 6.



2. Previous Research on Labor Market Training Programs

         Few public policies have been studied and evaluated as rigorously as job training

programs.4 Most of the existing evidence is derived from programs in the United States

and Europe. In the U.S. case, particularly credible evidence is available from randomized

3
  The first JE cohort was a smaller, pilot cohort, for which information was not collected in a rigorous and
systematic manner.
4
  Among the earliest evaluation in the economics literature are the studies by Ashenfelter (1978) and Kiefer
(1979). Subsequent studies include the important paper by Lalonde (1986), which emphasized the case for
the use of randomized experiments in training program evaluations.


                                                     1
evaluations of the Job Partnership Training Act (see Bloom et al., 1997; GAO, 1996;

Heckman, Lalonde, and Smith, 1999), the Job Corps (Burghart et al. 2001), and a series

of programs for welfare recipients (Friedlander, Greenberg, and Robins, 1997). One

conclusion that emerges from the U.S. and European literature is that the impacts of job

training are generally modest, at best. A second key finding is that the effectiveness of

training varies with the characteristics of participants and the type of training. For

example, many studies have concluded that women benefit more from training than men.5

On-the-job training is often thought to be more effective than classroom training,

although this is by no means a universal finding.6 Voluntary programs are generally

found to be more effective than mandatory programs (Friedlander, Greenberg, and

Robins, 1997). Finally, in the case of work experience programs, private sector programs

are found to be more effective than public sector programs (Kluve et al, 2006).

        With respect to youth, randomized evaluations from the two main programs

serving disadvantaged youth in the U.S. – the Job Partnership Training Act (JPTA) and

the Job Corps – yield quite different results. The short-run impacts for young women in

JPTA are essentially zero (although the longer-term impacts appear to be more positive –

see GAO, 1996), while the short-run impacts for young men are negative. In contrast, the

Job Corps had a significantly positive effect on both genders. Lee (2005) for example,

shows that Job Corp had about a 12 percent effect on earnings three years after training.

        The European evidence is far more uncertain (Heckman, Lalonde, and Smith,

1999) in part because of the lack of experimental studies and the wide variation in



5
 See Friedlander, Greenberg, and Robins (1997).
6
  See Heckman, Hohmann, Khoo and Smith (2000). The Job Corps –a largely classroom training program
for disadvantage youth– has been found to be relatively effective: see Burghardt et al. (2001).


                                                2
evaluation methods.7 Nevertheless, one key finding that emerges from the meta-analysis

by Kluve et al. (2006) is that programs serving youth are substantially less likely to show

positive impact effects than programs for adults.

        Evidence on the effectiveness of training in developing countries is more limited.

Betcherman, Olivas and Amit Dar (2004), for example, review 69 impact evaluations of

unemployed and youth training programs, only 19 of which are in developing countries.

Of those 5 are specific to youth training -- all in Latin America. Betcherman et al. (2004)

conclude that training impacts in Latin America are more positive than the impacts of

programs in the United States and Europe.8                  Likewise, Ñopo and Saavedra (2003)

analyze a sample of training programs in Latin America and conclude that employment

and income impacts of the programs tend to exceed the impacts in developed countries.9

        While there are a number of existing studies of training programs in Latin

America, to the best of our knowledge all of these have used non-experimental methods

– most notably propensity score matching methods.                          And the positive results

notwithstanding, as in European case the variability in methods and data have produced

widely varying results, even for the same program. A case in point is Peru’s youth




7
  The British YTS case is emblematic of this dispersion in results. Studies such as Main and Shelley (1990)
and Main (1991) document positive results on short-term employment in the neighborhood of 11-17
percent. On the other hand, studies such as Whitfield and Bourlakis (1990) find smaller impact on
employment, of 4 percent, while Dolton et all (1994) find negative impacts on employment of between 4
and 17 percent. In a recent meta-evaluation of active labor market programs, which is based on a sample of
95 impact evaluations across European countries, Kluve et al (2006) found a tendency for “overly
optimistic” results in the non-experimental evaluations.
8
  All of these evaluations (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Peru and Uruguay) correspond to youth programs that
have common features with the Dominican Republic program.
9
  Weller (2004) also looks at Latin America training programs, but in the context of all active labor market
programs.


                                                     3
training program: seven evaluations have produced a very wide range of estimated

impacts for this program.10

        Two other problems are common in much of the literature, and are shared by our

evaluation of the JE program. First, few studies present estimated impacts beyond two or

three years post-training. In the case of Latin America, existing evaluations tend to focus

on impact after 12 or 18 months. As a result, there is considerable uncertainty about the

persistence of training effects.11        A second limitation is the paucity of information on

program costs, and of other possible program effects, such as general equilibrium

spillover or “crowding” effects (Heckman and Carneiro, 2003).



3. LAC Training Programs and Juventud y Empleo

a. Background Context

        Job training programs traditionally played a central role in active labor market

policies of the Latin American and Caribbean (LAC) region. During the era of import-

substitution growth policies, many countries adopted a centralized model for training

provision, organized through a national training institute (NTI).12 Program content was

usually dictated by NTI’s, and services were targeted to more highly skilled workers who

were already employed in the sectors favored by the import substitution growth strategy.

        Since the abandonment of the import-substitution model in the early 1980s, the

role and modus operandi of the NTI’s have been re-evaluated. NTI’s have been under

10
   These evaluations used data generated for different cohorts. The estimated earnings impact 6 months
after treatment ranged from 12% to 60%. Impact at after 18 months ranged from 13% to 40%.
11
   A notable exception is the JPTA evaluation. The GAO obtained data for five years after random
assignment (GAO, 1996). These data have unfortunately never been released to other researchers. Longer
term data are also available for the British YTS program. Dolton (2004) tracks beneficiaries 11 years after
the training was completed.
12
   NTI’s in this era included SENA in Colombia, SENAI in Brazil, SNPP in Paraguay, INFOTEP in
Dominican Republic,SENATI in Peru and INAFORP in Panama.


                                                    4
pressure to adopt a “demand-driven” model of training, based on a separation between

the financing, planning, and delivery of training services, and the active participation of

local employers in the selection of providers and program content.

       Two influential programs, the Mexican PROBECAT, which started in 1984, and

Chile Joven, which started in 1992, have laid the groundwork for this new generation of

programs. In PROBECAT, trainees often receive classroom training in the firms where

they carry out their internships. Variants of this “Mexican model” were adopted in

Central America (Honduras and El Salvador for example) during the late 1990s. Under

the alternative “Chilean model,” trainees generally receive technical/vocational training

at an independent provider, followed by an internship at a private sector firm. Variants of

this plan were adopted in Venezuela and Argentina during the mid 1990s, and in Peru,

Colombia, Uruguay and the Dominican Republic in the late 1990s.



b. Juventud y Empleo – Basic Design

       Juventud y Empleo (JE) was developed and implemented by the Government of

the Dominican Republic with financial support from the IADB. The first phase of the

program – which ran from 2001 to 2006 – was targeted to low-income youth (ages 18 to

29) with less than a secondary education (i.e. no more than 11 years of completed

schooling) who were not currently enrolled in school. Special attention was directed to

enrolling women. The stated objective of the program was to increase “employability” of

the lowest income members of the working age population by facilitating access to the




                                              5
labor market through training and counseling. According to the program design mandate,

this was to be achieved by tailoring program content to the needs of local employers.13

        Following the principles of the “Chilean model”, the Ministry of Labor

outsourced the provision of training services to private training institutions (Instituciones

de Capacitación – ICAPs). Courses (with a maximum duration of 350 hours) were

conducted in the ICAPs’ facilities and split into two parts: basic skill training, and

technical/vocational training. Basic skills training was meant to strengthen trainees’ self

esteem and work habits, while vocational training was customized to the needs of local

employers.

        ICAPs were selected through a competitive process. Proposals from potential

training providers were required to include written commitments from one or more firms

to offer a two-month internship to all trainees graduating from the provider’s program.

This was supposed to ensure that the ICAP was offering training that would be of value

to local employers.14 The original project design also required ICAPs to follow-up on the

trainees during the internship period to provide counseling and technical assistance. In

practice, this follow-up was limited.

        All potential training providers were required to present training proposals for the

courses they would offer. The proposals were evaluated and revised by the National

Institute of Technical and Professional Training (Instituto Nacional de Formación

Técnica Profesional - INFOTEP). INFOTEP was also contracted to inspect the selected


13
   See “Reform and Labor Training Program” Project Document (1183/OC-DR). Inter-American
Development Bank.
14
   It should be noted that, during program execution, delays occurred between the presentation of bids by
the ICAPs and the awarding of contracts. By the time trainees graduated, many of the firms that had
originally signed an internship agreement with the ICAPs were unable to offer the number of internships
initially promised. Therefore, a large proportion of graduating trainees were matched with internships
offered by different firms than those originally contacted by the ICAPs


                                                   6
ICAPs before any training took place, and during the training courses.          Much less

frequently, ICAP personnel also visited some of the firms that were providing

internships.

       Trainees were not paid during the program, but the program did provide a partial

reimbursement of transportation costs and meals, up to a maximum of 50 Dominican

Pesos per day (roughly two dollars). The daily stipend was well below the market wage

rate available for a typical trainee, who earned about 4,500 Pesos per month in the post-

training follow-up survey (more than four times the stipend). The program also provided

insurance against accidents on the workplace for all trainees.



c. Implementation

       The original JE design specified that individuals interested in receiving training

would submit applications through a local employment office of the Minister of Labor,

where personal information would be gathered and checked against eligibility rules

before being sent to a central office for random assignment. In practice, the local offices

did not have the capacity to perform this function, and the enrollment task was taken on

by the ICAP’s. Staff from the Ministry of Labor and the ICAPs conducted outreach and

information programs in the poor neighborhoods of the larger urban centers of the

Dominican Republic, informing people about the availability of the training courses. The

outreach effort included “perifoneo” (announcements by vehicle-mounted loudspeaker),

radio advertisements, and contacts with churches and other community groups.

       Applicants for a training position completed a short survey that gathered

information on their age, education, and employment status. This information was then




                                             7
used to determine eligibility. Some of the eligibility requirements (e.g., unemployment

status and education achievement) were hard to verify, and the rules were apparently

known by applicants, leading to reporting problems that we discuss in more detail below.

Once a group of 30 eligible applicants was recruited, the ICAP submitted the list of

names (selected on a first-come, first-serve basis from the list of those who met the

eligibility criteria) to the Ministry of Labor, which randomly selected 20 names to receive

training.15 The other 10 were assigned to the control group. ICAPs were allowed to

reassign up to five people from the control group to the treatment group, in the event that

one or more of the original treatments failed to show up for training (“no-shows”) or

dropped out within the first two weeks of the course (“dropouts”). No-show and dropout

rates were relatively high, and over one-third of the original control group was reassigned

to treatment status.

        For the second cohort of the JE program, information was submitted by the

ICAP’s for a total of 8,391 eligible applicants who were applying to receive training in

early 2004. Of these 5,802 (69.1%) were originally assigned to the treatment group, and

2,589 (30.9%) were assigned to the control group. A total of 1,011 of the treatments

were either dropouts or no-shows, and 966 original members of the control group were

re-assigned to the treatment group. Thus, a total of 1,623 people remained in the control

group, while 5,757 (=5802-1011+966) were in the treatment group and received at least 2

weeks of training. We refer to these as the “realized” control and treatment groups,

respectively.


15
   The original program design called for three treatment groups and one control group. The three
treatment groups would have received (i) training and no internship, (ii) internship and no training, (iii)
both. Due to the difficulties in implementing this scheme the program was simplified to have only one
treatment and one control group.


                                                    8
4. Basic Data Description

a. The Evaluation Sample

        Although baseline information was collected on all applicants to the JE program,

follow-up information was only collected for a subsample of the “realized” treatment and

control groups. This subsample was drawn by stratified sampling (using age, gender, and

education classes as strata) from administrative lists of the realized treatment and control

groups, and includes 563 controls and 786 treatments.16

        The fact that data were collected from the realized treatment groups, rather than

the initial program assignment groups, is potentially problematic. The most serious

difficulty is that lack post-program information on people initially assigned to treatment

who failed to show up for training, or dropped out less than two weeks. Unless the

incidence of dropout and no-show behavior is random, the outcomes of the remaining

members of the treatment group may over-state or under-state the average value of

training. To assess the likely magnitude of this problem, we present an analysis using the

baseline survey data on all originally assigned trainees and controls in the second cohort

of the JE program in the next section. A related concern is that people re-assigned from

the control group to the treatment group may have been non-randomly selected. Given

the nature of this process and available program documents, however, we believe that re-

assignment was essentially random.

        Originally, the follow-up survey was scheduled to be conducted 6 months after

completion of the classroom segment of the training. In practice, however, the survey

16
  From now on we refer to these as “treatment” and “control” groups. The size of the evaluation sample
was determined to meet a minimum precision requirement for the difference in means of the employment
rates between the treatment and control groups.


                                                   9
was conducted between May and July of 2005. As part of the survey, members of the

treatment group were asked to provide monthly information on their activities, starting

from the month that they completed (or left) their classroom training program. Because

of variation in the date of entry into the program, and variation in the duration of

classroom training, the number of months of post-classroom training data available for

members of the treatment group ranges from 1 to 18, with a median of 13 months.17

         Information on the treatment group members who completed the follow-up survey

enables us to estimate the fractions of the trainees in JE who completed the various

phases of treatment. A total of 93.3% of the realized treatment group completed their

classroom training, while 6.7% did not. Of the completers, 84.8% started an internship.

Finally, of those who started the internship 92.4% completed it. Thus, the completion

rate for the entire classroom and internship program was 74% (=.933 × .848 × .924),

which compares favorably with other training programs.18

         An important complication that arises in the post-program survey is that since the

control group members did not enter training, they could not be asked about their

activities in the time since program completion. Instead, members of the control group

were asked to provide a monthly calendar starting from August/September 2004. Thus,

for members of the control group, we have access to information on roughly 7-9 months

of data over the period from September 2004 to May-July 2005.




17
   For 2.9% of trainees the survey was conducted less than 6 months after course completion; 14% were
surveyed 6-9 months after; 21.6% between 10-12 months after; and 61.5% were surveyed 13 months or
more after course completion.
18
   Note that the treatment group is defined as those who completed at least two weeks of classroom
training. If no-shows and early dropouts are included in the calculation of the completion rate, it falls to
60%, which is still relatively high.



                                                      10
        For the dynamic analysis described in Section 5, we make one further adjustment

to the sample. Specifically, to ensure that comparisons of the treatment and control

groups are not affected by the fact that some treatments were still in classroom training,

for the dynamic analysis we limit attention to the subgroup of the treatments in the

follow-up survey who had completed their classroom training (or dropped out) by

September 2004.19 Using this criteria we identified a set of 651 members of the treatment

group (82.8% of the treatment group included in the evaluation sample). We refer to the

sample comprising all 563 controls in the follow-up sample and the 651 treatments in the

follow-up sample that completed their classroom training by September 2005 as the

“dynamic sample”.



b. Basic Sample Characteristics and Tests for Randomness

        Table 1 shows some basic characteristics for members of the (realized) treatment

and control groups, as well as for a comparison group in the general population taken

from the October 2004 labor force survey.20               We include information collected in the

baseline (eligibility) survey completed by all program applicants (denoted as “baseline”

characteristics in the table), as well as information on selected characteristics collected in

the follow-up survey.

        Looking first at the differences between the treatment and control groups, there

appears to be only small and unsystematic differences between the groups. For both

groups the mean ages are about 22.3 at baseline, and 22.8 at the follow-up survey. The

regional distributions of the treatments and controls are also similar, as are the fractions

19
  The date of ending classroom training has to be imputed for early dropouts.
20
  This group was defined in terms of age (16-29, mimicking the program’s eligibility criteria) and region,
limiting the sample to those living in the same provinces in which the program operated.


                                                    11
who are male, the mean levels of schooling of both parents, the fractions who report

receiving remittances (at either baseline or follow-up), the fractions employed at baseline,

the fractions with previous work experience, and average household size. The only

notable exception is the distribution of schooling, where – despite the similarity in mean

years of schooling – the treatment group appears to have a lower fraction of people with

primary education and a higher fraction with secondary schooling than the control group.

Given the patterns for parental education, and for years of schooling, we suspect that the

slight differences in the fractions with primary versus secondary education are accidental,

rather than the result of a failure of randomization, or of the fact that the groups are based

on realized program group status, rather than initially assigned status.21

         Although the comparisons in Table 1 between the realized treatment and control

groups suggest that these two groups are very similar, we conducted an additional

analysis using data from the baseline survey that are available for everyone in the second

cohort of the JE program.              Specifically, we compared the characteristics of four

subgroups, defined by the combination of initial program assignment and realized

assignment: (1) those who were originally assigned to treatment and were either no-

shows or dropouts; (2) those who were originally assigned to treatment and actually

received treatment; (3) those who were originally assigned to the control group and did

not receive treatment; (4) and those who were originally assigned to the control group but

were re-assigned to treatment. A sufficient condition for realized program group status to

be “as good as random” is that the classification into these four groups is random.

21
   To test randomization more formally, we ran a probit model for being in the realized treatment group on
all the baseline characteristics, as well as the follow-up survey characteristics that are arguably unaffected
by treatment (parental education, location). We then conducted a test for the joint significance of the
covariates, which should be insignificant if assignment is random. The statistic is insignificant when
education is measured in years, but marginally significant if it is measured in categories.


                                                      12
        Appendix Table 1 presents the means for a set of descriptive statistics for the four

groups. Looking across groups, there are few obvious differences by status. The only

characteristic that clearly stands out is age: no-shows and dropouts were somewhat more

likely to be age 20-24, and less likely to be age 25 or older, than the other groups.

        To test the hypothesis of randomness more formally we fit a multinomial logit

model for being in each of the four groups, using the age, gender, education, and family

status of the applicants, and interactions of these variables, to predict assignment/realized

status. The results are summarized in Appendix Table 2. The likelihood ratio test for the

hypothesis that all the coefficients of the model are 0 is statistically significant,

suggesting that the covariates have some predictive power. In particular, it appears that

some of the age effects and their interactions are statistically significant, although the

pseudo-R2 is tiny. This finding suggests that we have to be cautious in inferring the true

effect of the JE treatment from comparisons between the realized program group and

realized control group.

        In view of theses results, in the comparisons below we present both “unadjusted”

comparisons of the mean differences between the two groups, and a reweighted

difference, which uses the method described by DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux (1996) to

“balance” the distribution of the characteristics of the two groups.22 This is a simple

semi-parametric alternative to a regression adjustment which will lead to unbiased

estimates of the experimental impacts based on realized treatment group status under the

assumption that that no-show/dropout behavior was random, conditional on the observed


22
  In brief, the method is as follows. Step 1: estimate a logit model for the probability of being in the
control group as a function of the baseline and time-invariant characteristics measured in the follow-up
survey. Step 2: construct weighted means for the treatment group, using as a weight for a given person the
function p/(1-p), where p is the predicted probability he or she is in the control group.


                                                   13
covariates, and that re-assignment from the control group to the program group was also

random, conditional on the observed covariates.                 Results from a regression adjusted

comparison are quite similar and in the interests of simplicity we report only the

unadjusted and reweighted comparisons.

         Relative to the comparison group of same-aged people in the October 2004 Labor

Force Survey (ENFT), members of the experimental sample are a little less likely to be

male, consistent with the stated objectives of the program. People in the experiment also

tend to have less-educated parents than those in the overall population. Most noticeably,

people in the experiment have lower employment rates and previous work experience (as

measured in the baseline survey), reflecting the eligibility requirements of the program.

         A third interesting set of contrasts in Table 1 is between responses to similar

questions at the baseline and follow-up surveys. For example, in the baseline survey no

one in the treatment or control groups reported having post-secondary education, whereas

in the follow-up both groups report a 12% rate of post-secondary education. We suspect

that this discrepancy reflects under-reporting by applicants who were aware of the

eligibility criteria of the program (which specified less than a high school degree for

eligibility). A similar under-reporting phenomenon could explain the higher fraction of

the sample with reported remittances at the follow-up than at the baseline.23

Results

a. Employment

         The main goal of the JE program was to increase the “employability” of

participants. Hence, a natural yardstick for assessing program success is a comparison of

23
   The remittance question at baseline refers to 2002, while the question in the follow-up survey refers to
2004, and in the ENFT to July-September 2004. We suspect that timing differences cannot account for the
rise in remittance rates between baseline and follow-up.


                                                    14
the post-program employment rates of the treatment and control groups, which, under the

assumption of random assignment is an unbiased estimate of the average treatment effect.

Table 2 reports the employment rates for both groups, as well as the raw and weighted

difference. The results clearly show no program impact on participant employment rate24:

at the time of the follow-up survey 57% of individuals in treatment group were employed

versus 56% of those in the control group. The results from the reweighted comparison

are even closer to 0. When we disaggregate the results by gender, age, education and

region none of the estimated employment impacts are statistically different from 0 at

conventional levels. Nevertheless, the point estimates are positive and large enough to be

economically significant for the youngest age group (17-19 years old), and for those in

the East and Santo Domingo regions.

         While the main focus of the JE program was on employment, it is also interesting

and important to consider the effects of the program on earnings. To explore these

effects, we begin by looking at monthly labor earnings and hours per week.25 Table 3

shows total monthly labor income for the two groups, assigning 0 earnings for non-

workers. Members of the treatment group have monthly total labor earnings which are

RD$484 (or 17%) higher than the control group.                    While this is a large effect, it is

imprecisely estimated, reflecting the small samples sizes and the underlying variability in

earnings. Examining various subgroups, the estimated earnings impacts are larger for the

youngest age group and for residents of Santo Domingo. The impacts also seem to be



24
   The employment rate is computed at the time of the follow-up survey (May - July 2005). Even
controlling for the month of application and for the month of graduation/separation, there are no significant
differences between the employment status of treatments and controls.
25
   Additionally, we also examine whether the quality of the job was different as measured by having health
insurance. Those results are discussed in the dynamic analysis.


                                                    15
larger for those with some secondary education (a 21% impact versus a 9% for people

with only primary education).

        Table 4 shows the impacts on hours worked per week. Consistent with the results

on the probability of employment, there do not seem to be large or systematic effects on

hours of the overall sample or any subgroup.                   Interestingly, for many groups the

estimated effects of JE are negative, though uniformly insignificant.



b. Conditional Impact on Workers

        Given the negligible impact on employment and hours per week, but the positive

effects on earnings, it is interesting to look at how the JE program affected hourly wages.

As pointed out in Lee (2005), a comparison of hourly wages in an experimental setting is

problematic when the intervention affects the probability of work. In the case of JE,

however, the program appears to have had no effect on employment, implying that wage

comparisons between the groups are potentially valid.26 Table 5 presents results for the

overall experimental population. The top row simply reproduces the employment impact

from Table 2. The remaining rows show means of income, hours worked, hourly wages,

and the probability of health insurance, conditional on working, for the treatment and

control groups, as well as the unadjusted and adjusted (reweighted) gaps between them.

The JE program appears to have had a marginally significant 10% impact on the hourly

wages of participants. No significant differences exist either in hours worked per week



26
  Formally, people who report wages are a selected subset of the population, and, if the experiment effects
the probability of working it may change the relative amount of selectivity bias in the observed wages of
the two groups. Lee (2005) presents an informative procedure for bounding the size of any wage effects,
when there is an employment rate difference. When there is no employment difference, and employment is
assumed to be governed by a single index selection model, simple (unadjusted) comparisons of wages are
valid.


                                                    16
(conditional on working) or in the probability of obtaining health insurance through the

primary job, though the point estimates of the insurance effect are positive.

         Tables 6a and 6b conduct the same exercise for different subgroups. Table 6a

shows the unadjusted data, whereas 6b shows results using the reweighting procedure to

standardize the characteristics of the treatment group back to those of the controls.27

Across the various subgroups there is no evidence of a significant effect on hours

(conditional on working). Likewise, although most of the point estimates are positive,

none of the estimated effects on hourly wages are significant. We conclude that the

suggestive positive effects on wages seen for the overall sample in Table 5 are relatively

evenly distributed across the sample.

         Although the estimated impacts on hourly wages and earnings are not statistically

significant, the magnitude of the point estimates (around 10%) is relatively large. In

particular, the estimated impact on average monthly earnings of those with a job is about

RD$440 – or about 38 US dollars per month – with a t-statistic for the adjusted gap of

1.5. The estimated cost of the JE program was about 330 US dollars per trainee. Taking

the point estimate at face value, assuming that the employment rate of the trainees (and

controls) remains at 55%, and that impact on earnings conditional on employment

persists indefinitely, and the initial investment in training costs would be recovered in

about two years. Unfortunately, given the imprecision of the estimated earnings impacts,

and the absence of longer-term follow-up data, it is impossible to reach a definitive

conclusion on the cost-effectiveness of the JE program.




27
   Note that the first row of Table 6a corresponds to the third column of Table 5 (raw differences), and the
first row of Table 6b corresponds to the last column of Table 5 (reweighted differences).


                                                     17
c. Quality of the Training Institutions

        A natural hypothesis about training programs is that higher quality training will

have a bigger impact on participant outcomes. Information on the quality of different

ICAPs was obtained from a supervision system set up by INFOTEP (the National

Training Institute). For each ICAP we know whether or not it was a member of the

INFOTEP network, and if so, the quality grade assigned by INFOTEP for the institution.

Of the 33 ICAPs contracted for training in Phase 1 of the JE program, 22 were certified

by INFOTEP and 11 were not (however, 80% of trainees attended a certified ICAP).

Among the certified ICAPs, 10 received the minimum grade, 6 received a medium rating

and 3 received the maximum rating.28 We tried to test whether the impact of training was

related to the “quality” of the ICAP by dividing enrollees into those who were assigned to

ICAPs with different INFOTEP ratings (treating non-members as a fourth category). To

account for local variation in other unobserved factors that may be correlated with

quality, we assigned the controls to the ICAPs they would have trained with, if they had

been in the treatment group. Comparisons between treatment and control outcomes

within each quality group showed no evidence of a large or systematic “quality effect”.



d. Dynamic Employment Impacts

        So far we have examined the impact of the program at the time of the follow-up

survey, which took place between May and July 2005. In this section we focus on

employment dynamics, specifically monthly employment outcomes between August


28
  The share of trainees – among those who enrolled with a certified ICAP-- was 37% at ICAP’s with low
rating, 50% at those with medium rating and 8% at those with a high rating.


                                                  18
2004 and May 2005. As noted earlier, for this purpose, we limit the sample of treatment

group members to those that finished or dropped out of the course on or before August

2004.    This creates a “balanced” panel of individuals for whom we observe monthly

employment status from August 2004 until May 2005.

        Figure 1 shows monthly employment rates for the treatment and control groups

during each month of this ten month window, along with the difference in employment

rates for each month, and a 95% confidence interval around the difference. We present

data for the overall sample (top left panel) and for some of the key subgroups in the

experiment. As suggested by the estimated employment impacts at the time of the

follow-up survey (in Table 2), there is no indication of an overall treatment effect, but

there is some indication of positive employment effects for the youngest sample

members, and for those in the East region.

        We also conducted a similar analysis using information on the dynamic path of

the likelihood of having employer-provided health insurance (i.e., being employed at a

job that provides health insurance coverage). We interpret this variable as a rough

indicator of the quality of the job held at a point in time. (Unfortunately, the surveys did

not collect monthly wage data). Figure 2 shows the fractions of people in the treatment

and control groups with employer-provided health insurance each month, along with the

experimental impact (and a 95% confidence interval). Overall, the treatment group has

about a four percentage point higher coverage rate than the control group (19.5% vs.

15.5%), and the gap is marginally significant over most of the post-training window.

However, the difference is present only for men; it is negligible for women. Although

the estimates are quite noisy, the effect seems to be concentrated among better-educated




                                             19
sample members (with a secondary education) and among those living in Santo

Domingo.



e. A Model of Impacts on “Employability”

        The designers of the JE program specified “increased employability” as an

objective of training. One interpretation of this concept is that training would raise the

probability of moving from unemployment to employment, and lower the probability of

moving from employment to unemployment. Building on this interpretation, in this

section we develop a simple dynamic model of monthly employment outcomes in the JE

evaluation, to determine whether participating in the program had an impact on either

probability.    We also use a similar model to examine the effects of the JE program on

transitions into and out of jobs with employer-provided health insurance.

        The model consists of two parts: one for the person’s employment status in

“month 1” (August 2004) – which we interpret as a period just after the end of training –

and another for the rate of employment transitions over the next 9 months.29 In this

setting, the JE program has two types of potential effects: an effect on employment status

in month 1, which could be negative if training takes someone out of the labor force, and

an effect on the subsequent transition probabilities.

        To proceed, let yit represent the employment status of person i in month t, let Xi

represent a set of observed baseline covariates for individual i, and let Ti be a dummy

indicating i’s program status (Ti =0 for a control group member and Ti =1 for a program

group member). The statistical problem is to develop a model for

29
  Some of the issues in specifying treatment effects in a dynamic setting are described in Ham and Lalonde
(1996) and Card and Hyslop (2005).


                                                   20
       P( yi1, yi2, .... yi11 | Ti, Xi ) = P (yi1 | Ti, Xi ) × P( yi2, .... yi11 | yi1 , Ti, X i )

We assume that there is unobserved heterogeneity across the population, represented by

the random effect αi. Under random assignment, the distribution of the random effect is

the same in the treatment and control groups.

       In the absence of the JE program we assume that in months 2-10, the probability

that person i is employed in month t depends on αi, on a linear trend (capturing the

upward trend in employment we observe in the data from months 1-10) on the X’s, and

on employment status in the previous month:

       P(yit=1 | yit-1, Ti=0, Xi, αi) = P( β0 + β1 t + Xiβx + λyit-1 + αi + eit ≥0 )

where eit is a logistic random variable that is i.i.d. over time and across people. This

implies that

       P(yit=1 | yit-1, Ti=0, Xi, αi.) = logit (β0 + β1 t + Xi βx + λyit-1 + αi)

where logit(z) = exp(z)/(1 + exp(z)) is the logistic distribution function.

       For people in the treatment group we assume that exposure to treatment

potentially increases "employability".           This is captured by two treatment effects: a

potential increase in the probability of being employed in period t if the person was not

working in period t-1 (i.e., an increase in the rate of moving from non-work to work), and

a potential increase in the probability of being employed in period t if the person was

working in period t-1 (i.e., an increase in the rate of job retention). Formally, we assume

that

       P(yit=1 | yit-1, Ti=1, Xi, αi) = logit (β0 + β1 t + Xi βx + λyit-1 + ϕ0(1-yit-1)

                                                     + ϕ1yit-1 + αi) .




                                                    21
The parameter ϕ0 represents the effect of the JE program on the probability of moving

from non-work to work, while ϕ1 is the effect on the probability of job retention.

        We assume that the distribution of the random effects can be approximated by a

point mass distribution with a small number (3) points of support. Thus, αi is a random

variable that takes on values {α1, α2, α3} with probabilities {π1, π2, π3}. We jointly

estimate the location of the mass points and their probabilities.30 Finally, we assume that

the probability that the individual is employed in August 2004 is given by

        P(yi1=1 | Ti,Xi,αi) = logit ( γ(αi) + µ Xi βx + δTi )

where γ(αi) = γj (for j=1,2,3) represent unrestricted constants for each point of support of

the random effect, µ is a scalar parameter that "rescales" the effects of the X’s in the

initial conditions probability model, and δ represents the treatment effect on the

probability of employment in month 1.

        We fit a number of versions of this model to the sequences of monthly

employment outcomes of the treatment and control groups, including models without any

covariates, and other specifications with controls for various combinations of gender, age,

education and region. Estimates from a representative specification are presented in

column 1 of Table 7. This model includes three observed characteristics: a dummy for

males, a dummy for ages 20-24, and a dummy for ages 25 and older (with the omitted

category being ages 17-19).          The main parameter estimates are very similar from

specifications with no covariates, or with a longer list of controls. In column 2, we also


30
  The use of a point-mass distribution to approximate the distribution of unobserved heterogeneity was
popularized in econometrics by Heckman and Singer (1984). Our model is similar to ones used in Card
and Sullivan (1988) and Card and Hyslop (2005).



                                                 22
show estimates from a parallel specification fit to the sequence of indicators for having a

job with employer-provided health insurance.

       As one might expect, the parameter estimates from the two models are similar,

though there are some interesting differences. Consistent with the patterns in Figures 1

and 2, the model in column 1 of Table 7 has a positive trend, while the trend in the model

for employment with insurance is negligible (see row 2). Males are more likely to be

employed in any month, or to be employed at a job with insurance (row 7). Likewise,

older workers have higher probabilities of employment or employment with health

insurance (rows 8-9). The estimates of the “loading factor” µ (row 10) suggest that the

covariates combine in a similar way to affect the probabilities of employment in months

2-9 and in month 1.     Finally, both outcomes exhibit significant state dependence: the

estimate of λ is 4.67 for employment and 7.00 for employment with insurance.

       Given the absence of a large or systematic gap in the employment rates of the

treatment and control groups (Figure 1) it is not surprising that the estimated treatment

effects for employment are small and imprecise (rows 4-6).      The point estimates suggest

that any treatment effect is concentrated on the job retention rate, though the t-statistic is

only about 1. The estimated treatment effects for the probability of having a job with

health insurance are larger, though still relatively imprecise. Training appears to have

raised the probability of holding a job with health insurance during August 2004 (“month

1”), as well as the rates of moving into a job with insurance, and holding onto such a job.

       Some further insight into the predictions of the dynamic model for health

insurance coverage are presented in Figure 3. This figure shows the actual difference

between the treatment and control groups in the likelihood of a job with insurance (shown




                                             23
by the black squares), as well as the predicted differences from the model (the heavy

line). We also show the predicted difference under the assumption that treatment only

affected the “initial condition” in month 1 (the dashed line), and under the assumption

that treatment affected the initial condition and the probability of retaining a job with

health insurance (the lighter solid line).       Looking at month 10 (i.e., May 2005) the

predicted treatment effect is around 4.5 percentage points, of which about 2 points can be

attributed to the impact of treatment on health insurance status in month 1, another point

can be attributed to the impact of treatment on the likelihood of retaining a job with

insurance, and the remained (about 1.5 points) can be attributed to the treatment effect on

the likelihood of moving from no insurance to insurance.               The relatively large

contribution of the initial insurance status in month 1 suggests that training helped the

trainees move to better jobs almost immediately – perhaps through employment at the

firm that offered on-the-job training.         Nearly one-half of the overall effect on the

likelihood of holding a job with health insurance at the end of the follow-up period is

attributed to this initial condition effect.



5. Interpretation and Conclusions

        This paper presents the first evaluation based on an experimental design for a job

training program in Latin America. Previous evaluations of similar programs, based on

observational designs, typically report positive impacts of training on the probability of

having a job and on labor earnings. In contrast, we find that the Juventud y Empleo (JE)

program in the Dominican Republic had no significant effect on employment. There is

evidence of an modest (10%) impact on hourly wages and earnings per month




                                                24
(conditional on employment), although the estimated effects are only marginally

significant (t=1.5 for monthly earnings). The point estimate is economically significant,

and large enough to potentially offset the costs of the JE training in about 2 years, if the

impact persisted.

       Although our evaluation is based on a randomized design, in the implementation

of the experiment some people who were initially assigned to training dropped out, and

were not included in the survey of post-program outcomes. Our analysis suggests that

dropouts were not very different than those who completed training, and we use a re-

weighting procedure to adjust the available samples of trainees and controls for minor

differences in their observed characteristics. It is possible there is some remaining bias in

our experimental contrasts, arising from unobserved differences between the dropouts

and those who completed training, although we believe theses biases are probably small.

       This paper also contributes to the literature by providing an operational definition

for “employability”, based on transition probabilities between employment and non-

employment status.      Building on this definition, we fit a logistic model with state

dependence and unobserved heterogeneity for the observed employment transitions of the

treatment and control groups. The results of the model suggest that the JE program had

no significant impact of trainee employability, although a similar model shows a modest

impact on job quality, as measured by the probability of holding of a job that offers

health insurance.

       Our finding that the Juventud y Empleo training program had (at best) relatively

modest effects on participants’ labor market outcomes is consistent with the results from

evaluations in many developed countries. Although it may be possible to improve the




                                             25
effectiveness of the JE program in the Dominican Republic, and similar programs in

other Latin American and Caribbean countries, it is unlikely that programs of this nature,

operating under similar financial and operational constraints, can fully address the many

barriers and problems faced by disadvantaged youths in the region. In any case, the

results from this evaluation suggest that it is important that job training programs be

closely tracked and rigorously evaluated.31




31
   The Office of Evaluation and Oversight at the IDB is currently working on five quantitative impact
evaluations of similar programs, including a natural experiment in Panama and quasi experimental designs
for Mexico, Peru, Argentina and Colombia.


                                                  26
Appendix Table 1: Comparisons of Characteristics Between Four
Assignment/Realized Treatment Status Groups

                     Assigned to   Assigned to    Assigned to     Assigned to
                     Treat. and    Control and   Treat. and No-   Control and
     Variable         Received      Remained     show/dropout     Reassigned
                          1             2               3              4
Female                  0.545        0.570           0.534          0.528
Years of Schooling      9.255         9.083           9.171          9.459
Primary                 0.324         0.386           0.374         0.274
Age                    22.246        22.368          22.136         22.034
Student                0.351         0.305           0.403          0.437
Married                0.186         0.215           0.201          0.170
Dependants              0.192         0.193           0.213          0.181
Remittances             0.033         0.035           0.040          0.037
Letrina                 0.252         0.274           0.217          0.216
Santo Domingo           0.539         0.553          0.507          0.467

Household Members       4.872         4.826          4.781           4.939
Age 17-19               0.240         0.239          0.231           0.254
Age 20-24               0.505         0.492          0.546           0.510
Age 25+                 0.254         0.269          0.223           0.236
Labor Experience        0.151         0.148          0.159           0.164
Employed                0.028         0.025          0.025           0.016

N                       4791          1623           1010            941




                                       27
Appendix Table 2: Tests for Randomness Between Four Assignment Groups

Multinomial logistic regression               Number of obs           =                 8365
                                              LR chi2(63)             =               117.17
                                              Prob > chi2             =                    0
Log likelihood = -9464.0928                   Pseudo R2               =               0.0062

                              Control           No Show/Dropouts Control-Replacement
      Variable            Coef.   Std. Err.      Coef.   Std. Err. Coef.    Std. Err.
Female                    0.057       0.144      0.286       0.186        0.136      0.182
Years of Schooling       0.009        0.027      0.060       0.034        0.052      0.036
Household Size           -0.009       0.015      -0.027      0.019         0.016     0.019
Married (M)              0.050        0.208      0.069       0.253        0.139      0.257
Primary (P)               0.078       0.171      0.307       0.219        -0.160     0.233
P*F                      -0.037       0.128      0.088       0.153        -0.130     0.168
Age 20-24 (A20)          -0.156       0.130      0.406       0.173        0.182      0.164
P*M                      0.086        0.160      -0.273      0.194        0.011      0.220
No. Dependents (D)       -0.268       0.186       0.220      0.226        -0.049     0.232
P*D                      0.287        0.157      0.162       0.187        0.154      0.212
D*F                      -0.119       0.169      -0.117      0.200        0.050      0.216
M*F                      0.132        0.197      -0.057      0.228        -0.227     0.243
Age 17-19 (A17)          -0.299       0.154      0.506       0.196        0.116      0.188
A17*P                    0.455        0.177      0.001       0.226        0.185      0.238
A17*M                    0.173        0.256      0.163       0.351        0.286      0.328
A17*D                    0.222        0.264      -0.423      0.360        -0.106     0.338
A17*F                    0.070        0.182      -0.601      0.230        -0.089     0.227
A20*P                    0.098        0.149      0.114       0.185        0.115      0.205
A20*M                    -0.160       0.169      0.264       0.204        -0.040     0.222
A20*D                    0.283        0.165      -0.057      0.197        -0.089     0.213
A20*F                    0.065        0.152      -0.362      0.191        -0.241     0.193

Note: Multinomial logit model for assignment/realized treatment status. Omitted group is the
set of originally assigned trainees who completed training.




                                                   28
Table 1: Basic Characteristics of the Sample

                                                   Treatment       Control Comparison
                                                     Group         Group Group**
Age (in Years):
 At Baseline                                          22.3           22.3        --
 At Follow-up                                         22.8           22.8       22.1
Geographic Distribution:
 East                                                 16.0           13.0        7.1
 North                                                18.8           16.7       32.9
 Santo Domingo                                        44.0           45.3       50.0
 Southwest                                            21.1           25.0       10.1

Percent Male                                          44.7           42.8       49.0

Parental Education:
 Schooling of Father (years)                           6.9           7.2         9.4
 Schooling of Mother (years)                           7.0           6.9         9.3

Distribution of Completed Education
At Baseline:
  Years of Schooling                                   9.3            9.2        --
  Primary*                                            30.7           36.9        --
  Secondary*                                          69.3           63.1        --
At Follow-up:
   Years of Schooling                                 10.7           10.5       9.6
   Primary *                                          15.5           22.7       37.1
   Secondary *                                        72.1           64.8       45.2
   Post-secondary                                     12.3           12.4       17.7

Receive Remittances:
 At Baseline                                           3.3            4.1         --
 At Follow-up                                         24.7           20.6        8.0

Employed (Baseline)                                   3.1             3.4       48.9
Previous Work (Baseline)                              17.7           15.8       58.8
Household Size                                         5.0            5.1        4.7

* Denotes statistically significant difference between treatment and control groups in
  this variable.
** Based on October 2004 ENFT (Labor Force Survey) for the provinces were the
training program was offered, for overall population ages 16-29.




                                            29
Table 2: Employment Status at the Follow-up Survey


                                                                Raw         Re-weighted
Sample:                        Treatments         Controls   Difference      Difference

All                                   57.38%        55.95%         1.43%              0.02%
                                       1.77%         2.09%         2.74%              2.74%

Men                                   70.94%        70.54%         0.40%             -0.77%
                                       2.43%         2.94%         3.81%              3.85%

Women                                 46.44%        45.03%         1.41%              0.28%
                                       2.39%         2.78%         3.67%              3.65%

Ages 17 - 19                          50.37%        42.59%         7.78%              6.93%
                                       4.32%         4.78%         6.45%              6.35%

Ages 20 - 24                          59.12%        57.64%         1.48%             -0.10%
                                       2.37%         2.92%         3.75%              3.80%

Age 25+                               58.26%        61.68%        -3.42%             -4.46%
                                       3.35%         3.77%         5.05%              5.00%

Primary Education                     56.85%        57.21%        -0.37%             -1.99%
                                       3.20%         3.44%         4.70%              4.59%

Secondary Education                   57.61%        55.21%         2.40%              1.16%
                                       2.12%         2.64%         3.38%              3.43%

EAST                                  61.90%        53.42%         8.48%              6.95%
                                       4.34%         5.88%         7.25%              7.50%

NORTH                                 60.14%        67.02%        -6.89%             -6.70%
                                       4.04%         4.88%         6.39%              6.41%

Santo Domingo                         58.67%        53.33%         5.34%              4.13%
                                       2.65%         3.13%         4.09%              4.09%

SOUTHWEST                             48.80%        54.61%        -5.81%             -7.46%
                                       3.89%         4.21%         5.73%              5.60%

Notes: standard errors in italics. In the last column, the mean for the treatment group is a
weighted mean, where the weight for a given person is p/(1-p), and p is the estimated
probability the person is in the control group, given his/her covariates.



                                             30
Table 3: Labor Earnings in the Month of the Follow-up Survey

                                                                 Raw        Re-weighted
Sample:                        Treatments        Controls     Difference     Difference

All                                    $3,236        $2,752         $484               $273
                                         $146          $150         $215               $208

Men                                    $4,750        $4,107         $643               $456
                                         $251          $262         $373               $366

Women                                  $2,014        $1,739         $276               $135
                                         $146          $153         $215               $207

Ages 17 - 19                           $2,680        $1,826         $854               $619
                                         $343          $321         $479               $444

Ages 20 - 24                           $3,267        $2,865         $402               $228
                                         $188          $209         $287               $285

Age 25+                                $3,518        $3,157         $362               $128
                                         $306         $284          $429               $403

Primary Education                      $2,890        $2,654         $236                $21
                                         $238          $250         $346               $328

Secondary Education                    $3,389        $2,810         $579               $421
                                         $183          $189         $273               $268

EAST                                   $3,181        $2,965         $216                $13
                                        $325          $510          $577               $617

NORTH                                  $3,292        $3,727        -$436              -$510
                                        $327          $430          $534               $551

Santo Domingo                          $3,687        $2,712         $975               $781
                                         $243          $216         $338               $320

SOUTHWEST                              $2,287        $2,065         $223                $12
                                         $270          $224         $358               $326

Notes: standard errors in italics. See note to table 2. The dependent variable is monthly
earnings (including 0’s for non-earners). The value of earnings is censored at the 99th
percentile.




                                            31
Table 4: Hours of Work Per Week in the Follow-up Survey

                                                              Raw         Re-weighted
Muestra                       Treatments       Controls    Difference      Difference

All                                    23.97       23.39           0.58             -0.73
                                        0.94        1.14           1.47              1.47

Men                                    32.50       32.38           0.12             -0.99
                                        1.46        1.81           2.31              2.35

Women                                  17.09       16.67           0.42             -0.54
                                        1.13        1.34           1.74              1.73

Ages 17 - 19                           20.53       21.02          -0.49             -1.65
                                        2.20        2.85           3.54              3.49

Ages 20 - 24                           24.59       22.57           2.02              0.80
                                        1.26        1.49           1.97              1.98

Age 25+                                24.87       26.34          -1.47             -2.77
                                        1.84        2.15           2.83              2.78

Primary Education                      24.00       24.27          -0.27             -2.02
                                        1.69        2.04           2.62              2.54

Secondary Education                    23.96       22.88           1.08              0.02
                                        1.13        1.35           1.78              1.80

EAST                                   27.12       25.60           1.52              0.37
                                        2.39        3.91           4.33              4.73

NORTH                                  22.70       26.78          -4.07             -3.81
                                        1.94        2.63           3.21              3.34

Santo Domingo                          25.72       23.11           2.61              1.33
                                        1.51        1.72           2.29              2.26

SOUTHWEST                              19.07       20.50          -1.44             -2.95
                                        1.88        1.95           2.72              2.57

Notes: standard errors in italics. See note to table 2. The dependent variable is weekly
hours (including 0’s for non-workers).




                                            32
Table 5: Summary of Labor Market Outcomes in the Follow-up Survey


                                                                                      Raw              Re-weighted
Outcome:                                    Treatments         Controls            Difference           Difference

Employment Rate                                  57.38%            55.95%                 1.43%               0.02%
                                                  1.77%             2.09%                 2.74%               2.74%

Monthly Income (All Jobs)               $        5,818     $       5,289       $          529      $          438
                                        $          195     $         202       $          288      $          284

Hours worked per week (All Jobs)                   43.43               44.27               -0.84               -1.11
                                                    0.79                0.98                1.25                1.27

Hourly Wage (All Jobs)                  $       151.19     $      133.92       $        17.27      $        14.50
                                        $         9.91     $        7.02       $        13.32      $        11.84

Health Insurance in Primary Job                   38.0%                34.8%               3.1%                2.5%
                                                   2.5%                 2.9%               3.9%                3.9%

Notes: standard errors in italics. See note to table 2. The sample for employment includes everyone. The sample
for income, hours per week, hourly wage, and health insurance includes those with positive earnings and
between 10 and 85 hours per week. The value of earnings is censored at the 99th percentile.




                                                                  33
Table 6a: Unadjusted Difference For Selected Indicators

                                  Monthly             Hours per      Hourly    Health
                       Employment Earnings            Week           Wage      Insurance
All                            1.43% $         529         -0.84 $     17.27         3.1%
                                2.74% $        288          1.25 $     13.32          3.9%

Men                            0.40% $         757         -0.33 $     23.33         9.3%
                                3.81% $        406          1.58 $     21.74          5.2%

Women                          1.41% $         177         -1.66 $      8.07         -5.3%
                                3.67% $        360          1.96 $     10.35          5.7%

Ages 17 - 19                   7.78% $       1,164         -3.42 $     33.49         6.9%
                                6.45% $        751          2.70 $     17.47          9.8%

Ages 20 - 24                   1.48% $         379         0.83 $      17.05         -0.8%
                                3.75% $        369          1.69 $     21.08          5.2%

Age 25+                       -3.42% $         552         -2.48 $     10.27         8.2%
                                5.05% $        577          2.44 $     19.72          7.0%

Primary Education             -0.37% $         429         -0.08 $     12.15         3.4%
                                4.70% $        476          2.32 $     12.75          6.4%

Secondary Education            2.40% $         528         -1.24 $     18.01         2.6%
                                3.38% $        360          1.48 $     18.99          4.8%

EAST                           8.48% $         -872        -7.08 $      3.24        -17.6%
                                7.25% $        760          3.70 $     15.80         10.7%

NORTH                          -6.89% $        -140        -0.21 $    -10.53         8.1%
                                6.39% $        698          2.68 $     20.24          8.1%

Santo Domingo                  5.34% $         858         -1.94 $     38.73         9.5%
                                4.09% $        445          1.87 $     26.98          5.9%

SOUTHWEST                     -5.81% $         969         3.00 $       2.43         -2.9%
                                5.73% $        523          2.63 $     16.73          8.4%

Notes: standard errors in italics. See notes to Table 5.


                                             34
Table 6b: Reweighted Differences for Selected Indicators

                                  Monthly              Hours per      Hourly    Health
                       Employment Earnings             Week           Wage      Insurance
All                            0.02% $         438          -1.11 $     14.50         2.5%
                                2.74% $        284           1.27 $     11.84          3.9%

Men                            -0.77% $        698          -0.41 $     20.16         9.3%
                                3.85% $        399           1.62 $     19.09          5.2%

Women                          0.28% $            90        -2.04 $      6.91         -6.4%
                                3.65% $        359           1.99 $     10.38          5.8%

Ages 17 - 19                   6.93% $         912          -3.79 $     29.01         7.5%
                                6.35% $        731           2.72 $     17.22          9.5%

Ages 20 - 24                   -0.10% $        342          0.86 $      13.90         -0.3%
                                3.80% $        367           1.74 $     17.93          5.4%

Age 25+                        -4.46% $        427          -3.14 $     10.53         4.9%
                                5.00% $        555           2.45 $     20.24          6.9%

Primary Education              -1.99% $        353          -0.77 $     12.73         3.2%
                                4.59% $        452           2.28 $     11.73          6.3%

Secondary Education            1.16% $         500          -1.29 $     15.98         2.3%
                                3.43% $        362           1.52 $     17.41          4.9%

EAST                           6.95% $         -990         -7.12 $      0.80        -18.0%
                                7.50% $        827           3.92 $     15.15         11.3%

NORTH                          -6.70% $        -233         0.43 $     -15.21         8.4%
                                6.41% $        737           2.72 $     21.95          8.2%

Santo Domingo                  4.13% $         803          -2.32 $     35.73         8.5%
                                4.09% $        414           1.88 $     21.85          5.8%

SOUTHWEST                      -7.46% $        794          2.22 $       0.10         -4.4%
                                5.60% $        504           2.58 $     16.22          8.2%
Notes: standard errors in italics. See notes to Table 5.


                                             35
Table 7: Employability Model - Estimated Parameters

                                                                 Employed with
                                                Employment        Health Insurance

Model Parameters
1. Constant (β0)                                  -1.99                 -2.43
                                                  (3.43)                (4.36)

2. Trend (β1)                                      0.06                 -0.03
                                                  (0.02)                (0.03)

3. State-dependence (λ)                            4.67                 7.00
                                                  (0.15)                (0.31)

4. Treatment Effect if Not Employed in             0.03                  0.24
   Previous Period (ϕ0)                           (0.10)                (0.20)

5. Treatment Effect if Employed in                 0.13                  0.18
   Previous Period (ϕx1)                          (0.14)                (0.27)

6. Treatment Effect in Probability of              0.07                  0.18
   Employment in Month 8 (δ)                      (0.15)                (0.27)

7. Male Dummy in Employment Model                   0.73                 0.71
                                                   (0.11)               (0.27)

8. Dummy for Age 20-24 in Employment                0.37                 0.41
    Model                                          (0.11)               (0.20)

9. Dummy for Age 25+ in Employment                   0.60                0.57
    Model                                           (0.13)              (0.25)

10. Loading Factor For Covariates in Model           1.33                 1.89
     for Employment in Month 8 (µ)                   (0.26)              (0.66)

11. Log Likelihood                                - 3630.7              - 1536.3

12. Total Number of Parameters                      17                    17


Note: Models include point-mass random effects, with three points of support. See text.
Standard errors in parentheses.




                                          36
                       Distribution of Hourly Earnings
                       Treatment and Control in Valid Sample
       .00015
           .0001
     Density
.00005 0




                   0   5000           10000              15000   20000
                                  Hourly Earnings

                                Control             Treatment




                                      37
                        Figure 1. Employment Rates



                  Employment Rate of Treatments and Controls                                                                                      Employment Rate of Treatments and Controls, MEN

70%                                                                                                                     80%

                                                                                                                        70%
60%
                                                                                                                        60%
50%
                                                                                                                        50%

40%                                                                                                                     40%

30%                                                                                                                     30%

                                                                                                                        20%
20%
                                                                                                                        10%
10%
                                                                                                                         0%
                                                                                                                                    8/04            9/04           10/04            11/04           12/04              1/05                2/05                  3/05           4/05          5/05

 0%                                                                                                                     -10%
       8/04      9/04     10/04        11/04        12/04      1/05         2/05             3/05    4/05   5/05
                                                                                                                        -20%
-10%
                                                                                                                                                                                   Treatment        Control           Difference            CI              CI
                                  Treatment        Control     Difference          CI           CI




              Employment Rate of Treatments and Controls, WOMEN                                                                              Employment Rate of Treatments and Controls, aged 17-19

60%                                                                                                                        60%


50%                                                                                                                        50%


40%                                                                                                                        40%


                                                                                                                           30%
30%

                                                                                                                           20%
20%

                                                                                                                           10%
10%

                                                                                                                               0%
 0%                                                                                                                                        8/04             9/04           10/04            11/04           12/04              1/05               2/05                   3/05          4/05          5/05
       8/04      9/04     10/04         11/04       12/04       1/05        2/05             3/05    4/05   5/05
                                                                                                                           -10%
-10%

                                                                                                                           -20%
-20%
                                                                                                                                                                                        Treatment           Control           Difference               CI         CI
                                       Treatment     Control   Difference    CI         CI




               Employment Rate of Treatments and Controls, East                                                                                      Employment Rate of Treatments and Controls
80%
                                                                                                                                                                 Santo Domingo
                                                                                                                        70%
70%
                                                                                                                        60%
60%
                                                                                                                        50%
50%

40%                                                                                                                     40%

30%                                                                                                                     30%

20%
                                                                                                                        20%
10%
                                                                                                                        10%
 0%
       8/04      9/04     10/04         11/04       12/04       1/05        2/05             3/05    4/05   5/05
                                                                                                                         0%
-10%                                                                                                                                8/04             9/04           10/04              11/04          12/04               1/05                   2/05                   3/05           4/05          5/05


-20%                                                                                                                    -10%
                                                                                                                                                                                    Treatment         Control            Difference               CI             CI
                                       Treatment     Control   Difference    CI         CI




                                                                                                                   38
                                                Figure 2. Employer-Provided Health Insurance

                                            Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance                                                                                                                                                                                 Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance, MEN
25%                                                                                                                                                                                                                               35%


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  30%
20%

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  25%
15%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20%

10%                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15%


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10%
5%

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5%
0%
             8/04                 9/04                 10/04               11/04               12/04                   1/05                   2/05                 3/05                 4/05                 5/05                  0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              8/04           9/04          10/04       11/04         12/04         1/05          2/05          3/05    4/05   5/05

-5%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -5%
                                                                         Treatment             Control             Difference                  CI           CI                                                                                                                        Treatment      Control      Difference      CI     CI




                                         Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance, WOMEN                                                                                                                                                                         Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance, aged 20-24
  16%                                                                                                                                                                                                                              25%

  14%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20%
  12%

  10%                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15%
      8%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10%
      6%

      4%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5%
      2%

      0%                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0%
                    8/04                 9/04                  10/04               11/04               12/04                   1/05                  2/05                 3/05                 4/05                 5/05                      8/04            9/04         10/04        11/04        12/04         1/05          2/05          3/05    4/05   5/05

      -2%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -5%
      -4%

      -6%                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -10%
                                                                               Treatment               Control                Difference              CI            CI                                                                                                                Treatment      Control      Difference      CI     CI




                                          Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance, secondary
                                                      education at baseline                                                                                                                                                                                 Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance, Santo Domingo

        25%                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30%



        20%                                                                                                                                                                                                                          25%



        15%                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20%



        10%                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15%


            5%                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10%


            0%                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5%
                           8/04                 9/04                   10/04               11/04               12/04                   1/05                 2/05                 3/05                 4/05                 5/05


            -5%                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8/04           9/04      10/04        11/04       12/04         1/05         2/05          3/05   4/05   5/05
                                                                                      Treatment                Control                Difference             CI            CI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Treatment      Control     Difference     CI     CI




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              39
Figure 3. Actual and Simulated Treatment Effects on Probability of Employment
with Health Insurance

                    7%



                    6%



                    5%
 Treatment Effect




                    4%



                    3%



                    2%
                                 Actual Data
                                 Simulated Data, Full Treatment Effects

                    1%           Simulated, Initial Condition Effect Only
                                 Simulated, Initial Condition and Retention Effect



                    0%
                         1   2       3                 4                    5        6     7   8   9   10
                                                                   Month (1=August 2004)




                                                                            40
REFERENCES

Ashenfelter, O. “Estimating the effects of training programs on earnings.” Review of
      Economics and Statistics, 1978, vol. 60, pp.648-60.

Betcherman, Gordon, Karina Olivas, and Amit Dar. “Impacts of active labor market
       programs: new evidence from evaluations with particular attention to developing
       and transition countries.” World Bank Social Protection Discussion Paper 0402,
       2004.

Bloom et al., “The benefits and costs of JTPA Title II-A programs: key findings from the
      national job partnership act study.” Journal of Human Resources, 1997, vol. 32,
      no.3, pp. 549-576.

Burghardt, J. and Schochet, P. “National Job Corps Study: impacts by center
      characteristics”, Princeton, Mathematica Policy Research, 2001.

Dolton, P. “The economics of youth training in Britain.” The Economic Journal, 1993,
       vol. 103, no. 420, pp. 1261-1278.

Dolton, P., Makepeace, G. and Treble, J. “The wage effect of YTS: evidence from YCS”,
       Scottish Journal of Political Economy, 1994, vol. 41, pp. 444-454.

Card, David and Dean R. Hyslop. “Estimating the Effects of a Time-Limited Earnings
       Subsidy for Welfare Leavers.” Econometrica 73, November 2005: 1723-1770.

Card, David and Daniel G. Sullivan. “Measuring the Effect of Subsidized Training
       Programs on Movements In and Out of Employment.” Econometrica 56, May
       1988: 497-530.

General Accounting Office. “Job Training Partnership Act: Long-Term Earnings and
      Employment Outcomes.” 1996, Washington, D.C.

Friedlander, D., Greenberg, D. and Robins, P. "Evaluating government training programs
       for the economically disadvantaged." Journal of Economic Literature, 1997, vol.
       35, no. 4.

Heckman, J. and Singer, B. "A method for minimizing the impact of distributional
     assumptions in econometric models for duration data," Econometrica, 1984, vol.
     52, no 2, pp. 271-320.

Heckman, J., Lalonde R. and Smith, J. "The economics and econometrics of active labor
     market rograms," in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card (Eds.), Handbook of
     Labor Economics, 1999, vol. 3A, pp. 1865-2097.




                                           41
Heckman, J. Hohmann, N. and Smith, J. "Substitution and dropout bias in social
     experiments: a study of an influential social experiment," Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 2000, vol. 115, no. 2, pp. 651-94.

Heckman, J. and Carneiro, P. “Human capital policy”, NBER Working Paper 9495, 2003.

Kiefer, N. The economic benefits of four employment and training programs. New
        York, 1979.

Kluve, J., D. Card, M. Fertig, M. Góra, L. Jacobi, P. Jensen, R. Leetmaa, L. Nima, E.
       Patacchini, S. Schaffner, C.M. Schmidt, B. van der Klaauw, and A. Weber,
       “Study on the effectiveness of ALMPs”, report prepared for the European
       Commission, DG Employment, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities, Essen,
       2005.

Lalonde, R. “Evaluating the econometric evaluations of training programs with
      experimental data,” American Economic Review, 1986, vol. 76, No. 4, pp.604-
      620.

Lalonde, R. “The promise of public sector-sponsored training programs”, Journal of
      Economic Perspectives, 1995, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 149-168.

Lee, David S., “Training, Wages, and Sample Selection: Estimating Sharp Bounds on
       Treatment Effects”, NBER Working Paper #11721, 2005

Main, B.G.M., and Shelley, M. "The effectiveness of YTS as a manpower policy ",
       Economica, 1990, vol. 57 pp. 495-514.

Main, B. G. M. “The effects of the Youth Training Scheme on employment probability.”
       Applied Economics, 1991, vol. 23, pp.367-72.

Ñopo and Saavedra, “Recomendaciones para la Mejora del Levantamiento de la Línea de
      Base de Projoven y Sugerencias para la Construcción de una Línea de Base
      Aleatorizada colmo parte de un Diseño Experimental”, GRADE, 2003

Weller, Jürgen, comp, En búsqueda de efectivdad, eficiencia y equidad. Las políticas del
       mercado de trabajo y los instrumentos de su evaluación, CEPAL, 2004

Whitfield, K. and Bourlakis, C. “A empirical analysis of YTS, employment and
       earnings.” Journal of Economic Studies, 1990, vol. 18, pp. 42-56.




                                           42
