NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHO BLOWS THE WHISTLE ON CORPORATE FRAUD?
Alexander Dyck
Adair Morse
Luigi Zingales
Working Paper 12882
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12882

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2007

*Alexander Dyck thanks the Connaught Fund of the University of Toronto and Luigi Zingales the
Center For Research on Security Prices, the Stigler Center, and the Initiative on Global Financial Markets
at the University of Chicago for financial support. We would like to thank Alexander Phung and Victor
Xin for truly outstanding research assistantship. We thank John Donohue, Jay Hartzell, Andrew Metrick,
Shiva Rajgopal, Adriano Rampini, and seminar participants at Harvard Business School, Harvard Law
School, Michigan Law School, the University of Pennsylvania, the Duke-UNC Corporate Finance
Conference, the NBER Summer Institute, the University of Texas Conference on Empirical Legal
Studies and the American Finance Association Meetings (2007) for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Alexander Dyck, Adair Morse, and Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Who Blows the Whistle on Corporate Fraud?
Alexander Dyck, Adair Morse, and Luigi Zingales
NBER Working Paper No. 12882
February 2007
JEL No. G3
ABSTRACT
What external control mechanisms are most effective in detecting corporate fraud? To address this
question we study in depth all reported cases of corporate fraud in companies with more than 750 million
dollars in assets between 1996 and 2004. We find that fraud detection does not rely on one single mechanism,
but on a wide range of, often improbable, actors. Only 6% of the frauds are revealed by the SEC and
14% by the auditors. More important monitors are media (14%), industry regulators (16%), and employees
(19%). Before SOX, only 35% of the cases were discovered by actors with an explicit mandate. After
SOX, the performance of mandated actors improved, but still account for only slightly more than 50%
of the cases. We find that monetary incentives for detection in frauds against the government influence
detection without increasing frivolous suits, suggesting gains from extending such incentives to corporate
fraud more generally.
Alexander Dyck
Joseph L. Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, Ontario
Canada M5S 3E6
adyck@rotman.utoronto.ca
Adair Morse
University of Michigan
Ross School of Business
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
adairm@umich.edu

Luigi Zingales
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
luigi.zingales@gsb.uchicago.edu

The large and numerous corporate frauds that emerged in the United States at the
onset of the new millennium provoked an immediate legislative response in the Sarbanes
Oxley Act (SOX). This law was predicated upon the idea that the existing institutions
designed to uncover fraud (e.g., the auditors) had failed, and their incentives as well as
their monitoring should be increased. The political imperative to act quickly prevented
any empirical analysis to substantiate the law’s premises. Which actors play a role in
deterring corporate fraud through detection? What motivates them? Did reforms target
the right actors and change the situation? Can detection be improved in a more cost
effective way?
To answer these questions we gather data on a comprehensive sample of alleged
corporate frauds in the United States that took place between 1996 and 2004 in
companies with more than 750 million dollars in assets. After screening for frivolous
suits, we end up with a sample of 230 cases of alleged corporate frauds, which include all
of the high profile cases such as Enron, HealthSouth, and World Com.1
Through an extensive reading of each fraud’s history, we identify who is involved
in the revelation of the fraud, and what are the circumstances that lead to its detection.
Using data on the fraud duration we study the timing of revelation to infer which
mechanisms are more efficient in revealing fraud. To understand better why these fraud
detectors are active, we study the sources of information and the incentives detectors face
in bringing the fraud to light. To identify the role played by short sellers, we look for
unusual levels of short positions before a fraud emerges.

1

In that follows we will drop the term alleged and simply refer to fraud. While a number of these cases
have settled with findings of fact of fraud, the majority of them settled for financial payment without any
admittance of wrongdoing and hence, from a legal point of view, remains allegations.

1

We find that no specific actor dominates the revelation of fraud. Even using the
most comprehensive and generous interpretation, shortsellers and equity holders revealed
the fraud in only 9 percent of the cases. Financial analysts and auditors do a little better
(each accounting for 14 percent of the cases), but they hardly dominate the scene. The
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) accounts for only 6 percent of detected
frauds by external actors. More surprising is the key role played by actors who lack a
direct role in investment markets, such as the the media (14 percent), non-financialmarket regulators (16 percent), and employees (19 percent).
As interesting as who detects corporate fraud are who did not. Stock exchange
regulators, commercial banks, and underwriters are notable for their complete absence.
Also, private security litigation plays a minimal role (less than 2 percent) in the detection
of fraud. This does not mean that it is useless to prevent fraud, since it could be the
mechanism through which people committing fraud are forced to pay for their mistakes.
But it does suggest that this mechanism cannot work alone. It needs another (vast) set of
institutions to help bring fraud to light.
Another way to measure the relative efficiency of those actors, besides the
frequency, is to look at the average speed with which these actors bring fraud to light.
Financial analysts and short sellers are in a league of their own, taking only a median
duration of 9.1 months to reveal fraud. These are the players whose market role is closest
to a financial monitoring mechanism. Frauds that make it through these monitors are then
caught by those with a significant stake in the firm: external equity holders (15.9
months), suppliers, clients and competitors (13.3 months). Non financial market
regulators and auditors also seem to intervene at a similar speed (respectively 13.3 and

2

14.7 months). Finally, for frauds that persist longer, revelation of the fraud is left to
actors with weaker access to the firm, namely, the media (21.0 months), the SEC (21.2
months), and professional service firms like plaintiff lawyers (31.4 months), or to
employee whistleblowers (20.9 months).
Having identified the whistle blowers, we then investigate the cost-benefit trade
offs they face. Despite their acitivity, analysts, journalists, auditing firms, and employees
who bring fraud to light do not seem to be rewarded in monetary or in career terms.
Direct payment is made extremely unlikely by insider trading laws that constrain
individuals with material inside information from profiting directly by shorting the stock
themselves. Thus, we search for other indications of rewards. If detection were a high
payoff activity, we would expect those revealing frauds to be the young aggressive types
looking to use revealing fraud to promote their careers. By contrast, we find that 59
percent of analysts’ detections are done by more seasoned analysts working at top 10
investment banks. In newspapers, almost all the fraud revelations are published in top
newspapers by established journalists.
We do, on the other hand, identify real costs to blowing the whistle. Conditional
on a fraud being committed, auditing firms are more likely to lose the job when they
reveal it than when they do not. In 45 % of the cases, the employee blowing the whistle
does not identify him or herself individually and in 82% of cases with named employees,
the individual alleges that they were fired, quit under duress, or had significantly altered
responsibilities as a result of bringing the fraud to light.
Generalizing from these results on the identity and incentives of fraud detectors,
we arrive at what might be called a paradox of whistle blowing: those with the weakest

3

incentives to blow the whistle (e.g. employees) are most active, while those with the
strongest incentives to act (e.g. shortsellers) are surprisingly less frequent actors. This
paradox can be understood if we espouse Hayek’s (1945) view that information is
diffuse. Actors with weak incentives have an advantage in whistle blowing because they
have superior access to information about the fraud. So, despite having weak incentives,
actors with access to information eventually bring frauds to light. In contrast, those with
incentives apparently have difficulty accessing credible information to act upon.
In fact, our data reveal the relative merits of two fundamental approaches to fraud
detection. The first, which we label the “mandatory” approach, relies on entrusting some
individuals with the task of collecting information that might lead to the detection of
fraud. This category includes auditors, the SEC, and also possibly non-financial-market
regulators. These actors are generally paid for the effort they exert, not for the outcome
they achieve. The alternative approach, which we label the “market” approach, does not
designate ex ante the people in charge of detecting fraud. By contrast, it provides a
reward system for people who bring fraud to light. These incentives can be monetary, as
in the case of shortsellers, or reputational, as in the case for the financial analyst who
exposes a problem in her report. Overall, mandatory approaches to fraud detection
account for only 35% of our sample, whereas market based institutions account for a
much bigger portion, 65%, of our sample.
This overall performance, however, obscures a dramatic change after 2002. While
prior to July 2002, the market-based approach accounted for 73% of detections, the
proportion declined to 46% of detected frauds after July 2002. As we explain in section 5,

4

this likely is a direct consequence of a series of changes (including the passage of SOX)
that focused on increasing the incentives and the penalties for the mandated actors.
Since a Hayekian view of the challenge of fraud detection seems to fit our data
best, particularly prior to 2002, we also consider an alternative strategy to the US current
regulatory focus on mandated actors: sharpen the incentives of those actors who are
endowed with information via a direct payment contingent on the revelation of a fraud.
Specifically, we examine the impact of the only notable monetary reward for fraud
detection in our sample – monetary awards through the Federal Civil False Claims Act,
(also know as qui tam statute). In the situation where the fraud involves a false claim
against the government, individuals who bring forward information that identifies the
fraud and allows the government to successfully pursue a suit against the company are
entitled to between 15 and 30 percent of the money recovered by the government.
Consistent with this monetary incentive impacting behavior, we find that in healthcare(an
industry where the government accounts for a significant percentage of revenue and thus
such suits are more likely) 46.7% of frauds are brought to light by employees. This
contrasts with only 16.3% of cases detected by employees in all other industries. This
difference is statistically significant at the 1% level. Hence, a strong monetary incentive
to blow the whistle does motivate people with information to come forward.
One possible concern with such incentives is that they might be too strong and
lead to an excessive amount of frivolous suits. In the healthcare industry, however, we
do not find any evidence of that, since the percentage of frivolous suits (suits dismissed
or settled for less than 3 million) is lower, not higher, in that industry.

5

By contrast, the non monetary incentives for employee whistleblowers introduced
by SOX do not lead to an increased rate of detection by employees. In fact, in our sample
employee whistleblowing drops from 20.7% to 15.6% of cases after SOX.
Our work is related to a large literature in accounting and finance that looks at the
characteristics of firms involved in fraud (e.g. Richardson, Tuna and Wu (2002), Burns
and Kedia (2006), Efendi, Srivastava and Swanson (2006)) , the impact of fraudulent
financial reporting on firm value (e.g. Palmrose and Schotz (2004)) and the role of
specific whistleblower types including the press (Miller (2006)) and employee
whistleblowers (Bowen, Call and Rajgopal (2007)). We differ in our focus: comparing
the relative importance of difference sources of detection. We also differ in the broadness
of our sample that includes both accounting related and non-accounting related frauds.
Our work is also related to a significant literature in law and economics. As Choi
(2004), Griffin, Grundfest and Perino (2001), and Thompson and Sale (2003)), we use
federal securities class actions to construct the sample of fraud. The focus of these papers,
however, is on the frequency and the cost imposed by fraud, not on the alternative
mechanisms of detection. In this respect, our work is closer to Black (2001) and Coffee
(2001), who discuss the best mechanisms to protect investors from fraud and raise
questions whether specific actors are best thought of as reputation intermediaries who
take an active role in policing the system or more simply as transaction engineers who
attend to the concerns of their clients. Our paper provides data that sheds light on these
questions.
Finally, our analysis reveals mechanisms that bring fraud to light that are not part
of the standard analysis of corporate governance, which has typically emphasized the role

6

of boards (e.g., Hermalin and Weisbach (1998)) and the presence of large shareholders
(Morck, Shleifer and Vishny (1988)). Since corporate fraud can be seen as the ultimate
form of mismanagement, in this sense, our paper is related to a large literature on the real
effect of bad corporate governance (Becht et al, (2003), and Morck, Wolfenzon and
Yeung (2005) provide summaries of this literature).
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 explains the data and
sample selection process. Section 2 analyzes the mechanisms that contribute to fraud
detection and their relative efficiency in terms of time it takes them to bring a fraud to
light. Section 3 analyzes the costs and benefits of whistle-blowing faced by market-based
actors. Section 4 explores the changes in environment occurred after 2002 and their
effects on the relative frequency of different whistleblowers. Section 5 summarizes the
lesson we can draw from our analysis, while section 6 concludes.

1.
1.1

Data
Sample of Frauds
The ideal sample for evaluating fraud detection would include all firms where the

company and/or its officers engaged in fraud. Of course, any sample of observed frauds
has the bias of excluding frauds never caught and excluding those caught and corrected
privately, a point we discuss in the next subsection. Given that we are working in the
realm of observed frauds, we base the construction of our sample on the assumption that
all cases of value-impacting fraud lead to a security class action lawsuit filed under the
federal 1933 Exchange Act and or the 1934 Securities Act . If this is true, then we can
employ the Stanford Securities Class Action Clearinghouse (SSCAC) data, which is the

7

most comprehensive database of such suits. This assumption seems to hold for the
following reasons.
First, class action law firms have automated the mechanism of filing class action
suits so that they start searching for a cause to file a suit every time there is a negative
shock to share prices. Since stock prices drop following revelation of most serious
corporate frauds, it is highly unlikely that a corporate fraud would emerge without a
subsequent class action suit being filed (Coffee, 1986).
Second, the class action suit will most likely be filed under the federal securities
laws rather than State laws (Thompson and Sale, 2003).2 The federal statute is more
stringent than most State laws in that for federal class action is sufficient to provide
evidence of misrepresentation (Supreme Court ruling in Green vs. Santa Fe).Thompson
and Thomas (2003), who study state class actions suits, show that there are very few state
cases (outside of change of control lawsuits) that lead to financial settlement, and many
of these also involve a federal class action suit.
The biggest potential problem with using class action data is not that we might
miss important frauds, but rather that such an approach might be overinclusive (i.e.,
containing some allegations that are frivolous). To address this concern we introduce six
filters. First, we restrict our attention to alleged frauds that ended in the period of 1996 2004, specifically excluding the period prior to passage of the Private Securities
Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (PSLRA) that was motivated by a desire to reduce
frivolous suits and among other things, made discovery rights contingent on evidence.
During 1996-2004, there are 2171 class action suits.

2

This trend was reinforced by the passage of the Securities Litigation Uniform Standards Act of 1998.

8

Second, we restrict our attention to large U.S. publicly-traded firms. Large
domestic firms have sufficient assets and insurance to motivate law firms to initiate
lawsuits and do not carry the complications of cross-border jurisdictional concerns.
Operationally, we restrict our attention to firms with at least $750 million in assets in the
year prior to the end of the class period (as firms may reduce dramatically in size
surrounding the revelation of fraud). The size and domestic filters reduce our sample to
501 cases.
Third, we exclude all cases where the judicial review process leads to their
dismissal.3 Fourth, for those class actions that have settled, we only include those firms
where the settlement is at least $3 million, a level of payment previous studies suggested
to divide frivolous suits from meritorious ones.4 We also explore the robustness of our
findings to higher cutoff point for settlement: $10 million and $50 million.
Fifth, we exclude from our analysis those security frauds that Stanford classifies
as non standard, including mutual funds, analyst, and IPO allocation.5 The third through
fifth screens more than halve the number of cases from 501 to 244 cases.
The final filter removes a handful of firms that settle for amounts of $3 million or
greater, but where the fraud, upon our reading, seems to have settled to avoid the negative
publicity. The rule we apply is to remove cases in which the firm’s poor ex post
3

We do retain cases voluntarily dismissed when the reason for dropping the suit is bankruptcy for in this
instance the cases could still have had merit but as a result of the bankruptcy status, plaintiff lawyers no
longer have a strong incentive to pursue them.
4
Grundfest (1995), Choi (2004) and Choi, Nelson, and Pritchard (2005) suggest a dollar value for
settlement as an indicator of whether a suit is frivolous or has merit. Grundfest establishes a regularity that
suits which settle below a $2.5 -$1.5 million threshold are on average frivolous. The range on average
reflects the cost to the law firm for its effort in filing. A firm settling for less than $1.5 million is most
almost certainly just paying lawyers fees to avoid negative court exposure. To be sure, we employ $3
million as our cutoff.
5
Stanford Class Action Database distinguishes these suits for the reason that all have in common that the
host firm did not engage in wrongdoing. IPO allocation cases focus on distribution of shares by
underwriters. Mutual fund cases focus on timing and late trading by funds, not by the firm in question.
Analyst cases focus on false provision of favorable coverage.

9

realization could not have been known to the firm at the time when the firm or its
executives issued a positive outlook statement for which they are later sued.6 This filter
removes 14 cases producing our final sample of 230 cases.
While we use the term fraud, strictly speaking these are only examples of alleged
frauds. Settlements almost always involve no admittance of wrongdoing. As a result, it
is impossible for us to establish whether there was real fraud (which in legal terms
implies the intent to deceive) or just gross negligence. For the purpose of this paper,
however, this difference is not so relevant. We are interested in understanding the
mechanisms that bring extreme bad forms of governance to light, not in establishing
intent. For simplicity, in the rest of the paper we do not use the adjective “alleged”. The
appendix relates this sample to other samples of fraud used in the literature.
1.2 Sample Selection Biases
By focusing on discovered frauds, we introduce two biases. First, we do not
observe frauds that were committed but were never caught. The intense public scrutiny
of large U.S. firms, the ability to go back in time and sue based on past wrongdoing, and
the strong incentives to sue by plaintiff lawyers, likely diminish this problem, but it still
is a possibility.
Second, we do not observe frauds caught so early that they never enter the public
domain; hence, we cannot say anything about the importance of specific mechanisms in
preventing fraud that does not occur. This is a more serious limitation for considering
6

An illustrative example of such dropped cases is Carnival Corporation. After its stock price plunged 41%
in a month following a period with significant fires and mechanical problems on a number of its cruise
ships, Carnival Corporation was sued. The fraud allegation was that the company did not comply with
applicable safety regulations and minimized the extent of such safety problems in its public statements.
The relatively low settlement amount ($3.4 million) combined with the fact that the company had strong
motive to settle regardless of the merits of the case (the company’s profitability depended upon its public
reputation), led us to drop this case.

10

fraud detection by internal control mechanisms. For example, monitoring by the board of
directors either directly or through the audit committee might be very effective in
deterring fraud and in stopping frauds early on. As a result of missing such early fraud
detections, our data do not allow us to measure the effectiveness of such internal
governance mechanisms. What our data do allow us to evaluate are which are the most
effective external mechanisms that help detect corporate fraud when there is a failure of
internal mechanisms. This is a limited but important aspect of governance that has
received little attention.
1.3

Identifying the Detector of Fraud
The key variable we focus on is the identity of the actor who brings the fraud to

light. To do this, we manually collect information on events surrounding the fraud and
its detection from news reports, the SSCAC database, and other public sources for each
of our 230 cases. Our primary source of data is Factiva, where we search the
comprehensive database of news and wire reports over the range beginning three months
prior to the class period and going until the settlement date or until current if the case is
yet pending. The only limit we apply to our search is to require that the firm’s name is in
the first 30 words of the article. We do not restrict the media source from which the
article might be drawn because we are concerned that local newspapers may conduct
more thorough investigative reporting of local firms. Thus, we sacrifice having to read
more articles rather than miss such important fact-finding. Our searches return an
approximate average of 800 articles per case, reflecting in part the newsworthiness of the
alleged frauds and of the companies in question (related to their size).7

7

To address potential concerns about subjectivity in identifying the first actor to bring the fraud to light, we
used the following procedure. To ensure consistent coding, the initial classification of the fraud detector

11

In many cases the news reporting about the fraud clearly indicates what actor
brought this particular fraud to light, for example, a particular analyst, or employee, or
government regulator. In other cases, the evidence is more indirect such as the
simultaneous reporting of an auditor being fired and a discussion of difference of opinion
regarding what come to be characterized as fraudulent reporting at the firm. Our ability
to access reports following the initial uncovering of the fraud and that emerged in
additional legal and regulatory scrutiny of the cases often revealed actors behind the
scene that forced the firm to come forward with the information (e.g. employees). In all
cases, we try to identify the actor that identified the concern if this lead to the fraud
coming to light. This means in the case of the media that we only attribute the media as
the identifier of the fraud if the media story does not give credit for the information to
any specific source, named or unnamed (e.g. anonymous employee).
In a number of cases we find that the whistleblower is not the person labeled by
the media as such. A chain of events initiated by another entity may already be forcing
the scandal to light when an individual expedites the process by disclosing internal
information. For instance, Enron’s whistleblower by our classification is the Texas
edition of the Wall Street Journal, not Sherron Watkins who is called the Enron
whistleblower in the media. Of course, we do not want to discredit the importance of
internal individuals identified as participating in bringing fraudulent activity to the public.
However, our aim is to identify the initial force that starts the snowball of a scandal
coming to light. In the Enron example, investigative reporting by the Texas version of

was done by a single research assistant who was involved in all cases. Each case was also examined by a
minimum of one author of the paper. Where significant judgment was required, a file was prepared of
relevant information, all three authors read the file and agreed on the coding the outcome, often requiring
additional searches to satisfy ourselves of the classification.

12

the Wall Street Journal raises concern about Enron’s marking-to-market practices and the
source of firm revenues a full 8 months prior to employee whistle blowing.
1.4

Fraud Duration
A second variable we focus upon is the duration of the fraud. The securities class

action filing identifies a class period, giving a begin date and end date for the fraud.
Because this period can and often is revised as the suit progresses, we use the most recent
definition. The passage of SOX produced a change in the statute of limitations for filing
cases from three years to five years. The legal requirement may have influenced the
reported duration of the fraud in the class action particularly prior to 2002.8 To address
this issue we have reclassified the maximum duration through our whole sample period to
be three years (1,095 days).
1.5

Other Variables
In the analysis that follows, we will at times reexamine the distribution of fraud

detectors controlling for characteristics of the fraud and industry. We will describe the
variables when introduced. Table 1 provides definitions of all variables and sources

2.

An Analysis of the Fraud Detection Process

2.1

Who Detects Corporate Fraud?
Table 2 presents the initial distribution of fraud detectors for the cases in our

sample. We begin by noting that even after reading through the large number of articles
on companies before and after the fraud comes to light we still attribute 32% of the fraud

8

We examined this issue by comparing the fraud duration data and the length of financial restatements for
all the firms in our sample with both sources of data. We find that, in part as a result of the statute of
limitations on class actions, class periods are conservative estimates of frauds, with restatement periods on
average being 223 days longer than class periods

13

detections to the firm itself. We do not draw specific conclusions about the effectiveness
of internal control systems based on this evidence alone as we do not observe those
potential frauds also caught (and stopped) by these parties.9 One approach that would
allow such inferences would be to compare differences in board characteristics of firms
in our sample and in non-fraud companies, as done by Bowen, Call and Rajgopal (2007)
for firms with employee whistleblowers. This is a very valuable endeavour, but a
different one from what we are pursuing here: the role played by external monitors. For
this reason, in what follows we will focus on the68% of frauds caught by external
mechanisms.
As Table 2 shows, the SEC accounts for 6%. percent. Financial analysts and
auditors do a little better (respectively 15 and 14 percent of the cases), but they hardly
dominate the scene. Shortsellers, who should have the strongest incentive to uncover
fraud, account for only 1 percent. Even more surprising is the key role played by actors
who lack a governance mandate, such as the employees (19 percent), the media (15
percent), and industry regulators (15 percent).
2.2

Importance of Shortsellers in Fraud Detection?
A potential concern with these results is that some actors have an incentive to

avoid being seen as the source of the information and that we may be misattributing
responsibility for these actors, in particular the short sellers. Shortsellers have a strong
incentive to identify bad news and disseminate it (Diamond and Verrachia (1987)) but no
incentive to reveal themselves as the source. A fraud-revealing short seller might be
9

What we can say, based on findings in Dyck, Morse and Zingales (2007), is that these revelations
generally follow a negative operations shock (27% of these cases) or restructuring and managerial turnover
(23% of the cases), consistent with insiders being pushed to reveal the information. And we do not find
that these cases are masking specific external pressures as very rarely is revelation the result of outside
scrutiny (4% of the cases).

14

cutoff from future information from firms and might face suits or investigations for
spreading false information (e.g. Lamont (2003)). As a result, the fact that we only
attribute fraud detection to short sellers in 2 cases out of 230 may be because we have
not identified their work behind the scenes.
We investigate the possibility that shortsellers might be more active by
identifying whether the level of short interest in a stock helps to predict the timing of the
fraud coming to light, controlling for other factors. We construct a monthly short interest
variable with data from Bloomberg, where we normalize short interest by the number of
the shares outstanding from CRSP to make the data comparable across companies. Our
goal is to answer whether short interest positions prior to fraud can predict detection
among all possible monthly dates 1994-2004.
Table 3 provides evidence consistent with shortsellers predicting fraud and
possibly having a role in its detection. The most straightforward test is to estimate a
logistic regression of whether fraud is detected in that period as a function of lagged short
interest and aggregate short interest (as a percentage of market shares). The aggregate
shares variable controls for possible changes in short activity driven by non-firm specific
factors. Column 1 reports that short selling is a positive and significant predictor of fraud
detection in our sample.
Columns 2-4 back this finding up by introducing additional controls and
examining if short-sellers are more likely to work in combination with a particular type of
actor. Column 2 includes additional controls for the type of fraud – whether the fraud
involves accounting restatements and the type of fraud committed (self-dealing,
misrepresentations on financial statements, failure to disclose, or other non-financial

15

illegal activity). Column 3 is even more stringent, replacing these controls with firm fixed
effects. Finally, in column 4, we run separate regressions for each fraud detector type,
again with controls that are allowed to vary by fraud type.
These regressions indicate a symbiotic relationship between shortsellers and a
range of actors. There is a significant association between abnormal shorting and
detection by buyers, suppliers, and competitors (columns 2-4), media (columns 2, 4),
analysts (column 4), and auditors (column 2). These results are consistent with other
research that suggests shortsellers are informed as they target firms with accounting
restatements and high accruals, anticipated downward analyst revisions, and negative
earnings surprises (e.g. Desai et. al (2005)).
While Table 3 indicates shortseller activity is associated with detection, it does
not provide any indications about which specific cases should be reclassified as
shortseller related. To explore this possibility we conducted a related test, whereby we
look at individual time series of short positions and ask whether the lagged short position
could predict fraud detection for each company. Since a test for significance of a single
point event is fraught with noise, we ask whether the 6 month average pre-detection short
interest is greater than the mean short interest position (excluding a year and a half
around the fraud) plus 2 standard deviations. The criterion is fairly stringent, as two
standard deviations increase the short position 60% on average.
In Figure 1 we plot the evolution of short interest around the date of the end of the
class period for those with short interest greater than or equal to 2 standard deviations,
one standard deviation, one half standard deviation and the median firm in our sample.
The group with more than two standard deviation difference in short interest includes 16

16

cases, eight of which we reclassify as shortseller cases. The reclassified cases were
previously the media (4 cases), analysts (2 cases), an auditor (1 case) and a client (1
case). As a quality check, we re-analyzed each of these cases to search for explanations
of the sources of the information in the fraud detection to see it there were reasons to
eliminate a role for short sellers, and found no such cases. We do not reclassify the
remaining eight cases because in two of them, the employee is the fraud detector and
there is little reason that communication went from shortseller to employee. In the other
six cases, the timing indicates that the shortselling activity began after the detector we
have identified brought the fraud to attention.
2.3

Who Acts to Detect Frauds, Accounting for Indications of Shortseller Activity?
In Table 4, we now reexamine who detects corporate fraud after having

reclassified the additional 8 cases where there are indications of shortseller involvement.
In all remaining tables in the paper we use this reclassified data.
The data suggests one clear picture: no specific actor dominates the revelation of
fraud. The United States apparently relies upon a village of fraud detectors, many
lacking a governance mandate.
A second fact emerging from Table 4 is the relative unimportance of many
mechanisms emphasized in the literature. Completely missing are investment banks,
commercial banks and stock exchanges. The absence of these actors in fraud detection is
consistent with Coffee’s (2001) hypothesis that these actors had “neither the obligation
nor the right to make disclosure when any reasonable doubt exists concerning the client’s
obligation of disclosure”, Coffee (2003). This result does not preclude the possibility that

17

these actors played a more indirect role: not accepting jobs from companies whenever a
concern of fraud emerged.
Even private security litigation, emphasized by legal scholars such as Coffee
(1986), plays a minimal role in the revelation of fraud: less than 2 percent of the cases.
This does not mean that private litigation is useless in preventing fraud, since it could be
the mechanism through which people committing fraud are forced to pay for their
mistakes. But it does suggest that this mechanism cannot work alone.
Similarly, the SEC accounts for only 6% of the cases, the auditors for 14%, the
financial analysts for another 14%. Even the short-sellers are very marginal (6% of the
cases). More important are the media, which only recently have been considered as an
important player in corporate governance (Zingales (2000), Dyck and Zingales (2004),
Miller (2006), Dyck, Volchkova, and Zingales, (2006)). Even more important are players
generally neglected by the corporate governance literature such as the employees (19%)
and non-financial-market regulators (16%).
2.4

How Fast Do They Act?
The relative frequency of detection is not the only measure. Of great importance

is also the speed of detection, i.e. how long it takes between the beginning of the fraud
(defined as the beginning of the class action period) and detection. The faster that frauds
are brought to light, the quicker the market can respond to this information. Table 4
reports these speeds of detection, expressed in months since the beginning of the fraud.
Financial analysts and short sellers are in a league of their own, taking only a
median duration of 9.1 months to reveal fraud. Frauds that make it through these
monitors are then caught by auditors (14.7 months) and non-financial market regulators

18

(13.3 months). At a similar speed, however, operates also a heterogeneous group of
actors: external equity holders (15.9 months), and suppliers, clients and competitors of
the firm (13.3 months).
Finally, for frauds that persist longer, revelation of the fraud is left to actors with
weaker access to the firm, namely, the media (21.0 months) and professional service
firms like plaintiff lawyers (31.4 months), to employee whistleblowers (20.9 months), or
to the SEC (21.2 months). While this evidence on the speed of various actors could be
influenced by characteristics of the fraud, column 6 shows that this is unlikely to be the
case, as the rank order of median durations after accounting for various characteristics is
practically unaltered.
2.5

Is There Specialization by Different Fraud Detectors?
It is possible that certain actors specialize in detecting fraud of certain

characteristics (type of misconduct, whether the fraud requires restatements, and whether
the industry is regulated). If so, the frequency across all frauds may underestimate an
actor’s role if that actor is a specialist.
Table 5 splits the data by various criteria. Panel A breaks down frauds by four
types of fraud introduced in Dyck, Morse and Zingales (2006): whether the fraud
involved self-dealing, whether the fraud involved other potentially illegal activity, and for
the frauds that do not fit into these categories, whether the alleged fraud primarily
focused upon financial misrepresentations (about the past or the future) or failure to
disclose material information (about the past or the future).
Our main results seem robust: it takes a web of monitors to detect fraud, and we
continue to see the importance of actors who lack a governance mandate. There are also

19

indications of limited specialization. We, not surprisingly, find that auditors and analysts
do better in failure-to-disclose cases. But even in this category, media and employees
play a significant role. Analysts (but not auditors) are also effective in misrepresentation
cases, but employees and non financial market regulators account for almost twice as
many detections in this category. Media, non-financial market regulators and employees
account for the lions share of activity in policing self dealing and other illegal activity,
while analysts are completely absent and the SEC plays no role in revealing self-dealing
cases.
Panel B and Panel C explore splits on whether the fraud required financial
restatements10 (and hence may be a particular area of concern for auditors and financial
market regulators) and whether the firm was in a regulated industry or not (and hence
open to scrutiny by financial market regulators). Again, our main results are robust,
while revealing some degree of specialization. In Panel B, auditors clearly specialize in
restatement related frauds while analysts specialize in non restatement frauds. Panel C
shows how non financial market regulators specialize in regulated firms, a group where
they account for almost one quarter of detections, the single greatest frequency. Among
non-regulated firms, short sellers are twice as frequent detectors as for regulated firms.
Panel D examines whether the distribution of fraud detectors differs as we change
the magnitude of the settlement amount used as a cutoff for frivolous suits. Column 1
reports the distribution of whistleblower for all the cases that either did not settle or
settled for more than $3 million. Column 2 reports the distribution only for cases that
settled for more than $3 million, while columns 3 and 4 for cases that settled for more
10

Many frauds require financial restatements but others do not, normally as a result of a "failure to
disclose" material information, and/or a disclosure of misleading forward-looking information. The Data
Appendix provides further information on the construction of this variable.

20

than $10 and $50 million. The chi-square test in panel D reveals that the distributions are
not significantly different suggesting little bias in focusing on the results using the
complete sample. Interestingly, shortsellers and the media are more important in the
cases with the largest settlement amount while both the SEC and the auditors are less
important. Since larger cases are generally associated with larger companies this might
reflect the stronger influence that large firms have both on the regulators and on the
auditors. Overall, this evidence confirms the need for a web of monitors against fraud.
2.6

Adjusted Duration Analysis
In Figure 2 we present yet one more approach to characterizing our findings on

frequency and duration. The graph plots the results of a competing risk model (a variant
of hazard rate analysis), viewing each of our fraud detectors as competing sources for
detecting fraud, and controlling in a regression format for the nature of the fraud and for
whether financials were restated. Specifically, we estimate a Cox proportional hazard
model assuming that the likelihood of detection depends upon the fraud detector, and
upon the same characteristics of the fraud that we used in the adjustments to median
duration described above. The plot indicates for each date of duration of the fraud (x
axis) what is the probability of detection (y axis) for a given fraud detector, given a fraud
has not yet been detected and given the characteristics of the fraud. Thus, for example
both at the 25th percentile duration and at the median duration of fraud in our sample
(indicated by dashed vertical lines), the analyst line is highest indicating that analysts are
the most important actors for frauds of these durations.
This figure reinforces our previous findings (based on duration data) that analysts
are, with shortsellers, the first to act. In addition, it shows that analysts are also the most

21

frequent actors at these durations. The fact that they are not the most dominant actors
overall comes from the fact that they are almost entirely absent for frauds of longer than
median duration (as it is reflected in the flat slope of the line after the median).
Similar analyses can be done for each other actor. The relatively flat slope for the
auditor line up to approximately 365 days indicates that it takes a year for auditors to act.
The steep slope between 365 and 730 days indicates that auditors are active in the range
between one and two years after the beginning of the fraud. They become inactive again
after two years.
The relatively constant slope of the media and non financial market regulators
lines suggests that these detectors are involved at all durations, including short ones. The
lower slope of the professional service and financial market regulator lines with a pickup
later on indicates their almost exclusive relevance for frauds of longer duration.
The employee line is particularly interesting. They are involved in detection at all
durations, but they become more important at fraud of longer duration as indicated by the
increasing slope of the line. The height of the line at the end indicates their absolute
importance for frauds of the longest duration.
2.7

Interactions Among Detectors of Fraud
Attributing all the credit to one single whistleblower per case misses all the

interactions between different sources of information. In the Enron case, for instance, the
early article in the Texas edition of The Wall Street Journal attracted the interest of a
hedge-fund manager, who began to scrutinize the company's financial statements and
assembled a short position. The hedge-fund manager, in turn, tipped off a reporter at
Fortune, Bethany McLean, who in March, published a story entitled "Is Enron

22

Overpriced?", where she questioned how exactly Enron made its money. Another shortseller tipped off Peter Eavis, of TheStreet.com, who in an article on May 9, 2001 started
to mention shady "related entities". Even Smith and Emshwiller (the Wall Street Journal
reporters generally credited for the discovery of Enron’s fraud) benefited from “sources
close to Enron <who> began to furnish the Journal with documents” (Sherman 2002).
As this example shows, without such interactions, it may be that the initial
suggestions of fraud may not be widely disseminated and/or believed. Illustrating this
potential problem is HealthSouth where the fraud would likely have been detected and
stopped earlier if the concerns of former bookkeeper Michael Vines were heeded when
he left the company in May 2002. As emerged after the fact in response to Congressional
concerns about how this fraud could have gone detected for so long, Vines reportedly
sent his concerns to Ernst and Young, but was ignored, and then in early 2003 posted his
concerns on Yahoo web site, where he wrote: "I know for a fact that HRC has assets on
the books that are made up to trick the auditors." This information channel lacked
credibility, as suggested in the comments of an online naysayer: "If you really had
information, you would have shorted the stock and given your info to the appropriate
people. You wouldn't be babbling about it here.”11
Table 6 provides indications of some of these interactions. This table reports “to
whom” the whistle was blown, identifying the next actor after the fraud detector involved
in bringing the fraud to light. For shortsellers and analysts, for example, the media is
clearly a complementary actor being the “to whom” actor in 60% and 57% of cases
respectively. Analysts also enjoy their own credibility, being the “to whom” actor for
11

By Carrick Mollenkamp, Wall Street Journal, May 20, 2003," Missed Signal: Accountant Tried In Vain
to Expose HealthSouth Fraud --- Ex-Employee Took His Case To Auditors, Then Web -- But Convinced
No One --- What About the Others?

23

20% of the shortseller cases. At the same time, in 38% of the cases the analysts are the
end of the line, and blow the whistle directly to the “public”.
Employees rely upon a wider range of additional actors including non-financial
regulators (33%), lawyers (13%), the SEC (10%), the media (3%), and other external
(3%). In 37% of these cases, employees whistle blowing is followed up by the firm
revealing the information. The overall takeaway is that looking at interactions reinforces
our earlier findings of the importance of a range of actors, and particularly reinforces the
relevance of the media and non-financial regulators who account for 23% and 10% of
cases in the “to whom” channel respectively.
2.8

Where Do the Fraud Detectors Get Their Information?
Finally, we ask what were the primary sources of information used by each fraud

detector in identifying the fraud. For each fraud, we read the case and identified the
likely source of the information by the detector. We contrast information that arises from
SEC mandated disclosures and information derived from all other sources. Among other
information sources we distinguish information that could be constructed from public
sources (e.g. comparing a firm relative to competitors); information that emerges from
non-financial market regulator requirements; and information internal to the firm.
Table 7 presents these results. Except for the employees, the auditors, and the non
financial market regulators, all the actors rely heavily on SEC disclosure. Thus, financial
disclosure is crucial for fraud detection (39% of the cases), but insufficient. To identify
fraud it is often necessary to have access to information inside the firm (37% of the
cases). In only a third of these cases do the auditors reveal the fraud, in almost half, the
employees. The other major source of information is regulatory discovery (15% of the

24

cases). Only 8% of the frauds are identified thanks to private collection of information.
One third of these investigations are done by analysts.
Given the variety of information sources, these results confirm the need for a web
of monitors to detect fraud. They also highlight the costs associated to collecting the
information to reveal a fraud. Only 24% of the fraud detection is the result of information
collected in a specific investigation. The vast majority seems serendipitous discoveries by
people who had access to the crucial information in the normal course of their business.
The crucial question, then, is what are the incentives for these people to reveal the fraud?
We will attempt to answer this question in the next section.

3.

What Are the Incentives to Blow the Whistle?
Some actors– like auditors and financial market regulators — have a clear

mandate to bring fraud to light. But what motivates the others? We focus our discussion
on those groups where we have a relatively large number of observations - financial
analysts, the media, and employees - and on plaintiff law attorneys, an actor prominent in
discussions of the importance of private enforcement. To organize our analysis of each
of these actors we will focus on four factors that, as theory suggests, should be crucial:
the access to information at low cost, the incentives to collect additional information, the
monetary or career benefit from whistle blowing and the costs whistle blowers can face.
Before doing so, we note that the fraud detectors we observe are those who had the
highest incentives to do so and hence our estimate of the cost-benefit ratio is downward
biased. This makes the findings that we detail below, that their monetary and career

25

incentives to blow the whistle are in almost all circumstances very low, particularly
remarkable.
3.1

Financial Analysts
We identify a fraud detector as a financial analyst if they work in a brokerage

house or investment bank or if they work for investors directly, issuing newsletters or
public statements about companies.
From an information point of view, analysts are well located. While they do not
have direct access to company information, especially after regulation FD (adopted by
the SEC in August of 2000) curtailed their privileged access to companies’ management,
they are in the business of collecting information for valuation purposes. So while their
goal is not to search for fraud, they might be particularly well positioned to identify it, by
comparing results across companies in the same industry. Table 7 provides some useful
indications of the relative importance of information from these channels, with this
collectible public information accounting for 19% of cases and information internal to the
firm accounting for 14% of cases.
Viewed as agents of professional investors, analysts appear to have strong
incentives to reveal fraud. Each analyst is paid to analyze companies and has potentially
improved career prospects for establishing a reputation of insightful analysis valuable to
investors. Identifying frauds is one part of establishing such a reputation (e.g. Fama
(1980), Hong and Kubik (2000)).12 Analysts’ incentives to reveal fraud, however, may be
reduced by the potential conflict of interest between the advising they do and the
investment banking services their company generally offer (e.g. Michaely and Womak
12

Consistent with such career concerns in the analyst industry, Hong and Kubik (2000), for example, report
that good forecast records are rewarded by upward mobility to higher-tiered brokerage houses, and the
maintenance of jobs in top-tier brokerage houses.

26

(1999)). Their incentives to reveal fraud may also be significantly reduced or eliminated
by their tendency to herd.13 Finally, before regulation FD analysts might have had
incentives to develop a good reputation vis-à-vis the companies they followed to gain
privileged access to soft information. If this were the case, they might not have the right
incentives to bring a fraud to light.
Our findings lend support to both views. The fact that analysts are the first line of
defense in terms of the speed at which they detect fraud suggests their capabilities to
detect frauds. But the fact that analysts only account for 15 percent of our observations
suggest that this channel has not been fully exploited.
To further our understanding of financial analyst incentives in our sample, we
gathered information on the identity of the analyst that brought the information to light,
including the investment bank they worked for. To explore the potential impact on their
career, we investigated the three year window surrounding the revelation of fraud. Since
we do not have access to their bonus information, our only proxy for their career prospect
is the Institutional Investor All American Analyst ranking. The magazine gives
individuals this designation based upon a survey they conduct each year of buy-side
money managers. As Hong and Kubik (2000) report, “All Stars” are actively sought by
investment banks and receive the highest salaries.
Consistent with Hong, Kubik, and Solomon (2000), we find in Table 8 that
analysts’ willingness to go against the herd (as signified by their identifying fraud)
increases with age and with the status of their brokerage house: 59 percent of financial

13

Sharfstein and Stein (1990) for example identify a “share the blame” effect whereby costs are greater in
being different and incorrect, than in being incorrect like everyone else. This herding based bias is greater
when analysts are young and there is uncertainty about their ability.

27

analyst detections are associated with analysts in top 10 investment banks, 14 percent in
brokerage houses ranking 11th - 40th, and 27 percent in other institutions.
But we do not find any evidence associated with a significant reward for detecting
fraud. No financial analyst changed into a different investment bank tier in the two years
following their revelation of fraud. And there was only a small change in likelihood of
being an All Star. Prior to detection, 24 percent of the analysts detecting fraud belonged
to the All Stars group. Following the revelation of fraud, the probability of entering the
elite group is only an additional 6 percent. Unfortunately, we do not have a good measure
of the counterfactual (what this probability would have been had they not identified the
fraud), but even if the alternative would have been zero, a 6 percentage point increase
does not seem a very high reward.
3.2

Media
Journalists are similar to analysts, in the sense that they collect and analyze

information for their clients (the readers). They also have an incentive to build a
reputation of being nice vis-à-vis companies in order to cultivate their sources (Dyck and
Zingales (2003)). And as with analysts, there may also be a conflict arising from the fact
that the companies in their stories often make direct payments to their employers (e.g.
advertising).
The main difference between journalists and analysts is that journalists are much
less specialized than analysts and thus potentially have access to less company and
industry specific information. On the upside, however, journalists might benefit more
from revelation of fraud, because a scoop may help establish their career and reputation.

28

The data in Table 7 show that for cases where media are the whistle blowers, they rely
most heavily on mandated disclosure, accounting for 71% of cases.
Our data seem to suggest that the incentives to reveal fraud differ tremendously
between major national outlets and minor ones. As Table 9 shows, 11 of the 13 cases
reported by newspapers are published in the Wall Street Journal or the New York Times.
Similarly, Business Week and Fortune account for 5 of the 6 cases identified by
magazines. Why do minor and local newspapers play no role?
One possibility is that minor newspapers cannot afford the most talented
journalists able to do the investigation necessary to discover fraud, cannot afford to pay
for the cost of these investigations, or focus such activity on smaller more local
companies.14 An alternative hypothesis is that only very established media with a
diversified advertising base can afford to alienate potential (or actual) advertisers. The
pressure faced by Fortune when it was about to publish the first negative report on Enron
gives credibility to the second hypothesis.15
That most newspapers are not willing to pay and publish scoops on corporate
fraud might also reflect the fact that these types of news are less entertaining (Miller
(2006), Dyck, Moss, and Zingales (2005)). After all, the National Enquirer pays a fortune
to find out every possible detail about the personal lives of media stars.

14

In Miller’s (2006) study of firms with SEC Accounting, Auditing and Enforcement Releases which
includes many smaller companies, he finds that local news outlets report frauds in 30.7 percent of cases
flagged by the press prior to revelation by the firm.
15
As reported in the New York Times, “Her questions were so pointed that Enron's chief executive, Jeffrey
K. Skilling, called her unethical for failing to do more research. Three Enron executives flew to New York
in an unsuccessful effort to convince her editors that she was wrongheaded. Enron's chairman, Kenneth L.
Lay, called Fortune's managing editor, Rik Kirkland, to complain that Fortune was relying on a source who
stood to profit if the share price fell.” Felicity Barringer, “10 Months Ago, Questions on Enron Came and
Went With Little Notice,” 28 January 2002, Page 11, Column 1.

29

Table 9 also tries to get at the personal career incentives of the journalists. While
many of the journalists involved are national figures who also write books, it is not clear
that they became national figures by exposing fraud. The upside from revealing
information seems limited. On the positive side, however, the downside seems limited as
well. While there are many stories insinuating that analysts got fired for their negative
report on companies, we are not aware of any claim that journalists get fired for this
reason. Hence, journalists might be better protected than analysts on the downside
associated with whistle blowing.
3.3

Employees
In no case is the tension between access to information and lack of incentives to

reveal fraud more intense than for employees. Employees clearly have access to
information; few, if any, frauds can be committed without involving some interaction
among the people within a firm. However, the career incentives against revealing the
fraud are stronger for employees than for any other group. Even according to an advocate
for whistleblowing, consequences to being the whistleblower include distancing and
retaliation from fellow workers and friends, personal attacks on one’s character during
the course of a protracted dispute, and the need to change one’s career.16
To elucidate under what context an employee whistleblower would act, we
construct Table 10, a summary of the whistleblower position and incentives for each of
the 30 cases for employee whistleblowers. As expected, the burdens of whistleblowing
are large. In 82% of cases where the identity of the whistleblower was revealed, s/he was
fired, quit under duress, or had significantly altered responsibilities. In addition, many
employee whistleblowers report having to move to another industry and toanother town.
16

See quitam.com.

30

Referring to James Bingham, a whistleblower in the Xerox case, his lawyer said: "Jim
had a great career, but he'll never get a job in Corporate America again."
The surprising part, thus, is not that most employees do not talk; it is that some
talk at all. Table 10 tries to give a sense of what motivates them. In 45 % of the cases, the
costs of blowing the whistle are eliminated by keeping the identity of the whistleblower
concealed.17 This is often the case when the company is unionized. The unions seem to
be in a good position to protect the whistleblowing employee from the potential
retaliation.
In 35 percent of the cases (6 out of 17) where the identity of the whistleblowers is
known, we observe a qui tam lawsuit. Such suits arise from the Federal Civil False
Claims Act, revised in 1986, whereby individuals revealing fraud committed against the
U.S. government can collect 15 – 30% of the money recovered by the government. In our
sample, two qui tam cases that have already settled rendered whistleblowers with rewards
of $35million and $70 million. More generally, the outcome of qui tam suits is very
uncertain and very delayed in time (5 and 10 years in these cases), but the expectation is
that these rewards might have been an important factor in leading the employee to talk.
In addition to the monetary reward in the form of qui tam payments, the
revelation of information seems to be associated to a wrongful dismissal claim in another
30% of the cases (5 out of 17). These are cases in which the employee has already been
fired, and so s/he has less to lose. In the remaining 35% of the cases, however, it is

17

This includes 9 cases where the individual is anonymous, 3 cases where there multiple individuals all
associated with an employee organization blowing the whistle, and 2 cases where a change of authority
from one to another accounting group (e.g. arising from a merger) brought out the information and the
group rather than any individual is associated with the information.

31

difficult to find a rational reason for the employee to talk, especially in light of the very
high emotional costs paid by whistleblowers.
3.4

Plaintiff Law Firms
In the corporate governance literature private enforcement plays a prominent role

among the set of mechanisms to protect shareholders (e.g., La Porta et al., 2003). In our
sample we find only two cases (equal to 1.4 percent) where a security class action is the
mechanism that triggers the revelation of fraud. In both cases, the class action suit leads
to the discovery of information about managerial self dealing. For example, in the case of
Sprint, the plaintiff sues the company for the failed merger with WorldCom and this leads
to the discovery of a bylaw, introduced by management just before the attempted merger,
ensuing them a payoff regardless of the outcome of the merger.
That class action plays almost no role in the revelation of fraud does not mean it is
not an important mechanism to prevent fraud. First of all, it could play an important role
in punishing who has committed fraud. Second, it could help publicize and make credible
the claims made by other whistle blowers. At the very minimum, however, our finding
suggests that private litigation alone is not sufficient to stop fraud. It can only work when
a web of other mechanisms help bring fraud to light.
3.5

How Much Do Incentives Matter?
As a test of the effect of incentives on whistle-blowing, we exploit the fact that

qui tam lawsuits are not available in all industries, but only in very few industries where
the government is a significant buyer of services. Specifically, in Table 11 we compare
the distribution of whistleblowers between the healthcare industry, which is a significant
buyer of government services, and all other industries. Consistent with this incentive

32

having a significant impact, we find a striking difference, with employees accounting for
46.7% of cases of fraud detection cases in the healthcare industry vs. 16.3% in industries
where employees cannot easily avail themselves of the rewards from qui tam lawsuits.
Since a Chi-Square test rejects the hypothesis that the distributions are equivalent, we can
conclude that these types of incentives matter.18
A potential objection against stronger incentives to whistle blowing is that these
incentives might create a free option for the employees, leading to an excessive amount
of false claims.19 To test this proposition we look at the frequency of frivolous suits (suits
dismissed or settled for less than 3 million) in the healthcare industry (where these
incentives are present) and in the other industries (where they are not clearly present). We
find that the percentage of frivolous suits (panel B) is lower in the healthcare industry.
Hence, there is no evidence that stronger incentives to blow the whistle lead to more
frivolous suits.

4. Did the Situation Change After the Major Scandals?
Thus far we have considered the whole period 1996 to 2004 as homogenous. But
after the turn of the millenium many things have changed. First, in 2000 regulation Fair
Disclosure was approved, making it impossible for analysts to have private conversations
with top executives of the firms they follow. According to the proponents of this
measure, this change should have increased analysts’ independence, making them more

18

This also provides a rationale for Bowen, Call and Rajgopal’s (2007) finding that employee
whistleblowing were more likely in firms in ‘sensitive’ industries, which they defined as including
pharmaceuticals, healthcare, medicine, the environment, oil, utilities and banksl .
19
Bowen, Call and Rajgopal (2007) provide a more extended discussion of this issue and related literature.

33

likely to reveal fraud. According to the opponents, this change could reduce analysts’
incentives to search for information, making them less likely to reveal fraud.
In late 2001 and early 2002 the Enron Scandal and the collapse of Arthur
Andersen increased the risk faced by auditors and thus their incentives to speak up.
In July 2002 the Sarbanes Oxely act was passed, introducing a vast array of
changes. SOX made SEC involvement more politically appealing by providing that SEC
civil penalties be used to compensate investors that were victims of securities fraud. It
also made SEC involvement more feasible by significantly increasing its budget. SOX
also dramatically changed auditors incentives by introducing a ban on consulting work
done by audit firms, by making it clearer that their primary responsibility was to the
board, and through section 404 requiring enhanced internal controls and investigation of
control weaknesses by auditors.
SOX also altered the cost of whistleblowing for the employees. Section 301
requires audit committees of publicly traded companies to establish procedures for “the
confidential anonymous submission by employees of the issuer of concerns regarding
questionable accounting or auditing matters.” It also enhances protections for employees
against being fired for coming forward with such information.
Finally, in April 2003 the New York Attorney General reached a settlement with
ten of the nation's top investment firms aimed at promoting the independence of equity
research. If this Global Research Settlement achieved its goal, the analysts should have
become more independent and thus active in revealing fraud.
Since all of these changes took place almost simultaneously, it is impossible to
separate the effect of each one of them. It is possible, however, to see whether the relative

34

frequency of the different type of whistleblowers changed according to the net changes in
their relative incentives.
Table 12 examines changes in the activity of auditors before and after Enron. It
reveals a significant uptick in the overall level of auditor involvement in detection and in
the scope of their detection activity. Prior to Enron, auditors accounted for just 9.6% of
frauds detected by external actors, and focused exclusively on frauds requiring financial
restatements. Post Enron, they account for 16.9% of cases, and their activity is spread
across not only financial restatement cases, but also those cases not involving
restatements. One possible explanation for this broader scope is auditors’ increased
exposure to liability for a firm’s fraudulent activity. Another is that auditors become
more aware of fraudulent activity as a result of their responsibility in evaluating internal
controls per SOX section 404.
In Table 13 we examine time trends more comprehensively, looking at changes
pre and post SOX for the overall distribution of fraud detectors. The table shows a
stunning increase in the role of auditors (a four fold increase in the relative frequency of
detections) and of the SEC (a doubling of their importance, albeit from a very low level).
The increased role of the auditors come at the expense of analysts (who drop from 14 to
11% of the cases of detection), of shortellers (from 9 to 0%), and the media (from 15 to
9%).
That the percentage of employee whistleblowers (Table 13) drops from 21 to 16%
suggests Sox’s modest incentives for whistleblowers have not been very effective. One
possible explanation is that protecting the whistleblower current job is a small reward
given the extensive ostracism whistleblowers face. Another explanation could be that

35

many firms either go bankrupt or are bought up after revelation of fraud. As a result, job
protection in the pre-existing firm is but a small reward.

5. The Paradox of Whistle Blowing
Generalizing from our results, we arrive at what might be called a paradox of
whistle blowing: those with weakest incentives to blow the whistle (e.g. employees) are
most active, while those with the strongest incentives to act (e.g. shortsellers) act very
rarely. This paradox can be understood in the context of Hayek’s (1945) idea that
information is diffuse. The whistleblowers with weak incentives have superior access to
information about the frauds and this access to information eventually leads to its use
despite the weak incentives. Those with incentives, by contrast, have difficulty accessing
credible information to act upon.
This Hayekian view suggests a distinction between two approaches to fraud
detection. The first, which we might label the “mandated” approach, consists of
entrusting some individuals with the task of collecting information that might lead to the
detection of fraud. These individuals are generally paid for the effort they exert, not for
the outcome they achieve. These actors include external auditors, financial market
regulators, industry regulators, and other non-financial market government offices.
The alternative approach, which we might label the “market” approach, does not
designate ex ante the people in charge of detecting fraud. By contrast, it provides a
reward system for people who bring fraud to light. These incentives can be monetary, as
in the case of shortsellers, reputational, as in the case of financial analysts exposing
problems in their reports, or moral, as is alleged with some employee whistle blowing.

36

In comparing the functioning of these two systems, which coexist as in the U.S.
market, it is useful to focus on two dimensions: the cost to collect the information
necessary to identify fraud and the incentives not only to collect this information, but also
to reveal it. At one extreme, we have shortsellers, who can benefit handsomely from the
revelation of bad news, but have the most limited access to company-specific information
and thus are likely to have the highest cost to collect it. On the other hand, we have
employees. They have the lowest cost of collecting information: they stumble on frauds
in the regular course of their jobs. But they generally derive no benefit from revealing
bad information. In fact, they often pay a significant cost in doing so in terms of loss of
employment, ostracism, verbal and sometimes even physical harassment. Between these
two extremes lay all the other actors.
The two approaches differ in the way they use incentives and in the way they tap
into the diffuse information already present in the system. With diffuse information, the
market works best when incentives are provided where the information is. The mandated
system, in contrast, designates those with responsibility and requires that information be
provided where the incentives are (or at least where there are no strong disincentives).
As Table 4 makes it clear, the market approach dominates fraud detection during
this period. The mandated approach accounts for just 20% of detections if we restrict our
focus to auditors (14%) and the financial market regulators (6%). If we adopt a more
encompassing view of mandated mechanisms and also count non-financial-market
regulators, this total only increases to 36% of our sample. In contrast, all market based
actors collectively account for 64% of cases.

37

It is possible that mandated actors could, in part, make up for their relative
infrequency of action by being much quicker to act, which would improve affairs as
efficiency is clearly enhanced if information about the frauds was brought to the attention
of the public earlier. But we find that this is not the case. As shown in column 5, the
median duration of frauds caught by market actors is 15 months, marginally faster than
frauds caught by mandated actors as a whole (15.8 months) and definitely faster than
frauds caught by financial market mandated actors (16.8 months).
This dominance of market-based actors was much more extreme pre 2002, when
market-based actors accounted for 73% of the cases detected. After 2002, mandated
actors were more active with a 56% to 44% lead. This change is mainly due to a surge in
the activity of auditors. One explanation for these results is that the mandate was poorly
designed prior to 2002 and these mandates have been strengthened. External auditors
historically have been tasked with attesting that the financial information provided by
firm management is prepared consistent with generally accepted accounting principles
and while required to report fraud that they see, they have not had an obligation to seek
out fraud.20 The nature of this mandate has changed only recently. In 1997 a Statement
of Auditing Standard clarified that auditors had a responsibility to detect material
misstatements. More importantly, the passage of SOX increased the obligation of
auditors in this domain. .

20

This distinction can be traced as far back as the Kingston Cotton Mills Case of 1896, which concluded
that auditors were not responsible for uncovering frauds "It is the duty of an auditor to bring to bear on the
work he has to perform that skill, care, and caution which a reasonably competent, careful, and cautious
auditor would use. An auditor is not bound to be a detective, or, as was said, to approach his work with
suspicion, or with a foregone conclusion that there is something wrong. He is a watchdog, but not a
bloodhound. Auditors must not be made liable for not tracking out ingenious and carefully laid schemes of
fraud, when there is nothing to arouse their suspicion ...So to hold would make the position of an auditor
intolerable." Lord Lopes, 1896, cited in Sarup (2004).

38

Similarly, while the SEC has responsibility in policing against fraud, it has
suffered from a paucity of resources, particularly during the late 1990s and has since then
seen an increase in its budget.21
What this study cannot determine is which aspect of the post 2002 reforms has
triggered a change in auditors’ behavior. Is it the severing of the consulting business with
their clients, the effect of the demise of Arthur Andersen, the effect of required increased
professional skepticism by auditors, or the increased awareness of frauds arising from
implementation of section 404 and internal controls? In other words, is this a permanent
change or a temporary reaction to an event that made the risk of bad auditing salient,
reaction that will subside with time? Only time will tell.
What our study can determine, however, are the effects of the other reforms. And
overall, they seem to be ineffective. Analysts do not seem to be more active as a result of
regulation FD and the global research settlement. Similarly, employees do not appear to
feel protected by the provisions in section 301 of SOX.
What our study can also suggest is a different approach to reforms. As the
evidence in the healthcare industry shows, employees respond to incentives and a reward
to whistle-blowing leads to a higher rate of detection. This higher rate of detection does
not appear to come at the cost of more frivolous suits.
The idea of extending the qui tam statue to corporate frauds (i.e. providing a
financial award to those who bring forward information about a corporate fraud) is very
21

As the GAO (2002b) reports, “The percent of all corporate filings that received a full review, a full
financial review, or were just monitored for specific disclosure items decreased from about 21 percent in
1991 when 13,198 were reviewed to about 8 percent in 2000 when 8,498 were reviewed” Further analysis
is provided in Mark Maremont and Deborah Solomon, “Missed Chances: Behind SEC's Failings: Caution,
Tight Budget, '90s Exuberance --- Its Reactive Culture Made Agency Slow Off the Mark While Spitzer
Raced Ahead --- Giving Up Too Soon on Tyco,”Wall Street Journal, 24 December 2003.

39

much in the Hayekian spirit of sharpening the incentives of those who are endowed with
information. This proposal has an additional benefit. If it does not work and no
whistleblower provides useful information, no money will be spent for the reward. In this
regard, it is a much more cost-effective than usual forms of regulation, where the cost is
borne even if the regulation has no positive effect. And if the reward system works very
well and is very effective in deterring corporate fraud, very little money will be paid in
rewards because very little fraud will be committed. Once again, this is different from a
mandated approach, where the costs have to be paid even when the deterrence effect
makes frauds extremely unlikely.

6. Conclusions
The clearest result emerging from our data is that in the United States fraud
detection relies on a wide range of, often improbable, actors. No single one of them
accounts for more than 20% of the cases detected. These findings suggest that the failures
of internal governance in other countries cannot be easily solved by introducing U.S.
institutions like class action suits or the SEC (together they account for only 8.4% of the
revelation of frauds by external actors). An effective corporate governance system relies
on a complex web of market actors that complement each other. Unfortunately,
reproducing such a complex system abroad is much more difficult than copying a single
legal institution.
The other clear result is that, at least before SOX, the “mandated” approach to
fraud detection did not work well at all. Only 5.8% of the fraud cases were identified by
the authority in charge of discovering them (i.e., the SEC). Even if we enlarge the
definition and we include external auditors (who have a duty to disclose fraud when they

40

find it, but not to search for it) and industry regulators (who are not in charge to look for
financial frauds), only 35.3% of the cases were revealed by people appointed to search
for it.
One interpretation of these results is that information about fraud is so diffuse that
is extremely costly (and so ineffective) to appoint an official investigator: it is like
looking for a needle in the proverbial haystack. Fraud tends to be revealed by people who
find out about it in their normal course of business and who do not have any strong
disincentive (or even better have some positive incentive) to reveal it. For example, in
sectors like healthcare where qui tam suits are possible and thus whistleblowers are
rewarded, employees play a much bigger role in revealing fraud.
Unfortunately, we have shown that in many real world situations (like auditors,
analysts, and employees in other sectors) there are little or no monetary or career-related
incentives to reveal fraud. That only the most established newspapers and the most senior
analysts are willing to come forward suggests – to the contrary- that the risks involved in
blowing the whistle are substantial.
After the introduction of SOX, which significantly increased their duties and
monitoring, the performance of mandated actors improved. Still they account for only
slightly more than 50% of the cases. Only time will tell whether this recent surge in their
relative performance is just a temporary blip, due to the enormous amount of public
scrutiny that certain actors (like auditors) received after a few major corporate scandals,
or a permanent shift due to the changes in the incentives imposed by legislation.

41

Either way our analysis suggests an alternative, cheap, way to address the
problem: to extend the qui tam legislation to corporate fraud. As the evidence in the
healthcare industry shows, such a system seems to work very effectively.
An objection to this approach is that it might lead to an excessive amount of
frivolous suits. But the evidence in the healthcare industry seems to dismiss this concern.
Another objection is that an explicit reward to whistleblowers might foster distrust among
employees, undermining their ability to work together for the benefit of the company. We
are not aware of any sign of this problem in sectors subject to qui tam suits, but this is
certainly an aspect that deserves further study before this idea is implemented.

42

Data Appendix
Comparing Our Sample with Other Fraud Samples
Many accounting studies focus on a sample of companies identified by the GAO
that restated their financial statements between 1997 and June 2002 (e.g. Palmrose and
Scholz (2004)). This ‘GAO sample’ includes all type of restatements (i.e. major and
minor, revenue increasing and decreasing, and as a result of new GAAP, reclassification
of accounts, merger/acquisition, restructuring charges or fraud).
Our sample differs in two principle ways. First, many of these cases will not
make it into our sample. This arises because the GAO sample includes: some non-US
firms; the GAO sample includes many smaller firms that do not meet the selection
criteria for our sample (the median market cap in the GAO sample (measured at date t-1)
is $ 214 million while the market cap of firms in our sample (also measured at t-1) is $
3525 million); and, because the underlying fraud is not sufficiently serious to trigger a
lawsuit that withstands scrutiny and yields a settlement or is ongoing . Second, this
approach does not allow for cases of fraud where firms do not issue restatements, a
category of frauds that accounts for 38 percent of our observations.
Other accounting studies have focused on a narrower sample of firms where the
SEC has sanctioned the firm and released an Accounting, Auditing and Enforcement
Release (AAER) (e.g. Dechow, Sloan and Sweeney (1996), Miller (2006)). We will
capture these cases if there is a simultaneous suit under federal securities laws that meets
our tests for inclusion. The SEC sample also is focused on smaller firms (the median
market cap (measured at t-1) for AAER firms is 262 million) and, given its limited
budget, on a few high profile and egregious cases of fraud.22 Our companion paper
provides a more complete comparison of these samples and the relationship of our
sample to these.
The larger size of firms in our sample likely corresponds with additional scrutiny
both before the fraud was brought to light and evaluation of the fraud and how it got
uncovered after the fact. This additional scrutiny aids us in identifying the likely source
of the information about fraud and in identifying some of the interactions among fraud
detectors, including identifying actors who pushed the board to action. These factors
help to account for the higher percentage of cases in our sample where indications of
fraud arise from actors outside the firm. In our sample, we identify the firm as the source
of information in 32% of cases whereas the firm is identified as the source in between
49% and 58% of cases in the GAO sample (1997-2002, and 2002-2005 respectively), and
in 71% of cases in the AAER sample used by Miller (2006).23

22

Dechow, Sloan and Sweeney (1996) write: “because our sample is subject to SEC enforcement actions,
it is almost certainly biased toward the inclusion of the more obvious and spectacular cases of earnings
manipulation.”
23
Correspondence with Shiva Rajgopal, January 2007.

43

Legal scholars have been the biggest user of the SSCAC database to construct
samples of probable frauds (see citations above). A potential concern with this sample is
that it is potentially missing additional cases of alleged fraud that are filed as a class
action under state laws or as a derivative action. Thompson and Sale (2003) and
Thompson and Thomas (2003, 2004) provide analysis and evidence that exploring such
suits would not turn up many additional cases as there has been a profound shift in cases
from state to federal courts, accentuated by the passage of PSLRA and the Uniform
Standards Act (1998). Their comprehensive analysis of these filings in Delaware in 1999
and 2000 shows that almost all such cases that withstand scrutiny are breach of fiduciary
duties in merger and acquisitions (and thus not fraud in the general use of this term in that
they do not involve misrepresentations).
Identifying Frauds that Require Restatements
We distinguish between frauds that required financial restatements and frauds that
do not. To identify whether the fraud involved restatements we used information from
the United States General Accounting Office (GAO) report on Financial Statement
Restatements that identifies 918 restatement announcements from 1997 to June 2002,
which we matched to those in our sample. We also searched a firm’s SEC filings after
the revelation of fraud for either (a) a 10-Q/A or 10-K/A filing which indicate amended
filings; or (b) an 8-K which referred to restatement information. We identified a fraud as
involving misrepresentation if any of the following conditions applied: it restated its
financials [116 cases]; it announced an intention to restate its financials but did not as a
result of bankruptcy (e.g. Enron) [7 cases]; it took a one-time accounting-related charge
[6 cases]; and, it is an ongoing case where there are accounting-related investigations [3
cases].
The residual category of frauds that don’t require financial misrepresentation, are
primarily composed of "failure to disclose" material information, and a disclosure of
misleading forward-looking information, with the case of CVS illustrating the first type
and Ascend the second type. In the case of CVS, the alleged fraud was to issue positive
statements concerning its business and operations and possibilities for expansion but not
to disclose that a national shortage of pharmacists was negatively impacting CVS's
business forcing a scale back in expansion plans. Or consider the case of Ascend
Communications, where the company followed a competitor’s announcement that it
would ship a 56K modem, with a near immediate announcement that it too would ship a
56K modem and beat the competitor to market, even though there were strong
indications, including the supplier that allegedly would produce the modem, that
suggested this was not possible.

44

References
Bar-Gill and Lucien Bebchuk, 2003, “Misreporting Corporate Performance,” John M
Olin Center for Law, Economics and Business, Harvard Law School Working
Paper Series.
Black, Bernard, 2001, “The Legal and Institutional Preconditions for Strong Securities
Markets,” UCLA Law Review, Vol 48 (1), 781-855.
Bowen, Robert, Andrew Call and Shiva Rajgopal, “Whistle-Blowing: Target Firm
Characteristics and Economic Consequences,” 2007, working paper, University of
Washington.
Burns, N. and S. Kedia. 2006. The impact of performance-based compensation on
misreporting. Journal of Financial Economics 79: 35-67.
Coffee, John, 1986. “Understanding the Plaintiff's Attorney,”Columbia Law Review, 669727.
Coffee, John, 2001, “The Acquiescent Gatekeeper: Reputational Intermediaries, Auditor
Independence and the Governance of Accounting,” Columbia Law and economics
Working Paper No 191.
Coffee, John, 2003, “The Attorney as Gatekeeper: An Agenda for the SEC.”
Choi, Stephen J. 2004, "Do the Merits Matter Less after the Private Securities Litigation
Reform Act?" Working Paper.
Choi, Stephen J. 2005, "Behavioral Economics and the SEC.” Working Paper.
Choi, Stephen J., Karen K. Nelson and A.C. Pritchard. 2005. “The Screening Effect of
the Securities Litigation Reform Act.” Working Paper.
Cox, James D., Randall S. Thomas and Diku Kiku. 2003. "SEC Enforcement Heuristics:
An Empirical Inquiry." Duke Law Journal, 53(2), pp. 737-79.
Dechow, P. M., R. G. Sloan, and A. Sweeney. 1996. “Causes and consequences of
earnings manipulation: An analysis of firms subject to enforcement actions by the
SEC.” Contemporary Accounting Research, 13 (1): 1-36.
Desai, Hemang, Srini Krishnamurthy and Kumar Venkataraman, 2006, “Do short sellers
target firms with poor earnings quality?: Evidence from earnings restatements,”
Reveiw of Accounting Studies, March.
Diamond, D., Verrecchia, R., 1987. “Constraints on short-selling and asset price
adjustment to private information”. Journal of Financial Economics 18, 277-311.

45

Efendi, Jap, Anup Srivastava, and Edward Swanson, forthcoming, “Why Do Corporate
Managers Misstate Financial Statements? The Role of in-the-money Options and
Other Incentives,” Journal of Financial Economics.
Dyck, Alexander and Luigi Zingales, 2003,“Media and Asset Prices,” working paper
Dyck, Alexander and Luigi Zingales, 2004, “Private Benefits of Control: An International
Comparison”, Journal of Finance 59: 537 - 600.
Dyck, Alexander, David Moss, and Luigi Zingales, 2005, “Media vs. Special Interests”,
working paper.
Dyck, Alexander, Adair Morse and Luigi Zingales, 2006, “The Nature of Corporate
Fraud,” working paper.
Dyck, Alexander, Nathalia Volchkova, and Luigi Zingales, 2006, “The Corporate
Governance Role of the Media: Evidence from Russia” NBER Working Paper.
Fama, Eugene, 1983. “Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm,” Journal of
Political Economy, 88 (2): 288-307.
General Accounting Office, 2002, “Financial Statement Restatements: Trends, Market
Impacts, Regulatory Responses, and Remaining Challenges,” 03-018
General Accounting Office, 2002b, “SEC Operations: Increased Workload Creates
Challenges,” 02-302.
Griffin, Paula, Joseph Grundfest and Micael Perino, “Stock Price Response to News of
Securities Fraud Litigation: Market Efficiency and the Slow Diffusion of Costly
Information,” Stanford Law and Economics Olin Working Paper No. 208.
Grundfest, Joseph A. 1995. “Why Disimply?” Harvard Law Review, 108, 740-741.
Hayek, Friedrich, 1945, “The Use of Knowledge in Society,” American Economic
Review, 34 (4), 519-530.
Healy, Paul and Krishna Palepu, 2003,"The Fall of Enron," Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Spring.
Hermalin, Benjamin E. and Michael S. Weisbach (1998) “Endogenously Chosen Boards
of Directors and Their Monitoring of the CEO,” American Economic Review, 88: 98116.

Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey D. Kubik and Amit Solomon (2000) “Security Analysts’ Career
Concerns and the Herding of Earnings Forecasts,” Rand Journal of Economics 31,
121-144.
Hong, Harrison, and Jeffrey D. Kubik (2000) “Analyzing the Analysts: Career Concerns
and Biased Earnings Forecasts,” Journal of Finance, vol. 58, no. 1, February
2003, pp. 313-51
Johnson, Marilyn F., Ron Kasznik, and Karen K. Nelson. 2000. “Shareholder Wealth
Effects of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.” Review of
Accounting Studies, 5(3) 217-233.
Johnson, Marilyn F., Karen K. Nelson and A.C. Pritchard. 2003. “Do the Merits Matter
More? Class Actions under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act.”
Working Paper.
Lamont, Owen, 2003, “Go Down Fighting: Short Sellers Versus Firms,” working paper.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, 2006, “What Works in
Securities Laws,” Journal of Finance, 61, 1-33.
Michaely, Roni and Kent L. Womack (1999) “Conflict of Interest and the Credibility of
Underwriter Analyst Recommendations,” Review of Financial Studies 12, 653686.
Miller, Gregory S. 2006, "The Press as a Watchdog for Accounting Fraud." Journal of
Accounting Research 44, no. 5 (December): 1001-1033.
Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny (1988) “``Management Ownership
and Market Valuation: An Empirical Analysis”, Journal of Financial Economics 20:
293-316.
Morck, Randall, Daniel Wolfenzon, and Bernard Yeung (2005) “Corporate Governance,
Economic Entrenchment, and Growth” Journal of Economic Literature, XLIII: 655720.
Palmrose, Z-V., and S. W. Scholz. 2004. The circumstances and legal consequences of
non-GAAP reporting: Evidence from restatements. Contemporary Accounting
Research. 21 (1) (Spring): 139-180.
Richardson, Scott, Irem Tuna and Min Wu, 2002, “Predicting Earnings Management:
The Case of Earnings Restatements,”
Sarup, Deepak, 2004, “Watchdog or Bloodhound? The Push and Pull Toward a New
Audit Model,” Information Systems Control Journal,, Volume 1.

47

Thompson, Robert and Hillary Sale, 2003, “Securities Fraud as Corporate Governance:
Reflections Upon Federalism,” Vanderbilt Law Review
Thompson, Robert and Randall Thomas, 2004,“The Public and Private Faces of
Derivative Lawsuits,” Vanderbilt Law Review.
Winston, Clifford, 1998, “U.S. Industry Adjustment to Economic Deregulation,” Journal
of Economic Perspectives,” 89-110.
Zingales , Luigi, 2000, “In Search of New Foundations,” Journal of Finance, 55: 16231653.

48

0.16

0.14

0.12

Mean Short Interest %

0.10
All Data
Half SD Higher
SD Higher
2 SD Higher

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0.00
-20

-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

15

Months Around Revelation

Figure 1 – Short Interest and the Timing of Fraud Detection
This figure illustrates the pattern of short interest around the timing of fraud detection in our sample. Short
interest is defined as the total number of shares investors have sold short but have not yet bought back. divided by
the total number of outstanding shares for each company. The standard deviation bands are defined based on
the 6 month average pre-detection short interest relative to the mean short interest position for that firm
(excluding a year and a half around the fraud).

49

th

75 percentile

0.18

Hazard of Being Detected

25th percentile

50th percentile

0.15

0.12

0.09

0.06

0.03

0.00
0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

Days
Auditors
Analysts
SEC
Law Firms

Equity Holders
Strategic Players
Industry Regulators

Short Sellers
Media
Employees

Figure 2 - Hazard of Being Detected by Fraud Detector
This figure is based on a Cox proportional hazard model of the likelihood of detection. For each duration
the figure plots the probability of detection by each fraud detector (i.e. 1- survival probability), after
controlling for the type of fraud. A higher line at a specific duration indicates that type of fraud detector is
more likely to have detected the fraud up until that point.

50

Table 1 – Data Definition and Sources
This table identifies the main variables used in our analysis, defines the variables, and provides the sources.
Variable

Detector of
Fraud

Fraud Duration
Financial
Restatement
Dummy
Regulated Firm
Dummy
Nature of Fraud
Controls
Short Interest
Aggregate Short
Interest
Investment
Bank Ranking
All- Star
Analyst

Description
The actor who first identifies the fraud based on a combined reading of the legal case documents and an average of 800
articles from Factiva in a window from 3 months before the class action period to settlement. Ten detector categories
include: external auditor, financial analyst, investor, shortseller, media, strategic players, financial market regulators,
non-financial market regulators, employees and professional service organizations. The detection is attributed to the
media only when the story does not indicate another actor as the principal source of information. Strategic players
include suppliers, clients and competitors. Financial market regulators are the SEC and stock exchanges. Non-financial
market regulators include industry regulators (e.g. FERC, FAA, FDA) and other government agencies. Professional
service firms are law and insurance firms.
The class period defined in the security class action, reflecting all adjustments made before settlement. We restrict the
maximum duration to 3 years, to avoid changes in duration possibly arising from changing rules with the passage of
Sarbanes-Oxley in July of 2002.
Observation has value 1 if: the firm filed a 10-Q/A or 10-K/A filing or an 8-K which referred to restatement information
[116 cases]; it announced an intention to restate its financials but did not as a result of bankruptcy (e.g. Enron) [7 cases];
it took a one-time accounting-related charge [6 cases]; and, it is an ongoing case where there are accounting-related
investigations [3 cases].
Firm in following categories: financials (SIC 6000-6999), transportation equipment (SIC 3700-3799), transportation,
communications, electric, gas and sanitary services (SIC 4000-4999), drug, drug proprietaries and druggists sundries
(SIC 5122), petroleum and petroleum products wholesalers (SIC 5172), pharmaceuticals (SIC 2830-2836), and
healthcare providers (8000-8099), and healthcare related firms in Business Services.
Dummy variables identify primary nature of fraud as either self-dealing, non-accounting related illegal activity (e.g.
price fixing and non-compliance), financial misrepresentations, and failure to disclose.
The total number of shares investors have sold short but have not yet bought back. This information is available
monthly from Bloomberg. We normalize short interest by the total number of outstanding shares for each company.
The aggregate short position in the markets (NASDAQ, AMEX and NYSE) is the sum of all short interest positions for
all firms. We normalize aggregate short interest by the total number of shares traded in the markets.

Sources
Security Class actions filings
available from Stanford Securities
Class Action Database, Articles in
Factiva.

Stanford Securities Class Action
Database
SEC filings, General Accounting
Office (GAO) report on Financial
Statement Restatements.
Industries identified in Winston
(1998) and others.
Dyck, Morse and Zingales (2006)
based on Factiva and Security Class
actions filings.
Bloomberg
Bloomberg

Ranking of investment banks and brokerage houses by Vault.

Vault Investment Bank Guide

A dummy variable indicating whether or not the analyst appears as an All-American All-Star analyst according to the
annual survey in Institutional Investor magazine.

Institutional Investor Magazine

Table 2 – Who Detects Corporate Fraud?
This table identifies the actor that first brings the fraud to light. Internal governance includes frauds where
the detector is the firm (e.g. press release), company management, or the board of directors. Analysts
include both sell-side analysts from brokerage houses and buy-side analysts. Non-financial-market
regulators include industry regulators (e.g. FERC, FAA, FDA) and other government agencies (e.g., State
attorney general’s offices). Strategic players include buyers, suppliers and competitors to the firm. We
identify the actor as the media if information is first revealed in a print media outlet identified through
FACTIVA (newspaper and/or magazine) where the story does not indicate another actor as the principal
source of information.

Total Internal Governance
External Governance
Mandated Actors
Non-Financial Market Regulators
Auditors
SEC
Total Mandated Actors
Market Actors
Employees
Media
Analysts
Strategic Players
Equity Holders
Professional Service Firms
Short Sellers
Total Market Actors
Total External Governance
Total Cases

Count of External
Governance

% of External
Governance

25
22
9
56

16.0%
14.1%
5.8%
35.9%

30
25
23
11
5
4
2
100

19.2%
16.0%
14.7%
7.1%
3.2%
2.6%
1.3%
64.1%
100%

Count
74

% of Total
32.2%

156
230

67.8%

Table 3 – Are Short Sellers Involved in Fraud Detection?
This table examines whether short interest helps to predict fraud detection. The data consists of an
unbalanced panel of monthly observations for each company in our sample from 1994 until 2005. The
dependent variable takes the value of 1 if a fraud is detected and zero otherwise. Column 1 independent
variables are the short interest for the company one month earlier and aggregate short interest. Short
interest and aggregate short interest are divided by the number of share outstanding for (respectively) the
firm and the market. In column 2 we interact lag short interest with whistleblower type and include but do
not report controls for the type of fraud (restatement dummy, self-dealing dummy, other non-financial
illegal activity dummy, misrepresentations on financial statements dummy, failure to disclose dummy). In
column 3, we include firm fixed effects, and do not include controls for the type of fraud. In column 4, each
row is a separate logistic regression where the logistic is only fitted for that type of detector. (Column 4
allows the sensitivity of detection to the controls to vary by detector type.) All regressions include NeweyWest Standard Errors to correct for serial correlation in the panel. ***, **, and ** denote significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively. We exclude two observations for where shortsellers are identified as
the fraud detector.
Logistic Regression
Dependent Variable: Dummy for Fraud Detected in Period
1
2
3
Lag Short Interest (All)
3.53***
(0.94)
Lag Short Interest (Auditors)
4.06**
2.93
(1.60)
(4.37)
Lag Short Interest (Equity Holders)
-15.36
-20.84
(14.95)
(35.27)
Lag Short Interest (Analysts)
7.29
10.87
(5.18)
(8.18)
Lag Short Interest (Strategic Players)
6.63**
12.17*
(3.17)
(6.48)
Lag Short Interest (Media)
7.18**
7.41
(3.41)
(4.90)
Lag Short Interest (SEC)
7.39
10.41
(11.76)
(16.50)
Lag Short Interest (Non Financial Market
Regulators)
-3.60
-4.83
(5.92)
(11.05)
Lag Short Interest (Employees)
1.61
2.30
(1.95)
(3.10)
Lag Short Interest (Lawyers, Insurance)
4.82
7.77
(3.27)
(7.36)
Aggregate Market Short / Shares Market
138.4***
140.1***
165.1***
(21.65)
(22.01)
(26.71)
Pseudo R-Square
0.037
0.042
0.038
Observations
Included Whistleblower Type Effects
Included Dummies for Restated
Included Type of Fraud Dummies
Included Firm Fixed Effects

14546

14546

13594

No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

No
No
No
Yes

4
4.92*
(2.90)
1.24
(6.77)
-53.94
(36.26)
11.68**
(4.80)
13.32***
(4.83)
7.87*
(4.78)
7.93
(21.37)
-7.81
(9.08)
2.80
(2.85)
5.31
(4.24)
Varies
Varies
from 418 to
14546
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

53

Table 4 – Who Detects Corporate Fraud after Accounting for Probable Detections
by Short Sellers
This table revises our original counts for fraud detectors (column 2) with new estimates (column 3) after
reclassifying the fraud detector for eight observations where we found significant shortselling surrounding
fraud detection (figure 1). The median durations of the frauds (columns 5 and 6) are in months, based on
the class period, and capped at a maximum duration of 3 years. The median adjusted duration column is
based on a regression (not presented) of duration on type of actor, including a dummy for financial
restatements, and for the nature of the fraud (self-dealing, non-accounting related illegal activity, financial
misrepresentations, and failure to disclose).

Panel A – Frequency and Duration
Fraud Detector
(External mechanisms only)
Mandated Actors
Non-Financial Market
Regulators
Auditors
SEC
Total Mandated Actors
Market Actors
Analysts
Short Sellers
Strategic Players
External Equity Holders
Employees
Media
Insurance, Plaintiff Law Firms
Total Market Actors
Overall Totals

Original
Count

Revised
Count

Frequency
%

Median
Duration
(months)

Median
Adjusted
Duration
(months)

25

25

16.0%

13.3

14.7

22
9
56

21
9
55

13.5%
5.8%
35.3%

14.7
21.2
15.8

13.9
20.4
16.4

23
2
11
5
30
25
4
100
156

21
10
10
5
30
21
4
101
156

13.5%
6.4%
6.4%
3.2%
19.2%
13.5%
2.6%
64.7%

8.4
10.5
13.3
15.9
20.9
21.0
31.4
15.0
15.0

10.8
12.3
15.5
15.2
22.9
20.2
30.8
15.5

54

Table 5 – Does the Distribution of Fraud Detectors Vary With the Nature of the
Fraud, Industry, and Settlement Amount?
This table explores the robustness of the distribution of fraud detectors controlling for other factors. Panel
A breaks down the fraud by whether they involved self-dealing, other illegal activities, or if the fraud
primarily involved a failure to disclose (about the past or the future) or financial misrepresentations (about
the past or the future). Panel B breaks down the revised distribution of fraud detectors by whether the fraud
required the firm to file restated financial statements with the SEC or not. The median duration is the
median for the category. Panel C breaks down the revised distribution of fraud detectors by whether the
company is regulated or not. The median duration is the median for the category. Panel D explores
whether the distribution is influenced by the settlement amount.

Panel A – Breakdown by Type of Fraud
Self Dealing

Other Illegal

Failure to
Disclose

Misrepresentation

Non-Financial Market
Regulators

9.1%
(1)

40.9%
(9)

10.0%
(9)

26.1%
(6)

Auditors

18.2%
(2)

4.5%
(1)

18.9%
(17)

4.3%
(1)

-

4.5%
(1)

7.8%
(7)

4.3%
(1)

27.3%
(3)

50.0%
(11)

25.6%
(23)

34.8%
(8)

-

-

18.9%
(17)

17.4%
(4)

9.1%
(1)

4.5%
(1)

7.8%
(7)

4.3%
(1)

-

9.1%
(2)

7.8%
(7)

4.3%
(1)

External Equity Holders

9.1%
(1)

-

3.3%
(3)

4.33%
(1)

Employees

18.2%
(2)

31.8%
(7)

16.7%
(15)

26.1%
(6)

Media

18.2%
(2)

4.5%
(1)

17.8%
(16)

8.7%
(2)

Professional Service

18.2%
(2)

-

2.2%
(2)

-

72.7%
(8)
7.1%
(11)

50.0%
(11)
14.2%
(22)

74.4%
(67)
57.7%
(90)

65.2%
(15)
14.7%
(23)

Mandated Actors

SEC
Total Mandated Actors
Market Actors
Analysts
Short Seller
Strategic Players

Total Market Actors
Percentage of all (Total)

55

Panel B – Breakdown by Whether Firm Restated Financials or Not
Not Restated Financials
Restated Financials
Count
Frequency %
Count
Frequency %
Mandated Actors
Non-Financial Market Regulators
13
22.0%
12
12.4%
Auditors
3
5.1%
18
18.6%
SEC
0
0.0%
9
9.3%
Total Mandated
27.1%
40.3%
Market Actors
Analysts
12
20.3%
9
9.3%
Short Seller
4
6.8%
6
6.2%
Strategic Players
5
8.5%
5
5.2%
External Equity Holders
2
3.4%
3
3.1%
Employees
10
16.9%
20
20.6%
Media
8
13.6%
13
13.4%
Professional Service Firms
2
3.4%
2
2.1%
Total Market
72.9%
59.7%
Total (% of sample)
59
37.8%
97
62.2%
Median Duration
11.6
16.7
Chi-Squared Test for Median Equivalence of Restated vs NonRestated : χ(1) = 2.72 pvalue = 0.099

Panel C - Breakdown by Whether Firm in Regulated Industry or Not
Not Regulated Industry
Regulated Industry
Count
Frequency %
Count
Frequency %
Mandated Actors
Non-Financial Market Regulators
4
6.3%
21
23.6%
Auditors
10
15.9%
11
12.4%
SEC
3
4.8%
6
6.7%
Total Mandated
27.0%
42.7%
Market Actors
Analysts
11
17.5%
10
11.2%
Short Seller
6
9.5%
4
4.5%
Clients, Competitors, Suppliers
4
6.3%
6
6.7%
External Equity Holders
3
4.8%
2
2.2%
Employees
14
22.2%
16
18.0%
Media
8
12.7%
13
14.6%
Insurance, Plaintiff Law Firms
1
1.6%
3
3.4%
Total Market
73.0%
57.3%
Total
64
92
Median Duration
14.1
16.0
Chi-Squared Test for Median Equivalence of Regulated vs Non-Regulated: χ(1) = 0.66 pvalue = 0.416

56

Panel D –Breakdown by Settlement Amount
All External
With Settlement
Cases
Amount
Count
Freq %
Count
Freq %
Mandated Actors
Non-Financial
25
16.0%
18
15.4%
Market
Regulators
Auditors
21
13.5
16
13.7
SEC
9
5.8
6
5.1
Total Mandated
55
35.3%
40
34.2%
Market Actors
Analysts
21
13.5
16
13.7
Short Seller
10
6.4
8
6.8
Strategic Players
10
6.4
8
6.8
External Equity
5
3.2
4
3.4
Holders
Employees
30
19.2
22
18.8
Media
21
13.5
17
14.5
Professional
4
2.6
2
1.7
Service
Total Market
101
64.7%
77
65.8%
156
117
Overall Total

With Settlement
>$10 million
Count
Freq %

With Settlement
>$50 million
Count
Freq %

16

17.4%

9

21.4%

11
2
29

12.0
2.2
31.5%

2
0
11

4.8
0.0
26.2%

13
8
3

14.1
8.7
3.3

6
5
1

14.3
11.9
2.4

4

4.4

2

4.8

20
14

21.7
15.2

7
9

16.7
21.4

1

1.1

1

2.4

63
92

68.5%

31
42

73.8%

57

Table 6 – Does Fraud Detection involve Other Actors?
For each case detected by an original fraud detector, we identify in the columns to the right “to whom” the
whistle was blown (i.e. the next actor who played a central role in bringing the fraud to light). The
percentages sum to 100 across the columns and reflect the relative importance for the original fraud
detector in that row. The “public” category indicates that the original detector did not involve any other
actor in bringing the fraud to light. The “firm” category captures situations where the firm comes forward
with information about fraud that was initiated by actions by another actor.

Original
fraud
detector

To whom is the whistle blown?

Media

Mandated Actors
NonFinancial
20.0%
Regulators
(5)
4.8%
Auditors
(1)
22.2%
SEC
(2)
Market Actors
57.1%
Analysts
(12)
60.0%
Short Sellers
(6)
Strategic
30.0%
Players
(3)
Equity
80.0%
Holders
(4)
3.3%
Employees
(1)
Media
Law Firms,
Insurance
Column
Total

50.0%
(2)
23.1%
(36)

Non Fin’l
Regulator

SEC

Lawyers

Analyst

Other
External

Public

Firm

12.0%
(3)

--

--

4.0%
(1)

--

8.0%
(2)

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

66.7%
(6)

56.0%
(14)
95.2%
(20)
11.1%
(1)

---

--

--

--

--

38.1%
(8)

4.8%
(1)

--

--

--

20.0%
(2)

20.0%
(2)

--

--

20.0%
(2)

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

33.3%
(10)
4.8%
(1)

10.0%
(3)

13.3%
(4)

--

3.3%
(1)

--

--

--

--

--

95.2%
(20)

--

--

--

--

--

--

10.3%
(16)

1.9%
(3)

2.6%
(4)

1.9%
(3)

1.9%
(3)

23.1%
(36)

50.0%
(5)
20.0%
(1)
36.7%
(11)
-50.0%
(2)
35.3%
(55)

58

Table 7 – Source of Information
For each case, we assess where the information that is lead to the revelation originates from. We first
categorize whether the information comes from SEC Financial Market Disclose, usually via quarterly
reporting. Then, for those cases in which the information is not from SEC disclosure rules, we break down
whether the information is collectible public information (e.g., a survey by analysts), regulatory discovery
findings, or information from internal firm operations. Percentages of each of these categories are presented
for each whistleblower with the frequency counts in parentheses.
Financial
Market
Disclosure

Mandated Actors
Non-Financial Market
Actors
Auditors
SEC

Non-Financial Market Disclosures
Collectible
Public
Information

Regulator
Discovery

Internal to
Firm

12.0%
(3)
9.5%
(2)
100.0%
(9)

16.0%
(4)

68.0%
(17)

--

--

4.0%
(1)
90.5%
(19)

--

--

66.7%
(14)
70.0%
(7)
40.0%
(4)
80.0%
(4)
3.3%
(1)
71.4%
(15)
50.0%
(2)
39.1%
(61)

19.0%
(4)
10.0%
(1)
10.0%
(1)

30.0%
(3)

--

--

--

Count

25
21
9

Market Actors
Analysts
Short Seller
Strategic Players
External Equity
Holders
Employees
Media
Professional Service
Total

-4.8%
(1)
50.0%
(2)
8.3%
(13)

10.0%
(3)
4.8%
(1)

14.3%
(3)
20.0%
(2)
20.0%
(2)
20.0%
(1)
86.7%
(26)
19.0%
(4)

--

--

4

15.4%
(24)

37.2%
(58)

156

---

21
10
10
5
30
21

59

Table 8 – What is the Impact of Fraud Detection on an Analyst’s Career?
Panel A: Unconditional Probability of Being All American All-Star Analyst
Panel A presents the unconditional probability that an analyst who reveals a fraud is an “All-Star” analyst
in the year prior to fraud detection, as categorized by Institutional Investor magazine. We categorize
analysts as Yes or No for the rating if we know the analyst name detecting the fraud and use the category
Unknown if no specific name is provided for the analyst.
.

Unconditional Probability of Being All-Star Analyst
Superstar Before
No
0.717
Yes
0.239
Unknown
0.043

Panel B: Transition Probability of Being All American All-Star Analyst
Panel B presents the transition probability of an analyst remaining in their All-Star category or moving to
other All-Star categories in the year after the fraud detection for each ex ante All-Star category. The blank
fields indicate that no analysts who were in the Yes or Unknown All-Star categories moved to a different
category.

Transition Probability of Moving All-Star Categories - Year Prior to Fraud to Year After
Superstars After
Superstar Before
No
Yes
Unknown
No
0.818
0.061
0.121
Yes
-1
-Unknown
--1

60

Table 9 – Who in the Media Detects Fraud?
For each case in which the media is the fraud detector, the table records the newspaper or journal that
reveals the fraud, the reporter(s) of the article, the page on which the article appears, and comments about
the status and specialization of the reporter(s), where available.
Company
Allegheny Energy
AOL Time Warner,
Inc.

News Outlet
New York Times
New York Times

Reporter
David Barboza
Gretchen
Morgenson

Article Location
page 1
page 1, business

Computer
Associates

New York Times

Alex Berenson

page 1, business

staff writer, author of
book on governance

Halliburton
Company

New York Times

page 1, business

staff writer, author of
book on governance

Sprint Corporation

New York Times

Alex Berenson
and Lowell
Bergaman
David Cay
Johnston

page 25, section 1

Ascend
Communications

San Francisco
Chronicle

Herb Greenberg

page 1, business

author of book on tax
avoidance by
corporations
staff writer, specialist
on tech sector

3Com

San Francisco
Chronicle
Wall Street Journal

Herb Greenberg

page 1, business

Molly Williams

Wall Street Journal

Jonathan Weil

C11, Heard on the
Street
C1, Heard on the
Street

Enron Corporation

Wall Street Journal

Jonathan Weil

E.W. Blanch
Holdings
Qwest

Wall Street Journal

Deborah Lohse

Wall Street Journal

Raytheon Company
AT&T Corporation

Wall Street Journal
Business Week

Bausch & Lomb
Mattel, Inc.
Silicon Graphics

Broadcom
Corporation
Cardinal Health, Inc.

Reporter Status
staff writer, specialist
on governance

staff writer, specialist
on tech sector
staff writer
writes accounting
column for WSJ,

T1 - page 1 of
Texas Journal
(regional edition of
WSJ)
A 10

writes accounting
column for WSJ,
staff writer

Deborah
Solomon, Steve
Liesman, Denis
Berman
no author
Robert Barker

A1, B6

staff writer

Business Week
Business Week
Business Week

Rochelle Sharpe
Kathleen Morris
Robert D. Hof,
Ira Sager, Linda
Himelstein

p 87
** cover story**
** cover story**

Employee Solutions

Financial World

Debra Sparks

p 52

Apria Healthcare
Charter
Communications
Cambrex
Corporation
Long Island
Lighting Co.
Bristol Myers
Squibb
Tyco International

Fortune
Cable World

Erick Schonfeld
Mavis Scanlon

p 114
Na

Chemical Reporter

Na

Na

Daily Electricity
Reporter
Cancer Letter

Na

Na

Na

Na

SEC Insight

no author

Na

Investor column (p.
264)

subsequently writer
for business week

61

Table 10 – What are the Costs and Benefits for Employee Whistle Blowing?
The table indicates for each employee whistleblower the following information: company (column 1); the whistleblower name and position, whether the
whistleblower identifies herself (column 2); whether the whistleblower was terminated, quit, or was given a job with significantly reduced responsibility (column
3); other costs claimed by the employee (column 4); whether a lawsuit filed with potential for damages including the type of lawsuit (column 5); whether an
outcome to the lawsuit (column 6); and other possible benefits of whistleblowing (column 7).
Costs
Company
Apria Healthcare, Inc.
Columbia HCA
Healthcare / Olsten
[2 cases]
Dynegy, Inc.

Whistleblower, Position
Mark Parker, branch
manager
Donald McLendon,
executive of acquired firm

Terminated,
Quit, or
Reduced
Responsibility
yes

Other Costs

Benefits
Filed Lawsuit with
Potential for
Damages
yes - qui tam,
wrongful dismissal
yes - qui tam

yes

Couldn't find other job, financial
stress

Ted Beatty, management
trainee

yes

Couldn't find other job, forced to
leave hometown, home broken into,
threats and intimidation

GTECH Holdings
Corporation
Healthsouth

Joseph Hafemann, corporate
controller
David Armitage, engineer
Weston Smith, vice president

yes

JDN Realty

William Kerley, CFO

no

Johnson & Johnson

Hector Arce

yes

Marsh & McLennan
Companies, Inc.
Northeast Utilities

Peter Scannell, call taker

yes

Lost job, threats and intimidation

yes - qui tam

George Galatis, engineer

yes

yes - payment to
leave likely

Quorum

Jim Alderson

yes

Rite Aid

Joseph Speaker, senior
finance executive

no

"If I had it to do over again," says
Galatis, "I wouldn't." Alienated by
co-workers.
Lost job. Moved to 5 towns in next
10 years.
Left firm a year later.

Endocare

Positive
Outcome of
Lawsuit
no - government
doesn't join
yes - $35 million

Other Possible
Benefits
vengeance
avoid potential legal
liability

No

vengeance

yes

No

no

No

avoid potential legal
liability
vengeance

Sentenced to 27 months, forced to
pay $6.9 million
Alleged loss of $19 million
including legal and job loss costs

No
yes –wrongful
dismissal suit
yes - qui tam

yes - qui tam
No

avoid potential legal
liability
yes - $2.3 million
no - government
doesn't join
no - government
doesn't join
yes - settlement
amount not
revealed
yes - $70 million

Readers Digest
'everyday hero'
on cover of Time
magazine

Service Corporation
International
Solectron Corporation
Xerox Corporation
Ann Taylor
America West Holding
Cendant Corporation

Charles Albert and Thomas
Chaney
Ronald Sorisho, division
CFO
James Bingham, assistant
treasurer
internal unknown
Unionized maintenance
workers

yes
yes
yes
Unknown
Unknown

Accounting staff integrating
newly acquired firm
unnamed employee
internal unknown letter to
auditor and SEC
unnamed finance executive

Unknown

Corporate Accounting group

Unknown

Laidlaw
Nicor, Inc.
PhyCor, Inc.

internal unknown
anonymous letter
Doctors who are employees

Unknown
Unknown
Unknown

SUPERVALU, Inc.

an unnamed female auditor
fired
unknown letter to SEC

Unknown

unnamed employee

Unknown

Ceridian
Consol Energy
Enterasys Networks,
Inc.
Footstar, Inc.

Symbol Technologies
Tenet Healthcare
Corporation
Union Pacific
Corporation

Union action

"… never get a job in Corporate
America again," Bingham's lawyer.

yes –wrongful
dismissal suit
yes –wrongful
dismissal suit
yes –wrongful
dismissal suit

no information
no information
no information

avoid potential legal
liability
avoid potential legal
liability
improve
employment
conditions
avoid potential legal
liability

Unknown
Unknown
Unknown
avoid potential legal
liability
improve
employment
conditions
avoid potential legal
liability

Unknown

Unknown

improve
employment
conditions

63

Table 11 – Do Incentives Impact Employee Whistleblowing? Evidence from QuiTam Availability
This table provides a breakdown of the distribution of fraud detector for the healthcare and non-healthcare
industries, where healthcare includes medical treatments and supporting industries including
pharmaceuticals and manufacturers of medical supplies and equipment. In many healthcare companies,
the government is a significant buyer of company services, and consequently employees can possibly
benefit from qui-tam lawsuits. The null hypothesis of the Chi-Square test is that the employee percentage of
fraud detectors is the same for non-healthcare and healthcare industries.

Panel A – Distribution of Whistle Blowers
Non-Healthcare
Count
Freq %
Mandated Actors
Non-Financial Market Regulators
Auditors
SEC
Market Actors
Analysts
Short Seller
Strategic Players
External Equity Holders

Healthcare
Count
Freq %

23
19
9

16.3%
13.5%
6.4%

2
2

13.3%
13.3%

19
10
10
5

13.5%
7.1%
7.1%
3.6%

2

13.3%

Employees

23

16.3%

7

46.7%

Media
Insurance, Plaintiff Law Firms
Total

19
4
141

13.5%
2.8%

2

13.3%

15

Chi-Square Goodness of Fit Test for Employee Distributional Equality: χ (2) = 5.14 pvalue = 0.0234

Panel B – Frivolous Cases by Industry
Healthcare
Non-Healthcare
Total Sample

Original Sample

Fraud Cases

30
471
501

19
211
230

Dismissed as
Frivolous
11
260
271

Percentage
Frivolous
36.7%
55.4%
54.3%

Table 12 – Does Auditor Involvement in Detection Change post Enron?
The table breaks down the frauds along two dimensions. The rows indicate whether the fraud in question
required restatements filed with the SEC for the period in question (row 1) or did not require restatements
(row 2). The columns provide details about the identity of the fraud detector, and how the relevance of this
category of detector changes over time. Column 1 presents the percentage and count (in parentheses) of the
156 external frauds that required restatements, while column 2 repeats the exercise for the 21 cases where
auditors were the fraud detectors (we do not include the two accounting cases we reclassified as
shortsellers). In Columns 3 and 4, we breakdown the auditor cases over time, column 3 indicating the cases
raised by auditors prior to Enron, and column 4 indicating those cases post Enron.
Accounting
Status of Fraud

All Fraud
Detectors

Auditor

Auditor
PreEnron

Auditor
PostEnron

Required
Restatements

62.2%
(97)

85.7%
(18)

100%
(7)

78.6%
(11)

Not Required
Restatements

37.8%
(59)

14.3%
(3)

--

21.4%
(3)

156 External Cases

21 Cases
of 156 External
= 13.55

7 Cases
of 73 Pre Enron
= 9.6%

14 Cases
of 83 Post Enron
= 16.9%

Totals

65

Table 13 – Impact of SOX on Fraud Detector Distribution
This table provides the distribution of external fraud detectors before and after the passage of SarbanesOxley in July 2002.
Pre-SOX
Mandated Actors
Non-Financial Market Regulators
Auditors
SEC
Total Mandated Actors
Analysts
Short Seller
Market Actors
Strategic Players
External Equity Holders
Employees
Media
Insurance, Plaintiff Law Firms
Total Market Actors
Total

Post-Sox

Count

Freq %

Count

Freq %

17
8
5
30
16
10

15.3%
7.2%
4.5%
27.1%
14.4%
9.0%

8
13
4
25
5
--

17.8%
28.9%
8.9%
55.6%
11.1%
--

8
4
23
17
3
81
111

7.2%
3.6%
20.7%
15.3%
2.7%
72.9%

2
1
7
4
1
20
45

4.4%
2.2%
15.6%
8.9%
2.2%
44.4%

Chi-Square Goodness of Fit Test for Distributional Equality: χ (8) = 28.71 pvalue = 0.004

66

