                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE SPIKE AT BENEFIT EXHAUSTION:
        LEAVING THE UNEMPLOYMENT SYSTEM OR STARTING A NEW JOB?

                                           David Card
                                           Raj Chetty
                                          Andrea Weber

                                       Working Paper 12893
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12893


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2007




We are extremely grateful to Rudolph Winter-Ebmer and Josef Zweimuller for assistance in obtaining
the data used in this study. Funding was provided by the Center for Labor Economics at UC Berkeley.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by David Card, Raj Chetty, and Andrea Weber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Spike at Benefit Exhaustion: Leaving the Unemployment System or Starting a New Job?
David Card, Raj Chetty, and Andrea Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 12893
February 2007
JEL No. H0,J6,J64,J65

                                              ABSTRACT

In this paper, we review the literature on the "spike" in unemployment exit rates around benefit exhaustion,
and present new evidence based on administrative data for a large sample of job losers in Austria.
We find that the way unemployment spells are measured has a large effect on the magnitude of the
spike at exhaustion, both in existing studies and in our Austrian data. Spikes are typically much smaller
when spell length is defined by the time to next job than when it is defined by the time spent on the
unemployment system. In Austria, the exit rate from registered unemployment rises by over 200%
at the expiration of benefits, while the hazard rate of re-employment rises by only 20%. The difference
between the two measures arises because many individuals leave the unemployment register immediately
after their benefits expire without returning to work. The modest spike in re-employment rates implies
that most job seekers do not wait until their UI benefits are exhausted to return to work: fewer than
1% of jobless spells have an ending date that is manipulated to coincide with the expiration of UI benefits.

David Card                                           Andrea Weber
Department of Economics                              University of California, Berkeley
549 Evans Hall, #3880                                Department of Economics
UC Berkeley                                          549 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                              webera@econ.berkeley.edu
and NBER
card@econ.berkeley.edu

Raj Chetty
Department of Economics
UC- Berkeley
521 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
chetty@econ.berkeley.edu
    One of the best-known empirical results in public …nance and labor economics is the “spike”
in the exit rate from unemployment at the expiration of jobless bene…ts. This sharp surge in
the hazard rate is widely interpreted as evidence that recipients are waiting until their bene…ts
run out to return to work.          The spike in exit rates has become a leading example of the
distortionary e¤ects of unemployment insurance (UI) and social insurance programs more
generally (see e.g., Martin Feldstein, 2005).
    In this paper, we review the existing literature on unemployment exit rates around bene…t
exhaustion, and present new evidence using administrative data for a large sample of Austrian
job losers. Our main …nding is that the way in which the duration of unemployment spells is
measured has a large e¤ect on the magnitude of the spike at exhaustion, both in existing studies
and in our Austrian data. Spikes are generally smaller when the spell length is measured by
the time to next job than when it is de…ned by the time spent on the unemployment system.
In the Austrian data, we …nd clear evidence of a large spike in the exit rate from registered
unemployment at the point of bene…t exhaustion, consistent with earlier studies (e.g., Rafael
Lalive et. al., 2006). However, the hazard of re-employment rises only slightly at the same
point. Even recalls to the previous employer –which account for one-…fth of spell terminations
in our data –increase by no more than 20% at bene…t exhaustion.
    We conclude that most job seekers in Austria are not waiting to return to work until their
UI bene…ts are exhausted. Rather, a large fraction simply leave the unemployment registry
once their bene…ts end and they are no longer required to register to maintain their eligibility
for bene…ts.     This …nding underscores the importance of distinguishing between the e¤ects
of government programs such as UI on the decision to work vs. their auxiliary e¤ects on
the classi…cation of non-working time.1 The e¤ect of UI on whether individuals choose to be
classi…ed as “unemployed”or “out of the labor force”can be relatively large because it requires
little change in actual behavior. The distortionary costs of the program, however, ultimately
depend on how UI a¤ects the time spent working. Hence, the spike in unemployment-exit
hazards may substantially overstate the degree of moral hazard induced by UI.
    The “reporting”e¤ects induced by UI bene…ts can also lead to biases in the relation between
unemployment and the true state of the macroeconomy, particularly in countries where bene…ts
   1
     A similar point is made by David Card and W. Craig Riddell (1993) in explaining the much larger divergence
between unemployment rates in Canada and the U.S. than between their employment rates.
last inde…nitely.      As a result, comparisons of unemployment rates across countries may be
contaminated by di¤erences in UI systems that a¤ect the de…nition of unemployment.2


1        A Review of the Existing Literature
1.1       The Measurement of Spell Durations and Spikes

Existing studies of labor market transitions near the point of unemployment bene…t exhaustion
have used three alternative measures of duration: the length of bene…t receipt, the duration of
registered unemployment, and the duration of non-employment (time to next job). Although
these measures are equivalent in simple theoretical models, in practice there are important
di¤erences between them. The duration of bene…t receipt is of interest for computing direct
program costs. The time to re-employment is more important for analyzing economic e¢ ciency
and optimal bene…ts (e.g. using the reduced-form elasticity approach in Martin Baily (1978)
and Raj Chetty (2006)).
        To see why distinguishing between these measures matters for economic e¢ ciency, consider
an individual who spends x > T weeks in non-employment, where T is the maximum duration
of UI bene…ts.       Suppose the individual’s search behavior is unresponsive to T , but that he
automatically drops o¤ the unemployment register at time T . In this case, an increase in T
will raise the duration of bene…t receipt and the duration of unemployment, but have no e¤ect
on the duration of joblessness.          Note that this policy change has no e¢ ciency cost – since
behavior is unchanged, the increase in T constitutes a pure transfer. This example illustrates
why focusing on the duration of bene…ts or registered unemployment can lead to a misleading
characterization of the e¢ ciency costs of UI.
        The choice of duration measures also determines the type of spikes that can be detected.
Since the exit rate from the bene…t system is mechanically equal to 100% at the exhaustion of
bene…ts, studies that use data on the duration of bene…ts (e.g., Robert Mo¢ tt, 1985; Bruce
Meyer, 1990) focus on the pattern of exit rates just prior to bene…t exhaustion. In contrast,
studies of the duration of registered unemployment or non-employment (time to next job) have
    2
     Even when unemployment is measured by the number of individuals who report “searching for a job” in a
labor force survey (as in the U.S.), the fact that job search is an explici requirement for UI eligibility can a¤ect
how many non-workers are classi…ed as unemployed. In particular, the availability of longer UI bene…ts may
have a "mechanical" e¤ect on unemployment if UI recipients feel compelled to report that they are searching
for a job.



                                                         2
tended to focus on potential spikes at the point of exhaustion (e.g., Lawrence Katz and Meyer,
1990b, Lalive et. al., 2006). Some studies with relatively coarse timing information combine
spikes in the hazard just before and at exhaustion (e.g., Jan van Ours and Milan Vodopivec,
2006).
   An important concern in the measurement of spikes is that unemployment exit rates often
exhibit irregularities –due to measurement errors or institutional features –that coincide with
the timing of bene…t exhaustion. As noted by Katz (1985), for example, survey-based spell
data often exhibit heaping at exactly 26, 39, and 52 weeks. Exit rates from the UI system
may also exhibit bi-weekly or monthly spikes re‡ecting the periodicity of bene…t payments or
job search reporting requirements (Dan Black et al., 2003).    For this reason, recent studies
have attempted to isolate the independent e¤ect of bene…t exhaustion by adopting a quasi-
experimental design that compares exit rates at a …xed duration for people who are and are
not approaching the exhaustion of bene…ts.

1.2      Studies Using Data on Unemployment Durations

Table 1 presents a selective summary of studies that have estimated the spike in unemployment
exit rates at or just before bene…t exhaustion. The upper panel focuses on studies that use
data on the duration of unemployment bene…ts or registered unemployment, while the lower
panel presents studies that use data on duration of non-employment (time to next job). For
each study, we have attempted to describe the data sources and research design, and the main
…ndings with respect to spikes just prior to bene…t exhaustion and at exhaustion.
   Mo¢ t’s (1985) seminal study used administrative data on weeks of compensated unem-
ployment (row 1 of Table 1). Examining Kaplan-Meier (KM) plots of the UI leaving rate,
Mo¢ tt found that the exit rate from UI rises in the weeks just prior to bene…t exhaustion,
consistent with the predictions of a simple search model (Dale Mortensen 1977). Meyer (1990)
and Katz and Meyer (1990a) extended Mo¢ tt’s statistical model and estimated a higher exit
rate in the week prior to exhaustion, controlling non-parametrically for “baseline”exit hazards
and identifying the exhaustion e¤ect from variation in the potential duration of bene…ts across
individuals (row 2).   Katz and Meyer (1990a) note that many UI recipients are eligible for
only a small “partial payment” for their last week of bene…ts, and may fail to pick up their
last check for this reason, leading to a spike in exits in the week prior to exhaustion. After


                                              3
adjusting for the partial week e¤ect, their net estimate of the increase in the exit hazard in
the second-to-last week of eligibility is statistically indistinguishable from 0.
   Card and Phillip Levine (2000) studied the behavior of UI claimants following a temporary
bene…t extension in New Jersey (row 3). They found a similar spike in exit rates in the 25th
week of bene…t receipt for people who eligible for 26 or 39 weeks, perhaps re‡ecting a tendency
to return to work after exactly 6 months, irrespective of UI bene…ts.
   Recent studies using administrative data from the unemployment registers of European
countries are not limited to examining pre-exhaustion hazards because individuals can remain
on the register after bene…ts are exhausted.         A recent example is the study by Lalive et.
al. (2006), who analyze exit rates from registered unemployment in Austria (row 4). Using
Kaplan-Meier hazard plots, they document a very large spike in the exit rate at the point of
bene…t exhaustion (30 or 39 weeks), but …nd no upward trend prior to exhaustion.

1.3   Studies using Data on Time to Next Job

Early studies of the duration of non-employment (or time to the next job) used survey data
to test for spikes at the point of UI bene…t exhaustion.       Katz (1985) and Katz and Meyer
(1990a) showed that UI recipients in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics exhibit spikes in
their probability of returning to work at 26 or 39 weeks – the points at which UI bene…ts
typically run out –whereas non-recipients have much smaller spikes (row 5). In a companion
paper, Katz and Meyer (1990b) used administrative data on UI recipients supplemented with
survey information on job start dates to …t a competing risks model of recalls and new job
starts (row 6). They found a sharp spike in re-employment at the point of exhaustion, although
the number of observations at the spike is small (n=26). Subsequent studies by Fallick (1991)
and McCall (1997) used samples from the Displaced Worker Surveys in the US and Canada to
compare re-employment hazards of UI recipients and non-recipients (rows 7 and 8). Neither
of these studies found a bigger spike in re-employment rates of UI recipients at the point of
exhaustion.
   More recent studies have used administrative data on payrolls combined with unemploy-
ment registry data to examine re-employment hazards.            These studies typically adopt a
quasi-experimental approach and compare re-employment rates between UI claimants who
are exhausting bene…ts at a speci…c duration and others who are not. Three of these stud-


                                                 4
ies use data from Scandinavian countries (Sweden, Norway, and Finland), and in each case
…nd little or no evidence of a rise in re-employment rates at the point of bene…t exhaustion
(rows 9,10, 11). In contrast, a fourth study by van Ours and Vodopivec (2006) …nds a large
and clearly discernible spike in the re-employment hazard at the point of UI exhaustion for
job seekers in Slovenia (row 12). One explanation for the large spike in the Slovenian case –
emphasized by Vodopivec (1995) –is that UI recipients are working in the informal sector and
waiting until their bene…ts expire to return to the formal sector (where their new job start is
measured). Such behavior is presumably less likely in the Scandinavian countries, where the
informal sector is small.3

1.4    Summary

Our reading of the existing literature is that the timing and magnitude of any spike in the
hazard rate around bene…t exhaustion depends on the measure of spell length used in the
analysis.    With respect to behavior just prior to exhaustion, there is some evidence of a
rise in exits from the unemployment system, but little evidence of a corresponding shift in
re-employment rates.       A concern with the pattern of exits from the unemployment system
is that any over-estimation of the duration of eligibility will generate what appear to be pre-
exhaustion spikes.      Moreover, in the U.S. at least, the relatively high fraction of recipients
with only a partial bene…t payment for their …nal week could explain some of the rise in exit
rates prior to exhaustion.       With respect to behavior at the point of exhaustion, some (but
not all) of the studies using survey data to measure job starts …nd evidence of a spike in the
re-employment hazard, while most (but not all) of the studies using administrative data on
job starts …nd a relatively smooth hazard. Overall, the literature suggests that spikes in the
exit rate around bene…t exhaustion are generally smaller when duration is measured as time
to next job rather than time unemployed.
   3
    We have not included in our summary table a study by Jurajda and Tannery (2003) which uses matched
UI claims and UI tax records from the State of Pennsylvania to look at job …nding and recall behavior. This
study …nds extremely large spikes in the recall and new job …nding hazards at bene…t exhaustion (weekly hazard
rates on the order of 10% and 20%, respectively, relative to rates around 1% per week before exhaustion). A
re-examination of their data shows a coding error that leads to some overstatement of the spike at exhaustion,
so the true magnitude is unclear. We are grateful to Frederick Tannery for providing his data and programs.




                                                      5
2    Austrian Data and Institutional Background

To provide a more direct comparison between the two measures of spell length, we study
durations of registered unemployment and time to the next job using a rich data set based
on administrative records for Austria. Austria is a particularly interesting country to study
because, unlike many other Western European countries, it has relatively low unemployment
rates (an average of 4.1% over the 1993-2004 period) and relatively high rates of job turnover.
Alfred Stiglbauer et. al. (2003), for example, show that rates of job creation and job destruc-
tion for most sectors are comparable to those in the U.S.
    The Austrian unemployment bene…t system also shares several features with the U.S.
system. In particular, in both Austria and the U.S., claimants establish bene…t eligibility
for up to a year when they …rst enter the UI system. People who return to work without
exhausting bene…ts, then become unemployed again within a year can claim their remaining
weeks of bene…ts. Job losers who have worked for 12 months or more in the preceding two
years are eligible for bene…ts that replace approximately 55% of their previous (after-tax)
wage. Individuals who have worked fewer than 36 months in the 5 years prior to …ling for UI
can receive up to 20 weeks of bene…ts. Those who have worked for 36 months or more can
receive bene…ts for up to 30 weeks, which we refer to as “extended bene…ts” (EB).
    In addition to unemployment bene…ts, job losers with su¢ ciently long tenure are eligible
for lump sum severance payments according to a …xed schedule set by the government. Firms
outside the construction sector are required to pay workers who are laid o¤ after 3 years
of service a severance payment equal to 2 months of their salary.      Payments are generally
made within one month of the job termination, and are exempt from social security taxes.
We analyze the e¤ects of severance payments on search behavior in Card, Chetty, and Weber
(2006). In this paper, we focus on the e¤ects of extended UI bene…ts on the spike at exhaustion.
Since there is some overlap in the eligibility thresholds (speci…cally, for job losers who have
worked for only one employer in the past 5 years), we address the potential confounding e¤ect
of severance pay using methods described below.
    There are two key institutional di¤erences between the unemployment bene…t systems in
Austria and the U.S.: (1) the absence of any experience rating in the UI tax system, and (2)
the availability of a secondary bene…t (known as “unemployment assistance”) for those who


                                               6
have exhausted regular UI. Unemployment assistance is means-tested and pays a lower level
of bene…ts –on average 38% of the UI bene…t level –inde…nitely.
       A …nal important feature of the Austrian labor market is the prevalence of temporary
layo¤s that end in recall to the previous employer.4              As we show below, about 22% of the
unemployment spells in our sample ultimately end in recall.5 This allows us to test whether
the timing of recalls is speci…cally linked to the exhaustion of UI bene…ts, as suggested by
Katz (1985).

2.1      Data

We analyze the e¤ect of bene…t expiration on labor market transitions using data from the
Austrian social security registry, which covers all workers except civil servants and the self-
employed. The dataset includes daily information on employment and registered unemploy-
ment status, as well as total annual earnings at each employer, and various characteristics of
workers and their jobs.
       Our analysis sample includes all spells of UI associated with job losses between 1981 and
2001, with two key restrictions. First, we limit the sample to involuntary job losers between
the ages of 20 and 50.6        Second, we include only the subsample of job losers who worked
between 33 and 38 months (3 years +/-3 months) in the past …ve years.                       This restriction
allows us to focus on a relatively homogeneous sample of job losers who are either eligible for
20 or 30 weeks of bene…ts, depending on whether they worked more or less than 36 months in
the past 5 years. The …nal analysis sample includes 92,969 job losses. Further details on the
database and our sample de…nition are given in the appendix.
       There are two measures of unemployment duration that can be constructed in the data.
The …rst is the duration of registered unemployment (the measure used by Lalive et al.,
2006). This is de…ned as the total number of days that an individual is registered with the
unemployment agency. Individuals are required to register while they are receiving bene…ts,
and can remain registered once their bene…ts are exhausted to take advantage of job search
assistance services. The second, which we call “time to next job,” is the elapsed time from
   4
     Temporary unemployment with recall is particularly prevalent in seasonal industries like tourism and con-
struction. See Emilia Del Bono and Andrea Weber (2006).
   5
     By comparison, Katz and Meyer (1990b) reported that 57% of the spells in their data ended in recall.
   6
     Job quitters face a 28-day waiting period for UI eligibility. To eliminate them, we drop people who do not
take up UI bene…ts within 28 days of their job loss.


                                                      7
the end of the previous job to the start of the next job. Although over 90% of job losers are
observed working in a new job, some never return to the data set (perhaps because they move
to self-employment or leave the labor force), leading to a long tail of censored observations for
the time to the next job.
   Table 2 summarizes the characteristics of 4 groups of job losers. Columns 1-2 include all
involuntary job losers between 20 and 50 years of age. Columns 3-4 include all the individuals
in the analysis sample: the subset with 33-38 months of employment in the past 5 years, i.e.
those around the extended bene…t (EB) eligibility threshold. The remaining columns include
the subsets on the left and right side of the extended bene…t (EB) eligibility threshold (columns
5-6 and 7-8, respectively).
   Relative to the overall population of job losers, those in the analysis sample are younger
(29.9 years versus 33.3), more likely to be female (53% versus 42%), and more likely to be
recorded as married (46% versus 38%). As expected given the restrictions on months worked,
they also have lower total months of work in the past …ve years and lower job tenure (23.5
months versus 44.4 months). Their annual earnings at the previous job are also about 15%
lower. Despite these di¤erences, their post-layo¤ outcomes are not very di¤erent from those
of other job losers.   In particular, they have about the same average duration of registered
unemployment (4.5 months) and similar probabilities of leaving unemployment within 20 weeks
or one year. Moreover, they have about the same probabilities of remaining jobless for 20 or
52 weeks as the overall sample of job losers, and the same probability of being observed at a
new job at some time in the sample (94%). Those who do …nd a new job have slightly smaller
average wage losses than job-…nders in the overall sample (-2% versus -6%) and are a little
less likely to be recalled to the previous employer.     Overall, however, the characteristics of
the job losers in our analysis sample are fairly similar to those of the broader set of job losers,
suggesting that our empirical results are likely to be representative of the population of job
losers in Austria.
   Comparisons between job losers with 33-35 months of work in the past 5 years and those
with 36-38 month of work suggest that the two groups have similar pre-displacement charac-
teristics, although the latter group is slightly more likely to be female and has slightly longer
tenure at the most recent employer. This comparison of observable characteristics gives little
indication of selection around the discontinuity, and suggests in particular that employers are


                                                8
not systematically altering layo¤ decisions based on whether an employee is eligible for 20 or
30 weeks of UI.
    One signi…cant di¤erence between the 33-35 and 36-38 month groups is that 18% of individ-
uals eligible for EB receive a severance payment upon job loss, whereas none of the individuals
who do not qualify for EB get severance pay. This di¤erence arises from the discontinuity in
severance pay eligibility at 3 years of job tenure, which coincides with the threshold for EB
eligibility for the subsample of people who worked for only one employer in the past 5 years.
Job losers in this category (18% of our sample) become eligible for EB at exactly the same
point as they become eligible for severance pay. Consequently, any discontinuous change in
behavior at 36 months worked is mainly due to EB, but also includes a small e¤ect of severance
pay. We show below that our estimates are robust to controlling for the severance pay e¤ect
using a “double RD” speci…cation (see also Card, Chetty, and Weber 2006).


3     Empirical Results
3.1   Graphical Analysis

We begin with a simple graphical analysis to show how unemployment exit and job …nding
hazards vary over the unemployment spell. Let hU
                                               t;T denote the unemployment exit hazard in

week t for an individual who is eligible for T weeks of UI bene…ts. Similarly, let hJt;T denote
the re-employment (job-…nding) hazard. We compute these rates as the number of failures in
week t divided by the size of the risk set at the beginning of the week.
    Figure 1a plots hU         J
                     t;20 and ht;20 , the unemployment exit and re-employment hazards for

individuals who are eligible for 20 weeks of UI bene…ts. Figure 1b shows the corresponding
series for individuals eligible for 30 weeks of bene…ts. In both …gures, there is a sharp spike in
the unemployment exit hazard in the week of bene…t exhaustion (t = T ), and a relatively high
unemployment exit rate in the weeks immediately after exhaustion (consistent with Lalive et
al., 2006). The corresponding changes in the job …nding hazards, however, are very small.
    Next, we study the e¤ect of potential duration on the hazard rate by examining the di¤er-
ence in the hazard rates between individuals eligible for 20 and 30 weeks of UI. De…ne dU
                                                                                        t =

hU     U         J    J     J                      U      J                 J
 t;20 ht;30 and dt = ht;20 ht;30 . Figure 2 plots dt and dt . Observe that dt is positive for all

t < 20, indicating that individuals eligible for 20 weeks of bene…ts search harder to …nd a job



                                                9
throughout the unemployment spell (anticipating their shorter duration of bene…ts), and not
just at the point when bene…ts are exhausted. There is a small increase in dJt from week 18
to 22: 20-week eligibles are somewhat more likely to …nd jobs in those weeks than the 30-week
eligibles. Conversely, individuals eligible for 30 weeks of bene…ts are slightly more likely to
…nd jobs from week 28 to 32.
   These patterns contrast sharply with the corresponding di¤erences in the unemployment
exit rates (dU
             t ), which exhibits sharp spikes at t = 20 and t = 30. The hazard rates in both

groups remain elevated after their respective exhaustion dates, indicating that individuals are
more likely to drop out of the unemployment register in the weeks after their bene…ts end as
well.
   In Figures 3 and 4, we distinguish between recalls and new job starts to determine the
source of the spike in re-employment hazards.         Figure 3 plots the hazard of being recalled
to the previous job, the hazard of …nding a new job, and the total hazard of re-employment
(which equals the sum of the recall and new job start hazards). In constructing this …gure,
we make the conventional assumption of independent competing risks (e.g., Katz and Meyer,
1990b): the hazard plot for recalls treats new job starts as censored, while the hazard plot
for new job starts treats recalls as censored.    Figure 3a considers individuals eligible for 20
weeks of bene…ts, while Figure 3b considers those eligible for 30 weeks of bene…ts.        These
…gures show an elevation in both the new job-…nding and recall rates after bene…t exhaustion,
suggesting that both margins are operative in the modest rise in job-…nding hazards evident
in Figure 1.
   To give a clearer picture of how the potential duration of bene…ts a¤ects the hazard rates,
in Figure 4 we plot the di¤erence in hazards between the 20-week and 30-week UI groups, as in
Figure 2. Figure 4a plots the di¤erence in recall hazards, while Figure 4b plots the di¤erence
in new-job …nding hazards. The di¤erence in new job start hazards rises around weeks 18-23,
and falls around weeks 30-32, indicating that individuals are somewhat more likely to start a
new job in the weeks after bene…ts expire. The series for recalls exhibits a similar pattern,
with a sharper dip after week 30. This …gure suggests that recalls are somewhat more likely
to be re-timed to coincide with the expiration of UI bene…ts, consistent with the hypothesis
of Katz (1985).



                                                 10
3.2      Hazard Model Estimates

To quantify the size of the spikes in re-employment and unemployment-exit rates, we estimate
Cox proportional hazard models that allow for an unrestricted baseline hazard in the duration
of search and include a ‡exible function of time-to-exhaustion.                  In particular, we estimate
models of the following form:

                                ht =    t exp(f (T       t) + (T = 30) + X)                              (1)

where ht denotes the hazard rate in week t,               t   denotes the nonparametric “baseline” hazard
rate, X denotes a set of covariates, f (T              t) is a function of the time-to- exhaustion, T        t,
and      is a proportional shift in the hazard for people with 30 weeks of eligibility. We censor
all spells at 50 weeks to focus on hazards in the year after job loss. We use a spline function
for f in order to allow di¤erent e¤ects at di¤erent weeks, as in Meyer (1990):


  f (T       t) =   0 I(T   t = 0) +   1 I(T   t 2 f1; 2g) +       2 I(T   t 2 f3; 4g) + :::

                                         +     1 I(T      t 2 f 1; 2g) +       2 I(T    t 2 f 3; 4g) + :::

The      j   coe¢ cients are identi…ed despite the nonparametric baseline hazard by the relative
di¤erence in the hazard rates between the 20-week and 30-week eligibility groups at each t, as
in Figure 2. The identi…cation assumption is that the two groups would have similar hazard
rates at each duration in the absence of their di¤erential UI eligibility. Given the similarity
of pre-displacement characteristics between people with 33-35 months of employment in the
past 5 years and those with 36-38 months (Table 2) we believe this is a plausible assumption.
Further evidence on the validity of comparisons between job losers with work experience on
either side of the threshold for extended UI bene…ts is presented in Card, Chetty, and Weber
(2006).
   The model in (1) can be easily extended to obtain a “regression discontinuity” (RD) es-
timate of the spike around bene…t exhaustion.                  In particular, (1) can be augmented with a
control function g(W ), where W represents months of work in the 5 years prior to job loss, to
account for variation in the expectation of the unobserved component of the hazard function
that may be correlated with EB eligibility. As in other regression discontinuity analyses, the
necessary assumption for identi…cation is that g is continuous at W = 36. Since eligibility for


                                                         11
30 weeks of bene…ts jumps discontinuously at W = 36, the coe¢ cient                   and the exhaustion
spline f remain identi…ed. We present RD estimates of the bene…t exhaustion spline after our
baseline analysis.
    Table 3 reports estimates of the exp( j ) coe¢ cients for variants of (1). These represent
the ratio of the hazard rate in time-to-exhaustion interval j relative to the rate in the …rst
eight weeks of the spell (the omitted time-to-exhaustion interval).7 In speci…cations 1 and 2,
we estimate the model using unemployment duration as the measure of spell length, de…ning
the failure event as exiting the unemployment registry. In speci…cations 3 and 4, we measure
duration by time to next job, de…ning the failure event as starting a new job. Speci…cations 1
and 3 include no controls, while speci…cations 2 and 4 include the following covariates: age and
its square, log wage and its square, gender, “blue collar” status, Austrian nationality, region
dummies, industry dummies, and prior …rm size. Note that if eligibility class (20 or 30 weeks
of UI) is “as good as randomly assigned” the addition of these controls should not a¤ect the
point estimates of the models, though it could in principle lead to a gain in precision.
    The estimates from speci…cations 1 and 2 show that the unemployment exit hazard is
approximately 2.4 times higher in the week of bene…t exhaustion than in the reference period,
and remains elevated for the next 8 weeks.           In contrast, as shown in columns 3 and 4, the
re-employment hazard is only 1.15 times larger in the week of exhaustion than the reference
period, and remains elevated for only 2 weeks post-exhaustion. Despite the di¤erences post-
exhaustion, the unemployment-exit and re-employment hazards track each other closely prior
to exhaustion. In particular, neither hazard shows an increase just prior to exhaustion, and
both imply that eligibility for 30 weeks of UI bene…ts reduces the average exit rate from
unemployment by approximately 6%.
    Next, we estimate a set of competing risks models for the time to the next job that distin-
guish between recalls and new job starts under the assumption of competing independent risks,
as in Figure 3. The estimates, reported in Table 4, show that the hazard of recall rises by a
factor of about 1.2 at bene…t exhaustion, and remains about 25% higher than the reference
hazard for up to 4 weeks.        The hazard of new job starts rises by a little less at exhaustion
(a factor of 1.14) and remains elevated for only the 2 weeks after exhaustion. These results
   7
     More precisely, the weeks that are more than 12 weeks before bene…t exhaustion are omitted from f (P t).
Hence, the baseline hazards correspond to the hazard rates in these weeks, and the hazard ratios that are
reported are relative to this baseline.


                                                     12
mirror the …nding in Katz and Meyer (1990b) that the hazard of recall shows a somewhat
larger spike at bene…t exhaustion than the new job …nding hazard. However, the magnitudes
of both e¤ects are much smaller in Austria than in Katz and Meyer’s data for Missouri job
losers in the late 1970s.
   Robustness Checks. In Table 5, we report estimates of variants of equation (1) to evaluate
the robustness of our main results on the spike in unemployment exit rates and re-employment
rates. All of these speci…cations include the control set used in speci…cations 2 and 4 of Table 3.
In speci…cations 1 and 2 of Table 5, we add a third order polynomial in W , the number of days
worked in the last 5 years, to equation (1) to obtain an RD estimate of the exhaustion spline.
As noted above, the addition of this control function should eliminate any minor di¤erences
in the expected hazard function between people in our sample who are eligible for extended
bene…ts and those who are not.       Reassuringly, this addition has very small e¤ects on the
estimated exhaustion spline coe¢ cients for both the unemployment-exit and re-employment
hazards.
   As noted above, another potential concern in the estimation of (1) is that about one-…fth
of individuals eligible for EB also receive severance payments, which can have an independent
e¤ect on search behavior and thereby bias the EB estimates. In speci…cations 3 and 4 of Table
5, we separate the e¤ects of EB and severance pay by adding a third-order polynomial in the
number of days worked at the prior employer (the running variable for severance pay eligibility)
and an indicator for severance pay to the model.        We also include the cubic polynomial in
W . As we show in Card, Chetty, and Weber (2006), this “double RD”speci…cation identi…es
the severance pay and EB e¤ects consistently because the two policies depend discontinuously
on di¤erent running variables.    Controlling for severance pay eligibility has a modest e¤ect
on the magnitude of the dummy for 30 weeks of UI bene…ts, but has almost no e¤ect on the
estimated exhaustion splines.
   The speci…cation in (1) assumes that the di¤erence in potential duration induces a constant
di¤erence in the hazard rate ( ) and a deviation that depends on time to exhaustion.            We
have estimated more ‡exible speci…cations that allow for di¤erences in the time-to-exhaustion
splines for people eligible for 20 or 30 weeks of UI.   In one variant (columns 5-6 of Table 5),
we added an interaction between eligibility for EB and a post-exhaustion dummy (T           t   0).
The coe¢ cient on the interaction term indicates that hazards at and after bene…t exhaustion


                                                13
are slightly higher for the 30-week group, but the estimates of the exhaustion splines for
both unemployment-exit and re-employment rates remain essentially unchanged. In a second
variant (not reported), we introduced separate exhaustion splines for the 20-week and 30-week
eligibility groups.   Again, we …nd slightly larger spikes in both the unemployment-exit and
re-employment rates around the 30 week exhaustion point. However, the unemployment-exit
rate exceeds the re-employment rate by a similar factor at 20 and 30 weeks.
   Finally, in column 7, we estimate the baseline model for time to next job using an alternative
measure of time-to-bene…t-exhaustion. In our basic speci…cations we included only job losers
who register with the employment o¢ ce within 28 days of their last day of work, and measured
the duration of nonemployment from the end of last job to the start of the next job. Austrian
UI regulations state that the bene…t claim period actually begins on the day a claim is …led
(rather than being backdated to the date of job loss). This means that the time to bene…t
exhaustion is shifted relative to the duration of non-employment by the number of days of
delay between the date of job loss and the date of claim …ling. To see whether the spike in
re-employment hazards at bene…t exhaustion is sensitive to the measure of time to exhaustion,
we re-estimate (1), correcting for late registration in the measure of time-to-bene…t-exhaustion.
Since over three quarters of the job losers in our sample …le for UI within 3 days of losing their
job, this adjustment a¤ects a relatively small subsample, and the estimates in column 7 are
only slightly larger than those reported in column 4 of Table 3.
   In summary, the hazard model estimates show robust evidence of a very large spike in the
unemployment exit hazards when bene…ts expire.         The spike in re-employment rates is an
order of magnitude smaller, even among recalls to the previous employer.

3.3   Quantifying the Magnitude of Re-Timing

How quantitatively important is the re-timing of job starts to coincide with bene…t exhaustion
in our sample? To answer this question, we use our estimated hazard models to calculate the
excess fraction of completed spells of joblessness that end at or within the month after bene…t
exhaustion, relative to a counterfactual in which there was no spike in re-employment rates
during this interval.
   About 80% of jobless spells end prior to bene…t exhaustion, and that the average re-
employment rate at and just after exhaustion is roughly 4%.            Hence, a 20% higher re-


                                               14
employment rate at exhaustion and in the following 4 weeks implies that an extra 0.8% of
spells of joblessness end at or just after the expiration of UI bene…ts than would do so in the
absence of the exhaustion spike.8 This calculation suggests that the manipulation of job starts
to coincide with bene…t exhaustion is quantitatively a less important behavioral response to
the provision of UI bene…ts than the smooth reduction in re-employment hazards that occurs
throughout the spell.
    Existing studies have focused primarily on the size of the spike in the hazard at exhaustion.
In future studies, it would be useful to report a measure of the fraction of spells that are re-
timed to coincide with bene…t exhaustion, as above. We believe such a measure is more useful
for assessing the quantitative importance of moral hazard costs due to the re-timing e¤ect.


4      Conclusions

Our survey of the existing literature and our empirical analysis of job losers in Austria indicate
that the choice of duration measures has an important e¤ect on inferences about the size of the
spike in hazards at bene…t exhaustion. Previous studies have used three alternative measures
of spell duration: the duration of bene…t receipt, the duration of registered unemployment,
and the time to next job. The spike in exit rates at exhaustion of bene…ts is particularly large
when spells are measured by duration of registered unemployment. Studies that focus on the
duration of bene…t receipt often …nd elevated hazards prior to exhaustion. In contrast, most
studies that have focused on time to re-employment and used administrative data to measure
job starts have found relatively small changes in exit rates at or near bene…t exhaustion.
    In the Austrian case, we show that the exit rate from registered unemployment rises by
over 200% at the expiration of bene…ts, while the hazard rate of re-employment rises by only
20%.    This modest spike implies that fewer than 1% of jobless spells have an ending date
that is manipulated to coincide with the end of UI bene…ts. The di¤erence in spikes between
the two measures arises because many individuals leave the unemployment registry once their
bene…ts expire without returning to work.
    While our …ndings for Austria are consistent with existing studies of other countries, we
caution that the magnitude of any spike in the re-employment rate will depend on institutional
   8
     By comparison, a similar calculation based on the estimates reported by Katz and Meyer (1990b) shows
that an additional 3.5% of jobless spells end precisely at the date of UI exhaustion.



                                                   15
factors and labor market conditions that may di¤er across countries or over time. Some impor-
tant factors include the availability of post-exhaustion bene…ts (Michele Pellizzari, forth.), the
participation of UI recipients in the uncovered sector (Vodopivec, 1995), and the incentives for
…rms to cycle workers through temporary unemployment and recall them when their bene…ts
expire (Feldstein, 1976; Katz, 1985). We conclude that the size of the spike in re-employment
rates at exhaustion in the current U.S. labor market (and many other labor markets) remains
an open question. Further work on estimating these hazards using administrative measures
of time to next job would be particularly valuable.




                                               16
   Appendix A. Sample De…nition.
   The Austrian Social Security Database contains employment records for private sector
employees, public sector workers who are not classi…ed as permanent civil servants, and the
unemployed. The groups for whom information is missing are self employed and civil servants.
Based on Austrian national statistics, about 10% of the labor force were self employed and 7%
were civil servants in 1996. Therefore, we estimate that the Social Security Database covers
roughly 85% of the total workforce.
   For each covered job, the database reports the starting and ending date of the job, the
identity of the employer, certain characteristics of the job (e.g., industry, occupation), and total
earnings. No information is available on hours of work. Earnings are censored at the Social
Security contribution limit, but this only a¤ects a small fraction (2%) of the observations in our
sample. The database also includes starting and ending dates for unemployment insurance
(UI) claims, and information on whether an individual is registered with the employment
o¢ ce as looking for work. No information is available on the amount of UI payments actually
received. We code an individual as “unemployed”if he or she is receiving UI, or registered as
looking for work.
   From the database, we extract all terminations from jobs, which had lasted for at least one
year, between 1981 and 2001 that were followed by a UI claim and did not result in a retirement
claim within the same calendar year (1,817,221 terminations). We exclude terminations from
jobs in schools, hospitals, and other public sector service industries (4% of the total) because
some of these jobs are …xed term. We eliminate terminations involving people whose age in
years is under 20 or over 49 at the time of the job loss (8% of the remaining sample). Further,
we drop all terminations with a delay of over 28 days between the job termination date and
the start of the UI claim. This restriction eliminates some 9% job quitters (who face a 4 week
waiting period for UI) and leaves us with 1,379,370 observations. Summary characteristics of
this sample are presented in columns 1-2 of Table 2.       Finally, we focus on individuals, who
had worked between 33 and 38 months (3 years plus/minus 3 months) during the last 5 years.
The …nal sample includes 92,969 job losers. Note that individuals can appear in our sample of
job losses multiple times. Among individuals included in the sample at least once, we observe
a single job loss for 98%.
   For the job losses in our sample, we use all available information on employment, unem-


                                                17
ployment, and earnings in the Social Security database …les for the years 1972 to 2003. We
merge in information on completed education and marital status from the Austrian unemploy-
ment registers, which are available from 1987 to 1998. Spell-speci…c demographic information
is available in this …le for each unemployment spell, and we use the information in the last
recorded unemployment spell for each individual to assign education and marital status. For
individuals whose only spell of unemployment occurred before 1987 or after 1998, however,
these variables are missing. We can assign information for 66% of job losses occurring before
1987, and 75% of job losses after 1998.




                                             18
   References

   Baily, Martin N. 1978. “Some Aspects of Optimal Unemployment Insurance.” Journal
of Public Economics, 10: 379–402.
   Black, Dan A., Je¤rey A. Smith, Mark C. Berger and Brett J. Noel. 2003. “Is
the Threat of Reemployment Services more E¤ective than the Services Themselves? Evidence
from Random Assignment in the UI System.” American Economic Review, 93: 1313-1327.
   Bratberg, Espen, and Kjell Vaage. 2000. “Spell Durations with Long Unemployment
Insurance Periods.” Labour Economics, 7(2): 153–180.
   Card, David, and W. Craig Riddell. 1995. “Unemployment in Canada and the United
States: A Further Analysis,” Papers 352, Princeton, Department of Economics - Industrial
Relations Sections.
   Card, David, and Phillip Levine. 2000. “Extended Bene…ts and the Duration of
UI Spells: Evidence from the New Jersey Extended Bene…ts Program.” Journal of Public
Economics, 78: 107–138.
   Card, David, Raj Chetty, and Andrea Weber. 2006. “Cash-on-Hand and Competing
Models of Intertemporal Behavior: New Evidence from the Labor Market.” National Bureau
of Economic Research (Cambridge, MA) Working Paper No. 12639.
   Carling, Kenneth, Per-Anders Edin, Bertil Holmlund, and Fredrik Jansson.
1996. "Unemployment Duration, Unemployment Bene…ts, and Labour Market Programmes
in Sweden." Journal of Public Economics, 59: 313–334.
   Chetty, Raj. 2006. “A General Formula for the Optimal Level of Social Insurance.”
Journal of Public Economics, 90: 1879–1901.
   Del Bono, Emilia, and Andrea Weber. 2006. "Do Wages Compensate for Anticipated
Working Time Restrictions? Evidence from Seasonal Employment in Austria." IZA Discussion
Papers 2242, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).
   Fallick, Bruce C. 1991. "Unemployment Insurance and the Rate of Re-Employment of
Displaced Workers." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 73: 228–235.
   Feldstein, Martin. 1976. "Temporary Layo¤s in the Theory of Unemployment." Journal
of Political Economy, 84: 937–958.
   Feldstein, Martin. 2005. "Rethinking Social Insurance." American Economic Review,


                                            19
95: 1–24.
   Jurajda, Stepan and Frederick J. Tannery. 2003. "Unemployment Bene…ts and
Extended Unemployment Bene…ts in Local Labor Markets." Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, 56: 324-348.
   Katz, Lawrence. 1986. "Layo¤s, Recalls, and the Duration of Unemployment." National
Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge, MA) Working Paper No. 1825.
   Katz, Lawrence, and Bruce Meyer. 1990a. "The Impact of the Potential Duration
of Unemployment Bene…ts on the Duration of Unemployment." Journal of Public Economics,
41: 45–72.
   Katz, Lawrence, and Bruce Meyer. 1990b. "Unemployment Insurance, Recall Expec-
tations, and Unemployment." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105: 973 -1002.
   Kyyra, Tomi, and Virve Ollikainen. 2006. "To Search or Not to Search? The E¤ects of
UI Bene…t Extension for the Elderly Unemployed." VATT Discussion Papers 400, Government
Institute for Economic Research Helsinki.
   Lalive, Rafael, Jan van Ours, and Josef Zweimüller. Forthcoming, 2007. "How
Changes in Financial Incentives A¤ect the Duration of Unemployment." Review of Economic
Studies.
   McCall, Brian B. 1997. “The Determinants of Full-Time versus Part-Time Reemploy-
ment Following Job Displacement.” Journal of Labor Economics, 15: 714–734.
   Meyer, Bruce D. 1990. “Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells.” Econo-
metrica, 58: 757–782.
   Mo¢ tt, Robert. 1985. “Unemployment Insurance and the Distribution of Unemploy-
ment Spells.” Journal of Econometrics, 28: 85–101.
   Mortensen, Dale T. 1977. “Unemployment Insurance and Job Search Outcomes.” In-
dustrial and Labor Relations Review, 30: 595–612.
   Pellizzari, Michele. Forthcoming. “Unemployment Duration and the Interactions Be-
tween Unemployment Insurance and Social Assistance.” Labour Economics.
   Stiglbauer, Alfred, Franz Stahl, Rudolf Winter-Ebmer, and Josef Zweimüller.
2003. “Job Creation and Job Destruction in a Regulated Labor Market: The Case of Austria.”
Empirica, 30: 127–148.
   van Ours, Jan, and Milan Vodopivec. 2006. “How Shortening the Potential Duration


                                            20
of Unemployment Bene…ts A¤ects the Duration of Unemployment: Evidence from a Natural
Experiment.” Journal of Labor Economics, 24: 351–378.
   van Ours, Jan, and Milan Vodopivec. 2004. “How Changes in Bene…ts Entitlement
A¤ect Job-Finding: Lessons from the Slovenian ‘Experiment’.” IZA Discussion Paper 1181,
Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).
   Vodopivec, Milan. 1995. “Unemployment Insurance and Duration of Unemployment:
Evidence from Slovenia’s Transition.”Policy Research Working Paper Series 1552, The World
Bank.




                                           21
Table 1: Summary of Estimated Effects of Benefit Exhaustion on Re-Employment Rate
                                                                                                                                                                              Hazards (End UI/Start Job)
                                                                                                 Data Sources                Sample Limits             Risks             Spike Prior to           Spike at
     Author(s)                 Country/Year      Benefit Duration             Design         Unemploy.   Employ.            Age       Other           Modeled             Exhaustion             Exhaustion

A. Studies that Use Data on Unemployment Only                                                                                                                                 Patterns in UI Exit Hazard

1.   Moffitt (1985)           US (12 states)     39 weeks max.                single            Admin.           --        17-82          --          all exits      hazard +50% 1 week                  --
                                1978-83          (individual variation)    cross section                                                              from UI         before (KM graph)

2.   Katz and Meyer (1990a)   US (12 states)     39 weeks max.                single            Admin.           --        17-82          --          all exits     log hazard +0.58 (0.25)              --
     also Meyer (1990)          1978-83          (individual variation)    cross section                                                              from UI            1 week before

3.   Card and Levine (2000)     New Jersey       26 wks in 1995,97         pre-post-pre         Admin.           --        18-65      no partial      all exits        similar spike at                  --
                                 1995-97         39 weeks in 1996                                                                    UI Claimants     from UI            week 25 for
                                                                                                                                                                       max=26/39 wks

4.   Lalive et al. (2006)         Austria        30 weeks pre-1989;          pre-post            Admin.          --        35-54       at least        all exits        not detectable           hazard +50% at
                                 1987-91         30-52 weeks post-        + control group    (UI recipients                           1 yr work      from UI or          (KM graph)             exhaustion, spike
                                                 1989 (by age)                                + registered                                             registed                                shifts with max duration
                                                                                               searchers)                                               search                                      (K-M graph)

B. Studies that Combine Data on Unemployment and Subsequent Employment                                                                                                    Patterns in Re-employment Hazard

5.   Katz (1985); also Katz        U.S.          26/39 weeks                 recipient/         Survey         Survey      20-65      layoff and     new job or               --               notable diffs between
     and Meyer (1990a)           1980-81         (individual variation)    non-recipient        (PSID)         (PSID)                plant closing    recall to                                recips and non-recips
                                                                                                                                                      previous                                 at 26-30, 36-39 wks.


6.   Katz and Meyer (1990b)      Missouri        26 weeks max                 single            Admin.        Telephone     17+        answered   new job or         log hazard +0.4 (0.3)     log hazard +0.9 (0.2)
                                 1979-80         (individual variation)    cross section                       survey                phone survey recall to              1 week before             at exhaustion
                                                                                                                                                   previous

7.   Fallick (1991)                 US           26/39 weeks                 recipient/        Survey          Survey        --      involuntary      job in old              --                insig. Diffs between
                                   1983          (individual variation)    non-recipient     (CPS-DWS)        (CPS-DWS)               job losers        or new                                 recips and non-recips
                                                                                                                                      CPS-DWS          industry                                at 26-30, 36-39 wks.


8.   McCall (1997)               Canada          52 weeks                    recipient/        Survey          Survey      20-64     involuntary     full-time or             --                insig. Diffs between
                                 1983-85                                   non-recipient     (Can-DWS)        (Can-DWS)               job losers      part-time                                recips and non-recips
                                                                                                                                      Can-DWS          new job                                      at 52 weeks

9.   Carling, et al. (1996)       Sweden         60 weeks max.               recipient/         Admin.         Admin.      16-55          --            E,T,O             very small           log hazard +1.0 (0.6)
                                   1991          (individual variation)    non-recipient                                                                                (insignificant)       at exhaustion, 70% due
                                                                                                                                                                                               to dip in control's hazard

10. Bratberg and                 Norway          80 weeks/                   pre-post           Admin.         Admin.     20-60(?)        --             E,O            not detectable             not detectable
     Vaage (2000)                1990-91         186 weeks                + control group                                                                                (KM graph)                 (KM graph)
                                                                          (non-recipients)

11. Kyyra and                    Finland         24 months/                  pre-post           Admin.         Admin.     50-54        2+ Years         E,T,O             very small                 very small
     Ollikainen (2006)           1996-97         unlimited                + control group                                             Continuous                        (insignificant)            (insignificant)
                                                                            (other ages)                                                 work

12. van Ours and Vodopivec       Slovenia        3-18 months pre/          pre-post           Admin.        Admin.      19-43          --           E,O              very small        log hazard +0.8 (0.1)
     (2004; 2006)               1997-1999        3-9 months post       + control group                                                                             (insignificant)     at exhaustion for men
                                                                       (low experience)                                                                                                   (women similar)
Note: numbers in paretheses represent standard errors of estimated spike. In column giving risks modeled, notations "E", "T", and "O" denote that competing risk models are estimated, with "E"
"E" denoting a model for the risk of employment, "T" denoting a model for the risk of entering a training program, and "O" denoting a model for other risks (withdrawal from the labor force, etc.)
Table 2: Characteristics of Austrian Job Losers, 1980-2001

                                                            Analysis Sample:                               Job losers with 30
                                                            Job Losers around      Job losers with 20           weeks UI
                                       All Job Losers          EB threshold        weeks UI eligibility         eligibility
                                       Mean Std. Dev.        Mean Std. Dev.          Mean Std. Dev.         Mean Std. Dev.

Worker Characteristics:
Age in Years                            33.33      8.26       29.85       7.76        29.54       7.84       30.13      7.68
Female                                   0.42      0.49        0.53       0.50         0.51       0.50        0.54      0.50
Post-compulsory Schooling                0.59      0.49        0.59       0.49         0.60       0.49        0.59      0.49
Married                                  0.38      0.48        0.46       0.50         0.47       0.50        0.45      0.50
Austrian Citizen                         0.89      0.32        0.88       0.33         0.88       0.33        0.87      0.33
Blue Collar Occupation                   0.64      0.48        0.61       0.49         0.62       0.48        0.60      0.49

Previous Job/Employment:
Months of Tenure                        44.35   42.47         23.47      8.06         23.05    7.57          23.84    8.45
Months Worked in Past 5 Years           47.03   13.71         35.42      1.75         33.80    0.88          36.84    0.87
Eligible for Severance Pay               0.38    0.49          0.10      0.29          0.00    0.00           0.18    0.38
Eligible for Extended (30 week) UI       0.78    0.41          0.53      0.50          0.00    0.00           1.00    0.00
Previous Wage (Euros/yr)               18,782   9,431        16,095     7,051        15,954   6,943         16,220   7,143
Wage Top-Coded                           0.03    0.17          0.01      0.11          0.01    0.10           0.01    0.11
Number of Employees at Firm            278.70 1202.58        297.05   1357.16        252.91 1147.92         336.06 1517.21

Post-Layoff:
Duration of Unemployment (months)        4.51     8.31         4.42       7.49         4.18      7.31         4.64      7.64
Unemployed < 20 Weeks                    0.68     0.46         0.67       0.47         0.69      0.46         0.65      0.48
Unemployed < 52 Weeks                    0.94     0.23         0.95       0.23         0.95      0.22         0.94      0.23
Duration of Nonemployment (months)      14.49    35.97        14.33      33.49        13.97     33.13        14.64     33.79
Nonemployed < 20 Weeks                   0.58     0.49         0.55       0.50         0.57      0.49         0.54      0.50
Nonemployed < 52 Weeks                   0.81     0.39         0.80       0.40         0.80      0.40         0.79      0.41
Observed in New Job                      0.94     0.25         0.94       0.24         0.94      0.24         0.94      0.24
Exhaust Benefits                         0.22     0.41         0.25       0.43         0.31      0.46         0.20      0.40

Among those with New Job:
 Months to Re-employment                 7.37    15.26         8.19      16.29         8.01     16.28          8.35    16.31
 Change in Log Wage                     -0.06     0.46        -0.02       0.49        -0.02      0.49         -0.03     0.49
 Recalled to the Previous Employer       0.26     0.44         0.22       0.41         0.22      0.41          0.22     0.41


Note: Columns 1 and 2 are based on sample of 1,379,370 job losers over the period 1980-2001. Sample includes universe of
Austrians job losers (excluding civil service workers) who (1) are between the age 20-50, (2) worked at their previous firm for
more than 1 year and (3) took up UI benefits within 28 days of job loss (eliminating job quitters). Columns 3-4 are based on the
subsample of 92,969 job losers who worked between 33 and 38 months out of the last 5 years. Columns 5-6 include job losers
who worked 33-35 months out of the last 5 years, while columns 7-8 include those who worked 36-38 months. Wages are
expressed in real (year 2000) Euros. Unemployment duration is time registered as unemployed; nonemployment duration is time
to next job.
Table 3: Hazard Model Estimates Using Duration of Registered Unemployment
         and Time to Next Job

                              Duration Measure=                  Duration Measure=
                           Registered Unemployment               Time to Next Job
                           No Controls       Controls          No Controls      Controls

Pre-exhaustion:
   9-12 weeks before          0.978           0.970               0.999           1.002
                             (0.019)         (0.020)             (0.021)         (0.022)
    5-8 weeks before          1.018           1.018               1.010           1.014
                             (0.022)         (0.023)             (0.023)         (0.024)
    3-4 weeks before          1.054           1.070               1.051           1.042
                             (0.033)         (0.035)             (0.035)         (0.036)
    1-2 weeks before          1.045           1.042               1.007           1.027
                             (0.038)         (0.040)             (0.039)         (0.042)


        At exhaustion         2.404           2.373               1.150           1.148
                             (0.093)         (0.097)             (0.059)         (0.062)
Post-exhaustion:
      1-2 weeks after         1.478           1.455               1.199           1.187
                             (0.056)         (0.058)             (0.048)         (0.050)
     3-4 weeks after          1.369           1.375               1.035           1.062
                             (0.062)         (0.066)             (0.049)         (0.053)
     5-8 weeks after          1.226           1.224               1.009           1.012
                             (0.050)         (0.053)             (0.044)         (0.046)
    9-12 weeks after          1.165           1.147               0.929           0.927
                             (0.053)         (0.055)             (0.046)         (0.048)
     >12 weeks after          0.958           0.967               0.772           0.782
                             (0.052)         (0.055)             (0.044)         (0.047)


      Dummy for 30             0.932          0.954               0.923            0.950
     weeks of UI (EB)         (0.010)        (0.011)             (0.011)          (0.012)
Note: estimates (with standard errors in parentheses) are hazard ratios relative to
omitted group. Omitted group for exhaustion spline is >12 weeks before exhaustion.
All models include unrestricted baseline hazard for duration (in weeks). Models in
columns 2 and 4 include the following covariates: age and its square,
log wage and its square, gender, "blue collar" status, Austrian nationality, region
dummies, industry dummies, and prior firm size.
Table 4: Hazard Model Estimates For Competing Risks of Recall to Previous
         Employer and Start of New Job


                          Recall to Previous Employer             Start New Job
                           No Controls      Controls         No Controls       Controls

Pre-exhaustion:
   9-12 weeks before             1.001         1.021                0.996         0.994
                               (0.041)       (0.043)              (0.025)       (0.026)
    5-8 weeks before             1.035         1.056                1.001         1.000
                               (0.046)       (0.049)              (0.027)       (0.028)
    3-4 weeks before             1.035         1.041                1.048         1.037
                               (0.073)       (0.076)              (0.040)       (0.041)
    1-2 weeks before             0.954         1.007                1.023         1.035
                               (0.077)       (0.085)              (0.045)       (0.048)


        At exhaustion           1.188         1.231                1.140         1.124
                               (0.129)       (0.138)              (0.066)       (0.069)
Post-exhaustion:
      1-2 weeks after            1.265         1.321                1.172         1.144
                               (0.105)       (0.115)              (0.054)       (0.055)
     3-4 weeks after             1.144         1.231                1.016         1.026
                               (0.125)       (0.140)              (0.054)       (0.058)
     5-8 weeks after             0.841         0.905                1.046         1.029
                               (0.082)       (0.093)              (0.051)       (0.053)
    9-12 weeks after             0.748         0.845                0.970         0.940
                               (0.085)       (0.101)              (0.054)       (0.055)
     >12 weeks after             0.518         0.580                0.823         0.813
                               (0.069)       (0.082)              (0.052)       (0.054)


      Dummy for 30                0.917         0.970                 0.925        0.943
    weeks of UI (EB)            (0.024)       (0.027)               (0.013)      (0.014)
Note: estimates (with standard errors in parentheses) are hazard ratios relative to
omitted group. Omitted group for exhaustion spline is >12 weeks before exhaustion.
All models include unrestricted baseline hazard for duration (in weeks). Models in
columns 2 and 4 also include covariates listed in notes to Table 3. All models
measure spell length as time to next job.
Table 5: Robustness Checks

                       Regression Discont.   Control for Sev. Pay   Flex. post-exhaust. Alt Measure
                         (1)         (2)       (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)
         Duration Registered Time to Registered Time to Registered Time to               Time to
         Measure = Unemp.    Next Job Unemp. Next Job Unemp. Next Job                    Next Job

Pre-exhaustion:
  9-12 weeks before     0.970      1.002      0.970       1.002      0.966      0.990     1.035
                       (0.021)    (0.022)    (0.021)     (0.022)    (0.021)    (0.023)   (0.020)
   5-8 weeks before     1.018      1.014      1.017       1.013      1.014      1.001     1.082
                       (0.023)    (0.024)    (0.023)     (0.024)    (0.023)    (0.025)   (0.025)
   3-4 weeks before     1.070      1.042      1.069       1.042      1.068      1.034     1.102
                       (0.033)    (0.035)    (0.033)     (0.035)    (0.033)    (0.035)   (0.035)
   1-2 weeks before     1.041      1.027      1.041       1.026      1.041      1.015     1.091
                       (0.039)    (0.041)    (0.039)     (0.041)    (0.039)    (0.041)   (0.039)

     At exhaustion      2.373      1.148      2.371       1.147      2.340      1.107     1.269
                       (0.041)    (0.054)    (0.041)     (0.054)    (0.042)    (0.055)   (0.058)
Post-exhaustion:
     1-2 weeks after    1.455      1.187      1.453       1.186      1.436      1.140     1.345
                       (0.040)    (0.042)    (0.040)     (0.042)    (0.042)    (0.045)   (0.052)
    3-4 weeks after     1.375      1.062      1.372       1.060      1.371      1.044     1.174
                       (0.048)    (0.050)    (0.048)     (0.050)    (0.048)    (0.050)   (0.053)
    5-8 weeks after     1.224      1.012      1.221       1.009      1.221      0.996     1.076
                       (0.043)    (0.046)    (0.043)     (0.046)    (0.043)    (0.046)   (0.046)
   9-12 weeks after     1.147      0.927      1.144       0.924      1.173      0.946     1.058
                       (0.048)    (0.052)    (0.048)     (0.052)    (0.052)    (0.053)   (0.052)
    >12 weeks after     0.966      0.782      0.963       0.778      1.020      0.852     0.881
                       (0.057)    (0.060)    (0.057)     (0.060)    (0.072)    (0.068)   (0.050)

    Dummy for 30        0.939      0.889      0.955       0.907      0.951      0.939     0.975
   weeks of UI (EB)    (0.021)    (0.023)    (0.022)     (0.024)    (0.012)    (0.014)   (0.012)

        Dummy for                             0.922       0.919
      severance pay                          (0.024)     (0.027)

    30 weeks of UI x                                                  1.054      1.106
     Post-exhaustion                                                 (0.042)    (0.038)
Note: estimates (with standard errors in parentheses) are hazard ratios relative to omitted group.
Omitted group for exhaustion spline is >12 weeks before exhaustion. All models include
unrestricted baseline hazard for duration (in weeks) and individual covariates listed in notes to
Table 3. Specifications 1 and 2 include a cubic polynomial in the number of days worked in the
last 5 years. Specifications 3 and 4 include a cubic polynomial in the number of days worked in the
last 5 years and a cubic polynomial in the days of tenure on the last job. Specifications 5 and 6
include an interaction term between 30 weeks UI eligibility and a post-exhaustion dummy.
Specification 7 uses an alternative definition of time-to-exhaustion, as explained in the text.
                                                               Figure 1a
                                        Job Finding vs. Unemployment Exit Hazards: 20 Week UI




                        .2    .15
              Weekly Hazard Rate
              .05     .10




                                    0          10            20            30           40           50
                                                      Weeks Elapsed Since Job Loss

                                                 Job Finding Hazards            Unemp Exit Hazards



                                                               Figure 1b
                                        Job Finding vs. Unemployment Exit Hazards: 30 Week UI
                         .2   .15
              Weekly Hazard Rate
              .05     .10




                                    0          10            20            30           40           50
                                                      Weeks Elapsed Since Job Loss

                                                 Job Finding Hazards            Unemp Exit Hazards




NOTE–These figures plot weekly unemployment-exit hazards and re-employment (job-finding) hazards.
Sample in Figure 1a includes all individuals eligible for 20 weeks of UI benefits (individuals who have
between 33 and 35 months of work experience in the past 5 years). Sample in Figure 1a includes all
individuals eligible for 30 weeks of UI benefits (individuals who have between 36 and 38 months of
work experience in the past 5 years).
                                                                           Figure 2
                                            .1            Benefit Expiry Effect on Hazard Rates
    Difference in Weekly Hazard UI20-UI30
                                            .05
                                            0
                                            -.05
                                            -.1




                                                   0     10           20              30           40               50
                                                               Weeks Elapsed Since Job Loss

                                                       Unemployment Exit Hazards              Job Finding Hazards



NOTE–This figure plots the difference in weekly hazards between the group of individuals eligible for
20 weeks of UI benefits and 30 weeks of UI benefits. The unemployment exit hazard series is the
difference between the unemployment exit hazards plotted in Figures 1a and 1b. The job-finding
hazard series is the difference between the job-finding hazards plotted in Figures 1a and 1b.
                                                                    Figure 3a
                                              Reemployment Hazards -- Recalls vs. New Jobs: 20 Week UI



                                    .06
               Weekly Hazard Rate
                                    .04
                                    .02
                                    0




                                          0           10          20           30           40           50
                                                            Weeks Elapsed Since Job Loss

                                                                 All Reemployment
                                                                 New Jobs             Recalls




                                                                   Figure 3b
                                              Reemployment Hazards -- Recalls vs New Jobs: 30 Week UI
                                    .06
               Weekly Hazard Rate
                 .02       .04      0




                                          0           10          20           30           40           50
                                                            Weeks Elapsed Since Job Loss

                                                                 All Reemployment
                                                                 New Jobs             Recalls




NOTE–These figures decompose the re-employment hazard into new job starts and recalls under the
assumption of independent competing risks. The hazard plot for recalls treats new job starts as
censored, while the plot for new job starts treats recalls as censored. All individuals in Figure 3a are
eligible for 20 weeks of UI; in figure 3b, 30 weeks of UI.
                                                                                                      Figure 4a
                                                                             Difference in New Job Start Hazards -- 20 vs. 30 Week UI



                                                                .01
             Difference in Weekly Hazard UI20-UI30
                                                                .005
                                                                0
                                                                -.005
                                                                -.01




                                                                         0          10           20           30           40           50
                                                                                           Weeks Elapsed Since Job Loss



                                                                                                  Figure 4b
                                                                                 Difference in Recall Hazards -- 20 vs. 30 Week UI
                                                                 .005
                        Difference in Weekly Hazard UI20-UI30
                                                                 0
                                                                 -.005
                                                                 -.01




                                                                         0          10           20           30           40           50
                                                                                           Weeks Elapsed Since Job Loss




NOTE–These figures plot the difference in weekly job-finding hazards between the group of individuals
eligible for 20 weeks of UI benefits and 30 weeks of UI benefits. The new job start hazard series is the
difference between new job start hazards plotted in Figure 3a and 3b. The recall hazard series is the
difference between the recall hazards plotted in Figures 3a and 3b.
