NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRODUCT MARKET REGULATION AND MARKET WORK:
A BENCHMARK ANALYSIS
Lei Fang
Richard Rogerson
Working Paper 12891
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12891

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2007

We thank Berthold Herrendorf, Yongsung Chang, Ellen McGrattan and seminar participants at ASU,
NYU, Wisconsin and the University of Tokyo for useful comments. Rogerson acknowledges financial
support from the NSF. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Lei Fang and Richard Rogerson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Product Market Regulation and Market Work: A Benchmark Analysis
Lei Fang and Richard Rogerson
NBER Working Paper No. 12891
February 2007
JEL No. E2,J2,L5
ABSTRACT
Recent empirical work finds a negative correlation between product market regulation and aggregate
employment. We examine the effect of product market regulations on hours worked in a benchmark
aggregate model of time allocation. We find that product market regulations affect time devoted to
market work in effectively the same fashion as do taxes on labor income or consumption. In particular,
if product market regulations are to affect aggregate market work in this model the key driving force
is the size of income transfers associated with the regulation relative to labor income, and the key propagation
mechanism is the labor supply elasticity. We show in a two sector model that industry level analysis
is of little help in assessing the aggregate effects of product market regulation.
Lei Fang
Department of Economics
Arizona State University
Tempe AZ 85287
lei.fang.1@asu.edu
Richard Rogerson
Department of Economics
College of Business
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85287
and NBER
richard.rogerson@asu.edu

1.  Introduction 
Time  devoted  to  market  work  diﬀers  greatly  across  OECD  economies:  total  hours  of 
work  per  person  of  working  age  are  currently  more  than  30%  lower  in  Belgium,  France, 
Germany,  and  Italy  than  they  are  in  the  US.  A  growing  literature  seeks  to  understand 
the  causes  of  these  diﬀerences.1  Any  explanation  for  these  diﬀerences  must  consist  of 
two  components:  driving  forces  and  propagation  mechanisms.  The  driving  forces  are 
those  factors  that  diﬀer  across  these  economies,  and  the  propagation  mechanism  is  the 
economic  channels  through  which  these  factors  inﬂuence  hours  of  work.  Many  driving 
forces  have  been  suggested  in  the  literature,  including  taxes,  labor  market  regulations, 
and  unions.  A  recent  literature  has  emerged  on  the  importance  of  product  market  regu
lations  for  labor  market  outcomes.  Empirical  work  by  Boeri  et  al  (2000),  Bertrand  and 
Kramarz  (2002),  and  Lopez-Garcia  (2003)  ﬁnds  a  strong  negative  correlation  between 
product  market  regulation  and  employment.  Theoretical  work  includes  contributions 
by  Nickell  (1999),  Fonseca  et  al  (2001),  Blanchard  and  Giavazzi  (2002),  Messina  (2006), 
and  Ebell  and  Haefke  (2004,  2006). 
A  full  understanding  of  how  product  market  regulations  aﬀect  labor  market  out
comes  requires  a  systematic  assessment  of  the  channels  through  which  these  regulations 
aﬀect  equilibrium  outcomes  in  various  economic  environments.  This  paper  seeks  to 
contribute  to  this  eﬀort.  Speciﬁcally,  we  examine  the  eﬀects  of  one  prominent  aspect 
of  product  market  regulations—increased  entry  costs—  on  labor  market  outcomes  in  two 
static  versions  of  a  simple  benchmark  model  of  aggregate  time  allocation:  a  represen
tative  household  model  in  which  there  are  no  trading  frictions.  In  the  ﬁrst  version  we 
assume  monopolistic  competition  in  product  markets  but  competitive  behavior  in  the 
labor  market.  In  the  second  version  we  allow  for  imperfect  competition  in  both  labor 
and  product  markets.  In  both  versions  we  assume  that  the  household  values  only  con
sumption  and  leisure  and  that  the  preferences  would  be  consistent  with  balanced  growth 
in  a  standard  growth  model  setting. 
While  the  setting  in  which  we  carry  out  our  analysis  is  simple,  it  generates  three 
important  insights  about  the  eﬀect  of  product  market  regulations  which  take  the  form 
of  entry  barriers.  First,  from  the  perspective  of  inﬂuencing  time  devoted  to  market 
work,  the  key  driving  force  is  the  size  of  transfer  payments  relative  to  labor  income 
accruing  to  households  as  a  result  of  the  regulation.  Second,  the  extent  to  which  this 
driving  force  leads  to  less  market  work  is  completely  determined  by  the  elasticity  of  labor 
supply.  The  third  insight  follows  from  the  ﬁrst  two:  understanding  the  eﬀects  of  product 
market  regulations  on  time  allocated  to  market  work  in  this  setting  is  isomorphic  to  the 
problem  of  understanding  the  eﬀects  of  labor  income  taxes  or  consumption  taxes  on  time 
allocated  to  market  work.  In  both  cases  the  key  driving  force  is  the  size  of  transfers 
1 

Recent  examples  include  Alesina  et  al  (2006),  Davis  and  Henrekssen  (2004),  Prescott  (2003),  and 
Rogerson  (2005,  2006).  A  related  literature  seeks  to  understand  diﬀerences  in  unemployment  rates,  but 
these  diﬀerences  are  almost  an  order  of  magnitude  smaller  in  terms  of  implications  for  diﬀerences  in 
hours  devoted  to  market  work. 

1 

relative  to  labor  income,  and  the  key  parameter  of  the  propagation  mechanism  is  the 
labor  supply  elasticity.  These  results  hold  in  both  versions  of  our  model. 
Two  conclusions  follow  from  these  results.  First,  the  importance  of  product  mar
ket  regulation  relative  to  taxation  of  labor  income  and/or  consumption  is  completely 
dictated  by  the  relative  magnitude  of  the  transfers  induced  by  each.  Second,  entry  bar
riers  that  consist  of  real  resource  costs  have  no  impact  on  the  volume  of  market  work. 
Speciﬁcally,  in  this  case  it  does  not  matter  how  large  the  barriers  are,  since  they  do 
not  generate  any  transfer  payments  in  equilibrium.  Although  entry  barriers  of  this  type 
do  not  have  any  eﬀect  on  hours  of  work,  it  does  not  follow  that  they  have  no  welfare 
costs.  Even  when  there  is  no  eﬀect  on  time  allocated  to  market  work,  we  show  that 
product  market  regulations  still  inﬂuence  welfare  through  aﬀecting  other  dimensions  of 
the  resource  allocation. 
We  also  extend  our  analysis  to  a  two-sector  model.  Our  results  about  the  impact 
of  regulation  carry  over  to  this  setting  as  well,  even  if  the  regulations  are  sector  spe
ciﬁc.  Moreover,  we  show  that  the  relation  between  sectoral  market  work  and  sectoral 
regulation  is  not  informative  about  the  relationship  between  regulation  and  aggregate 
market  work.  The  key  message  is  that  one  cannot  extrapolate  from  industry-level  eﬀects 
to  aggregate  eﬀects.  Similar  to  the  case  of  labor  income  taxes,  our  two-sector  analy
sis  suggests  an  additional  channel  through  which  entry  barriers  may  inﬂuence  market 
hours.  In  particular,  if  we  think  of  one  of  the  sectors  as  representing  home  production, 
and  the  home  sector  produces  goods  that  are  substitutes  for  those  produced  in  the 
market,  then  if  entry  barriers  lead  to  higher  relative  prices  for  the  market  goods,  indi
viduals  will  substitute  away  from  market  produced  consumption  toward  home  produced 
consumption. 
Given  the  setting  in  which  our  analysis  takes  place,  our  results  are  most  related  to 
those  obtained  in  Messina  (2006).  He  too  considered  a  representative  household  model 
with  no  trading  frictions.  Although  his  model  is  much  richer  than  ours,  the  key  ﬁnding 
from  our  analysis  that  is  useful  in  interpreting  his  results  concerns  the  role  played  by 
the  entry  barrier.  He  assumes  that  the  barrier  is  a  payment  which  eﬀectively  leads  to  a 
transfer  payment  to  consumers.  He  calibrates  the  size  of  the  regulation  by  using  data 
from  Djankov  et  al  (2002),  which  is  based  on  measures  of  time  costs.  In  our  model,  if 
this  regulation  were  modelled  as  a  time  cost,  the  impact  would  be  zero.  While  Ebell  and 
Haefke  (2006)  consider  a  model  with  trading  frictions,  their  quantitative  analysis  shows 
that  changes  in  regulations  which  reﬂect  real  resource  costs  have  virtually  no  aﬀect  on 
unemployment. 
An  outline  of  the  paper  follows.  The  next  section  lays  out  the  basic  model  and 
characterizes  both  eﬃcient  and  equilibrium  allocations  in  the  absence  of  any  product 
market  regulations.  Section  3  characterize  the  eﬀect  of  taxes  on  time  devoted  to  market 
work.  These  expressions  will  be  useful  in  interpreting  the  analogous  expressions  derived 
for  the  case  of  product  market  regulations,  which  is  done  in  Section  4.  Section  5  considers 
an  extension  to  allow  for  endogenous  price  markups,  and  Section  6  considers  an  extension 
2 

to  allow  for  imperfect  competition  in  the  labor  market.  Section  7  considers  product 
market  regulations  in  a  two  sector  model,  and  Section  8  concludes. 

2.  Benchmark  Model 
2.1.  Environment 
This  section  lays  out  the  benchmark  model  of  monopolistic  competition  and  charac
terizes  the  equilibrium  allocation  for  the  model.  The  economy  is  static.  There  is  a 
representative  household  with  preferences  deﬁned  over  consumption  of  a  ﬁnal  good  (c) 
and  leisure  (1  −  h) given  by: 
α  log(c) +  (1  −  α)

(1  −  h)1−γ  −  1 
. 
1  −  γ 

(2.1)

The  parameter  α  satisﬁes  0  <  α  <  1  and  determines  the  relative  weight  of  leisure  and 
consumption,  while  the  parameter  γ  satisﬁes  γ  ≥  0  and  deﬁnes  the  Frisch  elasticity 
of  the  demand  for  leisure,  which  is  given  by  −1/γ.  We  adopt  this  speciﬁcation  of 
preferences  because  it  is  consistent  with  balanced  growth  and  permits  a  parsimonious 
way  of  incorporating  a  range  of  labor  supply  elasticities.  All  of  the  results  derived  below 
continue  to  hold  in  the  more  general  case  of  any  utility  function  consistent  with  balanced 
growth. 
There  are  two  production  sectors,  an  intermediate  goods  sector  and  a  ﬁnal  goods 
sector.  Each  point  on  the  positive  real  line  represents  a  potential  intermediate  good. 
Each  of  these  intermediate  goods  can  be  produced  using  a  linear  technology  y(i) =  h(i), 
where  h(i)  is  labor  input  for  the  intermediate  good  i,  but  there  is  a  ﬁxed  cost  φ  >  0 
associated  with  operating  any  of  these  technologies.  We  assume  that  the  ﬁxed  cost  is 
in  units  of  labor.  For  the  purposes  of  the  decentralization  in  which  we  will  assume 
many  ﬁrms  that  each  takes  the  actions  of  other  ﬁrms  as  given,  we  will  also  assume  that 
each  point  on  the  real  line  corresponds  to  a  diﬀerent  ﬁrm  and  that  each  ﬁrm  owns  the 
intermediate  good  technology  represented  by  the  same  point  on  the  real  line. 
The  ﬁnal  goods  sector  combines  the  available  intermediate  goods  into  the  ﬁnal  good 
via  the  CES  production  function: 
Z  ∞ 
y(i)ρ di]1/ρ ], 
(2.2) 
c  = [ 
0 

and  as  indicated,  the  only  use  of  the  ﬁnal  good  is  as  consumption.  In  the  decentralization 
that  follows  we  will  assume  that  the  ﬁnal  goods  sector  is  competitive,  and  hence  for 
simplicity  we  assume  that  there  is  a  single  representative  ﬁrm  in  this  sector.  We  assume 
that  the  representative  household  owns  all  of  the  ﬁrms  and  hence  receives  any  proﬁts 
that  might  accrue  in  equilibrium. 

3 

2.2.  Eﬃcient  Allocations 
For comparison with later  results it is useful to  ﬁrst  characterize  eﬃcient  allocations  for 
this  economy.  Given  the  symmetry  of  the  environment,  it  is  easy  to  show  that  eﬃcient 
allocations  will  also  be  symmetric,  in  the  sense  that  any  intermediate  good  technologies 
that  are  operated  in  equilibrium  will  be  operated  at  the  same  level.  Of  course,  given 
the  ﬁxed  cost,  only  a  ﬁnite  mass  of  these  technologies  will  be  operated.  Again,  due 
to  the  symmetry,  eﬃciency  will  only  dictate  the  mass  of  intermediate  goods  that  are 
produced  and  not  the  speciﬁc  identities  of  these  goods.  Since  this  indeterminacy  is  of 
no  substantive  interest,  we  simply  assume  that  the  intermediate  technologies  operated 
lie  in  the  interval  [0, N ]  and  we  characterize  the  optimal  value  of  N. 
In  view  of  the  above  discussion,  it  is  suﬃcient  to  choose  values  of  the  output  of 
each  intermediate  (y),  the  mass  of  intermediates  (N ),  and  total  market  work  (h) to 
maximize: 
α  log([Ny ρ ]1/ρ ) + (1  −  α)
subject  to  feasibility,  which  entails: 

(1  −  h)1−γ  −  1 
1  −  γ 

h  =  N (y  +  φ) 

(2.3)

(2.4) 

0  ≤  h  ≤  1 

N 

≥  0,  y  ≥  0 

Given  our  functional  forms,  the  solution  to  this  problem  is  interior.  Letting  λ  be  the 
Lagrange  multiplier  on  the  feasibility  constraint,  the  ﬁrst  order  conditions  are: 
α 
ρN 
α 
y 

=  λ(y  +  φ) 

(2.5)

=  λN 

λ  = 

(1  −  α)
(1  −  h)γ 

Simple  substitution  yields: 

and: 

h 
1 
1  −  α 
= 
γ 
α  (1  −  h)
ρ 

(2.6)

ρ 
φ. 
(2.7)
1  −  ρ 
which  completely  characterizes  the  solutions  for  h  and  y. Given  solutions  for  y  and  h 
we  can  then  use  the  feasibility  constraint  to  ﬁnd  the  value  of  N  in  terms  of  the  solutions 
for  h  and  y. 
y  = 

4 

2.3.  Decentralized  Equilibrium 
We  study  an  equilibrium  in  which  the  consumer  behaves  competitively  in  both  the 
output  and  the  labor  markets  and  the  ﬁnal  goods  ﬁrm  behaves  competitively  in  both 
the  ﬁnal  goods  market  and  the  intermediate  goods  market,  while  intermediate  goods 
ﬁrms  behave  as  monopolistic  competitors  in  output  markets  and  as  perfect  competitors 
in  the  labor  market.  Given  the  symmetry  imposed  on  the  environment,  we  focus  on 
equilibria  in  which  all  active  intermediate  goods  ﬁrms  charge  the  same  price  and  produce 
the  same  amount.  Given  that  we  have  an  unbounded  set  of  potential  ﬁrms,  proﬁts  in 
equilibrium  will  be  zero  for  any  ﬁrm  that  operates.  Given  the  symmetry  of  the  model 
it  is  clear  that  equilibrium  will  only  determine  the  mass  of  ﬁrms  that  operate  and  not 
the  identities  of  these  ﬁrms.  We  again  resolve  this  indeterminacy  by  assuming  that  the 
ﬁrms  that  operate  lie  in  an  interval  with  left  endpoint  equal  to  0.  We  will  normalize 
the  price  of  the  ﬁnal  good  to  be  equal  to  one  and  denote  the  symmetric  price  of  the 
intermediate  goods  by  p, and  the wage  rate by  w. 
Formally,  a  symmetric  equilibrium  for  our  model  is  a  list  c ∗  ,  h∗  ,  y ∗  ,  N ∗  ,  p ∗  ,  w ∗  , 
d∗ (p) such  that 
(1)  (Consumer  maximization)  Taking  w ∗ as  given,  c ∗  and  h∗  solve  the  consumer  maxi
mization  problem. 
(2)  (Final  good  producer  maximization)  Taking  p(i) =  p ∗  for  all  i  and  N ∗  as  given, 
y(i) = y  ∗  for  all  i  solves  the  ﬁnal  good  producer’s  proﬁt  maximization  problem.  And  the 
function  d∗ (p) represents  the  demand  of  the  ﬁnal  good  producer  for  any  intermediate  i 
as  a  function  of  the  price  of  intermediate  i,  holding  all  other  prices  at  their  equilibrium 
values,  and  holding  the  number  of  varieties  ﬁxed  at  N ∗  . 
(3)  (Intermediate  goods  producers  maximization)  For  each  i  ∈  [0, N ∗ ],  pi  = p ∗  ,  y(i) = 
h∗ /N ∗  −  φ  solves  the  proﬁt  maximization  problem  of  intermediate  producer  i, taking 
the  demand  function  d∗ (p)  and  the  wage  rate  w ∗  as  given. 
(4)  (Free  entry)  All  operating  intermediate  ﬁrms  earn  zero  proﬁts:  (p ∗  −  w ∗ )y ∗  = w ∗ φ. 
As  is  well  known,  it  is  relatively  easy  to  characterize  the  equilibrium  for  this  model. 
Since  this  derivation  will  be  useful  for  the  policy  exercises  conducted  in  the  next  section, 
we  sketch  the  derivation  here.  The  production  function  of  the  ﬁnal  good  producer 
1 
implies  that  the  demand  function  d∗ (p)  takes  the  form  d∗ (p) =  Ap  ρ−1  , where  A  is 
a  constant,  which  in  turn  implies  a  simple  markup  rule  for  the  equilibrium  price  of 
intermediate  goods:  p ∗  =  ρ 1  w ∗  . 
The  consumer  maximization  problem  is  to  choose  values  of  c  and  h  to  maximize: 
α  log(c) + (1 −  α)

(1 −  h)1−γ  −  1 
1 −  γ 

(2.8)

subject  to  the  budget  constraint  c  = w ∗ h.  Substituting  this  into  the  objective  function, 
we  obtain  the  ﬁrst  order  condition: 
(1 −  α) 
h 
= 1. 
α  (1 −  h)γ 
5 

(2.9)

This  expression  completely  characterizes  the  equilibrium  value  of  h.  The  analogous 
expression  for  the  Social  Planner’s  solution  has  the  same  expression  on  the  left-hand 
side  but  instead  had  1/ρ  on  the  right  hand  side.  Since  the  left-hand  side  is  decreasing 
in  h,  it  follows  that  the  decentralized  equilibrium  has  too  little  time  devoted  to  market 
work.  Although  the  time  devoted  to  market  work  in  the  decentralized  equilibrium 
is  independent  of  the  value  of  ρ,  the  extent  of  the  ineﬃciency  in  time  allocation  is 
decreasing  in  ρ,  since  the  Social  Planner’s  solution  for  h  is  decreasing  in  ρ.  In  particular, 
the  two  solutions  approach  each  other  as  ρ  converges  to  one. 
The  solutions  for  y  and  N  (and  hence  c)  are  also  easily  obtained.  Speciﬁcally, 
independently  of  the  above  derivation  for  h,  the  equilibrium  value  of  y  can  be  determined 
solely  from  the  zero  proﬁt  condition  given  we  know  the  equilibrium  price.  In  particular, 
zero  proﬁts  requires: 
(2.10) 
(p ∗  −  w ∗  )y  =  w ∗  φ 
and  using  the  fact  that  p ∗  =  w ∗ /ρ, this implies 
y  = 

ρ 
φ. 
1  −  ρ 

(2.11) 

Note  that  the  value  of  y  is  the  same  in  the  decentralized  equilibrium  as  it  is  in  the  Social 
Planner’s  problem.  It  follows  that  the  lower  value  of  h  in  the  decentralized  equilibrium 
results  in  a  proportional  decrease  in  the  number  of  intermediate  goods  that  are  produced 
relative  to  the  Social  Planner’s  problem.  The  value  of  N  is  again  easily  determined  from 
the  feasibility  condition: 
N  = 

h 
. 
(y  +  f ) 

(2.12) 

The  consumption  of  the  ﬁnal  good  is  then  easily  computed  as: 
c  =  N 1/ρ  y. 

(2.13) 

3.  Taxes  and  Market  Work 
In  this  section  we  derive  expressions  to  characterize  the  eﬀect  of  taxes  on  labor  in
come  and  consumption  on  equilibrium  allocations.  While  our  ultimate  interest  is  in 
understanding  the  eﬀect  of  product  market  regulations  on  equilibrium  allocations,  and 
speciﬁcally  on  time  devoted  to  market  work,  the  expressions  relating  taxes  to  alloca
tions  will  prove  useful  in  helping  us  interpret  the  expressions  that  we  obtain  for  product 
market  regulations.  We  consider  a  policy  in  which  labor  income  is  taxed  at  the  constant 
proportional  rate  τ  h  but  distinguish  policies  based  on  what  is  done  with  the  revenue. 
Speciﬁcally,  we  contrast  two  scenarios,  distinguished  by  whether  the  government  uses 
the  tax  revenues  in  a  manner  that  aﬀects  the  marginal  utility  of  private  consumption. 
In  the  ﬁrst  scenario  we  assume  that  the  revenue  is  rebated  lump-sum  to  the  representa
tive  consumer,  or  equivalently  in  this  model,  that  the  government  uses  the  tax  revenues 
6 

to  purchase  the  ﬁnal  good  and  then  transfers  these  purchases  of  the  ﬁnal  good  to  the 
consumer  as  a  lump  sum  transfer.  This  scenario  implies  that  government  spending  is 
a  perfect  substitute  for  private  spending.  The  second  scenario  also  assumes  that  the 
government  uses  its  revenues  to  purchase  the  ﬁnal  consumption  good,  but  assumes  dif
ferently  that  the  government  discards  these  goods,  or  equivalently,  uses  them  to  in  turn 
produce  something  that  consumers  do  not  value.2  In  this  scenario,  the  government  uses 
revenues  in  a  manner  that  does  not  aﬀect  the  marginal  utility  of  private  consumption. 
As  we  shall  see,  the  reason  for  considering  these  two  variations  on  spending  is  that  they 
have  extremely  diﬀerent  implications  for  equilibrium  allocations,  speciﬁcally  for  hours 
of  work,  and  will  be  useful  in  considering  diﬀerent  regulatory  policies. 
In  deﬁning  equilibrium  in  the  presence  of  these policies  we  must account for  the 
behavior  of  the  government  sector.  Let  g  denote  government  purchases  of  the  ﬁnal 
consumption  good  and  let  T  denote  government  lump-sum  transfers  in  units  of  the 
consumption  good.  Then  under  scenario  one  we  must  add  the  condition  T  ∗  =  g  ∗  = 
τ w ∗ h∗ ,  while  under  scenario  2  we  must  add  the  condition  g  ∗  =  τ  w ∗ h∗  but  set  T  ∗  = 0. 
Under  both  scenarios  it  is  easy  to  show  that  the  demand  function  for  a  given  inter
mediate  takes  the  same  form  as  before,  implying  that  in  equilibrium  the  price  charged 
by  intermediate  goods  producers  will  continue  to  satisfy  p ∗  =  w ∗ /ρ.  We next derive the 
implications  for  equilibrium  allocations. 
3.1.  Lump-Sum  Transfers 
With  lump  sum  transfers,  the  household’s  budget  constraint  becomes: 
c  = (1  −  τ )w ∗  h  +  T 

(3.1) 

Substituting  this  into  the  consumers  objective  function  yields  a  ﬁrst  order  condition  for 
h  given  by: 
(1  −  α) 
α(1  −  τ )w ∗ 
= 
∗
(1  −  τ )w  h  +  T 
(1  −  h)γ 

(3.2) 

Since  the  government  budget  constraint  requires  that  T  =  τ w ∗ h,  this  equation  reduces 
to: 
(1  −  α)h 
= (1  −  τ ) 
(3.3)
α(1  −  h)γ 

This  equation  gives  the  well-known  result  that  if  tax  revenues  are  rebated  lump-sum 
then  hours  of  work  are  decreasing  in  taxes. 
The  magnitude  of  this  eﬀect  for  a  given  change  in  τ  depends  on  the  labor  supply 
elasticity  parameter  γ.  In  particular,  consider  two  economies  that  are  identical  except 
2 

Another  equivalent  possibility  is  that  the  goods  are  used  to  produce  a  second  good  that  enters 
utility  additively  with  respect  to  utility  from  c  and  1  −  h. 

7 

for  their  values  of  τ . Let  τ 2  >  τ 1 , and  let  hi  represent  the  equilibrium  hours  worked  in 
economy  i,  i  = 1,  2.  It  follows  that  these  values  satisfy: 
log( 

h1 
1  −  h1
)  −  γ  log( 
) =  log(1  −  τ 1 )  −  log(1  −  τ 2 )
h2 
1  −  h2 

It  follows  that  for  a  given  value  of  h1 , the  ratio  h1 /h2  will  be  increasing  in  γ. To  describe 
this  in  terms  of  the  driving  force/propagation  mechanism  characterization  mentioned  in 
the  introduction,  the  driving  force  is  the  size  of  the  tax,  and  the  propagation  mechanism 
is  determined  by  the  labor  supply  elasticity  parameter  γ. 
To  ﬁnish  characterizing  the  equilibrium,  we  note  that  the  zero  proﬁt constraint 
ρ
implies  the  same  value  for  y  as  before  (i.e.,  y  =  1−
ρ  φ) , so  there is no  eﬀect  on  y. The 
feasibility  condition  is  unchanged,  so  N  changes  proportionally  with  h. 
For  comparison  with  later  results,  it  is  also  useful  to  consider  the  case  where  the 
tax  is  placed  on  consumption  as  opposed  to  labor  income.  Denoting  this  tax  as  τ c , and 
assuming  that  the  unit  price  paid  by  consumers  in  equilibrium  is  given  by  (1  +  τ c ), the 
expression  for  hours  becomes: 
(1  −  α)h 
1 
= 
. 
γ 
α(1  −  h)
1 +  τ c 

(3.4)

3.2.  Discarded  Revenues 
If  government  revenues  are  discarded  rather  than  returned  to  the  household,  then  the 
household’s  budget  constraint  is  simply  c  = (1−τ )w ∗ h. Deriving  the  ﬁrst  order  condition 
for  h  with  this  budget  equation  now  yields: 
(1  −  α) 
h 
= 1 
α  (1  −  h)γ 

(3.5)

which  is  identical  to  the  case  in  which  there  was  no  tax.  Considering  the  outcomes  for 
y  and  N  it  is  easy  to  show  that  y  continues  to  have  the  same  value  as  in  the  no-tax  case 
and  therefore  that  N  will  as  well.  This  does  not  imply  that  allocations  are  not  aﬀected 
by  taxes  in  this  case.  In  particular,  given  the  budget  constraint  above,  given  no  change 
in  w  and  h,  it  follows  that  c  is  equal  to  (1  −  τ )  of  its  value  in  the  no-tax  case. 

4.  Product  Market  Regulation  and  Market  Work 
Given  the  simple  form  of  our  model  we  cannot  consider  a  rich  class  of  regulatory  policies. 
However,  the  literature  that  we  referred  to  in  the  introduction  typically  focuses  on  one 
particular  aspect  of  regulatory  policy,  and  this  is  the  size  of  ﬁxed  costs  associated  with 
entry.  Hence,  we  focus  on  regulatory  policies  as  they  impact  on  the  size  of  the  ﬁxed 
entry  cost  φ.  However,  as  we  show  below,  it  is  important  to  distinguish  between  two 
diﬀerent  kinds  of  regulations.  The  ﬁrst  type  of  regulation  represents  real  resource  costs. 
Examples  of  this  include  regulations  that  require  additional  resources  to  be  used  up 
8 

in  the  entry  process,  by  requiring  additional  studies,  ﬁling  additional  reports,  requiring 
more  meetings  and  approval  at  various  levels  etc....The  second  type  of  regulation  involves 
purely  a  nominal  cost  and  does  not  involve  any  use  of  resources.  An  example  of  this  is 
when  entry  requires  the  purchase  of  a  license.  In  line  with  the  analysis  of  tax  policies,  in 
this  case  we  will  further  distinguish  between  two cases  based on what is done with the 
revenues  generated  by  the  nominal  entry  cost  payments:  are  they  returned  to  consumers 
via  a  lump-sum  transfer  or  are  they  discarded. 
In  all  of  the  above  cases,  equilibrium  will  continue  to  require  that  proﬁts  are  zero. 
A  ﬁnal  case  that  we  deal  with  is  one  in  which  the  nature  of  regulation  does  not  lead  to 
zero  proﬁts.  In  particular,  we  will  consider  a  policy  in  which  the  government  controls 
the  number  of  ﬁrms  that  operate  in  equilibrium,  possibly  by  randomly  issuing  permits, 
but  that  there  is  no  market  for  these  permits.  Assuming  the  number  of  permits  is  less 
than  the  equilibrium  value  of  N  in  the  case  without  permits,  then  any  ﬁrm  that  receives 
a  permit  will  make  positive  proﬁts  in  equilibrium. 
4.1.  Barriers  to  Entry  I 
Here  we  assume  that  the  barrier  takes  the  form  of  real  resource  cost.  This  means  that 
we  model  the  barrier  as  an  increase  in  the  ﬁxed  cost  φ,  which  recall  was  measured  in 
units  of  labor.  To  analyze  this  case  it  is  not  necessary  to  do  any  additional  calculations 
beyond  those  in  Section  2.4.  From  the  previous  expressions  derived  to  characterize 
equilibrium  we  see  that  an  increase  in  the  value  of  φ  has  no eﬀect  on  h,  but  leads  to  an 
increase  in  y  and  a  decrease  in  N .  It  follows  that  there  are  welfare  eﬀects  associated 
with  this  type  of  regulation,  but  that  there  is  no  eﬀect  on  time  devoted  to  market  work. 
4.2.  Barriers  to  Entry  II 
Here  we  instead  assume  that  the  barrier  takes  the  form  of  an  entry  fee.  We  assume  that 
the  entry  fee  is  equal  to  κ,  and  for  convenience  assume  that  the  fee  is  denominated  in 
units  of  the  wage  rate  w ∗  .  In  this  subsection  we  assume  that  the  proceeds  from  this 
entry  fee  are  thrown  away  by  the  government,  i.e.,  that  the  government  uses  the  proceeds 
to  purchase  the  ﬁnal  consumption  good  but  then  discards  it.  The  household’s  budget 
equation  does  not  change  and  as  a  result  the  ﬁrst  order  condition  for  the  consumer 
maximization  problem  continues  to  generate  the  usual  expression  for  h: 
h 
(1  −  α) 
= 1, 
α  (1  −  h)γ 

(4.1)

1 
( w ∗  −  w ∗  )y  =  w ∗  (φ  +  κ), 
ρ 

(4.2)

implying  that  there  is  no  eﬀect  on  hours  of  work.  There  is,  however,  an  aﬀect  on  c  and 
y.  In  particular,  the  zero  proﬁt  condition  now  reads: 

implying  that 
9


y  =

ρ 
(φ  +  κ) 
1  −  ρ

(4.3)

h 
(y  +  φ) 

(4.4)

so  that  y  is  increasing  in  κ.  But  since  κ  only  represents  a  nominal  cost,  feasibility  is  the 
same  as  before,  : 
N  = 

which  combined  with  the  result  for  y  implies  that  N  decreases.  It  follows  that  allocations 
in  this  case  are  identical  to  those  obtained  in  the  case  where  the  entry  cost  represents  a 
real  resource  cost.  Speciﬁcally,  although  product  market  regulations  in  this  context  do 
aﬀect  allocations  and  welfare,  they  do  not  manifest  themselves  in  changes  in  hours  of 
market  work. 
4.3.  Barriers  to  Entry  III 
Here  we  continue  to  assume  that  the  entry  barrier  is  a  license  fee  but  now  assume  that 
the  government  rebates  the  proceeds  to  the  household.  In  this  case  the  household  budget 
constraint  becomes 
c  =  w ∗  h  +  T 

(4.5) 

where  T  is  the  size  of  the  transfer.  Solving  the  consumer’s  maximization  problem,  the 
implied  condition  for  h  is 
(1  −  α)  w ∗ h  +  T 
=  w ∗  . 
α 
(1  −  h)γ 

(4.6)

It  is  possible  to  explicitly  solve  for  T  in  terms  of  h  using  the  other  equilibrium  conditions. 
As  above,  the  equilibrium  value  of  y  can  be  determined  solely  from  the  zero-proﬁt 
condition,  and  N  can  be  determined  from  the  feasibility  condition  as  a  function  of  y 
and  h.  Knowing  N  as  a  function  of  h  allows  us  to  solve  for  T  as  a  function  of  h. This 
gives: 
(1  −  ρ)κ  ∗ 
w  h 
(4.7)
T  =  w ∗  N κ  = 
φ  +  ρκ 
which  substituted  into  equation  (4.6)  yields: 
(1  −  α) 
h 
1 
= 
γ 
(1−ρ)κ/φ 
α  (1  −  h)
1 +  1+ρκ/φ 

(4.8)

However,  it  is  perhaps  more  revealing  to  instead  multiply  both  sides  of  equation 
(4.6)  by  h,  and  rearrange  to  yield: 
(1  −  α) 
h 
1

= 
γ 
α  (1  −  h)
1 +  wT ∗ h 
10


(4.9)


Note  that  the  term  T /w∗ h  represents  government  transfers  as  a  fraction  of  total  labor 
income  in  the  economy.  It  is  instructive  to  compare  this  with  the  expression  relating 
hours  of  work  with  tax  programs.  Speciﬁcally,  assuming  a  tax  only  on  consumption  and 
that  revenues  are  rebated  lump-sum  to  consumers,  we  obtained  the  expression: 
h 
1 
(1  −  α) 
= 
α  (1  −  h)γ 
1 +  τ c 

(4.10) 

The  two  expressions  are  identical  except  that  τ c  is  substituted  for  T /w∗ h. However, 
both  of  these  terms  have  similar  interpretations.  In  the  case  of  regulation,  T /w∗ h  is  the 
size  of  transfers  relative  to  total  labor  income,  while  in  the  case  of  consumption  taxes, 
simple  manipulation  of  the  consumer  and  government  budget  constraints  implies  that 
τ c  is  also  the  size  of  transfers  relative  to  total  labor  income.  The  implications  of  this  are 
two-fold.  First,  if  regulations  take  the  form  of  nominal  payments  and  these  payments 
are  rebated  to  households,  then  higher  regulation  is  associated  with  less  time  devoted  to 
market  work.  Second,  in  terms  of  the  impact  on  time  devoted  to  market  work,  this  type 
of  regulation  will  operate  through  exactly  the  same  channels  as  consumption  taxes.  In 
particular,  the  key  driving  forcing  is  the  size  of  the  implied  transfer  payments  relative 
to  total  labor  income,  and  the  key  parameter  that  determines  the  propagation  of  this 
forcing  variable  is  γ,  which  determines  the  labor  supply  elasticity. 
While  the  comparison  to  consumption  taxes  is  particularly  direct  in  terms  of  the 
expressions  that  one  obtains  for  hours  of  market  work,  since  there  is  an  equivalence 
between  labor  income  taxes  and  consumption  taxes,  there  is  also  a  strong  relationship 
between  this  type  of  regulatory  policy  and  labor  income  taxes.  Given  the  expressions 
derived  in  Section  3,  we  know  that  in  the  context  of  our  model,  a  consumption  tax  of  τ h 
is  observationally  equivalent  to  a  consumption  tax  of  τ c  =  1−1 τ h  −  1.  It  follows  that  the 
above  discussion  similarly  indicates  a  strong  relationship  between  this  type  of  product 
market  regulation  and  taxes  on  labor  income.3 
A  simple  point  to  note  here  is  that  looking  at  the  relative  size  of  κ  across  economies 
is  not  particularly  useful  in  assessing  whether  the  labor  market  eﬀects  are  likely  to  be 
large.  Many  researchers  refer  to  the  study  of  Djankov  et  al  (2002),  which  shows  that 
time  costs  of  setting  of  up  business  are  roughly  6  days  in  the  US  and  more  than  60 
in  many  European  countries,  implying  a  diﬀerence  of  an  order  of  magnitude  in  entry 
barriers.  Given  that  these  diﬀerences  reﬂect  time  costs  they  should  be  modeled  as 
representing  real  resource  costs.  However,  for  the  sake  of  illustration,  we  assume  that 
this  is  a  pure  nominal  cost.  A  simple  example  shows  that  this  magnitude  is  not  a  good 
indicator  for  the  size  of  the  driving  force.  Speciﬁcally,  assume  that  ρ  =  .8, and  φ  = 1. 
Assume  for  the  US  that  κ  =  .01,  implying  that  in  the  US  roughly  1%  of  total  setup 
costs  are  associated  with  regulatory  barriers.  In  line  with  the  above  mentioned  studied, 
assume  that  κ  =  .1  in  Europe.  Evaluating  the  right  hand  side  of  equation  (4.8)  for  the 
3 

In  fact,  the  procedure  that  Prescott  (2004)  followed  in  measuring  eﬀective  tax  rates  would  have 
included  government  fees  such  as  those  studied  here  in  his  measure  of  consumption  taxes. 

11 

two  cases  we  get  a  value  of  .998  for  the  US  and  .982  for  Europe,  implying  a  relative  value 
of  only  1.0165.  That  is,  relative  to  the  driving  force  associated  with  taxation  of  labor 
income,  this  order  of  magnitude  diﬀerence  in  entry  barriers  is  equivalent  to  a  diﬀerence 
of  less  than  2%  in  tax  rates.  If  we  alternatively  assumed  that  κ  in  the  US  is  equal  to 
.1, and  κ  in  Europe  is  equal  to  1,  implying  that  in  Europe  half  of  the  costs  associated 
with  starting  a  business  are  directly  due  to  regulation,  the  relative  magnitudes  of  the 
right  hand  side  of  equation  (4.8)  is  only  1.09. 
Lastly,  it  is  relatively  easy  to  obtain  expressions  for  the  new  values  of  y  and  N . Once 
again,  the  zero-proﬁt  condition  solely  determines  the  equilibrium  value  of  y: 
y  =

ρ 
(φ  +  κ) 
1  −  ρ

(4.11) 

and  then  the  feasibility  condition  can  be  used  to  determine  N . 
4.4.  Barriers  to  Entry  IV 
In  this  section  we  assume  that  the  government  directly  controls  entry  through  a  process 
of  permits,  but  there  is  no  charge  for  a  permit.  Speciﬁcally,  in  order  to  operate  an  inter
mediate  producer  must  obtain  a  permit,  and  we  assume  that  the  government  restricts 
the  number  of  permits  to  be  less  than  the  entry  that  would  occur  in  a  decentralized 
equilibrium.  If  the  number  of  permits  is  less  than  the  amount  of  entry  in  the  decen
tralized  equilibrium,  it  follows  that  proﬁts  will  be  positive  for  any  ﬁrm  that  receives  a 
permit.  Hence,  if  it  is  costless  to  apply  for  a  permit,  all  ﬁrms  would  apply.  We  can 
then  think  of  the  government  policy  as  simply  granting  permits  to  a  randomly  chosen 
mass  of  applicants.  While  we  have  described  one  particular  policy,  it  is  worth  noting 
that  this  policy  is  similar  to  some  others  of  potential  interest.  For  example,  suppose 
that  for  some  reason  (e.g.,  political  connections)  the  barriers  to  entry  for  some  ﬁrms 
are  higher  than  they  are  for  other  ﬁrms,  so  that  the  barriers  keep  out  potential  entrants 
even  though  proﬁts  are  positive  for  ﬁrms  that  operate.  The  permit  policy  described 
above  is  a  special  case  of  this  policy  in  which  the  policy  induced  barrier  is  zero  for  some 
ﬁrms  and  inﬁnite  for  other  ﬁrms. 
Let  N̄ be  the  mass  of  permits  granted  by  the  government,  and  assume  that  this 
number  is  binding,  in  the  sense  that  absent  permits,  additional  ﬁrms  would  like  to 
operate.  Denote  proﬁts  earned  by  an  intermediate  producer  in  equilibrium  by  π. Since 
the  household  owns  all  of  the  ﬁrms  in  the  economy,  these  proﬁts  will  be  returned  to  the 
household  and  the  household  budget  constraint  will  now  be: 
c  =  w ∗  h  +  π 

(4.12) 

The  fact  that  entry  is  restricted  does  not  change  the  slope  of  the  demand  function 
d∗ (p)  and  hence  does  not  change  the  fact  that  in  equilibrium  we  will  have  p ∗  =  w ∗ /ρ. 
Substituting  the  budget  equation  into  the  consumers  objective  function,  one  obtains  the 

12 

following  equation  to  characterize  the  optimal  choice  of  h: 
(1  −  α)  w ∗ h  +  π 
=  w ∗  . 
α  (1  −  h)γ 

(4.13) 

While we could  solve for  π  as  a  function  of  the  equilibrium  value  of  h  and  obtain  an 
equation  in  only  h,  it  is  again  more  revealing  to  simply  multiply  both  sides  by  h  and 
rearrange  to  obtain: 
h 
1

(1  −  α) 
= 
. 
γ 
α  (1  −  h)
1 +  w π ∗ h 

(4.14)


The  message  from  this  expression  is  exactly  the  same  as  from  equation  (4.9)  in  the 
previous  subsection.  Speciﬁcally,  this type of policy does have an impact on hours  of 
work,  but  the  key  forcing  variable  is  the  magnitude  of  proﬁts  created  by  the  policy 
relative  to  total  labor  income,  and  the  key  factor  that  determines  how  this  translates 
into  changes  in  hours  is  the  labor  supply  elasticity. 
To  complete  the  analysis  of  this  case,  note  that  the  value  of  N  in  equilibrium  is 
simply  the  number  of  permits  granted,  and  the  value  of  y  is  now  determined  by  the 
feasibility  condition. 

5.  Endogenous  Markups 
One feature  of  the previous analysis is that policy does not  aﬀect  the  markup  of  price 
over  marginal  cost  in  equilibrium.  One  might  suspect  that  one  of  the  key  channels 
through  which  product  market  regulations  work  is  to  increase  markups,  and  that  by 
virtue  of  not  having  this  channel  the  previous  analysis  is  of  limited  interest.  In  this 
section  we  show  that  adding  this  channel  to  the  analysis  has  no  impact  on  the  previous 
results. 
The  only  change  that  we  make  to  the  previous  model  is  in  the  technology  for  the 
ﬁnal  goods  sector.  Speciﬁcally,  rather  than  letting  ρ  be  a  ﬁxed  parameter,  we  assume 
that  ρ  is  an  increasing  function  of  the  mass  of  diﬀerent  intermediate  products  that  are 
available,  and  write  this  as  ρ(N ).  The  motivation  for  this  extension  is  the  intuitive 
notion  that  as  more  intermediate  goods  are  produced,  the  more  similar  they  are,  and 
hence  the  more  substitutable  they  become.  Formally,  this  should  be  modelled  explicitly 
as  a  property  of  the  commodity  space,  and  the  equilibrium  should  deal  explicitly  with 
the  issue  of  how  intermediate  ﬁrms  decide  where  to  locate  in  the  commodity  space.  We 
will  sidestep  this  issue  here  and  simply  assume  that  ﬁrms  that  operate  always  locate  in 
a  symmetric  fashion  so  that  all  of  the  intermediate  goods  are  equally  substitutable,  and 
that  this  substitutability  is  solely  a  function  of  N . 
For  a  given  mass  N  of  operating  intermediate  goods  producers,  this  model  behaves 
just  as  the  previous  model,  if  we  set  ρ  =  ρ(N ).  In  particular,  the  ﬁnal  good  producer’s 
demand  function  takes  the  same  form  as  before  and  as  a  result,  optimal  behavior  on 
the  part  of  the  intermediate  goods  producers  will  give  p ∗  =  w ∗ /ρ.  However,  it  now 
13 

follows  that  any  policy  which  alters  the  value  of  N  will  necessarily  alter  the  markup  in 
equilibrium,  through  its  eﬀect  on  ρ. 
Although  this  extension  does  have  implications  for  the  eﬀects  of  tax  and  regulatory 
policies  on  both  allocations  and  welfare,  it  turns  out  that  it  has  no  impact  on  how 
these  policies  qualitatively  aﬀect  the  total  volume  of  market  work.  This  can  be  seen 
quite  readily  from  an  examination  of  the  household’s  utility  maximization  problem.  In 
equilibrium,  the  household  simply  maximizes: 
α  log(c) + (1  −  α)

(1  −  h)1−γ  −  1 
1  −  γ 

(5.1)

subject  to  the  budget  constraint 
c  =  w ∗  h  +  T, 

(5.2) 

where  we  allow  for  the  possibility  that  the  household  receives  some  form  of  transfer 
payment  from  the  government  or  some  proﬁts  from  ﬁrms.  Substituting  the  budget 
equation  into  the  objective  function  one  obtains  the  ﬁrst  order  condition: 
(1  −  α)  w ∗ h  +  T 
=  w ∗ 
α 
(1  −  h)γ 

(5.3)

h 
1 
(1  −  α) 
= 
. 
γ 
α  (1  −  h)
1 +  wT ∗ h 

(5.4) 

which  can  be  rearranged  to  give: 

In  particular,  if  transfers  are  zero,  because  either  license  revenues  are  discarded,  or 
because  the  entry  costs  represent  real  costs,  then  there  will  be  no  eﬀect  on  the  volume 
of  market  work.  However,  we  know  from  the  previous  analysis  that  in  the  case  of  a 
regulation  that  takes  the  form  of  a  real  resource  cost,  regulations  do  lead  to  less  entry 
and  hence  a  lower  value  of  N . This  lower  value  of  N  necessarily  implies  that  there  will 
be  higher  markups  in  equilibrium,  but  the  above  expression  tells  us  that  when  T  = 0, 
the  fact  that  the  markup  increases  has  no  implications  for  the  volume  of  market  work 
in  equilibrium.  It  does  not  follow  that  endogenous  markups  have  no  implications  for 
the  eﬀect  of  entry  barriers  on  allocations.  The  zero  proﬁt  condition  now  implies  that: 
y  = 

ρ(N ) 
φ 
1  −  ρ(N ) 

(5.5)

so  that  if  φ  increases,  the  reduction  in  N  leads to an opposing eﬀect  on  y. Since 
feasibility  requires  that: 
N (y  +  φ) =  h 
(5.6) 
it  follows  that  a  given  increase  in  φ  will  have  a  smaller  eﬀect  on  N  than  in  the  case 
where  markups  were  exogenous.  Lastly,  recall  that  consumption  of  the  household  is 
given  by: 
(5.7) 
c  =  N 1/ρ  y 
14 

so  that  the  endogenous  markup  will  aﬀect  the  drop  in  c  associated  with  a  given  increase 
in  φ  due  to  regulations. 
In  cases  where  the  regulation  leads  to  income  transfers,  either  through  rebate  of 
license  feels  or  through  higher  proﬁts,  it  remains  true  that  the  key  impulse  is  the  size 
of  the  transfer  relative  to  labor  income  and  that  the  key  parameter  that  determines  the 
magnitude  of  the  eﬀect  is  the  labor  supply  elasticity  γ.  In  particular,  given  the  volume 
of  the  transfer  relative  to  labor  income,  from  the  perspective  of  what  happens  to  hours 
of  market  work  it  is  completely  irrelevant  whether  the  regulation  is  accompanied  by  a 
change  in  markups. 

6.  Imperfect  Competition  in  the  Labor  Market 
The  previous  analysis  has  assumed  that  labor  markets  are  competitive.  Several  papers 
suggest that the  eﬀect  of  regulation,  speciﬁcally  entry  barriers,  on  labor  market  outcomes 
is  very  much  inﬂuenced  by  this  assumption.  In  this  section  we  extend  the  model  to  allow 
for  monopolistically  competitive  behavior  in  the  labor  market  on  the  part  of  workers  and 
show  that  the  results  from  the  previous  analysis  continue  to  hold.  This  ﬁnding  should 
not  be  interpreted  to  suggest  that  noncompetitive  wage  setting  cannot  have  interactions 
with  product  market  regulation  that  inﬂuence  time  devoted  to  market  work.  Rather, 
the  analysis  should  be  interpreted  as  showing  that  the  mere  presence  of  noncompetitive 
wage  setting  does  not  overturn  the  previous  results. 
The  extension  that  we  consider  seems  a  natural  way  to  bring  noncompetitive  wagesetting  into  the  standard  model  of  time  allocation  that  does  not  introduce  trading 
frictions,  and  follows  the  approach  in  Comin  and  Gertler  (2006).  Speciﬁcally,  we  now 
assume  a  continuum  of  households  with  mass  equal  to  one,  each  with  the  same  prefer
ences  as  used  earlier  in  the  analysis.  What  distinguishes  the  households  is  that  each  is 
endowed  with  a  diﬀerent  type  of  labor  services.  The  production  technology  for  inter
mediate  goods  is  now  written  as: 
y (i) = [ 

Z 

1 

h(j )η dj ]1/η 

(6.1) 

0 

where  h(j ) is  the  input  of  labor  services  from  household  j , and  0 <  η  <  1 determines 
the  degree  of  substitutability  of  the  various  labor  types.  Our  previous  analysis  can  be 
seen  as  the  special  case  of  η  = 1,  in  which  case  all  labor  services  are  perfect  substitutes. 
Once  again  there  is  a  ﬁxed  cost  φ  associated  with  operating  each  intermediate  goods 
technology,  but  it  is  now  more  convenient  to  assume  that  this  cost  is  measured  in  units 
of  the  ﬁnal  consumption  good  rather  than  labor,  since  labor  is  no  longer  homogeneous. 
We  consider  a  decentralized  equilibrium  in  which  each  household  sets  the  wage  rate 
for  its  labor  taking  as  given  all  other  prices  in  the  economy.  Each  intermediate  producer 
will  behave  competitively  in  the  labor  market,  taking  the  wages  of  each  labor  type  as 
given.  We  ﬁrst  solve  for  the  decentralized  equilibrium  in  the  absence  of  any  taxes 

15 

or  regulations,  though  in  the  interest  of  space  we  focus  on  the  equilibrium  value  of 
h.  Because  this  case  is  a  relatively  straightforward  extension  of  the  earlier  model  we 
do  repeat  a  formal  deﬁnition  of  equilibrium.  We  note,  however,  that  a  symmetric 
equilibrium  will  now  involve  all  of  the  same  objects  as  before,  and  a  new  function  g  ∗ (w) 
that  represents  the  demand  for  each  type  of  labor  as  a  function  of  its  own  wage  holding 
all  other  prices  equal  to  their  equilibrium  values.  Similarly  to  what  happens  in  the 
market  for  intermediate  goods,  it  is  easy  to  show  that  this  function  takes  the  form 
1 
Bw η−1  , where  B  is  a  constant.  It  follows  that  in  equilibrium,  household  j  will  choose 
c,  h  and  w  to  maximize: 
α  log(c) + (1  −  α)

(1  −  h)1−γ  −  1 
1  −  γ 

(6.2)

subject  to: 
c  =  wh 
h  =  Bw

(6.3) 
1 
η−1 

Substituting  into  the  objective  function,  taking  ﬁrst  order  conditions  and  rearranging, 
one  obtains  the  following  expression  that  characterizes  the  optimal  choice  of  h: 
(1  −  α) 
h 
=  η. 
α  (1  −  h)γ 

(6.4)

This  expression  has  a  natural  interpretation  in  terms  of  markups.  The  inverse  of  the 
left-hand  side  of  this  equation  reﬂects  the  gain  to  the  worker  of  supplying  an  extra 
unit  of  labor,  and  the  right  hand  side  says  that  in  the  monopolistically  competitive 
equilibrium  this  value  will  be  a  markup  of  1/η  times  its  value  in  the  competitive  case. 
It  is  easy  to  show  that  the  Social  Planner’s  choice  of  h  is  the  same  as  before  and 
therefore  satisﬁes  equation  (6.4)  except  with  a  value  of  1/ρ  on  the  right  hand  side, 
and  the  equilibrium  allocation  assuming  a  competitive  labor  market  would  have  the 
value  1  on  the  right  hand  side.  It  follows  that  each  source  of  imperfect  competition 
decreases  hours  of  work  relative  to  the  eﬃcient  allocation.  These  expressions  show  that 
imperfect  competition  in  either  the  labor  market  or  the  market  for  intermediate  goods 
have  symmetric  eﬀects  on  hours  of  work,  since  the  right  hand  side  of  equation  (6.4)  is 
simply  ηρ  times  the  right  hand  side  of  the  equation  for  the  eﬃcient  allocation  of  time. 
Of  course,  how  large  the  impact  is  on  h  relative  to  the  eﬃcient  allocation  depends  on 
the  the  value  of  γ. 
While  the  above  analysis  shows  that  imperfect  competition  in  either  labor  or  product 
markets  induces  ineﬃciencies  in  the  allocation  of  time  to  market  work,  the  issue  of 
interest  here  is  how  a  change  in  product  market  regulation  aﬀects  time  devoted  to 
market  work  given  imperfect  competition  in  the  labor  market.  It  turns  out  that  our 
previous  analysis  of  the  eﬀects  on  hours  of  work  goes  through  without  any  change. 
Speciﬁcally,  all  of  our  previous  expressions  for  hours  of  work  remain  unchanged  except 
16 

for  the  addition  of  the  term  η  on  the  right  hand  side.  It  follows  that  the  presence  of 
labor  market  imperfections  of  the  sort  considered  here  has  virtually  no  impact  on  how 
changes  in  regulation  aﬀect  market  work.  In  particular,  the  result  that  regulations  that 
increase  the  real  resource  costs  associated  with  entry  has  no  eﬀect  on  time  allocated  to 
market  work  continues  to  hold  in  this  model,  independently  of  the  value  of  η. The  same 
holds  true  for  the  case  of  license  fees  that  are  thrown  away.  In  the  case  of  license  fees 
that  are  rebated,  it  remains  true  that  the  key  driving  force  is  the  size  of  the  rebates 
relative  to  labor  income  and  the  key  parameter  that  dictates  how  this  driving  force  is 
transformed  in  a  change  in  hours  is  the  labor  supply  elasticity  parameter  γ. 
The statement that the  value of  η  does  not  aﬀect  how  a  given  change  in  product 
market  regulations  aﬀect  total  market  work  should  not  be  confused  with  the  statement 
that  the  value  of  η  does  not  aﬀect  hours  of  market  work.  Our  results  most  deﬁnitely 
imply  that  diﬀerences  in  η  do  impact  on  hours  of  work,  so  that  economies  with  diﬀerent 
values  of  η  will  have  diﬀerent  equilibrium  time  allocations. 

7.  A  Two-Sector  Analysis 
The  framework  used  for  the  above  analysis  is  best  suited  to  comparing  two  economies 
which  have  diﬀerences  in  product  market  regulation  across  all  sectors.  However,  in 
reality  there  are  many  prominent  examples  of  product  market  regulations  that  are  sector 
speciﬁc.  In  this  section  we  consider  the  simplest  extension  of  the  model  to  permit  an 
analysis  of  this  issue.  To  pursue  this  we  extend  the  original  model  to  allow  for  two  ﬁnal 
consumption  goods.  We  now  write  preferences  as: 
α  log(c) + (1 −  α)

(1 −  h)1−γ  −  1 
1 −  γ 

(7.1)

where  c  is  now  total  consumption  and  h  is  total  time  devoted  to  market  work.  Total 
consumption  is  a  CES  aggregate  of  the  two  ﬁnal  consumption  goods,  denoted  by  c1  and 
c2 : 
(7.2) 
c  = (µcε 1  + (1 −  µ)c2 )1/ε 
where  ε  determines  the  elasticity  of  substitution  between  the  two  goods. 
The  technology  in  sector  2  is  the  same  as  that  considered  previously:  there  is  a 
continuum  of  potential  intermediate  goods  that  have  linear  production  functions  with 
unit  marginal  cost  and  face  the  ﬁxed  set-up  cost  φ, and  there is a  ﬁnal  goods  producer 
that  aggregates  the  intermediate  goods  into  the  ﬁnal  consumption  good  c2 : 
Z  N 
c2  = [ 
y(i)ρ di]1/ρ  . 
(7.3) 
0 

While  we  could  consider  a  symmetric  structure  for  the  production  of  the  other  ﬁnal 
good,  for  our  purposes  it  is  suﬃcient  to  consider  the  simpler  structure  in  which  c1  is 
produced  using  only  labor  with  a  linear  technology.  We  set  the  marginal  productivity 
17 

of  this  technology  to  one  and  assume  that  there  are  no  ﬁxed  costs  of  operation  in  this 
sector. 
We  consider  an  equilibrium  in  which  the  market  for  labor  and  the  markets  for  ﬁnal 
goods  are  competitive,  but  assume  that  the  market  for  intermediates  used  in  production 
of  the  c2  is  monopolistically  competitive  as  before.  Equilibrium  for  this  economy  is  a 
straightforward  generalization  of  that  in  the  previous  economies  studied,  so  we  do  not 
present  the  details  here.  As  before,  we  focus  on  symmetric  equilibria,  in  which  the 
prices  of  all  intermediate  goods  are  the  same,  denoted  by  p∗y . We  normalize  the  price 
of  c1  to  be  one,  denote  the  wage  rate  by  w ∗ , and  the  price  of  c2  by  p ∗ 2 . Given  the 
linear  technology  to  produce  c1 ,  it must  be that  w ∗  = 1  in  equilibrium.  The  demand 
functions  for  intermediate  goods  take  on  the  same  form  as  previously,  and  hence  prices 
in  equilibrium  will  still  be  given  by  the  same  markup: 
p∗ y  = 

1 
. 
ρ 

(7.4)

Finally,  given  that  the  ﬁnal  goods  producer  of  c2  is  competitive,  proﬁts  must  equal  zero 
in  equilibrium: 
(7.5) 
p ∗ 2 N 1/ρ  y ∗  −  N p ∗ y y ∗  = 0 
which  using  p∗ y  = 1/ρ  implies  that: 
p ∗ 2  =

1  ρ−1 
N  ρ . 
ρ 

(7.6)

It  follows  that  all  prices  can  be  expressed  in  terms  of  equilibrium  allocations. 
The  household’s  optimization  problem  can  be  written  as  maximizing: 
α 
(1  −  h)1−γ  −  1 
log(µcε1  + (1  −  µ)cε 2 ) + (1  −  α)
ε 
1  −  γ 

(7.7)

subject  to  the  budget  equation: 
c1  +  p∗ 2 c2  =  h 

(7.8) 

Letting  λ  be  the  multiplier  on  the  budget  constraint,  we  obtain  ﬁrst  order  conditions: 
(1  −  α)(1  −  h)−γ  =  λ 
αµ  ε−1 
c 
=  λ 
cε  1 
α(1  −  µ)  ε−1 
c 2 =  λp ∗ 2 
cε 
Combining  equations  (7.9),  (7.10)  gives: 
(1  −  α)(1  −  h)−γ  = 

αµ
. 
c1 (µ  + (1  −  µ)[ cc21  ]ε ) 
18 

(7.9) 
(7.10) 
(7.11) 

(7.12) 

Equations  (7.10)  and  (7.11)  and  and  (7.6)  imply: 
ρ−1
1 
c2 
µ 
= [ 
N  ρ ] ε−1 =  A(N ) 
c1 
(1  −  µ)ρ 

(7.13) 

Using  equation  (7.6)  to  substitute  for  p∗ 2  in  the  budget  equation  gives: 
N (ρ−1)/ρ  c2  =  ρ(h  −  c1 ). 

(7.14) 

Using  equation  (7.13)  this  can  be  written  as: 
c1  = 

ρh 
N (ρ−1)/ρ A(N)

+  ρ 

. 

(7.15) 

Substituting  equations  (7.13)  and  (7.15)  into  the  right  hand  side  of  equation  (7.12)  and 
simplifying  yields: 
h 
(1  −  α) 
= 1 
α  (1  −  h)γ 

(7.16) 

(1  −  α)  h  +  T 
= 1 
α  (1  −  h)γ 

(7.17) 

which  is  exactly  the  same  expression  as  in  the  one-sector  case.  Having  determined  the 
equilibrium  value  of  h  one  can  easily  solve  for  the  other  components  of  the  equilibrium 
allocation. 
One  can  show  that  the  previous  analysis  continues  to  carry  over  to  the  current 
context  as  well.  In  particular,  if  there  is  a  regulation  that  involves  a  license  fee  κ  to 
enter  the  intermediate  goods  sector,  then  aggregate  market  work  will  satisfy: 

where  T  is  the  magnitude  of  the  transfer  from  the  government  to  the  representative 
household.  This  gives  rise  to  the  same  type  of  expression  as  derived  earlier  in  the  one 
sector  case. 
An  interesting  feature  of  the  two-sector  analysis  is  that  we  can  also  address  how 
industry  speciﬁc  regulations  aﬀect  the  sectoral  allocation  of  hours.  In  this  regard,  it  is 
of  interest  to  rewrite  expression  (7.15)  as: 
ρ 
h1 
= 
(1−ρ)/ρ 
h 
A(N )N
+  ρ 

(7.18) 

which  can  be  simpliﬁed  to: 
h1 
= 
h 

1 
µ 
( 1−µ 
)

1 
ε−1 

ρ

ε 
1−ε 

N 

ε(ρ−1) 
(ε−1)ρ 

(7.19) 
+ 1 

This  expression  gives  the  fraction  of  total  work  that  is  carried  out  in  sector  1.  This 
expression  is  useful  in  interpreting  ﬁndings  from  industry  level  studies.  In  particular, 
consider  the  case  of  a  regulation  that  increases  entry  costs  in  the  intermediate  goods 
19 

sector,  and  assume  that  this  increase  takes  the  form  of  real  resource  outlays,  i.e.,  an 
increase  in  the  value  of  φ.  As  was  true  in  the  one-good  model,  our  above  analysis  tells  us 
that  this  regulation  will  have  no  eﬀect  on  aggregate  market  work.  However,  this  type  of 
regulation  will  lead  to  a  decrease  in  the  mass  of  intermediate  goods  ﬁrms  that  operate, 
and  equation  (7.19)  shows  how  this  decrease  in  N  will  translate  into  a  change  in  the 
relative  amount  of  work  done  in  each  of  the  two  sectors.  The  size  of  this  eﬀect  depends 
on  the  two  elasticity  parameters,  ε  and  ρ,  but  recalling  that  ρ  satisﬁes  0  <  ρ  <  1, the 
sign  of  the  response  will  be  determined  by  the  sign  of  ε.  In  particular,  if  ε  >  0, then 
hours  of  market  work  in  sector  2  will  decrease,  while  if  ε  <  0,  hours  of  market  work  in 
sector  2  will  actually  increase.  The  key  point  however,  is  that  the  change  in  industry 
hours  is  not  informative  about  the  eﬀect  of  this  type  of  regulation  on  aggregate  hours 
of  work. 
There  is  an  alternative  interpretation  of  our  two-sector  analysis  which  is  also  of  po
tential  interest.  Speciﬁcally,  rather  than  interpreting  the  two  sectors  to  be  two  diﬀerent 
market  sectors,  one  could  interpret  sector  1  to  be  the  home  sector  and  sector  2  to  be  the 
market  sector.  In  this  case,  any  movement  of  hours  between  the  two  sectors  will  show 
up  as  changes  in  market  work  even  if  changes  in  total  work  are  constant.  In  the  case 
just  discussed  in  the  previous  paragraph,  if  we  assume  that  home  and  market  goods  are 
relatively  good  substitutes,  so  that  ε  >  0,  then  a  regulation  which  increases  the  real 
resource  costs  of  entry  in  the  intermediate  goods  sector  will  lead  to  a  fall  in  hours  of 
market  work.  Of  course,  this  fall  in  market  work  will  be  accompanied  by  an  oﬀsetting 
increase  in  the  amount  of  homework.  Recent  work  on  cross-country  comparisons  of 
time  use  (see  e.g.,  Freeman  and  Schettkat  (2002),  Olovsson  (2004)  and  Ragan  (2005)) 
indicate  that  homework  is  higher  in  the  countries  of  continental  Europe,  so  this  channel 
may  be  signiﬁcant.  Of  course,  as  shown  in  Olovsson  (2004),  Ragan  (2005)  and  Rogerson 
(2005,  2006b),  it  is  also  true  that  adding  home  production  inﬂuences  how  market  hours 
respond  to  other  driving  forces,  such  as  taxes. 

8.  General  Preferences 
The  previous  analysis  has  focused  on  preferences  that  are  consistent  with  balanced 
growth.  While  there  is  good  reason  to  use  this  condition  to  discipline  preferences  in 
the  context  of  issues  involving  labor  supply,  it  is  also  of  interest  to  understand  how  our 
results  carry  over  to  other  speciﬁcation  of  preferences.  The  key  point  that  we  want  to 
make  in  this  section  is  that  the  strong  link  between  how  labor  taxes  and  entry  barriers 
aﬀect  hours  of  work  continues  to  hold  with  more  general  preferences. 
We  begin  with  the  analysis  of  labor  income  taxes.  If  we  had  simply  started  with 
a  utility  function  u(c,  1  −  h),  then  the  expressions  that  we  would  have  derived  for  the 
eﬀect  of  taxes  would  have  been: 
u2 ((1  −  τ )wh,  1  −  h) 
= (1  −  τ )w 
u1 ((1  −  τ )wh,  1  −  h) 
20 

(8.1) 

in  the  case  where  the  tax  revenues  are  not  returned  by  a  lump-sum  transfer,  and 
u2 (wh,  1 −  h) 
= (1 −  τ )w 
u1 (wh,  1 −  h) 

(8.2) 

u2 (wh,  1 −  h) 
= w 
u1 (wh,  1 −  h) 

(8.3) 

u2 (wh  + T,  1 −  h) 
= w 
u1 (wh  + T,  1 −  h) 

(8.4) 

u2 ((1 + b)wh,  1 −  h) 
= w 
u1 ((1 + b)wh,  1 −  h) 

(8.5) 

for  the  case  in  which  revenues  are  returned  via  a  lump-sum  transfer.  The  diﬀerence 
between  these  expressions  and  those  derived  earlier  is  that  the  wage  rate  w  now  appears. 
In  equilibrium,  wages  are  an  increasing  function  of  N ,  and  since  taxes  will  inﬂuence  N , 
the  wage  rate  w  will  vary  in  response  to  tax  policies,  thereby  introducing  additional 
eﬀects.  However,  in  the  ﬁrst expression above,  it  should be noted  that  the eﬀect  on  h  is 
determined  by  the  change  in  w(1 −  τ ) in  conjunction  with  the  properties  of  preferences. 
In  the  second  case  there  are  two  eﬀects:  holding  w  constant,  the  increase  in  τ  leads  to 
lower  hours  worked,  but  then  there  is  the  additional  eﬀect  on  hours  due  to  the  change 
in  w. 
Next  consider  the  case  of  changes  to  entry  barriers.  If  the  entry  barrier  represents 
real  time  costs,  then  hours  will  be  determined  by  the  condition: 

where once again,  the  wage  w,  will  be  decreasing  in  N ,  which  is  directly  aﬀected  by 
the  entry  barrier.  Comparing  this  expression  to  equation  (8.1),  the  key  point  is  that 
the  mechanics  are  identical:  the  equations  are  of  the  exact  same  form,  and  the  driving 
forces  enter  in  exactly  the  same  form.  One  should  not  conclude  that  the  driving  force 
is  larger  in  the  case  of  taxes,  since  the  eﬀect  on  w  is  larger  in  the  entry  barrier  case  due 
to  the  fact  that  the  entry  barrier  has  a  direct  eﬀect  on  N . 
If  we  instead  considered  the  case  in  which  the  entry  barrier  represents  a  fee  that  is 
transferred to consumers  via a  lump-sum  transfer,  then  the  condition  for  hours  becomes: 

As  before,  in  equilibrium,  T  is  proportional  to  wh,  so that letting this constant of 
proportionality  be  equal  to  b,  this  can  be  written  as: 

But  making  the  change  of  variable  w̃ = (1 + b)w,  and  deﬁning  (1 −  τ̃ ) = 1/(1 + b), this 
expression  can  be  rewritten  as: 
u2 (w̃h,  1 −  h) 
= (1 −  τ̃ )w 
˜
u1 (w̃h,  1 −  h) 

(8.6) 

Comparing  this  expression  with  equation  (8.2),  one  again  notes  that  they  take  on  the 
same  form. 

21 

To  summarize,  the  point  of  this  section  has  been  to  argue  that  even  with  general 
preferences,  the  strong  connection  between  the  mechanisms  through  which  labor  taxes 
and  entry  barriers  aﬀect  hours  of  market  work  remains.  In  particular,  this  analysis 
suggests  that  both  tax  policy  and  entry  barriers  give  rise  to  two  key  driving  forces: 
changes  in  the  return  to  working,  and  transfers.  How  these  driving  forces  translates 
into  changes  in  hours  of  work  is  in  turn  dictated  by  the  labor  supply  elasticities  implicit 
in  preferences.4 

9.  Conclusions 
The goal of this paper  was to  assess  the  eﬀect  of  product  market  regulations  which  take 
the  form  of  increased  entry  costs  on  time  allocated  to  market  work  in  the  context  of  a 
standard  aggregate  model  of  time  allocation.  Several  results  have  emerged.  The  eﬀect 
of  product  market  regulation  on  time  allocated  to  market  work  can  be  understood  in 
exactly  the  same  way  as  the  eﬀect  of  labor  or  consumption  taxes  on  the  time  allocated 
to  market  work.  The  key  driving  force  in  both  cases  is  the  implicit  transfer  of  resources 
to  households  as  a  fraction  of  total  labor  income,  and  the  key  feature  of  the  model  that 
inﬂuences  the  propagation  of  this  driving  force  is  the  labor  supply  elasticity.  A  direct 
implication  of  this  is  that  regulations  which  increase  the  real  resource  costs  associated 
with  entry  have  no  impact  on  time  devoted  to  market  work.  Our  analysis  also  showed 
that  diﬀerences  in  the  magnitude  of  entry  barriers  associated  with  regulation  are  not 
very  informative  about  the  impact  of  regulations  on  market  work,  since  large  diﬀerences 
in  regulatory  barriers  may  be  associated  with  small  diﬀerences  in  eﬀective  transfer  pay
ments.  Our  results  were  robust  to  allowing  for  endogenous  markups,  a  particular  form 
of  imperfect  competition  in  the  labor  market,  and  to  having  multiple  ﬁnal  goods.  The 
multi-sector  model  also  indicates  that  analysis  of  outcomes  in  individual  sectors  are 
unlikely  to  yield  information  regarding  the  eﬀect  of  labor  market  regulation  on  total 
market  work.  Taken  at  face  value,  our  results  indicate  that  stories  which  stress  product 
market  regulation  rather  than  taxes  as  a  key  driving  force  face  a  key  challenge.  Since 
the  propagation  mechanisms  are  identical,  the  relative  importance  of  the  two  is  deter
mined  by  the  relative  importance  of  the  implied  transfer  payments.  We  are  aware  of 
no  evidence  that  suggests  that  diﬀerences  in  implicit  transfers  associated  with  product 
market  regulation  are  comparable  to  the  diﬀerences  in  revenues  associated  with  either 
labor  or  consumption  taxation.  Of  course,  this  conclusion  should  be  qualiﬁed  by  the 
statement  that  our  ﬁndings  take  place  in  the  context  of  a  benchmark  model.  Recent 
work  that  stresses  the  interaction  of  trading  frictions  in  the  labor  market  and  the  eﬀects 
of  product  market  regulations  suggest  channels  which  may  overturn  this  ﬁnding. 

4 

There  is  an  important  quantitative  issue  that  this  analysis  does  not  address.  Namely,  what  are  the 
relative  quantitative  eﬀects  of  tax  policies  and  entry  barriers  on  wages. 

22 

References 
[1]  Alesina,  A.,  E.  Glaeser,  and  B.  Sacerdote,  “Work  and  Leisure  in  the  US  and  Europe: 
Why  So  Diﬀerent?,”  forthcoming  in  NBER  Macroeconomics  Annual,  2006. 
[2]  Bertrand,  M.,	 and  F.  Kramarz,  “Does  Entry  Regulation  Hinder  Job  Creation? 
Evidence  from  the  French  Retail  Industry,”  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics  117 
(2002),  1369-1413. 
[3]  Blanchard,  O.,  and  F.  Giavazzi,  “Macroeconomic  Eﬀects  of  Regulation  and  Dereg
ulation  in  Goods  and  Labor  Markets,”  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics  117  (2002), 
879-907. 
[4]  Boeri,  T.,  G.  Nicoletti,  and  S.  Scarpetta,  “Regulation  and  Labor  Market  Perfor
mance,”  CEPR  Working  Paper  2420,  2000. 
[5]  Comin,  D.,  and  M.  Gertler,  “Medium  Term  Business  Cycles,”  forthcoming,  Amer
ican  Economic  Review,  2006. 
[6]  Davis,  S.,  and  M.  Henreksson,  “Tax  Eﬀects  on  Work  Activity,  Industry  Mix  and 
Shadow  Economy  Size:  Evidence  from  Rich  Country  Comparisons”,  NBER  Work
ing  Paper  #10509,  2004. 
[7]  Djankov,  S.,  R.  Laporta,  F.  Lopez  de  Silanes  and  A.  Shleifer,  “The  Regulation  of 
Entry,”  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics  117  (2002),  1-37. 
[8]  Ebell,  M.,  and  C.  Haefke,“The  Missing  Link:  Product  Market  Regulation,  Collec
tive  Bargaining  and  the  European  Unemployment  Puzzle”,  manuscript,  2004. 
[9]  Ebell,  M.,  and  C.  Haefke,  “Product  Market  Deregulation  and  the  US  Employment 
Miracle,”  manuscript,  2006. 
[10]  Fonseca,  R.,  P.  Lopez-Garcia,  and  C.  Pissarides,  “Entrepreneurship,  Start-Up  Costs 
and  Unemployment,”  European  Economic  Review  45  (2001),  692-705. 
[11]  Freeman,  R.,  and  R.  Schettkat,  “Marketization  of  Production  and  the  US-Europe 
Employment  Gap”,  NBER  Working  Paper,  2002. 
[12]  Lopez-Garcia,  P.,  “Labor  Market  Performance  and  Start-Up  Costs:	 OECD  Evi
dence,”  CESifo  Working  Paper  #849,  2003. 
[13]  Messina,  J.,  “The  Role  of  Product  Market  Regulations  in  the  Process  of  Structural 
Change,”  forthcoming  European  Economic  Review,  2006. 
[14]  Nickell,  S.,	 “Product  Markets  and  Labor  Markets,”  Labor  Economics  6  (1999), 
1-20. 

23 

[15]  Olovsson,  C.,  “Why  Do  Europeans  Work  So  Little?,”  mimeo,  Stockholm  School  of 
Economics,  2004. 
[16]  Prescott,  E.,  “Why  Do  Americans  Work  So  Much  More  than  Europeans?”,  Quar
terly  Review  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Minneapolis,  July  2004,  2-13. 
[17]  Ragan,  K.,  “Fiscal  Policy  and  the  Family:  Explaining  Labor  Supply  in  a  Model 
with  Household  Production,”  mimeo,  University  of  Chicago,  2005. 
[18]  Rogerson,  R.,  “Structural  Transformation  and  the  Deterioration  of  European  Labor 
Market  Outcomes,”  mimeo,  2005. 
[19]  Rogerson,  R.,  “Understanding  Diﬀerences  in  Hours  Worked,”  manuscript  2006. 
[20]  Rogerson,  R.,“Taxes  and  Market  Work:  Is  Scandinavia  an  Outlier?,”  manuscript 
2006b. 

24


