NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NEWS SHOCKS AND OPTIMAL MONETARY POLICY
Guido Lorenzoni
Working Paper 12898
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12898

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2007

MIT and NBER. Email: glorenzo@mit.edu. I wish to thank for useful comments Marios Angeletos,
Ricardo Caballero, Marvin Goodfriend, Veronica Guerrieri, Ivan Werning and seminar participants
at the SED Meetings (Budapest), UQAM (Montreal), the Kansas City Fed, and MIT. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2007 by Guido Lorenzoni. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

News Shocks and Optimal Monetary Policy
Guido Lorenzoni
NBER Working Paper No. 12898
February 2007
JEL No. D83,E32,E52
ABSTRACT
This paper studies monetary policy in a model where output fluctuations are caused by shocks to public
beliefs on the economy's fundamentals. I ask whether monetary policy can offset the effect of these
shocks and whether this offsetting is socially desirable. I consider an environment with dispersed information
and two aggregate shocks: a productivity shock and a "news shock" which affects aggregate beliefs.
Neither the central bank nor individual agents can distinguish the two shocks when they hit the economy.
The main results are: (1) despite the lack of superior information an appropriate monetary policy rule
can change the economy's response to the two shocks; (2) monetary policy can achieve full aggregate
stabilization, that is, it can induce a path for aggregate output that is identical to that which would
arise under full information; (3) however, full aggregate stabilization is typically not optimal. The
fact that monetary policy can tackle the two shocks separately is due to two crucial ingredients. First,
agents are forward looking. Second, current fundamental shocks will become public information in
the future and the central bank will be able to respond to them at that time. By announcing its response
to future information, the central bank can influence the expected real interest rate faced by agents
with different beliefs and, thus, induce an optimal use of the information dispersed in the economy.
Guido Lorenzoni
MIT Department of Economics
E52-251C
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
glorenzo@mit.edu

1

Introduction

Suppose a central bank observes an unexpected expansion in economic activity. This could
be due to a shift in fundamentals, say an aggregate productivity shock, or to a shift in public
beliefs with no actual change in the economy’s fundamentals. If the central bank could tell
apart the two shocks the optimal response would be simple: accommodate the first type of
shock and oﬀset the second. In reality, however, central banks can rarely tell apart these shocks
when they hit the economy. What can the central bank do in this case? What is the optimal
monetary policy response? In this paper, I address these questions in the context of a model
with dispersed information, which allows for a micro-founded treatment of fundamental shocks
and shocks to public beliefs.
The US experience in the second half of the 90s has fueled a rich debate on these issues.
The run up in asset prices has been taken by many as a sign of optimistic expectations on the
presence of widespread technological innovations. In this context, the advice given by diﬀerent
economists has been strongly influenced by the assumptions made about the ability of the
central bank to identify the economy’s actual fundamentals. Some, e.g. Cecchetti et al. (2000)
and Dupor (2002), have attributed to the central bank some form of superior information and
have advocated early intervention to contain an expansion driven by incorrect beliefs. Others,
e.g. Bernanke and Gertler (2001), have emphasized the uncertainty associated with the central
bank’s decisions and have advocated sticking to a simple inflation-targeting rule. In this paper,
I explore the idea that, even if the central bank does not have superior information, a policy
rule can be designed to take into account, and partially oﬀset, “aggregate mistakes” by the
private sector regarding the economy’s fundamentals.
I consider an economy where aggregate productivity is subject to unobservable random
shocks. Agents have access to a noisy public signal of aggregate productivity, which summarizes
public news about technological advances, aggregate statistics, and information reflected in
stock market prices and other financial variables. The noise component in this signal, or “news
shock,” introduces shocks to public beliefs which are uncorrelated with actual productivity
shocks. In addition to the public signal, agents have access to private information regarding
the realized productivity in the sector where they work. Due to cross-sectional heterogeneity,
this information is not suﬃcient to identify the value of the aggregate shock. Therefore, agents
combine public and private sources of information to forecast the aggregate behavior of the
economy. The central bank has only access to public information.
1

In this environment, I obtain three main results. First, using a policy rule which responds to
past aggregate shocks, the monetary authority can aﬀect the relative response of the economy
to productivity shocks and news shocks. Second, monetary policy can achieve full aggregate
stabilization, that is, it can induce a path for aggregate output that is identical to that which
would arise under full information. Third, full aggregate stabilization is typically suboptimal
and optimal monetary policy partially accommodates the non-fundamental output fluctuations
due to news.
The fact that monetary policy can tackle the two shocks separately is due to two crucial
ingredients. First, agents are forward looking. Second, productivity shocks are unobservable
when they are realized, but become public knowledge in later periods. At that point, the central
bank can respond to them. By choosing an appropriate policy rule the monetary authority can
then alter the way in which agents respond to private and public information. For example,
the monetary authority can announce that it will increase the nominal price level following an
actual increase in aggregate productivity. Under this policy, agents observing an increase in
productivity in their own sector expect higher inflation compared to agents who only observe
a positive public signal. Therefore, they face a lower expected real interest rate and choose to
consume more. I will show that then equilibrium output becomes more responsive to private
information and less to public information. This moderates the economy’s response to news
shocks. This result points to an idea which applies more generally in models with dispersed
information. If future policy is set contingent on variables that are imperfectly observed today,
this can change the agents’ reaction to diﬀerent sources of information, and thus aﬀect the
equilibrium allocation.
In the model presented, the power of policy rules to shape the economy’s response to
diﬀerent shocks is surprisingly strong. Namely, by adopting the appropriate rule the central
bank can support an equilibrium where aggregate output responds one for one to fundamentals
and does not respond at all to the noise in public news. However, such a policy is typically
suboptimal, since it has undesirable consequences in terms of the cross-sectional allocation. In
particular, full stabilization generates an ineﬃcient compression in the distribution of relative
prices. This causes welfare losses that need to be balanced against the welfare gains associated
to smaller aggregate volatility.
In this paper, I am able to derive equilibrium quantities and welfare in closed form. This
is possible thanks to an assumption about the random selection of consumption baskets. In

2

particular, I maintain the convenience of a continuum of goods in each basket, while, at the
same time, I allow for baskets that diﬀer from consumer to consumer. This technical solution
may be usefully adapted to other models of information diﬀusion with random matching. Its
main advantage is that it allows to construct models where, each period, an agent interacts
with a large number of agents, and, at the same time, does not fully learn about aggregate
behavior.
A number of recent papers, starting with Woodford (2002) and Sims (2003), have revived
the study of monetary models with imperfect common knowledge, in the tradition of Phelps
(1969) and Lucas (1972).1 In particular, this paper is closely related to Hellwig (2005) and
Adam (2006), who study monetary policy in economies where money supply is imperfectly
observed by the public. In both papers consumers’ decisions are essentially static, as a cashin-advance constraint is present and always binding. Therefore, the forward-looking element,
which is crucial in this paper, is absent in their models. In the earlier literature, King (1982)
was the first to recognize the power of policy rules in models with imperfect information. He
noticed that “prospective feedback actions” responding to “disturbances that are currently
imperfectly known by agents” can aﬀect real outcomes.2 However, the mechanism in King
(1982) is based on the fact that diﬀerent policy rules change the informational content of
prices. As I will show below, that channel is absent in this paper. Here, policy rules matter
because they aﬀect agents’ incentives to respond to private and public signals.
The paper is also related to the literature on optimal monetary policy with uncertain fundamentals, including Aoki (2003), Svensson and Woodford (2003, 2005), and Reis (2003). A
distinctive feature of the environment in this paper is that private agents have access to superior information about fundamentals in their local market but not in the aggregate. In this
case, the monetary policy rule is designed to induce the most eﬃcient use of the information scattered across the economy. The presence of dispersed information generates a tension
between aggregate eﬃciency and cross-sectional eﬃciency in the design of an optimal policy
rule.
There is a growing literature on the eﬀect of expectations and news on the business cycle.
In particular, Christiano, Motto and Rostagno (2006) and Lorenzoni (2006) show that shocks
1

See also Moscarini (2004), Milani (2005), Nimark (2005), Bacchetta and Van Wincoop (2005), Luo (2006),
Maćkowiak and Wiederholt (2006). Mankiw and Reis (2002) and Reis (2006) explore the complementary idea
of lags in informational adjustment as a source of nominal rigidity.
2
King (1982), p. 248.

3

to expectations about productivity can generate realistic aggregate demand disturbances in
business cycle models with nominal rigidities.3 In Christiano, Motto and Rostagno (2006)
the monetary authority has full information regarding aggregate shocks and can adjust the
nominal interest rate in such a way so as to essentially oﬀset the eﬀect of the news shock and
replicate the behavior of the corresponding flexible price economy. Moreover, this oﬀsetting
is optimal in their model.4 This leads to the question: are expectations-driven cycles merely
a symptom of a suboptimal monetary regime, or is there some amount of expectations-driven
volatility that survives under optimal monetary policy? This paper addresses this question
in the setup of Lorenzoni (2006) and shows that optimal monetary policy does not eliminate
news-driven business cycles. One may think that this result comes immediately from the
assumption that the monetary authority has limited information. That is, it would seem that
the central bank cannot intervene to bring output towards its “natural” level, given that this
natural level is unknown. The analysis in this paper shows that the argument is subtler.
The monetary authority could eliminate the aggregate eﬀect of news shocks by announcing
an appropriate monetary rule. However, this rule is not optimal due to its undesirable crosssectional consequences.
A recent series of papers, starting with Morris and Shin (2002), looks at environments with
imperfect common knowledge, asking whether, from the point of view of social welfare, agents
put too much or too little weight on public signals relative to private signals.5 The model in
this paper has a similar flavor, since, under the wrong monetary policy rule, total output may
indeed respond too much (or too little) to public news. An interesting policy question that
has been addressed in this literature is what are the welfare consequences of public releases of
information. Morris and Shin (2002) obtain the paradoxical result that, in a simple coordination game, making a public signal available to the players may be detrimental for welfare. This
result has started a lively debate on the merits of transparency about macroeconomic policy.6
Using my model, I can address the related question whether better information about macroeconomic fundamentals is welfare improving. Here, a number of issues open up, regarding
aggregate and cross-sectional eﬃciency. First, it is true that an increase in the precision of the
3

See Beaudry and Portier (2006) and Jaimovich and Rebelo (2006) for flexible price models of cycles driven
by news about future productivity.
4
See Appendix B in Christiano, Motto and Rostagno (2006).
5
See Angeletos and Pavan (2005), Hellwig (2005), Hellwig and Veldkamp (2006), Angeletos, Lorenzoni and
Pavan (2007), Amador and Weill (2007).
6
See Amato, Morris and Shin (2002), Svensson (2005), Hellwig (2005), Morris and Shin (2005).

4

public signal may have negative welfare consequences, because it increases the response of the
economy to news and, thus, may increase output gap volatility.7 In Section 5, I show that, for
a realistic choice of parameters, there is a hump-shaped relation between the precision of the
public signal and output gap volatility. Second, a more precise public signal not only has effects on the output gap, but also on the cross-sectional allocation. As agents have more precise
information on average productivity, they can set relative prices that are more responsive to
their idiosyncratic shocks. Therefore, a more precise public signal is welfare improving because
it allows a more eﬃcient allocation of consumption and labor eﬀort across sectors. What is the
total welfare eﬀect of increasing the precision of the public signal? In the examples considered,
using realistic parameter values, the cross-sectional eﬀect dominates and a more precise public
signal increases total welfare. Therefore, the model implications are, overall, pro-transparency.
The model is introduced in Section 2. In Section 3, I characterize rational expectations
equilibria under diﬀerent monetary policy rules, show how the policy rule aﬀects the real allocation, and show that full aggregate stabilization is feasible. In Section 4, I derive the welfare
implications of diﬀerent monetary policy rules and I show that full aggregate stabilization is
typically suboptimal. In Section 5, I consider the model implications for transparency. Section
6 concludes.

2

The Model

2.1

Setup

I consider a dynamic model of monopolistic competition à la Dixit-Stiglitz with heterogeneous
productivity shocks and imperfect information regarding aggregate shocks. Prices are set at
the beginning of each period, but are, otherwise, flexible.
There is a continuum of infinitely lived households uniformly distributed on the unit interval
[0, 1]. Each household i is made of two agents: a consumer and a producer who is specialized
in the production of good i. Preferences are represented by the utility function:
"∞
¶#
X µ
1
1+η
t
N
β ln Cit −
E
,
1 + η it
t=0
where Cit is a consumption index, described below, and Nit is the labor eﬀort of producer i.
Each period t, consumer i consumes a random sample of the goods produced in the economy,
7

Here the output gap is measured with respect to the equilibrium under full information.

5

given by the set Jit ⊂ [0, 1], which will be described in detail below. The consumption index
Cit is given by the CES aggregate:
Cit =

µZ

Jit

σ−1
σ

Cijt dj

¶

σ
σ−1

,

(1)

with σ > 1, where Cijt is consumption of good j by consumer i in period t.
The production function for good i is
Yit = Ait Nit .
Productivity is household-specific and labor is immobile across households. The productivity
parameters Ait are the fundamental source of uncertainty in the model. Let ait denote the log
of individual productivity, ait = ln (Ait ). Individual productivity at date t has an aggregate
component, at , and an idiosyncratic component,

it ,

ait = at +
with

R1
0

it di

it ,

= 0. Aggregate productivity at follows the random walk
at = at−1 + θt .

At the beginning of period t, all households observe the value of aggregate productivity
in the previous period, at−1 . Next, the shocks θt and
cannot observe θt and

it

it

are realized. Agents in household i

separately, they only observe the sum of the two, i.e., the individual

productivity innovation
θit = θt +

it .

Moreover, all agents observe a noisy public signal of the aggregate innovation
s t = θ t + et .
The random variables θt , et ,

are independent, serially uncorrelated, and normally distributed
¡ 2 2 2¢
with zero mean and variances σ θ , σ e , σ .
it

Summarizing, there are two aggregate shocks: the productivity shock θt and the shock et ,

representing noise in the public signal. The latter will be called “news shock.” Both shocks
are unobservable during period t, but are fully revealed at the beginning of t + 1, when at is
observed. The public history of the economy at the beginning of date t is denoted by
ht ≡ hθt−1 , et−1 , θt−2 , et−2 , ...i .
6

Let me turn now to the set Jit , the consumption basket of consumer i. The set Jit is
randomly selected each period choosing goods with correlated productivity shocks. In this
way, even though each consumer consumes a large number of goods (a continuum), the law of
large numbers does not apply, and consumption baskets diﬀer across consumers. This limits
consumers’ ability to infer the underlying aggregate state of the economy from price observations. In the appendix, I give a full description of the matching process between consumers
and producers. Here, I summarize the properties of the consumption baskets that arise from
that process. Each consumer receives a “sampling shock” vit (unobserved by the consumer
himself) and the goods in Jit are selected so that the distribution of the shocks

jt

for j ∈ Jit

is normal with mean vit and variance σ 2 . The sampling shocks vit are normally distributed
across consumers, with zero mean and variance σ 2v . They are independent of all other shocks
R1
and satisfy 0 vit di = 0. To ensure consistency of the matching process the variances σ 2v , σ 2

and σ 2 have to satisfy σ 2v + σ 2 = σ 2 . Let me introduce here the parameter γ, given by
γ=

σ 2v
,
σ2

which reflects the degree of heterogeneity in consumption baskets. The limit case γ = 0 corresponds to the case where all consumers consume the same representative sample of goods. The
limit case γ = 1 arises when a consumer’s basket is made of goods with identical productivity
shocks. Let θit denote the average productivity innovation in the basket of consumer i,
θit = θt + vit .

2.2

Trading, financial markets and monetary policy

The central bank acts as an account keeper for the agents in the economy. Each household
holds a checking account, denominated in dollars, directly with the central bank. The account
is debited whenever the consumer makes a purchase and credited whenever the producer makes
a sale. Households start with a balance M > 0 at date 0. Their balance must be non-negative
at the beginning of each period, but it is allowed to go negative within the period. At the
beginning of period t the central bank pays the (gross) interest rate Rt−1 on nominal balances
carried over from last period. The presence of interest-paying money balances allows me to
study a monetary environment where money and nominal bonds are perfect substitutes. This
modeling choice is made for simplicity, as it allows a closed-form derivation of equilibrium

7

(t,0)

(t,I)

(t,II)

(t+1,0)

...

Agents observe st ,ait.

Consumers observe
{Pjt} and trade.

State contingent claims
paid.

at-1 revealed.

Producers set prices Pit.

Central bank pays Rt
on nominal balances.

Central bank sets Rt.

…

State contingent
claims traded.

Figure 1: Timeline.
quantities and welfare.8 The only other policy instrument available is a proportional subsidy
τ on sales, which is financed by a lump-sum tax Tt . As usual in the literature, the subsidy will
be used to eliminate the distortions due to monopolistic competition.
To describe the trading environment, it is convenient to divide each period t in three
stages, (t, 0) , (t, I) , and (t, II). In stage (t, 0), the central bank sets the interest rate Rt for
the current period, households observe at−1 and trade state-contingent claims on a centralized
financial market. These claims will be paid at the beginning of (t + 1, 0). In stage (t, I), all
aggregate and individual shocks are realized, producer i sets the dollar price of good i, Pit , and
stands ready to deliver any quantity of good i at that price. Finally, in stage (t, II), consumer i
observes the prices of the goods in his consumption basket, {Pjt }j∈Jit , chooses his consumption
vector, {Cijt }j∈Jit , and buys Cijt from each producer j ∈ Jit . In this stage, consumer i and
producer i are spatially separated, so the consumer does not observes the production of good
i when choosing his consumption vector. Figure 1 summarizes the events taking place during
period t.
Agents do not have access to the financial market in (t, I) and (t, II). Therefore, given
the presence of idiosyncratic uncertainty, households will generally end up with diﬀerent endof-period nominal balances. However, households can fully smooth these shocks by trading
8

For an alternative approach, see Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (2000), who start from a model with money in the
utility function (and zero interest on cash balances) and look at the “cashless” limit to derive welfare in closed
form.

8

contingent claims in stage (t, 0) which are paid at the beginning of (t + 1, 0). This implies
that the nominal balances Mit will be constant and equal to M in equilibrium.9 In this way, I
can eliminate the distribution of wealth from the state variables of the problem, which greatly
simplifies the analysis.10
Let Zit (ω it ) denote the state-contingent claims purchased by household i in (t, 0), where
ω it ≡ { it , vit , θt }. The price of these claims is denoted by qt (ω it ). Let Mit−1 denote the
nominal balances of household i at the beginning of period t. The household budget constraint
in period t is, then,
Mit+1 = Rt−1 Mit + (1 + τ ) Pit Yit −

Z

Jit

Pjt Cijt dj −

Z

Zit (ω̃ it ) qt (ω̃it ) dω̃ t − Tt + Zit (ωit ) .

Nominal bonds are in zero net supply, and I omit them for simplicity. It is easy to show that
in all the equilibria studied below their price is 1/Rt .
The behavior of the monetary authority is described by a policy rule. For the definition of
the policy rule it is useful to define an aggregate price index. For ease of notation, it will be
convenient to use the geometric mean11
Pt ≡ exp

µZ

¶

1

ln Pit di .

0

(2)

In period (t, 0), the central bank sets Rt based on the public history ht and the past realizations
of the price index. A monetary policy rule is described by the map R, which gives Rt =
R (ht , Pt−1 , Pt−2 , ...). Allowing the monetary policy to condition Rt on the public signal st
would not alter any of the results.
Finally, the supply of nominal balances is kept constant at M . Therefore, the government
budget balance condition is
Tt = (Rt − 1) M + τ

2.3

Z

1

Pit Yit di.

0

Equilibrium

Household behavior is captured by three functions, Z, P and C. The first gives the optimal
holdings of state-contingent claims as a function of the initial balances Mit and of the public
9

Note that the nominal balances Mit are computed after the claims from period t − 1 have been settled.
The use of this type of assumption to simplify the study of monetary models goes back to Lucas (1990).
³R
´ 1
1−σ
1
11
An alternative price index is P̂t ≡
Pit1−σ di
. All results stated for Pt hold for P̂t , modulo a
0
multiplicative constant.
10

9

history ht , Zit+1 (ω it ) = Z (ωit ; Mit , ht ). The second gives the optimal price for household i, as
a function of the same variables plus the current realization of individual productivity and of the
public signal, Pit = P (Mit−1 , ht , ait , st ). The third gives optimal consumption as a function of
´
³
the same variables plus the observed price vector, Cit = C Mit , ht , ait , st , {Pij }j∈Jit . Before
defining an equilibrium, I need to introduce two more objects. The map ∆ (ht ) gives the

distribution of nominal balances Mit for each public history ht , and q (ω it ; ht ) denotes the
price of a ω it -contingent claim in period (t, 0) after public history ht .
A symmetric rational expectations equilibrium under the policy rule R is given by an array of functions {Z, P, C, ∆, q} that satisfy three conditions: optimality, market clearing and
consistency. Optimality requires that the individual rules Z, P and C are optimal for the individual household, taking as given the policy rule R, the distributions ∆, and the fact that
all other households follow Z, P, C. Market clearing requires that the goods markets and the
market for state-contingent claims clear for each ht . Consistency requires that the dynamics of
the distribution of nominal balances, described by ∆, are consistent with individual decision
rules.

3

Policy Rules and Expectations

In this section, I characterize the equilibrium behavior of output and prices, and show how it
is aﬀected by the choice of a monetary policy rule.

3.1

Linear equilibria under a price targeting rule

Given the form of the agents’ preferences and the normality of the shocks, it is possible to
study linear rational expectations equilibria in closed form. To describe monetary policy I
concentrate on a specific type of interest rate rule, representing a form of price level targeting.
I will show later that this is without loss of generality. The nominal interest rate is set as
follows,12
rt+1 = ρ + ξ (pt − p∗t ) ,

(3)

where pt is the price index defined in (2), p∗t is the state-contingent target
p∗t = µat−1 + φθ θt + φs st ,
12

(4)

Throughout the paper, I adopt the convention that a lowercase variable denotes the natural logarithm of
the corresponding uppercase variable.

10

and ρ, ξ, µ, φθ , and φs are constant parameters. Under this rule, I look at equilibria where
individual prices and consumption are given by
pit = µat−1 + φθ θit + φs st ,

(5)

cit = ψ 0 + at−1 + ψ θit + ψ v θit + ψ s st ,

(6)

where ψ 0 , ψ , ψ v and ψ s are constant coeﬃcients.13 Due to the presence of complete financial
markets the equilibrium distribution of nominal balances is degenerate, with balances equal to
M for all households at the beginning of each period. In equilibrium, the aggregate price level
is always equal to the target p∗t and the nominal interest rate is constant and equal to ρ.
An equilibrium of the form (5)-(6) exists if the parameters of the policy rule satisfy certain
restrictions. In particular, next proposition shows that the choice of the parameter µ in (4)
uniquely pins down ρ, φθ , and φs in the policy rule and all the remaining coeﬃcients of the
linear equilibrium. The proofs of this and of all following results are in the appendix. Let φ
and ψ denote the vectors {φθ , φs } and {ψ 0 , ψ , ψ v , ψ s }.
Proposition 1 For every µ ∈ R there exists a unique vector {φ, ψ} and a unique ρ such that
(5)-(6) constitute a rational expectations equilibrium under the monetary policy rule (3)-(4)
for any value of ξ. If ξ > 1 the equilibrium is locally determinate.
Equilibrium behavior can be described as follows. At the beginning of period t, the monetary authority observes at−1 and announces a menu of price targets p∗t conditional on the
current realization of the aggregate shock θt , which it cannot currently observe. During trading, each agent i sets his price and consumption responding to the variables in his information
set. At the beginning of period t + 1, the central bank observes the realized price level pt
and the aggregate shock θt , and checks whether aggregate behavior did conform to the target
p∗t . As this is always true in equilibrium, the central bank leaves the nominal interest rate
unchanged at ρ.
Aggregate output is measured by the index14
Z 1
yt ≡
cit di.
0

13

Recall that θit is the average productivity innovation for the goods in the basket of consumer i. I will clarify
later why this variable enters (6).
14
An alternative quantity index is
R1
Pit Yit di
ŷt = log 0
.
Pt
All results stated for yt also hold for ŷt , modulo a constant term.

11

The equilibrium coeﬃcients ψ determine the response of aggregate output to aggregate shocks.
Summing (6) across agents, and recalling that st = θt + et , gives
yt = ψ0 + at−1 + ψθ θt + ψ s (θt + et ) ,

(7)

where ψ θ ≡ ψ + ψ v . The first question raised in the introduction can now be stated in formal
terms. How does the choice of a policy rule, µ, aﬀects the equilibrium coeﬃcients ψ θ and ψ s ,
which determine the response of output to fundamental and news shocks? The rest of this
section addresses this question.
Before proceeding further, it is useful to clarify why the consumption of agent i, in (6),
depends on θit . If all producers follow (5) then the population of log prices observed by
consumer i follows a normal distribution with mean µat−1 + φθ θit + φs st and variance φ2θ σ 2 .
Given that consumer i observes the public signal st , he can back out θit from the mean of
this distribution, as long as φθ 6= 0. Two conclusions follow: (i) knowing θit one can derive
the entire distribution of prices faced by consumer i, and (ii) θit is a suﬃcient statistic for all
the information regarding θt contained in the price vector {Pjt }j∈Jit (if φθ 6= 0). The second
conclusion is stated formally in the following lemma.
Lemma 1 If prices are given by (5) and φθ 6= 0 then the information of consumer i regarding
the current shock θt is summarized by the three independent signals st , θit and θit .
A useful consequence of this lemma is that in all linear equilibria with price targeting the
informational content of prices is the same and is independent of the monetary policy rule
chosen, except in the knife-edge case φθ = 0 in which prices are uninformative.

3.2

Monetary policy and real allocations

Let me turn now to the eﬀects of diﬀerent monetary policy rules, parametrized by µ, on the
real equilibrium allocation. Let me begin with the case of full information, which arises when
st is a noiseless signal, σ 2e = 0.
Proposition 2 With full information the real allocation in all linear equilibria with price
targeting is constant and independent of µ. Aggregate output satisfies
yt = ψ 0 + at .

12

This proposition gives a neutrality result: under full information the choice of the policy
rule is immaterial for the determination of the real allocation.15 Furthermore, this proposition
gives a characterization of aggregate dynamics: under full information aggregate output moves
one for one with aggregate productivity at . The value of the constant ψ 0 depends on the subsidy
τ . In particular, it is possible to find a subsidy τ ∗ that replicates the first best allocation, that
is, the allocation that would be chosen by a social planner maximizing the ex ante expected
utility of the representative household under full information.16 For this reason, I will use the
full-information equilibrium as a benchmark in the rest of the analysis.
When agents have imperfect information, the choice of the policy rule is no longer neutral,
as shown in the following proposition.
Proposition 3 With imperfect information (σ 2θ > 0, σ 2e > 0, σ 2 > 0) the real allocation in
a linear equilibrium with price targeting depends on µ. The eﬀects of changing µ on the
equilibrium coeﬃcients {φθ , φs , ψ θ , ψ s } are:
∂φθ
∂µ
∂ψ θ
∂µ

> 0,
> 0,

∂φs
> 0,
∂µ
∂ψ s
< 0.
∂µ

Moreover, ∂ (ψ θ + ψ s ) /∂µ > 0.
The main result of this proposition is that an increase in µ increases the response of
aggregate output to fundamental shocks and reduces its response to news shocks. To shed
light on this result, I will now discuss the way in which the choice of µ aﬀects household
behavior. Consider first the optimality condition that determines optimal consumption
¡
£
¢¤
cit = Ei,(t,II) cit+1 − rt − pit+1 + pit ,

where Ei,(t,II) [.] denotes the expectation of agent i at date (t, II) and pit denotes the price
index for the consumption basket of consumer i.17 Apart from the fact that price indexes are
consumer-specific, this is the standard consumer’s Euler equation with iso-elastic preferences,
linking the expected growth rate of consumption to the expected real interest rate.
15

See McCallum (1979) for an early neutrality result in a model with pre-set prices.
See Lemma 4 in the appendix.
17
A constant term is omitted in the optimality condition. See (13) in the appendix for the formal definition
of pit .
16

13

In a linear equilibrium (5)-(6), expected future consumption is given by Ei,(t,II) [cit+1 ] =
ψ 0 + Ei,(t,II) [at ] and is independent of the policy rule. The reason why the choice of µ aﬀects
consumption is that it aﬀects the expected real interest rate
£
¤
Ei,(t,II) rt − pit+1 + pit = ρ − µat−1 − µEi,(t,II) [θt ] + pit .

For a given pit , an increase in µ increases the response of consumers’ demand both to a
fundamental shock and to a news shock, given that both shocks increase the expectation
Ei,(t,II) [θt ], and, thus, the expected future price level. This would seem to suggest that an
increase in µ makes output more sensitive to both shocks. However, in general equilibrium,
the choice of µ also aﬀects the response of the current prices in pit . Therefore, to understand
the full eﬀect of monetary policy, I need to turn to the pricing conditions.
The optimality condition for pit takes the form
pit =

¢
¢
η ¡
1 ¡
Ei,(t,I) [dit ] − ait +
Ei,(t,I) [pit + cit ] − ait ,
1 + ση
1 + ση

(8)

where dit is the demand index

dit =

Z

j∈J˜it

¡
¢
cjt + σpjt dj,

capturing the intercept of the demand curve faced by producer i.18 After a fundamental or a
news shock, producers expect consumers’ demand to increase more if µ is larger, following the
reasoning above. As a consequence, they tend to set higher prices. Therefore, an increase in µ
magnifies the response of prices to both shocks.19 This is confirmed by the results for φθ and
φs in Proposition 3.
Let me go back now to the response of the expected real interest rate. Summing up the
discussion so far, the net eﬀect on the expected real rate depends on the relative strength of
two eﬀects: a direct eﬀect, by which a higher µ increases the expected future price level, and
an indirect eﬀect, by which a higher µ increases current prices. Proposition 3 shows that the
first eﬀect dominates in the case of a fundamental shock, while the second eﬀect dominates in
the case of a news shock. The reason for this diﬀerence is the following. After a positive news
18

The demand for good i is
Yit = Dit Pit−σ .

See Lemma 3 in the appendix for the full derivation of Dit . Constant terms are omitted both in (8) and in the
expression for dit .
19
This discussion focuses on the eﬀect working through Ei,(t,I) [dit ] in (8). It is possible to show that the eﬀect
working through Ei,(t,I) [pit + cit ] goes in the same direction.

14

shock producers tend to over-estimate the demand increase, given that they update upward
their beliefs on θt , while θt has not changed. If, instead, a positive productivity shock hits,
producers tend to under-estimate the demand increase, given that they only have access to
noisy observations of θt . Therefore, an increase in µ leads to higher prices in response to both
shocks, but the increase is sharper (relative to the actual demand increase) after a news shock.
This discussion also helps to clarify the mechanism behind the neutrality result in Proposition 2. In the case of full information producers perfectly anticipate any aggregate change
in demand, i.e., they never over-estimate or under-estimate demand conditions. This accounts
for the fact that the response of prices at date t fully oﬀsets the eﬀects of µ on future prices,
and the real rate is unchanged.
The key assumptions behind the non-neutrality result are that agents have dispersed information regarding θt , that they are forward-looking, and that the value of θt will be fully
revealed in the future. The central bank can then aﬀect individual behavior by announcing
that the price target p∗t+1 will respond to θt . If the price target p∗t+1 was set as a function
of variables that are common knowledge at date t, e.g. st , this would have no eﬀects on the
real allocation at date t. In this case, the change in demand would be perfectly forecasted by
producers, leading to a neutrality result analogous to the one derived in the case of perfect
information.
To conclude this discussion, let me remark that the parameters {φθ , φs , ψ θ , ψ s } also aﬀect
the sensitivity of individual consumption and prices to idiosyncratic shocks. Therefore, the
choice of µ has implications not only for the aggregate responses, but also for the cross-sectional
distribution of consumption and relative prices. This observation will turn out to be crucial in
evaluating the welfare consequences of diﬀerent monetary rules.

3.3

Full aggregate stabilization

Let me now compare aggregate output dynamics under full information and under imperfect
information. Recall that, with full information, aggregate output responds one for one to
productivity shocks. Inspecting (7) shows that the same property holds under imperfect information if and only if ψ s = 0 and ψ θ = 1. To achieve a path for aggregate output that tracks the
changes in the full information benchmark, the central bank has to eliminate the eﬀect of news
shocks and ensure, at the same time, that output responds one for one to fundamental shocks.
Next proposition shows that, even though the monetary authority can only set µ, it can still

15

ψ

θ

1

ψs

0

fs

0

µ

µ

Figure 2: Monetary Policy and Full Aggregate Stabilization
achieve both objectives. This type of policy rule is called “full aggregate stabilization.”
Proposition 4 There exists a monetary policy rule, given by µf s , that achieves full aggregate
stabilization, yt = ψ 0 + at .
To illustrate this result Figure 2 shows the equilibrium relation between µ and the parameters ψ θ and ψ s . Consistent with the results in Proposition 3, an increase in µ increases ψ θ
and reduces ψ s . The surprising result is that the value of µ that sets ψ s to zero is the same
that sets ψ θ equal to one.
Notice that the value of the constant ψ 0 in the equilibrium described in Proposition 4
is, in general, diﬀerent from the one in Proposition 2. However, the subsidy τ can be chosen so as to achieve the same value of ψ 0 . Therefore, by choosing the right pair (τ , µ) the
monetary authority can perfectly replicate the behavior of aggregate output arising under full
information.

3.4

General policy rules

Let me consider now more general interest rate rules. In particular, consider all the policy
rules under which the equilibrium behavior of prices and consumption is given by
pit = φ0,t + φθ,t θit + φs,t st ,
cit = ψ 0,t + at−1 + ψ ,t θit + ψ v,t θit + ψ s,t st ,
16

(9)
(10)

where the coeﬃcients φt and ψ t are linear functions of ht , that is, of all the variables that
are common knowledge at the beginning of period t. For simplicity, suppose the subsidy τ is
constant over time. The following proposition shows that the real allocation arising in any of
these equilibria can also be achieved under a price targeting rule analogous to (3)-(4).
Proposition 5 For any linear equilibrium of the form (9)-(10) there exists a sequence {ρt , µt }
such that the same allocation is supported in a linear equilibrium under the policy rule
rt+1 = ρt+1 + ξ (pt − p∗t ) ,
p∗t = µt at−1 + φθt θt + φst st .

4

Optimal Monetary Policy

4.1

Welfare

Let me turn now to welfare analysis and to the characterization of optimal monetary policy. I
will evaluate the choice of µ by looking at its implications for expected utility in period t
∙Z 1 µ
¶ ¸
1
1+η
N
Wt = Et
ln Cit di −
di ,
1 + η it
0

where Et [.] denotes the expectation conditional on the public history ht . In a linear equilibrium

(5)-(6) the only variables that are relevant for consumers’ utility are consumption, cit , and
relative prices, pit − pt .20 This implies that the term µat in pt+1 has no eﬀects on welfare in
period t + 1, although, as argued in the previous section, it matters for the real allocation
in period t. This allows me to conduct welfare analysis period-by-period and evaluate the
monetary rule µ by looking at its eﬀects on expected utility in period t. Thanks to lognormality the welfare measure Wt can be derived analytically.
Lemma 2 Given a linear equilibrium, characterized by the coeﬃcients φ and ψ , consumers’
welfare is equal to

½
µ
¶¾
1
1
Wt = at−1 + ψ 0 −
exp (1 + η) ψ 0 − w
1+η
2

where
³
´
w = − (1 + η) (ψ s + ψ θ − 1)2 σ 2θ + ψ 2s σ 2e + σ (σ − 1) φ2θ σ 2
− (1 + η) (1 + σφθ − (ψv + σφθ ) γ)2 σ 2 +

−ψ 2 σ 2 − (ψ v + σφθ )2 γσ 2
20

The distribution of labor supply can be derived from these quantities.

17

(11)

The choice of the interest rate rule aﬀects the equilibrium allocation both in terms of levels
(captured by the constant term ψ 0 ) and in terms of the economy’s response to aggregate and
idiosyncratic shocks (captured by the coeﬃcients φθ , ψ , ψ v , and ψ s ). However, any level eﬀect
of µ can be oﬀset by adjusting the subsidy τ . Therefore, the optimal value of µ can be found by
looking at its eﬀects on the welfare measure w, defined in (11), as shown in next proposition.
Proposition 6 The optimal monetary policy rule is found by choosing the µ that maximizes
(11), where the relation between µ and the parameters {φθ , ψ , ψ v , ψ s } is the one derived in
Proposition 1.
For the sake of interpretation w can be expressed as:
i
h
w = − (1 + η) E (yt − ψ 0 − at )2 |at−1 + σ (σ − 1) V ar (pjt |j ∈ Jit )
´
³
− (1 + η) V ar (nit ) − V ar cjt + σpjt |j ∈ J˜it ,

(12)

This expression shows that the welfare eﬀects of monetary policy can be split in four parts. The
first term in (12) captures the volatility of an aggregate “output gap” measure yt −ψ 0 −at . This
reflects deviations of aggregate output from the path that would arise under full information.21

The remaining three terms capture cross-sectional eﬀects. The second term reflects the eﬀect
of dispersion in relative prices on welfare. Note that this term is positive, that is, larger price
dispersion is beneficial in terms of welfare. This is due to the fact that higher price dispersion
reduces the price index P it for each consumer –since the price index is concave in individual
prices–, and increases consumers’ purchasing power. The third term captures the welfare loss
associated to the dispersion in labor supply across producers. The fourth term captures the
welfare loss due to the dispersion in consumption across consumers, corrected for the diﬀerence
in relative prices faced by diﬀerent consumers.
The fact that higher price dispersion increases welfare might seem at odds with standard
results in the sticky-price literature, where price dispersion is associated to a welfare loss.
However, in standard sticky-price models there are no idiosyncratic productivity shocks, so any
dispersion in relative prices is harmful, since producers have identical marginal costs. Here,
instead, relative price dispersion is beneficial as long as it reflects productivity diﬀerences.
Price dispersion that does not reflect productivity diﬀerences is still costly, since it determines
greater dispersion in labor supply across producers, as reflected in the third term of (12).
21

Recall, from the discussion on page 16, that
the level of ψ 0 is ¤generally diﬀerent with full information and
£
with imperfect information. The measure E (yt − ψ0 − at )2 |at−1 disregards this level eﬀect, which, again, is
taken care of by τ .

18

4.2

Optimal accommodation of news shocks

Having obtained a general characterization of optimal monetary policy, I can turn to the
question: is full aggregate stabilization optimal? That is, should monetary policy completely
eliminate the aggregate demand disturbances driven by news shocks and set ψ s = 0? The next
proposition shows that, typically, full stabilization is suboptimal and optimal monetary policy
involves some degree of accommodation of news shocks.
Proposition 7 If η > 0 and γ ∈ (0, 1) then full aggregate stabilization is suboptimal and the
optimal monetary policy µo satisfies

µo < µf s .
At the optimal monetary policy news shocks have a positive eﬀect on aggregate output
ψ os > 0.
Full aggregate stabilization is optimal, µo = µf s , if any one of the following conditions is
satisfied: (i) η = 0, (ii) γ = 0, (iii) γ = 1.
Full stabilization is only optimal in three special cases. The first, η = 0, corresponds to the
case of linear disutility of labor. To interpret the other two cases, recall that the parameter γ
reflects how representative is the sample of goods purchased by a given consumer. The limit
case γ = 0 corresponds to the case where all consumers consume all goods. In this case, prices
are fully revealing and there is full information at the consumption stage. The limit case γ = 1
arises when each consumer consumes essentially one type of good. In this case, there is no
asymmetric information among price-setters, since each producer knows all the prices faced by
his consumers. This shows that both asymmetric information among consumers and among
producers are needed to obtain a meaningful trade-oﬀ between aggregate stabilization and
cross-sectional eﬃciency.
To illustrate the result in Proposition 7 I will use a numerical example. The parameters
for the example are in Table 1. The values for σ and η are chosen in the range of values used
in the sticky-price literature. The values for the variances σ 2θ and σ 2 are set conventionally at
1, while I assume that the value of σ 2e is 1/3, implying that the public signal is relatively more
precise than the private signals. For γ I choose a value of 0.5.
Figure 3 illustrates how the choice of the monetary policy rule aﬀects the four variance
terms in (12). The figure identifies the value of µ that achieves full aggregate stabilization,
19

σ
σ 2θ
σ 2e

7
1
1/3

η
σ2
γ

2
1
0.5

Table 1: Parameters for the benchmark example
µf s , and the value corresponding to optimal monetary policy, µo . Panel (a) plots the relation
between µ and aggregate output gap volatility. Not surprisingly, the minimum for this curve
is reached at µf s , that is, at the monetary policy that achieves full aggregate stabilization. In
accordance with Proposition 4, output gap volatility is zero at µf s . Panel (b) shows the eﬀects
of monetary policy on equilibrium price dispersion. In a neighborhood of µf s , an increase
in µ has the eﬀect of reducing the dispersion of relative prices by reducing the value of |φθ |,

which determines the response of individual prices to individual productivity shocks.22 This
reduction in price dispersion can be interpreted as follows. A household facing a positive
productivity shock, θit > 0, increases its consumption more if µ is larger. As a consequence
the marginal utility of consumption decreases and, at the price-setting stage, household i has
a weaker incentive to lower the relative price of its good, even though its productivity has
increased. Therefore, relative prices respond less to diﬀerences in individual productivities.
Finally, under the parametric assumptions made, an increase in µ tends to reduce the dispersion
of labor supply and consumption. Both eﬀects are depicted in panel (c). Remember that price
dispersion has a positive eﬀect on welfare, while labor supply and consumption dispersion have
negative eﬀects. Therefore, the total eﬀect of an increase in µ in a neighborhood of µf s depends
on the relative strength of the eﬀects depicted in panels (b) and (c).
Figure 4 plots the total welfare function w. It shows that the price-dispersion term dominates and makes the loss function decreasing at µf s . This implies that optimal monetary
policy is characterized by µo < µf s . Proposition 7 shows that this is a generic property of the
model. Since the relation between ψ s and µ is decreasing (from Proposition 3) and ψ s is zero
when µ = µf s , it follows that optimal monetary policy entails ψ s > 0.

5

Transparency

So far, I have assumed that the source of public information, the signal st , is exogenous
and outside the control of the monetary authority. Suppose, now, that the central bank has
22
Lemma 5 in the appendix shows that as long as ψ θ ≤ 1 the value of φθ is negative. This, together with
Proposition 3 implies that |φθ | is decreasing in µ, for µ ≤ µf s .

20

(a) Output gap volatility
0.1

0.05

0
-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

0.8

1

1.2

(b) Price dispersion
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

(c) Labor supply and consumption dispersion
1

0.5

0
-0.2

0

o

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

fs

µ

1.2

µ

µ

Figure 3: The Eﬀects of Monetary Policy on Aggregate Volatility and on Cross-Sectional
Variances
Panel (a): variance of yt − at . Panel (b): variance of pjt for j ∈ Jit . Panel (c): solid line, variance of
nit ; dashed line, variance of cjt + σpjt for j ∈ J˜it .
0.9

0.85

w

0.8

0.75

0.7

0.65
-0.2

0

0.2

o

µ

0.4

0.6

fs

µ

0.8

1

µ

1.2

Figure 4: Monetary Policy and Total Welfare

21

0.1
0.09
0.08
0.07

Var(y t-at)

0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

8

ln(1/ σ 2e)

Figure 5: Precision of Public Information and Output Gap Volatility
some control on the information received by the private sector. For example, it can decide
whether or not to release some aggregate statistics, which would increase the precision of
public information. What are the welfare eﬀects of this decision? To address this question I
look at the eﬀects of changing the precision of the public signal, measured by 1/σ 2e , on total
welfare, assuming that the policy rule is set optimally for each level of 1/σ 2e . This exercise
connects this paper to a growing literature on the welfare eﬀects of public information.23
Figure 5 shows the relation between the precision of the public signal and the volatility
of the output gap.24 This relation is non-monotone, increasing for low values of 1/σ 2e and
decreasing for high values. When the signal is very imprecise agents disregard it and the
coeﬃcient ψs in (7) goes to zero. In this case aggregate volatility is low, since there is no
volatility due to the news shock et . When the signal becomes more precise, agents rely more
on the public signal and this, initially, increases aggregate volatility. Therefore, for low values
of 1/σ 2e , more precise public information has a destabilizing eﬀect on the economy. Eventually,
when the signal precision is very large, the economy converges towards the full information
equilibrium and output gap volatility goes to zero.
23

See Morris and Shin (2002) and
5 and 6.
¤
£ the references in footnotes
The latter is measured by E (yt − ψ 0 − at )2 |at−1 . To make the graph easier to read I use a log scale for
1/σ 2e . The parameters are those in Table 1.
24

22

2

1.95

w

1.9

1.85

1.8

1.75

1.7
-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

8

ln(1/ σ 2e)

Figure 6: Precision of Public Information and Total Welfare
This figure, however, is only telling a piece of the story. Figure 6 shows the eﬀect of changing
the signal precision on the total welfare measure w. Recall from (12) that w corresponds to
the sum of aggregate volatility (with a negative sign) and three terms reflecting cross-sectional
distortions. Figure 6 shows that, putting together all four terms, welfare is always increasing
in the signal precision.
To understand the diﬀerence between the two graphs notice that, when the public signal
is very imprecise, agents have to use their own individual productivity to estimate aggregate
productivity. This makes them underestimate the idiosyncratic component of their productivity and leads to a compressed distribution of relative prices. An increase in the signal precision
helps producers set relative prices that reflect more closely the underlying productivity diﬀerences. The associated gain in allocative eﬃciency is positive and more than compensates for
the welfare loss due to higher aggregate volatility, which is present at low values of 1/σ 2e .
The notion that more precise information about aggregate variables has important crosssectional implications is also highlighted in Hellwig (2005). In that paper there are no idiosyncratic productivity shocks, so the cross-sectional gain is reflected in a reduction in price
dispersion. However, the underlying principle is the same: in both cases a more precise public
signal leads to relative prices more in line with productivity diﬀerentials (which are zero in

23

Hellwig (2005)).
The graphs above have been derived under the assumption that monetary policy is set
optimally. However, given the parameters in Table 1, similar outcomes emerge if µ is kept
constant and only the signal precision changes. I have experimented with several parameter
combinations, both adjusting the policy rule and leaving it unchanged, and could not obtain
an example of a welfare-reducing increase in precision. Whether this is a general proposition
or counter-examples can be constructed is an open question for future work.

6

Conclusions

In this paper, I have explored the eﬀect of policy rules in a model where information about
macroeconomic fundamentals is dispersed across the economy. The emphasis has been on the
ability of the policy rule to shape the economy’s response to diﬀerent shocks. In particular, the
monetary authority is able to reduce the economy’s response to news shocks by manipulating
agents’ expectations about the real interest rate. The principle behind this result goes beyond
the specific model used in this paper: by announcing that policy actions will respond to
future information, the monetary authority can aﬀect diﬀerently agents with diﬀerent pieces
of information. In this way, it can change the aggregate response to fundamental and news
shocks. The result that full aggregate stabilization is feasible is clearly more dependent on the
specific features of the model. Nonetheless, that result is useful in clarifying why eliminating
the eﬀects of news is not optimal. Not necessarily because it is not possible, but because, even
when possible, it is socially costly.
The optimal policy rule used in this paper can be implemented both under commitment
and under discretion. To oﬀset an expansion driven by optimistic beliefs, the central bank
announces that it will make the real interest rate higher if good fundamentals do not materialize. With flexible prices, this eﬀect is achieved with a jump in the price level between t
and t + 1. As argued in Section 4.1, this jump has no welfare consequences from period t + 1
on. Therefore, the central bank has no incentive to deviate from its announced policy. In
economies with sluggish price adjustment, a similar eﬀect could be obtained by a combination of a price level change and an increase in nominal interest rates. In that case, however,
commitment problems are likely to arise, because both type of interventions have additional
distortionary consequences ex post. The study of models where lack of commitment interferes
with the central bank’s ability to deal with informational shocks seems an interesting area for
24

further research.
Finally, in the model presented, the information sets of consumers, producers, and of the
central bank, are independent of the monetary rule chosen. Morris and Shin (2005) have
recently argued that stabilization policy may have adverse eﬀects, if it reduces the informational
content of prices. Here this concern does not arise, as the information in the price indexes
observed by consumers is independent of monetary policy (as seen in Lemma 1). A natural
extension of the model in this paper would be to introduce additional sources of noise in prices,
so as to make their informational content endogenous and sensitive to policy.

25

Appendix
Random consumption baskets
At the beginning of each period, household i is assigned two random variables, it and vit , independently
drawn from normal distributions with mean zero and variances, respectively, σ 2 and σ 2v . These variables
are not observed by the household. The first random variable represents the idiosyncratic productivity
shock, the second is the sampling shock, that will determine the sample of firms visited by consumer
i. Consumers and producers are then randomly matched so that the density of producers of type it
matched to consumers ∙
of type vjt is given
¸ by φ ( it , vjt ), where φ is a bivariate joint normal density,
√
σ2
γσ v σ
with covariance matrix
, where γ ∈ [0, 1]. Since the variable vit has no direct eﬀect on
.
σ 2v
√
payoﬀs I can normalize its variance and set σv = γσ .
above the
Let the sets Jit and J˜it be defined as in the text. Given the matching¡ process described
¢
following properties follow. The distribution { jt : j ∈ Jit } is a normal N vit , (1 − γ) σ 2 . That is, the
average productivity innovation for the goods observed by consumer i is
θit = θt + vit .
o
n
¡
¢
The distribution vjt : j ∈ J˜it is a normal, N γ it , γ (1 − γ) σ 2 .
Throughout the paper, I use the following notation:
σ2
σ 2v

= (1 − γ) σ 2 ,
= γ (1 − γ) σ 2 ,

where σ 2 is the variance of the productivity shocks across the goods in the basket of a given consumer
and σ 2v is the variance of the sampling shocks across the consumers purchasing from a given producer.

Proof of Proposition 1
The proof is split in four steps. First, I introduce price and demand indexes that apply in the linear
equilibrium conjectured. Second, I use them to characterize the individual optimization problem. Then,
I define and solve a fixed point problem that gives the desired equilibrium. Finally, I turn to local
determinacy.

Price and demand indexes
Suppose that individual behavior is characterized by the linear rules (5) and (6). Individual optimization
implies that, given Cit , the consumption of good j by consumer i is:
¶−σ
µ
Pjt
Cit ,
Cijt =
P it
where P it is the price index
P it ≡

µZ

j∈Jit

1−σ
Pjt
dj

1
¶ 1−σ

.

(13)

Consider now producer i. Aggregating the demand for good i across all the consumers j ∈ J˜it gives
Yit = Dit Pit−σ ,
where Dit is the demand index
Dit ≡

Z

σ

j∈J˜it

26

P jt Cjt dj.

(14)

The aggregate price index and aggregate output are, as defined in the main text, pt =
R1
yt = 0 cit di. Given (5) and (6) they are equal to
pt
yt

R1
0

pit di and

= µat−1 + φθ θt + φs st ,
= ψ 0 + at−1 + ψ θ θt + ψ s st ,

where ψ θ = ψ + ψ v .
Lemma 3 If individual prices and quantities are given by (5) and (6) then the price index for consumer
i and the demand index for producer i are equal to
P it
Dit

= Vp exp {pt + φθ vit } ,
= Vd exp {yt + σpt + (ψ v + σφθ ) γ

(15)
(16)

it } ,

where Vp and Vd are constant terms equal to
Vp
Vd

1−σ 2 2
φθ σ },
2
1
1
(1 − σ) 2 2
2
= exp{ ψ 2 σ 2 + (ψ v + σφθ ) σ 2v + σ
φθ σ }.
2
2
2
= exp{

Proof. Given (5) the prices observed by consumer i are log-normally distributed, with mean
pt + φθ vit and variance φ2θ σ 2 , therefore,
Z
(1−σ)2 2 2
1−σ
Pjt
dj = e(1−σ)(pt +φθ vit )+ 2 φθ σ ,
j∈Jit

the price index is derived substituting this in (13). Using this result and expression (6), the demand
index for producer i, (14), can be written as
Z
¡
¢σ
eψ jt +ψv vjt eφθ vjt dj.
Dit = eyt +σpt Vpσ
j∈J˜it

o
n
Note that the distribution vjt : j ∈ J˜it is normal with mean γ
Z

eψ

jt +ψ v vjt +σφθ vjt

1

dj = e 2 ψ

2

it

σ 2 (ψ v +σφθ )γ

e

and variance σ 2v . It follows that
2 2
1
it + 2 (ψ v +σφθ ) σ v

.

j∈J˜it

Individual optimization
In the conjectured linear equilibrium the nominal interest rate is constant and equal to R = eρ . Let
f ( it , vit , θt ) denote the joint density of the shocks it , vit and θt . Let the prices of state-contingent
claims at (t, 0) be
q (ω it ) = g (θt ) f ( it , vit , θt ) ,
(17)
n
o
2
where g (θt ) ≡ exp − (1 + µ) θt + 12 (1 + µ) σ 2θ (recall that ω it ≡ { it , vit , θt }).
Given the conjectures made about aggregate behavior the only state variables for the optimization
problem of the individual household are Mit and at−1 . The problem can then be analyzed using the
Bellman equation
∙
¸
1
1+η
V (Mit , at−1 ) =
max
Et log Cit −
+ βV (Mit+1 , at )
N
1 + η it
{P (st ,θ it )},{C (st ,θ it ,θ it )},
{Zit (ω it )},{Mit+1 (ω it )}

27

subject to the constraints
Mit+1 (ω it ) = RMit + (1 + τ ) Pit Yit − P jt Cit −
Yit = Dit Pit−σ ,
Yit = Ait Nit ,
¡
¢
Pit = P (st , θit ) , Cit = C st , θit , θit ,
(15), (16).

Z

Zit (ω̃ it ) q (ω̃ it ) dω̃ it − Tt + Zit (ω it ) ,

where Et [.] represents the expectation formed at (t, 0). Given the conjecture made about the equilibrium
Et [.] can be replaced by E [.|at−1 ].
From this problem I can derive the optimality condition for prices and consumption
∙
µ
¶η
¸
1+τ
Yit
σ
1
Yit
Ei,(t,I)
= 0,
(18)
Yit −
σ − 1 Ait Ait
Pit
P it Cit
∙
¸
1
1
Ei,(t,II)
− βR
= 0.
(19)
P it Cit
P it+1 Cit+1
where Ei,(t,I) [.] and Ei,(t,II) [.] denote the expectations of agent i at (t, I) and (t, II). Given the
conjectured
equilibrium,
£
¤ and given Lemma 1, they can be replaced, respectively, by E [.|st , θit , at−1 ]
and E .|st , θit , θit , at−1 .
By Lemma 3 all the random variables in the expressions above are log-normal, including the output
of firm i which is equal to Yit = Pit−σ Dit . Rearranging and substituting in (18) and (19) gives
pit
pit + cit

¢
¢
η ¡
1 ¡
Ei,(t,I) [dit ] − ait +
Ei,(t,I) [pit + cit ] − ait ,
1 + ση
1 + ση
£
¤
= κc + Ei,(t,II) pit+1 + cit+1 .
= κp +

(20)
(21)

where κp and κc are equal to

κp
κc

1
(H (ψ , ψ v , ψ s , φθ ) − ln (1 + τ )) ,
1 + ση
= −ρ + G (ψ , ψ v , ψ s , φθ ) ,
=

where H and G are known functions which depend on the model parameters.
Let me show that the market for state-contingent claims clears and that nominal balances are
constant and equal to M . Suppose Mit = M . Let the portfolio of state-contingent claims be
Zit (ω it ) = M − RM − (1 + τ ) Pit Yit + P jt Cit + Tt .
For each realization of the aggregate shock θ̂t goods markets clearing implies that
Z Z
´
¡
¢ ³
Pit Yit − P jt Cit f it , vit , θ̂t d it dvit = 0.

Substituting the government budget constraint, this implies that: (1) the market for state-contingent
claims clears for each aggregate state θt ,
Z
Z 1
´
³
Zit (ω it ) f it , vit , θ̂t d it dvit = − (R − 1) M − τ
Pit Yit − Tt = 0,
0

and (2) that the portfolio {Zit (ω it )} has zero value at date (t, 0),
Z
Z µZ
´
³
Zit (ω it ) q (ω it ) dω it =
Zit (ω it ) f it , vit , θ̂t d

28

it dvit

¶

g (θt ) dθt = 0.

Substituting in the household budget constraint shows that Mit+1 = M .
Let me now check that the portfolio just described is optimal. The optimality condition for a
security contingent on ω it can be written as
Z
∂V (M, at )
∂V (M, at )
f (ω it ) = q (ω it )
f (ω it ) dω̃ t .
∂Bit
∂Bit
Using the envelope conditions, this gives
∙
¸
¸
Z ∙
³ ´
1
1
E
|at−1 , θt f (ω it ) = q (ω it ) E
|at−1 , θ̃t dF θ̃t .
P it+1 Cit+1
P it+1 Cit+1
Substituting equilibrium prices and consumptions (5)-(6), and the security prices (17), I obtain
h
i
e−(1+µ)θt = g (θt ) E e−(1+µ)θ̃t ,

which is satisfied, given the definition of g.

Fixed point
To check optimality substitute the conjectures made for individual behavior (5) and (6) in the optimality
conditions (20) and (21). Notice that all the shocks are i.i.d. so the expected value of all future shocks
is zero. Let β θ , β s and δ , δ η , δ s be coeﬃcients such that
E [θt |θit , st ] = β θ θit + β s st ,
£
¤
E θt |θit , θit , st = δ θit + δ v θit + δ s st ,

and define

δθ ≡ δ + δv .

¡ ¢−1
Defining the precision of the generic random variable x as π x ≡ σ 2x
the coeﬃcients β θ , β s and
δ , δ η , δ s are
βθ

=

δ

=

π
πe
, βs =
,
πθ + π + πe
πθ + π + πe
π
πv
, δv =
,
πθ + π + πv + πe
πθ + π + πv + πe

(22)
δs =

πe
.
πθ + π + πv + πe

(23)

Using the law of iterated
expectations
one can replace Ei,(t,I) [pit + cit ] on the right hand side of
£
¤
(20) with κc + Ei,(t,I) pit+1 + cit+1 . Substitute the conjectures (5) and (6) on both sides of (20) and
(21). Matching the coeﬃcients for θit , θit and st gives the conditions
(1 + ση) φθ
(1 + ση) φs
ψ
ψv
ψs

=
=
=
=
=

η ((ψ θ + σφθ ) β θ − 1 + (ψ v + σφθ ) γ (1 − β θ )) + (1 + µ) β θ − 1,
η ((ψ θ + σφθ ) β s + ψ s + σφs − (ψ v + σφθ ) γβ s ) + (1 + µ) β s ,
(1 + µ) δ ,
(1 + µ) δ v − φθ ,
(1 + µ) δ s − φs ,

(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)
(28)

and matching the constant terms gives
0 = − ln (1 + τ ) + H (ψ , ψ v , ψ s , φθ ) + ln Vd + (1 + η) ψ 0 ,
0 = −ρ + G (ψ , ψ v , ψ s , φθ ) .

29

(29)
(30)

The value of ψ is immediately given by (26). Conditions (24)-(28) give the following values for φθ
and φs ,
φθ
φs

η ((1 + µ) δ θ β θ − 1) + (1 + µ) β θ − 1 + η (1 + µ) δ v γ (1 − β θ )
,
1 + ση − η (σ − 1) (β θ + γ (1 − β θ ))
1
{η ((1 + µ) δ θ + (σ − 1) φθ ) β s + η (1 + µ) δ s + (1 + µ) β s
=
1+η
−η ((1 + µ) δ v + (σ − 1) φθ ) γβ s }.
=

(31)
(32)

Note that a solution for φθ exists since
1 + ση − η (σ − 1) (β θ + γ (1 − β θ )) ≥
1 + ση − η (σ − 1) > 0,
where the first inequality follows since β θ ≤ 1 and γ ≤ 1. Substituting in (27)-(28) gives ψ v and ψ s .
Finally, substituting ψ , ψ v , ψ s , and φθ in (29)-(30) gives ψ 0 and ρ.

Local determinacy
Let variables with a tilde denote deviations from the equilibrium derived above. A first order approximation of the optimality conditions gives
∙
´¸
η ˜
1 ³e
pit + c̃it
= 0,
dit +
Ei,(t,I) p̃it −
1 + ση
1 + ση
h
i
Ei,(t,II) e
pit + c̃it + r̃t − e
pit+1 − c̃it+1
= 0.
Taking expectations at time (T, 0) and integrating across agents, in that order, gives
¸
∙
η ˜
1
ET p̃t −
= 0,
dt +
(p̃t + ỹt )
1 + ση
1 + ση
ET [p̃t + ỹt + r̃t − p̃t+1 − ỹt+1 ] = 0,

(33)

for all t ≥ T . Since d˜t = ỹt + σ p̃t the first condition implies that ET [ỹt ] = 0. Moreover, notice that
r̃t = rt − ρ and p̃t = pt − p∗t . Therefore, under the policy rule (3)
r̃t = ξ p̃t−1 for all t ≥ T.
Substituting these conditions in (33) and letting ht = ET [p̃t ] gives the following diﬀerence equation for
ht :
ht+1 − ht − ξht−1 = 0 for all t ≥ T
with hT −1 = p̃T −1 . The assumption ξ > 1 ensures that any hT −1 6= 0 gives an explosive solution.
This shows that any equilibrium in a neighborhood of the original equilibrium must display pt = p∗t for
all realizations of the aggregate shocks. Using this result one can show that the individual prices and
consumption are the same as under the original equilibrium.

Proof of Lemma 1
In the text.

30

Proof of Proposition 2
Under full information β θ = δ = δ v = 0 and β s = δ s = 1. Substituting in (31)-(32) gives
1+η
,
1 + ση − η (σ − 1) γ
η (σ − 1)
φθ (1 − γ) + 1 + µ.
1+η

φθ

= −

φs

=

Next, (26)-(28) give
ψ
ψv
ψs

= 0,
= −φθ ,
= 1 + µ − φs =
η (σ − 1)
= −
φθ (1 − γ) ,
1+η

Finally, ψ 0 can be determined from (29). Notice that only φs depends on µ. The real equilibrium
allocation only depends on the consumption levels cit and on the relative prices pit − pt , and, given (5)
and (6), these are independent of φs . To conclude the proof, notice that
ψ θ + ψ s = −φθ −

η (σ − 1)
φθ (1 − γ) = 1.
1+η

The next lemma compares the full information equilibrium with a first-best benchmark.
Lemma 4 There is a τ ∗ such that the equilibrium under full information replicates the first-best allocation.
Proof. Given that there is no capital the first-best allocation can be derived period by period
solving the problem
¶
Z 1µ
1
1+η
max
ln Cit −
di
N
1 + η it
{Cijt }{Nit }
0
σ
µZ
¶ σ−1
σ−1
Cijtσ dj
∀i,
s.t.
Cit =
Jit
Z
Cjit dj = Ait Nit ∀i.
J˜it

The first order conditions can be re-arranged to obtain
1

Citσ

−1

−1

Cijtσ
Ait λi

= λjt for each i ∈ [0, 1] and each j ∈ Ji ,
= Nitη for each i,

(34)

where λjt is the Lagrange multiplier on the j-th resource constraint. Since the problem is concave these
conditions are suﬃcient for an optimum.
σ
Let τ ∗ be the τ that satisfies 1 + τ ∗ = σ−1
. Consider the equilibrium allocation arising under full
information, let
Pjt
λjt =
.
P jt Cjt

31

With full information the Euler equation (19) implies that P jt Cjt is constant across agents. The demand
σ −σ
Cit . These two facts imply that
for good j by consumer i is given by Cijt = P it Pjt
1

Citσ

−1

−1

Cijtσ =

Pjt
Pjt
=
= λjt .
P it Cit
P jt Cjt

Moreover, under full information the optimal pricing condition (18) gives
1 1 η
1
=
N ,
Ait Pit it
P it Cit
which can be rearranged to give (34). Therefore, the equilibrium allocation satisfies the first order
conditions of the problem.

Proof of Proposition 3
For the following derivations recall that under imperfect information all the coeﬃcients β θ , β s , δ , δ v , δ s
are in (0, 1) and γ ∈ [0, 1].
Diﬀerentiating (31) with respect to µ gives
ηδ θ β θ + β θ + ηδ v γ (1 − β θ )
∂φθ
=
> 0.
∂µ
1 + ση − η (σ − 1) (β θ + γ (1 − β θ ))

(35)

To prove the inequality notice that the numerator is positive as it involves all non-negative terms and
β θ > 0. The denominator is positive since
β θ + γ (1 − β θ ) ≤ 1,
and
η (σ − 1) ≤ ησ,
(since η ≥ 0), and these two inequalities imply
ση ≥ η (σ − 1) (β θ + γ (1 − β θ )) .
Diﬀerentiating (32) gives
∂φs
=
∂µ

µ
¶
∂φθ
1
{η δ θ + (σ − 1)
β s + β s + ηδ s
1+η
∂µ
µ
¶
∂φ
− η δ v + (σ − 1) θ γβ s } > 0.
∂µ

The inequality follows since γ ≤ 1 and δ v < δ θ imply that
µ
¶
µ
¶
∂φ
∂φ
δ θ + (σ − 1) θ − γ δ v + (σ − 1) θ > 0.
∂µ
∂µ
Recall that ψ θ = ψ v + ψ , then substituting (26) and (27) and diﬀerentiating gives
∂φθ
∂ψ θ
= δθ −
> 0.
∂µ
∂µ
To prove this inequality I need to prove that
δθ >

ηδ θ β θ + β θ + ηδ v γ (1 − β θ )
,
1 + ση − η (σ − 1) (β θ + γ (1 − β θ ))

32

(36)

where I am using (35). Dividing by δ θ on both sides and rearranging this is equivalent to
1 + ση − η (σ − 1) (β θ + γ (1 − β θ )) >

βθ
+ ηβ θ + ηδ v γ (1 − β θ ) ,
δθ

and this follows from the following two inequalities
1>

βθ
,
δθ

and
ση − η [(σ − 1) (β θ + γ (1 − β θ )) + β θ + δ v γ (1 − β θ )] >
∙
∙
µ
¸¸
¶
(1 − δ v ) γ
= ση 1 − β θ + 1 −
(1 − β θ ) > 0.
σ
Diﬀerentiating (28) gives
∂ψ s
∂φs
= δs −
< 0.
∂µ
∂µ
To prove the inequality notice that (36) implies
β + ηδ s
∂φs
≥ s
∂µ
1+η
and

β s + ηδ s
> δs.
1+η

Some lengthy but straightforward algebra, together with the inequalities derived above, can be used to
show that
∂φθ
∂φs
+
,
δθ + δs >
∂µ
∂µ
which proves the last statement.

Proof of Proposition 4
To prove the statement it is suﬃcient to find a µ and a vector {ψ , ψ v , ψ s , φθ , φs } that satisfy (24)-(28)
and such that ψ + ψ v = 1 and ψ s = 0. Let me set
³
´
1
1 − βδθθ
η + ηγ δδvθ + 1−β
³
´ θ
³
´,
φfθ s =
(37)
δ
1
ησ + ηγ σ − δθ + 1−β
1 − βδθθ
θ

and set the following values for the remaining variables

1 + φfθ s
− 1,
δθ

(38)

´
´
´ ¡
³³
³¡
¢
¢
1 + σφfθ s β s − 1 + µf s δ v + (σ − 1) φfθ s γβ s + 1 + µf s β s ,

(39)

µf s =
φfs s = η

ψf s
ψ fv s
ψ fs s

¡
¢
1 + µf s δ ,
¡
¢
= 1 + µf s δ v − φfθ s ,
¡
¢
= 1 + µf s δ s − φfs s .
=

33

Checking that ψ f s + ψ fv s = 1 is straightforward (recall that δ θ = δ + δ v ). To check that ψ fs s = 0 I need
to check the following equality:
³³
³¡
´
´
´ ¡
¡
¢
¢
¢
1 + µf s δ s = η 1 + σφfθ s β s − 1 + µf s δ v + (σ − 1) φfθ s γβ s + 1 + µf s β s .
Substitute µf s from (38) in this expression. Rearranging terms, this gives
φfθ s

η + ηγ δδvθ + δ1θ β sβ−δs
s
³
´
=
.
ησ + ηγ σ − δδθ + δ1θ β sβ−δs
s

To check that this expression is identical to (37) it suﬃces to show that
β − δs
βs
= s
.
1 − βθ
δθ − βθ
After some lengthy manipulation of the inference coeﬃcients, one can show that both sides of this
σ 2θ
equation are equal to σ2 +σ
2.
e
θ
Finally, I can check that these values satisfynthe equilibrium
o conditions (24)-(28). Conditions (26)fs
fs
fs
(28) follow immediately from the definitions of ψ , ψ v , ψ s . Substituting ψ fθ s = 1, ψ fs s = 0, and
ψ fv s =

1 + φfθ s
δ v − φfθ s ,
δθ

in (24)-(25) gives me the expressions (37)-(39). This confirms that also (24) and (25) are satisfied.

Proof of Proposition 5
First, using the household’s optimality condition I will derive necessary conditions for the coeﬃcients
{ψ t , ψ vt , ψ st , φθt }. Next, I will show that under the appropriate choice of µt and ρt the same coeﬃcients
arise in equilibrium and induce the same real allocation.
The consumer Euler equation can be derived as in Proposition 1, and, using the law of iterated
expectations, can be written as
£
£
¤¤
pit + cit = κc,t + Ei,(t,II) Et+1 pit+1 + cit+1 .
Since all idiosyncratic shocks are i.i.d.
£
¤
Et+1 pit+1 + cit+1 = φ0,t+1 + ψ 0,t+1 .

Moreover, recall that φ0,t+1 and ψ 0,t+1 are linear functions of the variables in ht+1 = hθt , et , θt−1 , et−1 , ...i.
ª
©
Therefore, it is possible to find a vector ζ t+1 , ξ s,t+1 , ξ θ,t+1 such that
φ0,t+1 + ψ 0,t+1 = ζ t+1 · ht + ξ s,t+1 st + ξ θ,t+1 θt .

Using the optimality conditions
(20) and (21) oneª can proceed as in the proof of Proposition 1 and
©
show that the coeﬃcients φs,t , φθ,t , ψ ,t , ψ v,t , ψ s,t must satisfy the following set of conditions
¡¡
¡
¢
¢
¢
(1 + ση) φθ,t = η ψ θ,t + σφθ,t β θ − 1 + ψ v,t + σφθ,t γ (1 − β θ ) + ξ θ,t+1 β θ − 1,
¢
¢
¢
¡¡
¡
(1 + ση) φs,t = η ψ θ,t + σφθ,t β s + ψ s,t + σφs,t − ψ v,t + σφθ,t γβ s + ξ θ,t+1 β s ,
ψ ,t = ξ θ,t+1 δ ,
ψ v,t = ξ θ,t+1 δ v − φθ,t ,
ψ s,t = ξ θ,t+1 δ s − φs,t .

34

©
ª
This shows that the parameter ξ θ,t+1 uniquely pins down the coeﬃcients φs,t , φθ,t , ψ ,t , ψ v,t , ψ s,t in
period t. Set
µt = ξ θ,t+1 − 1
one can proceed as in the proof of Proposition 1, show that this choice of µt delivers the same coeﬃcients
φθ,t , ψ 0,t , ψ ,t , ψ v,t , ψ s,t , and derive the value of ρt consistent with µt .

Proof of Lemma 2
Using the demand index Dit defined in (16), the equilibrium labor supply of consumer i is given by
Nit =

Dit Pit−σ
= Vd ect −at e(−1−σφθ +(ψv +σφθ )γ) it .
Ait

Substituting in the consumer utility function gives the per-period utility
³
´1+η
1
cit −
.
Vd1+η ect −at −(1+σφθ −(ψv +σφθ )γ) it
1+η

Taking expectations with respect to the idiosyncratic shocks
yt −

it

and vit gives

1
V 1+η exp{(1 + η) ψ 0 + (1 + η) (ψ s + ψ θ − 1) θt + (1 + η) ψ s et +
1+η d

1
+ (1 + σφθ − (ψ v + σφθ ) γ)2 (1 + η)2 σ 2 }.
2
Taking expectations with respect to the aggregate shocks θt and et gives
Wt

= ψ 0 + at−1 −
+

1
V 1+η exp{(1 + η) ψ 0 +
1+η d

2
´
(1 + η) ³
(ψ s + ψ θ − 1)2 σ 2θ + ψ 2s σ 2e + (1 + σφθ − (ψ v + σφθ ) γ)2 σ 2 }.
2

Substituting the expression for Vd derived in Lemma 3 gives the expression in the Lemma.

Proof of Proposition 6
The policy problem is to choose a subsidy τ , an interest rate rule (µ, φθ , φs , ρ, ξ), and equilibrium
coeﬃcients (ψ 0 , ψ v , ψ , ψ s ) that maximize Wt subject to the constraints (24)-(30). Notice that the
subsidy τ only appears in the constraint (29) and, for any value of the remaining variables, the constraint
(29) is satisfied by setting
τ = exp {H (ψ , ψ v , ψ s , φθ ) + ln Vd (ψ , ψ v , ψ s , φθ ) + (1 + η) ψ 0 } − 1.
A similar reasoning applies to ρ and constraint (30), while the choice of ξ has no eﬀects on the equilibrium
allocation. Therefore, the problem can be restated eliminating τ , ρ and ξ from the choice variables and
(29) and (30) from the constraints. As shown in the proof of Proposition 1 the constraints (24)-(28)
define a map between µ and (φθ , φs , ψ v , ψ , ψ s ). This can be used to define a map w (µ) between µ and
the variable w defined in (11). In short the policy problem can be stated as
µ
¶
1
1
max ψ 0 −
exp{(1 + η) ψ 0 − w (µ) }.
µ,ψ 0
1+η
2
For any value of ψ 0 the objective function in this problem is a monotone increasing function of w.
o
Therefore, the problem can be solved in
first
¡ two steps,
¢ setting µ = arg maxµ w (µ), and then choosing
1
1
o
ψ 0 to maximize ψ 0 − 1+η exp{(1 + η) ψ 0 − 2 w (µ ) }.

35

Proof of Proposition 7
Rearranging the constraints and substituting away the choice variable µ, the problem described in
Proposition 6 can be restated as
³
´
2
maxψθ ,ψv ,ψ ,ψs ,φθ − (1 + η) (ψ θ + ψ s − 1) σ 2θ + ψ 2s σ 2e + σ (σ − 1) φ2θ σ 2
− (1 + η) (1 + σφθ − (ψ v + σφθ ) γ)2 σ 2 +
2

−ψ 2 σ 2 − (ψ v + σφθ ) γσ 2 ,

subject to
βθ
− 1 + η (ψ v + σφθ ) γ (1 − β θ ) ,
δθ
β − δs
0 = η (ψ θ + σφθ ) β s + (1 + η) ψ s + (ψ θ + φθ ) s
− η (ψ v + σφθ ) γβ s
δθ

(1 + ση) φθ

= η ((ψ θ + σφθ ) β θ − 1) + (ψ θ + φθ )

ψ θ + φθ
δ ,
δθ
ψ + φθ
= ψθ − θ
δ .
δθ
=

ψ
ψv

(40)
(41)

(42)
(43)

It can be easily shown that the constraints (40)-(43) define a linear map that for each ψ θ gives the
remaining choice variables, ψ , ψ v , ψ s , φθ . Moreover, Proposition 4 implies that the first term in the
objective function is zero when ψ θ = 1.
Therefore, to prove the statements in the proposition it is suﬃcient to study the properties of the
following function
f (ψ θ ) ≡ −σ (σ − 1) φ2θ (1 − γ) + (1 + η) (1 + σφθ − (ψ v + σφθ ) γ)2 +
2

+ψ 2 + (ψ v + σφθ ) γ (1 − γ)

where ψ , ψ v , ψ s , φθ are those that satisfy the constraints (40)-(43). To derive this expression I have
used the fact that σ 2 = (1 − γ) σ 2 .
In particular, µf s is optimal if and only if f 0 (1) = 0 and µo < µf s if f 0 (1) < 0.
The expression for f 0 (ψ θ ) is given by:
f 0 (ψ θ ) = 2{−σ (σ − 1) (1 − γ) φθ

dφθ
+
dψ θ

µ
µ
¶¶
dφ
1
dφ
γ dφθ
+σ θ
+
+ (1 + η) (1 + σφθ − (ψ v + σφθ ) γ) σ θ − γ
−
dψ θ
1+γ
1 + γ dψ θ
dψ θ
µ
µ
¶
¶
1
dφ
dφ
γ
γ dφθ
ψ 1+ θ
+ σ θ },
+ (ψ v + σφθ ) γ (1 − γ)
−
dψ θ 1 + γ
1+γ
1 + γ dψ θ
dψ θ

where

1
ηβ θ + βδθθ + ηγ (1 − β θ ) γ+1
dφθ
³
´
=
.
γ
dψ θ
ησ (1 − β θ ) − βδθθ − ηγ (1 − β θ ) σ − γ+1
+1

Setting ψ θ = 1, it is possible to show that η ≥ 0 implies that the corresponding value for φθ satisfies
φθ ∈ [−1, 0) and φθ = 1 only if η = 0. This property, together with the properties σ > 1, β θ , δ θ ∈
(0, 1) , β θ < δ θ and γ ∈ [0, 1] can be used to show that: (i) f 0 (1) > 0 if γ ∈ (0, 1) and η > 0, (ii)
f 0 (1) = 0 in all remaining cases. The complete derivations are available from the author.
The next lemma shows that if µ ≤ µf s producers with higher productivity tend to set lower prices.

36

Lemma 5 If ψ θ ≤ 1 the response of prices to individual productivity is negative, φθ < 0.
Proof. By substitution one can show that φθ can be written as:
φθ = −

³
´
+ η (1 − β θ ψ θ ) − ηγ (1 − β θ ) ψ θ 1 − δδθ
³
´
.
1 − βδθθ + ησ (1 − β θ ) − ηγ (1 − β θ ) σ − δδθ

1−

βθ
δθ ψθ

Notice that β θ < δ θ , β θ < 1, δ < δ θ , σ > 1 and γ ∈ (0, 1). Therefore, the denominator of the fraction
on the right-hand side is positive, since
µ
¶
δ
ησ (1 − β θ ) ≥ ηγ (1 − β θ ) σ −
.
δθ
Moreover, if ψ θ ≤ 1 then
η (1 − ψ θ β θ ) ≥ ηγ (1 − β θ ) ψ θ

µ

δ
1−
δθ

¶

and the numerator is also positive.

References
[1] Klaus Adam, 2006, “Optimal Monetary Policy with Imperfect Common Knowledge,”
Journal of Monetary Economics (forthcoming).
[2] Manuel Amador and Pierre-Olivier Weill, 2007, “Learning from Private and Public Observations of Others Actions,” mimeo UCLA.
[3] Jeﬀery Amato, Stephen Morris and Hyun Song Shin, 2002, “Communication and Monetary Policy,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 18, pp. 495-503.
[4] George Marios Angeletos, Guido Lorenzoni and Alessandro Pavan, 2006, “Beauty Contests,” mimeo MIT.
[5] George Marios Angeletos and Alessandro Pavan, 2005, “Eﬃcient Use of Information and
Welfare Analysis with Complementarities and Asymmetric Information,” mimeo MIT.
[6] Kosuke Aoki, 2003, “On the Optimal Monetary Policy Response to Noisy Indicators,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 50, pp. 501-523.
[7] Philippe Bacchetta and Eric Van Wincoop, 2005, “Higher Order Expectations in Asset
Pricing,” mimeo, Study Center Gerzensee.

37

[8] Paul Beaudry and Franck Portier, 2006, “When Can Changes in Expectations Cause
Business Cycle Fluctuations in Neo-Classical Settings?,” Journal of Economic Theory,
forthcoming.
[9] Ben S. Bernanke and Mark Gertler, 2001, “Should Central Banks Respond to Movements
in Asset Prices?” American Economic Review, Vol. 91, No. 2, pp. 253-257
[10] Stephen Cecchetti, Hans Genberg, John Lipsky, and Sushil Wadhwani, 2000, Asset Prices
and Central Bank Policy. London, International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies.
[11] Larry Christiano, Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno, 2006, Monetary Policy and
Stock Market Boom-Bust Cycles, mimeo, Northwestern.
[12] Jean-Pierre Danthine, John Donaldson, and Thore Johnsen 1998, “Productivity Growth,
Consumer Confidence, and the Business Cycle,” European Economic Review 42, pp. 11131140.
[13] Bill Dupor, 2002, “Nominal Price versus Asset Price Stabilization,” mimeo.
[14] Bill Dupor, 2005, “Stabilizing Non-Fundamental Asset Price Movements under Discretion
and Limited Information,” Journal of Monetary Economics 62, pp. 727-747.
[15] Christian Hellwig, 2005, “Heterogeneous Information and the Welfare Eﬀects of Public
Information Disclosures” UCLA Working Paper.
[16] Christian Hellwig and Laura Veldkamp, 2006, “Knowing What Others Know: Coordination Motives in Information Acquisition,” mimeo NYU.
[17] Nir Jaimovich and Sergio Rebelo, 2005, “Can News about the Future Drive the Business
Cycle?” mimeo, Northwestern University.
[18] Robert King, “Monetary Policy and Information Content of Prices,” Journal of Political
Economy, April 1982, pp. 247-279.
[19] Guido Lorenzoni, 2006, “A Theory of Demand Shocks,” NBER WP 12477.
[20] Yulei Luo, 2006, “Consumption Dynamics under Information Processing Constraints,”
mimeo, University of Hong Kong.

38

[21] Robert E. Lucas Jr.,1972, “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,” Journal of Economic Theory 4 (2), pp. 103-24.
[22] Robert E. Lucas Jr.,1990, “Liquidity and Interest Rates.” Journal of Economic Theory,
1990, 50(2), pp. 237-64.
[23] Bartosz Maćkowiak and Mirko Wiederholt, 2006, “Optimal Sticky Prices under Rational
Inattention,” mimeo, Humboldt University.
[24] N. Gregory Mankiw and Ricardo Reis, 2002, “Sticky Information Versus Sticky Prices: A
Proposal to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
117, pp. 1295-1328.
[25] Bennett T. McCallum, 1979, “A Monetary Policy ineﬀectiveness Result in a Model with
a Predetermined Price Level,” Economics Letters, Vol. 3, No. 1, 1979, 1-4.
[26] Fabio Milani, 2005, “Expectations, Learning and Macroeconomic Persistence,” mimeo,
UC Irvine.
[27] Stephen Morris and Hyun Song Shin, 2002, “The Social Value of Public Information,”
American Economic Review 92, pp. 1521-1534.
[28] Stephen Morris and Hyun Song Shin, 2005, “Central Bank Transparency and the Signal
Value of Prices,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, pp. 1-66.
[29] Giuseppe Moscarini, 2004, “Limited Information Capacity as a Source of Inertia,” Journal
of Economic Dynamics and Control, vol. 28 (10), pp. 2003-2035.
[30] Kristoﬀer P. Nimark, 2005, “Calvo Pricing and Imperfect Common Knowledge: A Forward
Looking Model of Rational Inflation Inertia,” ECB Working Paper No. 474.
[31] Maurice Obstfeld and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, 2000, “New Directions for Stochastic Open Economy Models,” Journal of International Economics 50, pp. 117-53.
[32] Athanasios Orphanides, 2003, “Monetary Policy Evaluation with Noisy Information,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (3), pp. 605-631.
[33] Edmund S. Phelps et al., 1969, Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and Inflation
Theory, New York: Norton.
39

[34] Ricardo Reis, 2003, “Where Is the Natural Rate? Rational Policy Mistakes and Persistent
Deviations of Inflation from Target,” Advances in Macroeconomics, The B. E. Journals
in Macroeconomics, vol. 3 (1).
[35] Ricardo Reis, 2006, “Inattentive Producers,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 73 (3).
[36] Christopher A. Sims, 2003, “Implications of Rational Inattention,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 50 (3), pp. 665-690.
[37] Lars E.O. Svensson, 2006, “Social Value of Public Information: Morris and Shin (2002)
Is Actually Pro Transparency, Not Con,” American Economic Review 96, pp. 448-451.
[38] Lars E.O. Svensson and Michael Woodford, 2003, “Indicator Variables for Optimal Policy,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 50, pp. 691-720.
[39] Lars E.O. Svensson and Michael Woodford, 2005, “Indicator Variables for Optimal Policy
under Asymmetric Information,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control.
[40] Michael Woodford, 2002, “Imperfect Common Knowledge and the Eﬀects of Monetary
Policy”, in P. Aghion, R. Frydman, J. Stiglitz, and M. Woodford, eds., Knowledge, Information, and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund S. Phelps,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
[41] Michael Woodford, 2003, Interest and Prices, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

40

