NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LONG RUN HEALTH IMPACTS OF INCOME SHOCKS:
WINE AND PHYLLOXERA IN 19TH CENTURY FRANCE
Abhijit Banerjee
Esther Duflo
Gilles Postel-Vinay
Timothy M. Watts
Working Paper 12895
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12895

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2007

We thank Orley Ashenfelter, Joshua Angrist, Noel Bonneuil, Michael Greenstone, Michel Hau, David
Weir and many seminar participants for useful comments and discussions and for sharing data with
us, and Madeleine Roux for outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Abhijit Banerjee, Esther Duflo, Gilles Postel-Vinay, and Timothy M. Watts. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Long Run Health Impacts of Income Shocks: Wine and Phylloxera in 19th Century France
Abhijit Banerjee, Esther Duflo, Gilles Postel-Vinay, and Timothy M. Watts
NBER Working Paper No. 12895
February 2007
JEL No. I12,N32,O12
ABSTRACT
This paper provides estimates of the long-term effects on height and health of a large income shock
experienced in early childhood. Phylloxera, an insect that attacks the roots of grape vines, destroyed
40% of French vineyards between 1863 and 1890, causing major income losses among wine growing
families. Because the insects spread slowly from the southern coast of France to the rest of the country,
Phylloxera affected different regions in different years. We exploit the regional variation in the timing
of this shock to identify its effects. We examine the effects on the adult height, health, and life expectancy
of children born in the years and regions affected by the Phylloxera. The shock decreased long run
height, but it did not affect other dimensions of health, including life expectancy. We find that, at age
20, those born in affected regions were about 1.8 millimeters shorter than others. This estimate implies
that children of wine-growing families born when the vines were affected in their regions were 0.6
to 0.9 centimeters shorter than others by age 20. This is a significant effect since average heights grew
by only 2 centimeters in the entire 19th century. However, we find no other effect on health, including
infant mortality, life expectancy, and morbidity by age 20.
Abhijit Banerjee
MIT
Department of Economics
E52-252d
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
banerjee@mit.edu
Esther Duflo
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-252G
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
eduflo@mit.edu

Gilles Postel-Vinay
INRA-Lea DELTA
48 BD Jourdan
Ecole Normale Superieure
75014 Paris FRANCE
gpv@ens.fr
Timothy M. Watts
MIT Department of Economics
Cambridge MA 02139
watts@mit.edu

1. Introduction
Poor environmental conditions in-utero and early childhood have been shown to have
adverse consequences on later life outcomes, including life expectancy, height, cognitive
ability, and productivity (Barker, 1992)6. Important influences include the disease
environment (Almond, 2006), the public health infrastructure (Almond and Chay, 2005),
food availability (see e.g. Almond et al. (2006) and Qian (2006) on the great Chinese
famine, Rosebloom et al. (2001) and Ravelli et al (2001) on the Dutch famine of 19441945), and even the availability of certain seasonal nutrients (Doblhammer, 2000).
At the same time, evidence from developing countries suggests that young children’s
nutritional status, not surprisingly, is affected by family income (see e.g. Jensen, 2000,
Duflo, 2003). Taken together, these two facts suggest that, at least in poor countries,
economic crises may have important long term impacts on the welfare of the cohorts born
during these periods.7 Yet, except for the few papers on famines mentioned above, there
is very little evidence establishing a direct link between economic events at birth and
adult outcomes. This is perhaps not surprising, since such an analysis requires good data
on adult outcomes, coupled with information on economic conditions faced during early
childhood. Longitudinal data is often not available over such long time periods,
especially in poor countries, except for dramatic events such as famines. As a result, the
few existing studies tend to be limited to cohort analyses: For example, Van Den Berg,
Lindeboom and Portrait (2006) show that, among cohorts born between 1812 and 1912 in
the Netherlands, those born in slumps have lower life expectancy than those born in
booms. However, a concern with using just time variation is that it might reflect other
6

The idea that in-utero conditions affect long run health is most commonly associated and referred to as the
“fetal origin hypothesis”, and associated to DJP Barker (see e.g. Barker, 1992, 1994). For additional
evidence see, among others, Strauss and Thomas (1995), Case and Paxson (2006), Berhman and
Rozenzweig (2005) and references therein.
7
In rich countries this effect may be compensated by the fact that pollutants diminish during economic
slumps (Chay and Greenstone, 2003).

2

time-specific elements, such as the quality of public services, the relative price of
different nutrients, or even conditions in adulthood. To fill this gap, this paper takes
advantage of the Phylloxera crisis in 19th century France, which, we will argue, generated
a negative large income shock that affected different “departments” (roughly similar in
size to a US county) in France in different years, combined with the rich data on height
and health that was collected by the French Military Administration.
Phylloxera (an insect that attacks the roots of vines) destroyed a significant portion of
French vineyards in the second half of the 19th century. Between 1863, when it first
appeared in Southern France, and 1890, when vineyards were replanted with hybrid vines
(French stems were grafted onto Phylloxera-resistant American roots), Phylloxera
destroyed 40 percent of the French vineyards. Just before the crisis, about one sixth of the
French agricultural income came from wine, mainly produced in a number of small
highly specialized wine-growing regions. For the inhabitants of these regions, the
Phylloxera crisis represented a major income shock. Because the insects spread slowly
from the southern coast of France to the rest of the country, Phylloxera affected different
regions in different years. We exploit this regional variation in the timing of the shock to
identify its effects, using a difference-in-differences strategy.
We examine the effect of this shock on the adult height, health, and life expectancy
outcomes of children born in years where the Phylloxera affected their region of birth,
controlling for region and year of birth effects. The height and health data comes from the
military: Every year, all the conscripts (who were a little over 20 at the time of reporting)
were measured and the number of young men falling into a number of height categories
was reported at the level of the department. The statistics also reported the number of
young men who had to be exempted for health reasons, and specified the grounds of
exemption. This data is available for 83 departments which are consistently defined over

3

the period we consider. 8 In addition, we use data on female life expectancy at birth
constructed from the censuses and reports of vital statistics.
In many ways, France in the late 19th century was a developing country: In 1876 the
female life expectancy was 43 years; infant mortality was 22 percent; and the average
male height at the age of 20 was 1.65 meters, approximately the third percentile of the
American population today. The Phylloxera crisis therefore gives us the opportunity to
study the impact of a large income shock to the family during childhood on long-term
health outcomes in context of a developing economy. In addition, the crisis had a number
of features which makes it easier to interpret the results we get: First, we will show that it
was not accompanied by either important changes in migration patterns or by an increase
in infant mortality. We therefore do not need to worry about sample selection in those
who we observe in adulthood, unlike what seems to happen, for example, in the case of a
famine. Second, it did not result in a change in relative prices, which would have meant
that it would spill over into areas that do not grow wine (even the price of wine did not
increase very much, for reasons we will discuss below). As a result, we can identify
regions that were completely unaffected. Finally, the progression of the epidemic was
exogenous, as it was caused by the movement of the insects, which is something no one
knew how to stop until the late 1880s.
We find that the Phylloxera shock had a long-run impact on stature: We estimate that
children born during a “Phylloxera year” in wine-producing regions are 1.6 to 1.9
milimeters shorter than others. We estimate that this corresponds to a decline in height of
0.6 to 0.9 centimeters for children born in wine growing families in years where their
region was affected, a large effect considering that average height grew only 2
centimeters over the entire century. We do not find that children born just before, or just
after, the Phylloxera crisis are affected by it, which support the Barker hypothesis of the
importance of in-utero conditions for long run physical development. However, we also

8

France lost Moselle, Bas-Rhin, and Haut-Rhin to Prussia in 1870, while retaining the Territoire de
Belfort, a small part of Haut-Rhin. Moselle, Rhin-Bas, Haut-Rhin, and Belfort are excluded from the
analysis.

4

do not find any long-term effect on other measures of health, including morbidity at the
age of 20 (measured by the military as well) or life expectancy of women.
The remainder of this paper proceeds as follow: In the next section, we describe the
historical context and the Phylloxera crisis. In section 3, we briefly describe our data
sources (a data appendix does so in more detail). In sections 4 and 5, we present the
empirical strategy and the results. Section 6 concludes.

2. Wine Production and the Phylloxera Crisis
Wine represented an important share of agricultural production in 19th century France: In
1863, the year Phylloxera first reached France, wine production represented about one
sixth of the value of agricultural production in France, which made it the second most
important product after wheat (table 1). Wine was produced in 79 “departments” out of
89, although it was more than 15% of agricultural production in only 40 of them (we
refer to these 40 departments below as the “wine-growing” departments).
Phylloxera is an insect of the aphid family, which attacks the roots of grape vines,
causing dry leaves, a reduced yield of fruit, and the eventual death of the plant.
Indigenous to America, the insects arrived in France in the early 1860s, apparently
having traveled in the wood used for packaging (though it is possible that it was actually
in a shipment of American vines). By the 1860s, the pest had established itself in two
areas of France. In the departments on the southern coast, near the mouth of the Rhône,
wine growers first noticed the pest’s effects in 1863, and there are many records of it in
the years 1866-1867. In 1869 the pest also appeared on the west coast in the Bordeaux
region. The maps in figures 1A to 1D show the progression of the invasion starting from
these two points: From the south, the insects spread northward up the Rhône and outward
along the coast. From the west, the insects moved southeast along the Dordogne and
Garonne rivers and north to the Loire valley. By 1878, Phylloxera had invaded all of
southern France, and 25 of the departments where wine was an important production. It
reached the suburbs of Paris around 1885.

5

During the first years of the crisis, no one understood why the vines were dying. As the
Phylloxera spread and the symptoms became well-known, it became clear that the disease
posed a serious threat to wine growers, and two of the southern departments (Bouchesdu-Rhône and Vaucluse) formed a commission to investigate the crisis. The commission
found Phylloxera insects on the roots of infected vines in 1868 and identified the insects
as the cause of the dead vines. After experimenting with various ineffective treatments
(such as flooding, or treatment with carbon bisulphide), what was to be the ultimate
solution was discovered in the late 1880s. This solution required wine growers to graft
European vines onto pest-resistant American roots. In 1888, a mission identified 431
types of American vines and the types of French soil they could grow in, paving the road
to recovery starting in the early 1890s. Eventually, approximately four fifths of the
vineyards originally planted in European vines were replaced with grafted vines.
Figure 2 shows the time series of wine production in France from 1850 to 1908. The
decline in the first few years reflects the mildew crisis, which affected the vines before
the Phylloxera. After a rapid recovery between 1855 and 1859, the production grew until
1877, by which time more than half of wine growing departments were touched by the
Phylloxera. The production fell until 1890, when the progressive planting of the
American vines started the recovery.
Table 2 shows the importance of the Phylloxera crisis on wine production. Using data on
wine production reported in Gallet (1957), we construct an indicator for whether the
region was affected by the Phylloxera. Gallet (1957) indicates the year where the
Phylloxera aphids were first spotted in the regions. In most regions, however, for a few
years after that, production continued to increase (or remained stable), until the aphid had
spread. Since we want to capture the fall in wine production due to the insect, we define
the “pre-phylloxera” year as the year before the aphids were first spotted, and the
indicator “attained by phylloxera” is equal to one every year when wine production was

6

less than 80% of its level in the “pre-phylloxera” year. It is then turned back to zero after
1890, since the grafting solution had been found by then.9
We then run a regression of area planted in vines, the log of wine production, and yield,
for the years 1852-1892 on year dummies, department dummies, and an indicator for
whether or not the region was touched by the Phylloxera in that year. Namely, we run the
following specification:
yij=a Pij+ ki+dj+uij
where yij is the outcome variable (vine grown areas, wine yield, wine production, as well
as wheat production) in department i in year j, Pij is an indicator for Phylloxera, ki and dj
are department and year fixed effects, and uij is an error term. The standard errors are
corrected for auto-correlation by clustering at the department level.
We also run the same specification after controlling for department specific trends:
yij=a Pij+ ki+tij+dj+uij,
where tij is a department specific trend. The results are shown in table 2, panel B. The
yield and the production declined dramatically: according to the specification that
controls for a department specific trend, the production was 37% lower and the yield was
42% lower during Phylloxera years.
Unfortunately, yearly data on overall agricultural production or department “income” are
not available except for a few departments (Auffret, Hau and Lévy-Leboyer, 1981) so we
cannot provide a quantitative estimate of the fall in department “GDP” due to the
Phylloxera. However, there are reasons to think that there was no substitution towards
other activities, so that the decline in wine production led to a corresponding decline in
income in the affected departments. Table 2 shows that the area planted with vines did
not decline during the crisis, both because many parcels of land that had been planted
with vines would have been ill-suited to all other crops and also because most growers
9

We experimented with other ways of defining the Phylloxera attack as well, with results that are
qualitatively similar (although the point estimates clearly depend on how strong the fall in production has
to be before a department is considered to be “affected”).

7

were expecting a recovery. As a result, the decrease in wine production was not
compensated by a corresponding increase in other agricultural production: Columns 3 to
5, in the same table, show the results of regressing the production of wheat and the area
cultivated on wheat on the Phylloxera indicator, and shows no increase of wheat
production compensating the decline in wine production. In the few departments in which
the series on agricultural production have been constructed by Auffret et al. (1981), the
fall in overall agricultural production does appear to be commensurate with the fall in
wine production.
To make up for the shortage of French wine, both the rules for wine imports into France
and the making of “piquette” (press cake —the solids remaining after pressing the grape
grain to extract the liquids—then mixed with water and sugar) and raisin wines were
relaxed. For example, while only 0.2 million hectoliters of wine were imported in 1860s,
10 million hectoliters were imported in the 1880s (for comparison, the production was 24
million hectoliters in 1879). Imports declined again in the late 1890s (Ordish, 1972). As
can be seen in figure 1, this kept the price of wine from increasing at anywhere near the
same rate as the decrease in production. Price movements thus did little to mitigate the
importance of the output shock. Moreover, given the size of the crisis in the most affected
regions, farmers could not systematically rely on credit to weather the crisis. In particular,
Postel-Vinay (1989) describes in detail how, in the Languedoc region, the traditional
system of credit collapsed during the Phylloxera crisis (since both lenders and borrowers
were often hurt by the crisis). All of this suggests that Phylloxera was a large shock to the
incomes of people in the wine growing regions, and the possibility for smoothing it away
was, at best, limited.

3. Data
In addition from the department level wine production data already described, we use
several data sources in this paper (the data sets are described in more detail in the data
appendix).

8

First, we assembled a complete department-level panel data set of height reported by the
military. Height is widely recognized to be a good measure of general health, and
countless studies have shown that it is correlated with other adult outcomes (see Case and
Paxson (2006) and Strauss and Thomas (1995) for references to studies showing this in
the context of the developing world and, among many others, Steckel (1995), Steckel and
Floud (1997), and Fogel (2004) historical evidence on this issue from countries that are
now considered developed). France is a particularly good context to use military height
data. Since the Loi Jourdan, in 1798, young men had to report for military service in the
year they turned 20, in the department where their father lived (all the young men
reporting in one department and one year were called a “classe”, or military class). They
were measured, and since 1836, the data on height was published yearly in the form of
the number of young men who fell into particular height categories (the number of
categories varied from year to year). These documents also included, for each department
and each year, the number of young men exempted and the grounds for exemption (in
particular, if they were exempted for disease, the nature of the disease). Using this data,
we estimated both parametrically and non parametrically the average height of the 20year old in each department in each year, as well as the fraction of youth who were
shorter than 1.56 meters, the threshold for exemption from military duty (see data
appendix for the estimation methods).10 We also computed the fraction of each military
class exempted for health reasons, and created a consistent classification of the disease
justifying the exemptions.
The nation-level aggregate data on French military conscripts has been used previously
(see, Aron, Dumont and Le Roy-Ladurie (1972); Van Merten (1990), Weir (1997), and
Heyberger (2005)). However, this paper is the first to assemble and exploit the data on
mean height and proportion of those stunted for all departments and every year between
1872 and 1912.11 The details of the data construction are presented in the appendix.

10

Actually 1.56 meters was the highest threshold for exemption that was used---the threshold varied over
time.
11
With the exception of Postel-Vinay and Sahn (2006), which was written concurrently with this article
and exploits the same data set.

9

Moreover, we also conducted original archival work in three departments to collect
military data at the level of the canton (the smallest administrative unit after the
“commune”, or village) in three wine growing departments (Bouches du Rhône, Gard and
Vaucluse). The precise height data was not stored at this level, but the canton level data
tells us three things: The fraction of people not inducted into the military for reason of
height (which is available only until the cohort conscripted in 1901, since the military did
not reject anyone based on height after that year), the fraction rejected for reasons of
“weakness”, and the fraction put into an easier service for the same reason.
We use the data for the years 1872-1912 (corresponding to years of birth, 1852-1892),
which span the Phylloxera crisis, as well as the period before and the recovery, since this
is the period for which the military data is the most representative of the height in the
population. Starting in 1872, everyone had to report for military service. Starting in 1886,
everyone’s height was published, even if they were subsequently exempted from the
military service. Therefore, the data is representative of the entire population of
conscripts from 1886 on, and from 1872 to 1885, we are missing the height data for those
exempted for health reasons (15%) or for other reasons (25%). We discuss in the
appendix what we assume about the height of those exempted to construct estimates that
are representative of the entire sample, and using a complete individual level dataset
available for a sub-sample, we show that these assumptions appear to be valid. The data
should therefore be representative of the entire population of young men who presented
themselves to the military service examination in a given region.
This sample may be still endogenously selected if Phylloxera led to changes in the
composition of those who reported to the military conscription bureau in their region of
birth, either because of death, migration, or avoidance of the military service. According
to historians of the French military service (e.g. Woloch (1994)), the principle of
universal military conscription was applied very thoroughly in France during this period.
A son had to report in the canton where his father lived (even if the son had subsequently
migrated) and the father was legally responsible if he did not. Avoidance and migration
by the son are therefore not likely to be big issues. As a check, we computed the ratio

10

between the number of youths age 15-19 in each department in each census year, and
sum of the sizes of the military cohorts in the four corresponding year years (for example,
a youth age 19 (resp, 17) in 1856 was a member in the class of 1857 (resp. 1859): The
average is 99% and the standard deviation is low (table 1). Moreover, as we will show in
table 8, this ratio does not appear to be affected by the Phylloxera crisis.
The main potential sample selection problems that remain are therefore those of
differential migration by the fathers and mortality between birth and age 20. We will
show in the robustness section that neither of these seems to have been affected by the
Phylloxera infestation.
Finally, we use data on number of births and infant mortality (mortality before age 1),
from the vital statistics data for each department and each year and two data series
constructed by Bonneuil (1997) using various censuses and records of vital statistics: The
first one gives the life expectancy of females born in every department every 5 years,
from 1806 to 1901. The second gives the migration rates of females, both for the young
(20 to 29 year olds) and for the entire population.

4. Empirical Strategy

4.1 Department-level Regressions
Figures 3 and 4 illustrate the spirit of our identification strategy. Figure 3 shows mean
height in each cohort of birth for wine-producing regions (where wine represents at least
15% of the agricultural production) and other regions. Wine-growing regions tend to be
richer and, for most of the period, the 20 year old males are taller in those regions than in
others. However, as Figure 4 shows very clearly, the difference in average height between
those born in wine-producing regions and those born in other regions fluctuates. The
striking fact in this figure is how closely the general trend in the difference in mean
height follows the general trend in wine production. Both grow until the end of the 1860s,

11

decline in the next two decades (when the Phylloxera progressively invades France) and
increase again in the 1890s, when wine grafting allows production to again rise.
The basic idea of the identification strategy builds on this observation: It is a simple
difference in differences approach where we ask whether children born in wine producing
departments in years where the wine production is lower due to the Phylloxera, are
shorter at age 20 than their counterparts born before or after, relative to those who are
born in other regions in the same year. Likewise, we can ask whether they have worse
health (as described by the military, lower life expectancy, lower long term fertility, etc.).
The difference in differences estimates are obtained by estimating:
(1) yij=a Pij+ ki+dj+uij
where yij is the outcome variable (for example: height at age 20, life expectancy) in
departement i in year j, Pij is an indicator for Phylloxera (constructed as explained in
section 2, and set to 0 if the department was not a wine producing department12), ki and dj
are department and year fixed effects, and uij is an error term (following Bertrand, Duflo,
and Mullainathan (2004), the standard errors are corrected for autocorrelation by
clustering at the department level).
We also run the same specification after controlling for department-specific trends:
(2) yij=a Pij+ ki+tij+dj+uij
Also run is an alternative specification where we use a continuous measure of how much
a department is affected by the crisis, instead of the dummy: The measure is constructed
by interacting the dummy indicating that Phylloxera has reached the department with the
area of vineyard per capita before the crisis (we use average area of vineyards over the
years 1850-1869, taken from Gallet, as our pre-crisis measure). An alternative continuous
measure is the fraction of wine in agricultural production before the crisis, multiplied by
the fraction of the population deriving a living from agriculture.13

12

I.e. less than 15% of the agricultural income came from wine before the crisis.
We will argue below that this appear to be a correct approximation of the fraction of people who lived in
wine growing families.

13

12

Finally, in some specifications, we restrict the sample to those departments where wine
represented at least 15% of the agricultural production before the crisis. All these regions
were affected by the Phylloxera at one point or another, and in these specifications we
therefore only exploit the timing of the crisis, not the comparison between regions that
may otherwise be different.
All these regressions consider the year of birth as the year of exposure. But one could
easily imagine that the Phylloxera affects the long-run height (or other measures) even if
children are exposed to it later in their lives. We will thus run specifications where the
shock variable is lagged by a number of years (so it captures children and adolescents
during the crisis). For a specification check, we will also estimate the effect of being born
just after the crisis.

4.2 Canton-Level Regressions: Gard, Vaucluse, Bouches-du-Rhône
With regressions run at the department level, one may worry that any relative decline of
height during the Phylloxera crisis is due to some other time varying factor correlated
with the infestation. This concern is in part alleviated by controlling for department
specific trends, but since we are considering a long time period, it is still conceivable that
the trends have changed in ways that are different for regions and cohorts affected by
Phylloxera, but for reasons that have nothing to do with the disease. We therefore
complement this analysis by an analysis performed at the level of the canton: For three
departments in Southern France (Gard, Vaucluse, and Bouches du Rhône) we collected
data on military conscripts at the canton level from the archives in each of these
departments. Data on wine production is not available yearly at this fine a level, but the
area of vineyards was collected for the 1866 agricultural enquiry, and is also available at
the canton level in the archives. We will combine this measure of the importance of vine
production before the crisis with the indicator for the fact that the department as a whole
was hit by the disease as a proxy for the impact of Phylloxera on wine-production.
The specification we use for these departments is as follows:

13

(3) yijk=a (Pij*Vk)+ mk+dji+uijk,
where Vk is the hectares of vineyards in 1866 in canton k, Pij is, as before, a dummy
indicating whether department i is affected by the Phylloxera in year j, dji is a department
time year fixed effect and mk is a canton fixed effect. This specification only compares
cantons within the same department, and it fully controls for department times year
effects: It thus asks whether young men born in cantons where wine was more important
before the crisis suffered more due to the crisis than those born in cantons where it was
less important.

4. Results

4.1 Height
Table 3 shows the basic results on the height at age 20, at the level of the department.
Depending on the specifications, we find that, at age 20, those born in the Phylloxera
years are 1.5 to 1.9 milimeters smaller than others, on average. They are also 0.35 to
0.38 percentage points more likely to be shorter than 1.56 centimeters. In panel C and D,
we use the continuous measure of exposure to the Phylloxera (hectares of vineyards per
capita), first in the entire sample and, in order to check that the results are not driven
solely by the contrast between wine-producing and non wine-producing regions, in the
sample of departments where wine is at least 15% of agricultural production. We find
that, in wine-producing regions, one more hectare of vine per capita increases the
probability that a 20 year old male is shorter by 3% and reduces his height by 1
centimeter. If instead, we use data from all the regions, the effects are respectively 1.85%
and 7 milimeters.
The best way to scale the effect of the Phylloxera crisis would be to use the fraction of
the population living in wine producing households. There is, unfortunately, no data
source on this. To proxy it, we use the product of the share of wine in agricultural income
before the crisis (in 1862) and the share of the population living in households whose
main occupation is agriculture. This would be an overestimate of the fraction of

14

population living in wine producing households14 if the output per worker was higher for
wine than for other agricultural products. Estimates based on the cross-department
variation in output per worker and share of wine in agricultural production suggest,
however, that the output per worker in wine and non wine production is similar, so that
the coefficient of this variable can then be interpreted as the effect of the crisis on wine
growing families. We show this specification in panel E (for all regions) and F (for wine
producing regions only). The regressions indicate that a child born of a wine producing
family during the Phylloxera crisis was 0.5 to 0.9 centimeters smaller by age 20 than he
would otherwise have been. This is not a small effect, since heights in France grew only
by 2 centimeters in the entire 19th century: In term of stature, being born during the
Phylloxera crisis in a wine producing region was equivalent to losing almost half a
century worth of growth.
Table 4 shows the results of the specification at the canton level of the 3 wine-producing
departments. The results can be directly compared to the results in panel C and D of table
2, since, as in that table, the explanatory variable is the number of hectares of vines
divided by the population. One difference is that the data are only available for men born
until 1881, and the other is that the threshold for being rejected is not 1.56 meters, but
1.54 meters. This specification also suggests a significant impact of the Phylloxera on
height: We find that the probability of being rejected for military service because of
height was 1.3% higher for each additional hectare of wine per capita. This is a somewhat
smaller number than what we found in the department-level specification, but the two
numbers are not statistically different, and are of the same order of magnitude. The fact
that this specification, which uses a much finer level of variation, provides results that are
consistent with the department-level results, is reassuring.
Table 5 investigates the effects of the Phylloxera on various regions and cohorts.
Columns 1 to 4 estimate the effect of the Phylloxera on various cohorts. Column 1 is a
specification check: We define a “born after Phylloxera” dummy, and confirm that those
born immediately after the Phylloxera epidemics are no shorter than those who were born
14

Which would lead to an underestimate of the effect of the Phylloxera when we use this variable.

15

before. This is another element suggesting that the effect is probably not due to an
omitted changing trend. Column 2 examines the effect on those who were young children
(1 to 2 year olds), or toddlers (2 to 5 year olds) at the time of the epidemic. Interestingly,
we find no long-run effects on them. Finally column 3 looks at the effect on those who
were teenagers during the crisis, and finds again no effect on them. It seems that the
shock had no long lasting effects if it was experienced later in childhood.
Column 4 presents another specification check: We run a specification similar to equation
(2) (with the dummy set to 1 for regions where wine represents at least 15% of
agricultural production), but we also include a Phylloxera dummy for regions that
produce less than 15% of wine. Vineyards in those regions were also affected by the
Phylloxera (so that the “Phylloxera” variable can be defined as for all regions) , but we
do not expect this to really affect average height, since wine did not affect most of the
people in this region. Indeed, the coefficient of the Phylloxera dummy in regions
producing little wine is insignificant (and slightly positive).
Column 5 separates the regions that were affected early and those that were affected late
(we code as “early” regions where the Phylloxera was first spotted before 1876, the
median year at which it reached the regions). Since the disease was progressing slowly
from one region to the next, the regions affected later might have been able to anticipate
the crisis, and thus avoid a part of the negative impact. This is not what we find: The
effect seems to be just as large in regions affected later on.

4.2 Other Health Indicators
While height is an important indicator of long run health, it is also important to estimate
whether the Phylloxera affected more acute indicators of health, both in the short run
(infant mortality) and in the longer run (morbidity, life expectancy).

4.2.1 Mortality and Life Expectancy

16

Our next measure of health is the life expectancy of those born during the Phylloxera
periods. To study this question, we take advantage of data constructed by Bonneuil
(1997), from censuses and corrected vital statistics. Bonneuil constructed with great care
life expectancy at birth for women born every 5 years from 1801 to 1901.15 In column 1
of table 6, we use this variable as the dependent variable, still using the specification
from equation (2). We find no impact on life expectancy.
Another (cruder) measure of mortality is given by our data: Since after 1872, everyone
age 20 was called for the military service and since, as we will show below, it does not
appear that there was selective migration out of the Phylloxera departments, a proxy of
survival by age 20 for males is given by the size of the military cohort (classe), divided
by the number of births in that cohort (column 3). This measure also shows no effect of
Phylloxera. We also construct the ratio of the size of the classe and the number of
children who have survived to age 1 (column 4), and again see no effect. Finally, column
6 presents the results on infant mortality (mortality before 1). There again, we find no
impact.

4.2.2 Military Health Data
To investigate the size of the impact of the Phylloxera infestation on health, we then
exploit the data collected by the military on those exempted for health reasons, and the
reasons for which they were exempted. We use the same specification as before, with the
total number of people exempted, and then the number of people exempted for various
conditions, as dependent variables. We use the specification in equation (2) (with
department-specific trends).
Column 1 of Table 7 displays a surprising result: The number of young men exempted
for health reasons is actually smaller for years and departments affected by the
phylloxera outbreak. However, the following columns shed light on this surprising result:

15

Focusing on women avoids biasing the results due to the massive mortality of men during the first world
war.

17

The incidence of all the precisely defined illnesses (such as myopia, goiter, epilepsie etc.)
are in fact unaffected. The only category of health condition that are affected are that of
“faiblesse de constitution” (or weakness) and hernia. Weakness is clearly something that
is subject to interpretation and one very plausible explanation for what we find is that,
faced with the necessity of drafting a fixed number of people for the contingent, the
military authorities were stricter with the application of the “weak” category at times
where they were rejecting more people for reasons of height. The negative effect on
hernia is more puzzling, but could be due to the fact that these cohorts performed less
hard physical labor at young ages.
Overall there seems to be no clear evidence of a negative long-run impact of Phylloxera
on any health condition: While it affects long-run height, it seemed not to cause any other
physical problems. The conclusion is similar when using “canton” level data (table 4), in
the three wine producing regions. In this data, we have the number of people exempted
from military service because of weakness. If we consider the years until the year of birth
1881 (class of 1901), there is no impact of the Phylloxera on exemption for weakness.
After 1901, however, the military adopted a policy of not rejecting anyone because of
height and when we include the post 1901 period, we do see an increase in the number of
those exempted for weakness during the Phylloxera period. This suggests that after 1901
some of those who would have been exempted based on their height were now exempted
based on being labeled as weak, another indication of the permeability of those two
categories.

4.3. Robustness to Sample Selection
Table 5 presented a number of specification checks confirming the fact that those
conscripted 20 years after the department where they reported was affected by
Phylloxera, are shorter than others born in other years. However, as we have pointed out
above, while a strength of the military data is that it covers a large sample of the male
population, there are some reasons to worry about selection biases. The main source of
potential selection bias comes from the composition of the military class (the cohort who

18

was drafted in each department in each year), and whether it is representative of all the
children born in the department, or of all the children that would have been born in the
department in the absence of the Phylloxera.
Selection could arise at several levels. First, there could be fewer births during the
Phylloxera period, either due to fewer conceptions or to more stillbirths. The “marginal”
(unborn) children could be different than the others, in particular they could have been
weaker, had they lived. We regress the number of live births in a year, as well as the ratio
of stillbirths to total births in the Phylloxera years in table 6 (columns 2 and 5). There
does not appear to be an effect on the number of births.
Second, there could be more infant mortality in the Phylloxera years, thus selecting the
“strongest” children. However, we have seen in table 6 that life expectancy and the ratio
of the size of the class over the number of births, or the number of survivors by age 1,
were unaffected.
Third, children born in Phylloxera years may have been less likely to report for service
where they were born. Since they have to report in the place their parents live, this would
be due either to avoidance by the child or to migration of the children’s parents: Some
people may have left the affected regions during these years. Table 8 shows some
evidence showing that neither avoidance, nor migration, is likely to be biasing our
results: To get a measure of avoidance, we construct the ratio of the size of five
subsequent military cohorts on the size of the census cohorts for people age 15-19 (as
discussed above, the mean of this ratio is 99%). As shown in column 3 of table 9, this is
no different for children who were affected by the Phylloxera, suggesting they were no
more likely to avoid military service. Finally, columns 1 and 2 use data constructed by
Bonneuil on the migration of women. We use the fraction of women aged 20-29 and aged
20-60 who migrated as dependent variables. There appears to be no effect of the
Phylloxera on migration out of the affected departments. This does not mean that people
did not migrate at all: In the three departments for which we have canton-level data, we
find that find that the classes born in Phylloxera years are smaller in the cantons that

19

relied more intensively on wine production (column 4, table 4). This, combined with the
fact that we see no migration out of the departments, suggest that some of the families
may have migrated out of the wine producing cantons but remained in the department.16

5. Conclusion
The large income shock of the Phylloxera had a long-run impact on adult height, most
likely due to nutritional deficits during childhood. We estimate that children born in
affected regions during the years of the crisis were 0.5 to 0.9 centimeters shorter than
their unaffected peers. This is a large effect, considering that height increased only by
two centimeters over the period. Similar results are obtained when comparing
departments with each other or when using data at a lower level of aggregation, the
canton, which reinforces our confidence in their robustness. The effects are concentrated
on those born during the crisis, and imply that they suffered substantial nutritional
deprivation in-utero and shortly after birth, and those had long term impact on the stature
they could achieve.
However, this crisis did not seem to result in a corresponding decline in other dimensions
of health, including mortality, even infant mortality. This suggests, as suggested by
Deaton, Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2006) that despite the shock to income and
corresponding decline in nutrition, health status may have been protected by other
factors, for example public health infrastructure (see Goubert (1989) on the importance of
clean water in the period).

16

A regression of the urbanization rate on the Phylloxera dummy (controlling as usual for department
dummies, year dummies, and specific department trends) suggests indeed that urbanization progressed
significantly faster in Phylloxera years in the affected departments.

20

Appendix: Data sources and construction17
This article relies on a number of data sources, often assembled in electronic form for the
first time. We are pleased to make all the data available for distribution. This appendix
details the sources and the procedures followed to construct the data.
1. Wine and wheat production
a. Aggregated data on wine production
The aggregate data on wine and production comes from Statistique Générale de la
France, Annuaire Statistique, 1932, Paris, Imprimerie Nationale, 1933, p, 55*-56*.
b. Department level wine production and Phylloxera Crisis
The source is: Pierre Galet’s Cépages et Vignobles de France (Galet, 1957) which gives
yearly the area planted in vines and the volume of wine produced in almost every winegrowing department from 1860-1905. We used the yearly series on wine production as is.
We computed a measure of pre-phylloxera area planted in wine by computing the
average surface planted in vine during the years 1850-1869. We also obtain from Galet
the year of the first time the Phylloxera was spotted in every important wine-growing
department.
c. Department level yearly series on wheat production
From 1852 to 1876, the data comes from : Ministère de l'Agriculture et du commerce
Récoltes des céréales et des pommes de terre de 1815 à 1876, Paris, Imprimerie
Nationale, 1878. From 1877 onwards, it comes from Statistique Générale de la France,
Annuaire Statistique, 1932, Paris, Imprimerie Nationale, 1878--.
d. Canton level data on wine production pre-phylloxera
We use the data on wine surface from the Agricultural Inquiry of 1866 (Ministère de
l'Agriculture, du Commerce et des Travaux Publics, Enquête agricole, 2° série, enquêtes
départementales, 22° et 23° circonscription, Paris, 1867), which are available at the level
of the canton.
2. Population data
a. Department level population

17

(Note to referees: The data appendix could remain on-line if is not necessary in the
print version.)

21

The population (and the agricultural population ) of each department was obtained from
the 1876 census. Statistique de la France: Résultats généraux du dénombrement de 1876.
Paris, Imprimerie nationale, 1878.
b. Canton level population
The data on the population of cantons was taken from the military data (see below). The
wine superficie in 1866 was normalized by the canton population in 1872.
c. Births and deaths
Total number of births, stillbirths, and total number of deaths before age 1 are obtained
from the vital statistics, reported annually in “Statistique Générale de la France: Annuaire
statistique de la France, Paris, Imprimerie nationale” (various years). We computed infant
mortality as the number of deaths before the age of 1 divided by the number of births
during the previous year. As Bonneuil (1992) describes in detail, both the data on births
and deaths are noisy, and the data has very large outliers. We exclude from the raw series
the observations where the infant mortality is in the bottom percentile or the top
percentile. This does not remove any department but removes a few very low or very
high observations in some departments.
3. Military height and health data
a. Sources: Department level data
The department level data is reported yearly (since 1836) in the yearly publications
“Compte rendu sur le recrutement de l’armée”. Young men born in a given year, for
example 1852, formed the “classe of 1872”. They were normally examined early the
following year, at the age of between 20 years plus 8 months on average (plus or minus 6
months depending on the date of birth). They were measured and received a medical
exam.
Before 1871, not everyone was called for the military service: Each young man received
a random number, and people were examined in random order until the size of the
“contingent” (active army) needed for the year was filled. It was also possible to
exchange with someone else. The size of those exempted for health reasons was not
reported.
The data becomes clearer after a 1872 law (following the defeat of Germany) which
changed the nature of the military service: Everyone was now called, and replacements
were not allowed. The statistics also reported the height of a much larger fraction of the
class. There are two periods in the data:
1) From 1886 to 1912: Things are very simple. Every young man was examined, and
a summary table reported the distribution of height for the entire cohort (as the
number of people falling into various bins—the number of bins varied from 10 to
26.
2) From 1872 to 1885:
22

•
•

Every young man was called to be examined. From 1872 to 1885, a
“classe” was about 300,000 young men. Only about 10,000 per year did
not present themselves (3%), and were therefore not measured.
Among those who were measured
i. A fraction (about 50% of the cohort) was put in the “contingent”,
or active service. Their height is recorded in bins in the table
“contingent”.
ii. A fraction (10%) was put in a category “auxiliaire” (they were
asked to do an easier military service). Their height is recorded in
bins in the table “auxiliaires”, with the same category as the table
for the contingent.
iii. A fraction (7%) was put in a category “ajournés” (they were asked
to sit out and to go be examined again the following year—
fortunately, their data was not aggregated with that of the rest of
the contingent the following year). A number of them were
“ajournés pour défaut de taille” (too short), and we therefore know
that they are smaller than the height threshold in those years
(1.54m). A number were “ajournés pour faiblesse de constitution”
(weakness) and following Weir (1997) we assume that they are
taller than the minimum threshold (otherwise, they would have
been “ajournés pour défaut de taille”, and that they are otherwise
distributed like the rest of the population above this threshold.
They represents only a fairly small fraction of the population
(about 5%).
iv. A fraction (another 10% of the population) was put in a category
“exemptés” (exempted) for health reasons. Still following Weir
(1997) we assume that their height has the same distribution as the
rest of the population.
v. A fraction (about 25% of the population) was “dispensés”, and did
not need to do the military service, for reasons other than health
(priests, sons of widows, etc. where put in this category). Their
height was not reported in the summary descriptive either, and we
assume that their height as the same distribution as the rest of the
population.

Fortunately, since everyone was measured, it is possible to check some of these
assumptions (which this paper is the first to do). Farcy and Faure (2003) collected
individual level military data on about 50,000 young men born in 1860 (classe of 1880)
in Paris and a few other departments. Figure A1 compares the distribution of height of the
those who serve in the active service to that of the “dispensés” (25% of people exempted
from the military service for reasons other than health).18 The distributions are right on
top of each other. Figure A2 compares those exempted for health reasons to the entire
observed population (dispensés+auxiliaires+ajournés). While the correspondence is less
perfect (the distribution of height of the exempted has less mass at the mode), the median
18

For both figures we estimate the distribution with a kernel density estimator, using an Epanechnikov
Kernel and a bandwidth of one centimeter.

23

of the two distribution are the same (165 centimeters) and the means are also extremely
close (165.09 centimeters for the exempted, and 165.26 centimeters for the rest of the
population). This suggests that the approximations that are done in this paper are
acceptable.
• There was a last complication: From 1872 to 1885, the aggregate data was
not reported at the level of the department, but at a smaller level (military
district). We entered the data at that level and re-aggregated at the
department level.
b. Sources: Cantons level data
The height data were published after aggregation at the level of the department, but some
data was also tabulated at the level of the “cantons“. The yearly reports (“Comptes
statistiques et sommaires) are kept in the departmental archives, where we collected them
for three departments: Gard, Vaucluse, and Bouche du Rhône. The height distribution
was not tabulated at that level, but the population of the canton, the number of youth
placed in auxiliary service, the number of youth asked to sit out because they were too
short, and the number of youth placed in the active service was recorded. Note that we
lose this information after the class of 1881, since height stopped being a reason for
exemption at this time.
c. Computations methods
The records on height provide data in a summary form, giving the number of conscripts
in height bins of various widths―for example the number of those between 1.54 and 1.63
meters or those between 1.67 and 1.70 meters. Men shorter than the minimum height
requirement were exempt from service, and listed as “défaut de taille” (lack of height) in
the exemption statistics, resulting in left-censored data.19 The data are in fact doublecensored, since the final category includes conscripts above a certain height, 1.73 meters
for example. Between 1850 and 1912 the number of categories changes several times,
reaching a maximum of 28 from 1903-1912 and a minimum of 9 from 1872 to 1900.
We estimate the departmental distributions of height two ways. First, we assume that the
distribution is normal and estimate the parameters of the distribution by maximum
likelihood estimation. The log likelihood function is maximized using a simplex search
algorithm using starting guesses of 1.66 meters for the mean height and 0.04 meters for
standard deviation.20 Provided the assumption of normality holds, this technique yields

19

The minimum height is 1.56m from 1832 to 1871 and 1.54m from 1872 to 1900. From 1901 on there is
no minimum height requirement.
20
The general form of the log likelihood function for this data is

⎛
⎛ ⎛x −µ⎞
⎛ ⎛ x1 − µ ⎞ ⎞ n −1 ⎛
⎛ x − µ ⎞⎞
⎛ x − µ ⎞ ⎞ ⎞⎟
L = c1 * ln⎜⎜ Φ⎜
⎟ ⎟⎟
⎟ ⎟⎟ ⎟ + c n * ln⎜⎜1 − Φ⎜ n −1
⎟ − Φ⎜ i −1
⎟ ⎟⎟ + ∑ ⎜⎜ ci * ln⎜⎜ Φ⎜ i
σ
σ
σ
σ
⎝
⎠
⎠⎠
⎠
⎝
⎝
⎠
⎝
i
=
2
⎝
⎠
⎝
⎝
⎠⎠
⎝
where n is the number of height categories, c is the number of observations in each category, and x is a
boundary between categories and phi is the standard normal cdf.

24

efficient estimates of the means and variances of the distributions. We use the mean of
the distribution estimated following this procedure.
While height typically follows a normal distribution among adult populations (and the
graphs we just discussed indeed appear to be normal), the distribution of height among
French conscripts may differ from a normal distribution. In particular, if the Phylloxera
crisis did affect the long term health, it could result in a distorted distribution. In a
population with varying levels of initial health, an income shock might therefore not
simply shift the distribution; it could have bigger effects at the tails. Imposing a normal
distribution on affected regions may obscure these effects.
We therefore also estimate the height distributions non-parametrically. For each
department-year cell, the number of observations equals the number of height categories.
Each category is assigned the value of the mean of its limits and weighted by its count of
conscripts. The extreme lower and upper categories are assigned values one centimeter
below and above the censoring points. Using a kernel density estimator, we estimate the
PDF evaluated at fifty evenly spaced heights.21 Riemann summation transforms the
points of the PDF into a CDF, and we interpolate to find the deciles of the distribution.
We use this estimated data to compute a uniform series for the percentage of individuals
measured who are shorter than 1.56 meters (very short), which we use as an alternative
dependent variable.
4. Life Expectancy and Migration
The life expectancy and migration data were constructed by Bonneuil (1997) from vital
statistics and census data, that he very carefully corrected to provide consistent data.

21

We use a Gaussian kernel with optimal bandwidth approximated by h = 0 . 9 m , where m is the sample
1/5
n

variance of the midpoints of the height categories and n is the number of categories.

25

Table 1: Summary Statistics

Superficie grown in wine (hectare)
Log wine yield (value per hectare)
Log(wine production) (value)
Log(wheat production) (value)
Share of wine in agricultural production (1863)
Share of population working in agriculture
Superficie grown in wine per habitant
Share of populationin agriculture* share of wine in
agricultural Production
Number of live births
Share of males surviving untilage 20
Share of males surviving until age 20 (conditional on
surviving till 1)
Share of still births
Infant mortality (death before age 1/live birth)
Life expectancy (women)
Net outmigration of youth age 20-29
Net outmigration (all)
Military class size
Military class/census cohort aged 15-19
Proportion exempted for health reasons
Mean height of military class at 20
Fraction of military class shorter than 1.56 meters
Height of percentile 10
Height of percentile 20
Height of percentile 25
Height of percentile 50
Height of percentile 75
Height of percentile 80
Height of percentile 90
Notes:

Mean

Std. deviation

Observations

(7)

(8)

(9)

28205
2.55
12.03
13.66
0.15
0.58
0.07

33549
0.83
1.87
0.89
0.14
0.15
0.09

2165
2153
3088
3209
3649
3526
3769

0.09
10751
0.69

0.08
8593
0.23

3526
2795
2683

0.85
0.04
0.17
44.34
-0.02
-0.02
3567
0.99
0.24
1.66
0.05
1.57
1.59
1.60
1.65
1.69
1.70
1.72

0.29
0.01
0.04
4.55
0.05
0.02
2708
0.27
0.07
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01

2599
2795
2486
630
690
690
3526
504
3354
3526
3526
3526
3526
3526
3526
3526
3526
3526

1-Except when otherwise indicated, this table presents average by department of the variables used in this paper
over the years 1852-1892 (corresponding to the military classes 1872-1912, and years of birth 1852-1892
2- Data sources are described in details in the data appendix

Table 2: Impact of phylloxera on wine area and wine production
wine
log(area)
log(yield)
log(production)
log(area)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A. Controls: Year Dummies, Departement dummies
Phylloxera

log(production)
(6)

-0.349
(.055)
2153

-0.399
(.108)
3088

0.025
(.024)
1020

-0.009
(.026)
1020

-0.011
(.035)
3172

B.Controls: Year dummies, departement dummies, departement specific trend
Phylloxera
-0.090
-0.478
(.062)
(.071)
Observations
2165
2153

-0.558
(.104)
3088

0.014
(.018)
1020

-0.024
(.025)
1020

0.037
(.027)
3172

C. Sample restricted to wine producing regions (with department specific trend)
Phylloxera
-0.071
-0.523
(.062)
(.082)
1058
1051

-0.570
(.116)
1519

0.006
(.016)
456

-0.010
(.027)
456

0.040
(.03)
1433

Observations

-0.126
(.072)
2165

wheat
log(yield)
(5)

Note:
1-Each column and each panel present a separate regression
2-All regressions include department dummies and year dummies
3-Standard errors corrected for clustering and auto-correlation by clustering at the department level (in parentheses below the coefficient)
4- Importance of wine in production in a department is defined as
share of wine in agricultural production*share of population in an agricultural family
5-There are fewer data points in this regressions than in the next tables, because the data on wine and wheat production is not available for
every department in every year.

Table 3: Impact of phylloxera on height at 20
Dependent Variables

Mean height
(1)
A. Year Dummies, Departement dummies
Born in phylloxera year
-0.00150
(.00093)
Observations
3485
Department trend
No

Fraction shorted than
1.56 meter
(2)
0.00358
(.00204)
3485
No

B.Year dummies, departement dummies, departement trend
Born in phylloxera year
-0.00188
0.00381
(.00095)
(.00173)
Observations
3485
3485
Department trend
Yes
Yes
C. Hectare of vine per habitant
born in phylloxa year *hectare
vine per habitant
Observations
Department trend

-0.00753
(.00389)
3485
Yes

0.01928
(.01142)
3485
Yes

D. Hectare of vines per habitant (wine producing region only)
born in phylloxera year*hectare
-0.01101
0.03074
vine per habitant
(.00422)
(.01352)
Observations
1558
1558
Department trend
Yes
Yes
E. Share of population in wine growing families
born in ohylloxera*
-0.00551
Importance of wine
(.00392)
Observations
3485
Department trend
Yes

0.01198
(.00985)
3485
Yes

F. Share of population in wine growing families (wine producing regions)
Phylloxera*
-0.00901
0.02257
Importance of wine
(.00459)
(.01228)
Observations
1558
1558
Department trend
Yes
Yes
Note:
1-Each column and each panel present a separate regression
2- The dependent variables are mean height (or proportion shorter than 1.56
meters among a military class in a department and year)
2-"Born in Phylloxera year" is a dummy equal to 1 if the department
was affected by phylloxera in the year of birth of a military cohort
(see text for the construction of this variable)
3-All regressions include department dummies and year dummies
4-Standard errors corrected for clustering and auto-correlation by clustering
at the department level (in parentheses below the coefficient)
5- The share or population in wine growing families is estimated, as described in the text

Table 4: Effect of phylloxera on height, weakness, and exclusion for other reasons
Canton-level regression for three Departments

Hectare of vine per habitant in canton
*phylloxera was present in department in year of birth
Observations
Department*year fixed effect
Canton fixed effects
Sample

Dependent variable: Canton-level means
Fraction
rejected for
Fraction rejected for
size
Class size
weakness
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.01498
0.00033
0.01664
-64.38
(.0074)
(.0186)
(.0081)
(37.52)
2040
2040
2590
2610
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1852-1881 1852-1881 1852-1891
1852-1892

Mean of dependent variable
0.019
0.090
0.10
Standard deviation of dependent variable
0.019
0.056
0.06
Notes:
1-Data source: archival canton-level data collected by the authors for three departments affected by the
phylloxera: Vaucluse, Gard, and Bouches du Rhone
2-The data set contains canton-level data for these three department for the years 1852-1891
2-All the regression include separate fixed effects for each year in each department and canton fixed effects
3- All standard errors (in parentheses below the coefficient) are clustered at canton-level

147
291

Table 5: Who is affected?
Dependent variables
(1)
Born in phylloxera year
Born 1 to 5 years after phylloxera

-0.00220
(.00119)
-0.00108
(.00171)

Born 1 to 2 year before phylloxera
Born 2 to 5 years before phylloxera

(2)

Mean Height at 20
(3)

-0.00177
(.00093)

-0.00170
(.00091)

(4)
-0.00301
(.00121)

0.00000
(.00091)
0.00079
(.00119)

(5)
-0.00186
(.00084)

(6)
0.00550
(.00239)
0.00563
(.00626)

Fraction shorter than 1.56 meters at 20
(7)
(8)
(9)
0.00305
(.00181)

0.00349
(.00173)

0.00302
(.00229)

0.00705
(.00218)
0.00127
(.00081)
0.00127
(.00083)
3485

Number of observations
3485
3485
3485
3485
3485
3485
Notes:
1-All regressions include year of birth dummies, department dummies, and department specific trends
2-All standard errors (in parentheses below the coefficient) are accouting for clustering and autocorrelation by clustering at the department level

Columns 1 and 2: pretty obvious specifications
Column3: introduce dummy and dumigh, and these are the coefficients
Column 4: reg X codes_* year_* dumhigh dumearly, cluster(code)

0.00221
(.0017)

-0.00183
(.00127)
-0.00384
(.0011)

Born in phylloxera year, region affected early
Born in phylloxera year, region producing little
wine
Teenager during phyloxera

(10)

0.00088
(.00176)
-0.00222
(.00104)
3485

3485

3485

Table 6: Impact on fertility, mortality, and life expectancy
Life expectancy Live births Class size
(women)
/live births in birth year
(1)
(2)
(3)
Born in phylloxera year

0.5087
(.3604)
622

-39
(76)
2763

-0.0025
(.0062)
2651

Class size
/survivors at age 1
(4)
-0.0082
(.0087)
2568

Still births/all births Infant mortality
(before age 1)
(5)
(6)
-0.0004
(.0005)
2763

Notes:
1-All regressions include year of birth dummies, department dummies, and department specific trends
2-All standard errors (in parentheses below the coefficient) are accouting for clustering and autocorrelation by clustering at the department level
3- Data on life expectancy for women used in Column 1 is from Bonneuil (1997).
4-Data on live births, infant mortality, and still births obtained from vital statistics
5-Data on class size obtained from mility record. A class observed in year t was born in year t-20

-0.0033
(.0024)
2461

Table 7: Effect on health outcomes, military data
Exempt due to health Myopia
(1)

(2)

Goiter
(3)

Hernia
(4)

Spinal problem Epilepsy
(5)

(6)

Low IQ
(7)

Feeble
(8)

Blind
(9)

Born in
-0.0081
-0.00012
-0.00010
-0.00092
-0.00025
0.00001
0.00020
-0.00218
0.00008
Phylloxera year
(.0044)
(.00014)
(.00014)
(.00032)
(.00028)
(.00011)
(.00023)
(.00077)
(.00012)
Number of observations
3315
3485
3485
3485
3485
3485
3485
3485
3485
Notes:
1-All regressions include year of birth dummies, department dummies, and department specific trends
2-All standard errors (in parentheses below the coefficient) are accouting for clustering and autocorrelation by clustering at the department level

Deaf
(10)
0.00020
(.0001)
3485

Table 8: Migrations and Phylloxera

Net out-migrations, 20-29
(women)
(1)
Born in Phylloxera year

0.00072
(.004097)
852

Net out-migrations 20-60
(women)
(2)
-0.00068
(.00243)
852

Corresponding class size / size of cohort
age 15-19
(men)
(3)
0.006319
(.04721)
498

Notes:
1-All regressions include year of birth dummies, department dummies, and department specific trends
2-All standard errors (in parentheses below the coefficient) are accouting for clustering and autocorrelation by clustering at the department level
3-Data in Column 1 and 2 are obtained from Bonneuil (1997) (one observation per department and per census year); see data appendix
4-Data in column 3 computed by authors from censuses and military cohort data: to a cohort of young men aged 15-19
in year t in department j, corresponds the sum of the "classes" of years' t+1, t+2, t+3, t+4 and t+5.

Figure 1A: Phylloxera in 1870

wine-growing departments
infected by phylloxera

unaffected wine-growing
departments

Figure 1B: Phylloxera in 1875

wine-growing departments
infected by phylloxera

unaffected wine-growing
departments

Figure 1C: Phylloxera in 1880

wine-growing departments
infected by phylloxera

unaffected wine-growing
departments

Figure 1D: Phylloxera in 1890

wine-growing departments
infected by phylloxera

unaffected wine-growing
departments

Figure 2: Wine Production and Wine price
90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
1845

1850

1855

1860

1865

1870

1875

1880

wine production (excluding sugar wine)

1885

1890

Price

1895

1900

1905

1910

Figure 3: Mean height over time: Wine producing regions and others
1.68

1.67

1.66

1.65

1.64

1.63
1816 1821 1826 1831 1836 1841 1846 1851 1856 1861 1866 1871 1876 1881 1886 1891 1896 1901 1906 1911

mean height, wine producing regions
mean height, others

Figure 4: Wine production and height differentials
90

0.012

80

0.01

70
0.008
60
50

0.006

40

0.004

30
0.002
20
0

10
0
1849

1859

1869

1879
wine production
Height difference

1889

1899

-0.002
1909

Figure A1: Height Distribution in Individual Data

0

Density
.02 .04 .06 .08

Active service vs exempted (other than health)

120

140

160
180
Height in centimeters

Service actif

200

Dispenses

Figure A2: Height Distribution in Individual Data

0

Density
.02 .04

.06

Active service+auxilliaires+ajournes vs exempted for health

120

140

160
180
Height in centimeters

Service actif+Auxilliaires+ajournes

200
Exemptes

Source: Authors’ calculation from data reported in Farcy and Faure (2003)

References :

Official publications.

Ministère de l’Agriculture, du Commerce et des Travaux Publics, Enquête agricole, 2e
série, Enquêtes départementales, Paris, 1867 ; 22e circonscription (Gard,
Bouches-du-Rhône) and 23e circonscription(Vaucluse).
Ministère de l'Agriculture et du commerce, Récoltes des céréales et des pommes de terre
de 1815 à 1876, Paris, Imprimerie Nationale, 1878.
Ministère de la guerre Compte rendu sur le recrutement de l’armée, yearly 1872-1912
Statistique de la France : 2e série, t. III IV X XI and then yearly Mouvement de la
Population. (Paris, 1853--).
Statistique de la France : 2e série, t. VII and VIII. Statistique agricole. Enquête agricole
de 1852, 2 vol. (Paris, 1858-60).
Statistique de la France : 2e série, t. XIX. Résultats généraux de l’enquête décennale de
1862 (Strasbourg, 1868).
Statistique de la France: Resultats généraux du dénombrement de 1876. Paris, imprimerie
nationale, 1878
Statistique Agricole de la France, (Algérie et colonies) publiée par le ministre de
l'agriculture. Résultats généraux de l'enquête décennale de 1882 (Nancy, 1887).
Statistique Générale de la France, Annuaire Statistique, Paris, Imprimerie Nationale,
1878--.
Statistique Générale de la France, Annuaire Statistique, 1932, Paris, Imprimerie
Nationale, 1933.
Works Cited

26

Almond, Douglas (2006) “Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long-term Effects of
In-utero Influenza Exposure in the Post-1940 U.S. Population” Journal of
Political Economy, 114 (August) 612-712.
Almond, Douglas and Kenneth and Chay (2005) “The Long-Run and Intergenerational
Impact of Poor Infant Health: Evidence from Cohorts Born During the Civil Rights Era”
MIMEO, Columbia University.

Almond, Douglas and Lena Edlund and Hongbin Li and Jushen Zhang (2006) “Long
Term Effects of the 1959-1961 China Famine: Mainland China and Hong Kong”
MIMEO Columbia, 2006.
Aron, J. P., Dumont, P. and Le Roy Ladurie, E. (1972) Anthropologie du conscrit
français d’après les comptes numériques et sommaires du recrutement de l’armée
1819-1826, La Haye, Mouton, 1972.
Barker, D.J.P (1992). “Fetal and Infant origins of Later Life disease” London, London:
British medical Journal.

Barker, D. J. P (1994). Mothers, Babies and Disease in Later Life, London, London: BMJ
Publishing Group.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004) “How much can we
trust differences in differences Estimates” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
volume 119, number 1, pp 249-275.
Berhman Jere, and Mark Rosenzweig “The returns to birth weight” Review of Economics
and Statistics volume 86, pp 586-601
Bonneuil, Noël, Transformation of the French Demographic Landscape, 1806-1906,
Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1997.
Case, Anne and Christina Paxson (2006) “Stature and status: Height, ability, and labor
market outcomes”, Working Paper, RPDS, Princeton
Chay, Kenneth and Michael Greenstone (2003) “The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant
Mortality: Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a
Recession,” (with Kenneth Chay). Quarterly Journal of Economics, number 118,
volume 3.
Cutler, David Angus Deaton and Adriana LLeras-Muney “The Determinants of
Mortality,” joint with David Cutler and Angus Deaton, Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Vol 20, Number 3, Summer 2006.

27

Doblhammer (2003) “The Late Life Legacy of very early life” MPIDR Working Paper
WP-2003-030.
Duflo Esther (2003) “Grandmothers and Granddaughters: Old Age Pension and Intrahousehold Allocation in South Africa,” World Bank Economic Review 17(1) , pp.
1-25.
Farcy, Jean-Claude et Faure, Alain (2003), Une génération de français à l'épreuve de la
mobilité. Vers et dans Paris : recherche sur la mobilité des individus à la fin du
XIXe siècle. Paris, INED.
Fogel, R. W. The Escape from Hunger and Premature Death, 1700-2100, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Galet, Pierre, Cépages et vignobles de France, Montpellier, 1957-1962.
Goubert, Jean-Pierre. The Conquest of Water: The Advent of Health in the Industrial Age.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1989.
Heyberger, L. La révolution des corps, Strasbourg, Presses Universitaires de Strasbourg,
2005.
Jensen, Robert (2000) “Agricultural Volatility and Investments in Children” American
Econmic Review, Papers and Proceedings, volume 90, number 2, pp. 399-405.
Meng, Xin and Nancy Qian “The Long Run Health and Economic Consequences of
Famine on Survivors: Evidence from China's Great Famine”, Working Paper,
Brown University.
Postel-Vinay, Gilles, “ Debts and Agricultural Performance in the Languedocian
Vineyard, 1870-1914” In Grantham, G. and Leonard, C. S. (Eds.), Agrarian
Organization in the Century of Industrialization : Europe, Russia, and North
America (Greenwich, Connecticut and London, 1989), pp. 161-186.
Postel-Vinay, Gilles, and Sahn, David, “ Explaining Stuting in nineteenth Century
France”, LEA Working Paper, INRA, 2006.

28

Ordish, George. The Great Wine Blight, New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1972.
Ravelli ACJ, van der Meulan JHP, Michels RPJ, Osmond C, Barker DJP, Hales CN,
Bleker OP. 'Glucose tolerance in adults after prenatal exposure to the Dutch
famine'. International Journal of Epidemiology 2002, vol. 31, pgs 1235-1239,
Roseboom TJ, van der Meulen JHP, Michels RPJ, Osmond C, Barker DJP, Hales CN,
Bleker OP. ‘Adult survival after prenatal exposure to the Dutch famine 1944-45’
Pediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology 2001, vol. 15, pgs 220-225.
Steckel, Richard H. “A Peculiar Population: The Nutrition, Health, and Mortality of
American Slaves from Childhood to Maturity.” Journal of Economic History,
September 1986, 46(3) 721-741.
Steckel, Richard H. “Stature and the Standard of Living.” Journal of Economic
Literature, December 1995, 33(4) 1903-1940.
Steckel, Richard and Roderick Floud (1997), Health and Welfare during
Industrialization, NBER, Chicago and London, The University of Chicago Press.
Strauss, John and Duncan Thomas (1995) “Human Resources: Empirical Modeling
of Household and Family Decisions” in Berhrman, Jere and T.N. Srinivasan ed.s
Handbook of Development Economics, Amsterdam: North Hollandchapter 34,
pages 1885-2023.
Van Meerten, M. A. “Développement économique et stature en France, XIXe-Xxe
siècles”, Annales, Economie, Sociéte, Civilisation. 45 (1990), pp. 755-78.
Van den Berg, Gerard J., Martin Lindeboom, and France Portrait (2006), “Economic
Conditions in Life and Individual Mortality”, American Economic Review, Vol.
96, n° 1, p. 290-302.
Weir, D. “Economic Welfare and Physical Well-Being in France, 1750-1990”, in Steckel,
R. H. and R.Floud (eds), Health and Welfare during Industrialization, (Chicago,
1997), pp. 161-200.
Woloch, Isser (1994). The New Regime; Transformation of the French Civic Order,
1789-1820s. New York. Norton.

29

