                                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    AFRICA'S LAGGING DEMOGRAPHIC TRANSITION:
EVIDENCE FROM EXOGENOUS IMPACTS OF MALARIA ECOLOGY AND AGRICULTURAL TECHNOLOGY

                                                 Dalton Conley
                                               Gordon C. McCord
                                                Jeffrey D. Sachs

                                              Working Paper 12892
                                      http://www.nber.org/papers/w12892


                             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                                            February 2007




       The authors would like to thank Samuel Freeman for excellent research assistance. Thanks also
       to the United Nations Population Division and Prof. Robert E. Evenson for making their data available.
       The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
       National Bureau of Economic Research.

       © 2007 by Dalton Conley, Gordon C. McCord, and Jeffrey D. Sachs. All rights reserved. Short sections
       of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
       credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Africa's Lagging Demographic Transition: Evidence from Exogenous Impacts of Malaria
Ecology and Agricultural Technology
Dalton Conley, Gordon C. McCord, and Jeffrey D. Sachs
NBER Working Paper No. 12892
February 2007
JEL No. I1,J11

                                             ABSTRACT

Much of Africa has not yet gone through a "demographic transition" to reduced mortality and fertility
rates. The fact that the continent's countries remain mired in a Malthusian crisis of high mortality,
high fertility, and rapid population growth (with an accompanying state of chronic extreme poverty)
has been attributed to many factors ranging from the status of women, pro-natalist policies, poverty
itself, and social institutions. There remains, however, a large degree of uncertainty among demographers
as to the relative importance of these factors on a comparative or historical basis. Moreover, econometric
estimation is complicated by endogeneity among fertility and other variables of interest. We attempt
to improve estimation (particularly of the effect of the child mortality variable) by deploying exogenous
variation in the ecology of malaria transmission and in agricultural productivity through the staggered
introduction of Green Revolution, high-yield seed varieties. Results show that child mortality (proxied
by infant mortality) is by far the most important factor among those explaining aggregate total fertility
rates, followed by farm productivity. Female literacy (or schooling) and aggregate income do not
seem to matter as much, comparatively.

Dalton Conley                                       Jeffrey D. Sachs
Department of Sociology                             The Earth Institute at Columbia University
New York University                                 314 Low Library
295 Lafayette Street, 4th Floor                     535 West 116th Street, MC 4327
New York, NY 10012                                  New York, NY 10027
and NBER                                            and NBER
dalton.conley@nyu.edu                               sachs@columbia.edu

Gordon C. McCord
The Earth Institute at Columbia University
314 Low Library
535 West 116th Street, MC 4327
New York, NY 10027
gm2101@columbia.edu
Introduction

        The broad categories of determinants of fertility are generally thought to be

reasonably well identified by demographers, sociologists and economists, though the

detailed quantitative determinants of fertility levels and changes are much less

understood. The relationships between fertility, on the one hand, and economic

development, the status of women, access to family planning, pro-natalist or pro-planning

policies of government, and mortality (both adult and child), on the other hand, have been

elegantly theorized and extensively studied. Likewise, many researchers have gone

before us in empirically modeling these relationships in both cross-country and within-

country analyses. And in this vein, many refinements have been made to these models

over the last decade.

        In quantitative terms, however, we still lack a good understanding of why some

countries have experienced significant reductions of fertility rates, while those in Africa

remain with very high fertility rates—on average difference of almost three births

between Sub-Saharan Africa and the rest of the developing world. (See Figure 1, below,

for the distribution of total fertility rates in the developing world.) Are Africa’s high

fertility rates the result of illiteracy, poverty, rural populations, discrimination against

girls and women, high child mortality, lack of access of the poor to contraception? What

policies would be most supportive of a rapid, voluntary fertility transition? This paper

seeks to provide some new quantitative assessments of these questions. We acknowledge

from the start, however, that many of the potential explanatory variables are only

imperfect proxies for the household and community-level drivers of fertility and fertility

change. Bongaarts (1984) posits that fertility is regulated directly by proximate




                                                                                               3
determinants (e.g. contraception, age at marriage, abortion), while socioeconomic

variables (income, education, mortality) affect fertility only indirectly by modifying the

proximate determinants. Thus, we can aim only to get a rough quantitative assessment of

the role of key categories of determinants, rather than precise point estimates of how

specific policy changes would affect fertility rates.

                        [FIGURE ONE ABOUT HERE]

       Most theories of the demographic transition have put great stress, and we believe

rightly so, on the causal link from high child mortality to high desired fertility. Simply

put, when parents do not know whether their children will survive, they respond by

having large families. In a high mortality context, cultural patterns – age of marriage,

social norms in childrearing, community support structures – also favor high natality.

The original model of the demographic transition, indeed, was driven almost solely by

child mortality rates. Exogenous changes to child mortality (e.g. the advent of public

health, safe drinking water, immunizations, improved nutrition) were seen to be the basic

driver to reduced fertility rates as well, albeit with a lag of one or more generations. The

lag reflected two things according to the standard analysis: first, the lag in perception of

households that mortality rates had indeed come down persistently and reliably; and

second, the lag in cultural norms surrounding marriage age, birth spacing, family size,

and so forth, all needed to promote the transition from high to low fertility. Many studies

found, indeed, that the fertility transition is strongly conditioned by a preceding child

mortality transition.

       One issue that continues to plague this basic line of research—and therefore

which may be relevant to the African question—is the question of causal directionality




                                                                                               4
between child mortality and fertility choice. Several scholars have shown that reduced

family size affects human capital investment (Angrist, Lavy and Schlosser 2004; Conley

and Glauber 2006; Black, Devereux and Salvanes 2006) on the micro level as well as

economic growth at the macro level (Behrman and Rosenzweig 2001; Hazan and

Berdugo 2002; Joshi and Schultz 2005; Moav 2005). Likewise, the argument can be

made that at least some of the powerful correlation of high child mortality and high

fertility represents increased child mortality due to higher fertility thanks to increased

strain on household caloric resources and decreased parental care and supervision with

the addition of more children. Similarly, government “family planning efforts” could be

reflecting (rather than affecting) demand for reduced family size. With these concerns in

mind, in this paper we pursue a strategy of deploying some largely exogenous variation

in geophysical conditions and agricultural technology to derive estimates of the causal

impact of infant (as a proxy for child) mortality, rural productivity, availability of

abortion, literacy and income on fertility. We then discuss the implications of these

findings for the lagging demographic transition in Africa.

           To preview our empirical approach, we argue that the ecology of malaria

transmission is exogenous to fertility over the time period we are studying. Malaria is

currently the fourth leading cause of death (after neonatal disorders, diarrhea, and

pneumonia) for children under five in low income countries1 and is responsible for at

least one in every five child deaths in sub-Saharan Africa.2 Estimates of malaria



1
    See Black (2003).
2
  Since infection with malaria leaves an individual more vulnerable to morbidity and mortality from other
infections, malaria is an indirect as well as a direct killer. It is very likely implicated in more than one fifth
of all deaths. In some malaria control trials, the reduction of malaria has reduced all-cause under-5
mortality by as much as 40 percent.


                                                                                                                 5
mortality in Africa range from one million to three million deaths per year. Malaria

mortality, in turn, is highly sensitive to ecological conditions—as well as basic health

infrastructure. (More on this below.)

       Specifically, we deploy an ecological index of malaria transmission (used

elsewhere as well; see, e.g., Sachs [2002]; Carstensen and Gundlach [2006]) that

combines ecological factors—rainfall and temperature—with biological ones such as the

human biting rate of the mosquito species that serves as the vector for the transmission of

malaria to develop an index of malaria risk (see, Kiszewski (2004) and Sachs (2002) for

more details on its construction). The distribution of this malaria ecology index is shown

graphically in Figure 2, below. While the underlying factors determining malaria

transmission may be endogenous to human population movements over the course of

thousands of years (through co-evolution with mosquito species), we assert that from the

point of view of the current demographic transition in recent decades the biophysical

ecology of malaria transmission are exogenous.

                       [FIGURE TWO ABOUT HERE]

       However, since there may be lingering concerns that any cross-country

differences may be reflecting unobservable heterogeneity, we also pursue a longitudinal

strategy, instrumenting for infant mortality (as a proxy for child mortality) within

countries over time. Since the malaria ecology instrument does not vary over time – and

therefore cannot be used as an instrument in a panel – we use the proportion of the

population at risk of exposure to malaria. The narrowing of the range of malaria

transmission during the past 50 years, while subject to human control through the

application of DDT and improved malaria case management in sub-tropical regions,




                                                                                           6
should not be endogenous to the fertility rate. Some sub-tropical regions could use DDT

to eliminate transmission – if these regions had low baseline rates of transmission to

begin with – while most tropical regions, and especially sub-Saharan Africa, could not

break malaria transmission through the application of existing technologies, since

baseline rates of transmission were too high to be eliminated by existing technologies.3

As we can see in Figure 3, below, at first blush, the geography of malaria risk over time

overlaps—to a great extent—with the map of total fertility rates. Note that neither the

areas of malaria transmission nor the malaria ecology index include actual malaria cases

or deaths, but only the transmission risks, which we argue should be exogenous to

fertility. It is important to note that a review of the medical literature shows that malaria

may have a direct effect on fertility through malaria-related severe anemia, as well as

through increased incidence of hypertensive diseases of pregnancy, spontaneous abortion,

and maternal mortality.4 Since these prevent a live birth, and since TFR counts only live

births, then this effect should work in the opposite direction of our putative causal model,

thereby biasing any net effect on fertility toward zero. However, there is some evidence

that malaria may reduce lactation period (Bates et al. 2004), which might increase

fertility through decreased child spacing. Likewise, malaria in pregnancy is also

associated with low birthweight and increased neonatal and infant mortality—which is in

line with our models.


3
  In technical terms, the question is whether the suite of intervention tools is enough to drive the basic
reproduction number (R0) of malaria to below 1. This depends strongly on the pre-intervention R0. When
the pre-intervention number is close to 1, elimination of transmission is feasible. When it is much greater
than 1 (and sometimes higher than 100 in rural Africa), then elimination of transmission is not feasible.
Even with continuing transmission, however, control of illness and mortality is possible. Thus, maps of
malaria transmission may not change, while the burden of illness and death could change markedly.
4
  See for example Etard (2003), Maubert (1999) and Sartelet (1996) and Guyatt (2001). See also
http://www.rbm.who.int/cmc_upload/0/000/015/369/RBMInfosheet_4.htm for overview information on
malaria in pregnancy.


                                                                                                              7
                                     [FIGURE THREE ABOUT HERE]

                                     [FIGURE FOUR ABOUT HERE]

           Third, we examine the impact on agricultural productivity of Green Revolution

technologies. Specifically, we argue that a country’s share of crops that use high-yield

seed varieties has an important impact on agricultural productivity and therefore the

allocation of women’s time between child rearing and farm work, as well as the returns to

education. High-yield seed varieties increase cereal yields per hectare. These varieties

also maximize calories per bushel (sometimes at the expense of micronutrients, which

has been one of the critiques of Green Revolution technologies [see, e.g., Shiva 2005]).

           In 1945, the Rockefeller Foundation and the Mexican government established the

Cooperative Wheat Research and Production Program (later CIMMYT, the International

Maize and Wheat Improvement Center) to improve Mexico’s agricultural output, and

especially wheat yields.5 By the middle 1960s, these technologies were developed for

use in some other regions of the world, with help from many NGOs and financing from

the World Bank. In Asia, the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) developed

high-yield varieties of paddy rice. By the late 1990s, almost half of East Asian crops are

planted with such high yield, “Green Revolution” varieties; over two-thirds of South

Asian farming is done with these seeds; but the corresponding figure for Sub-Saharan

Africa is a mere 11 percent. (See Table 1 and Figure 4, below). Cereal yields—though

determined by many co-factors such as fertilizer inputs, mechanization, irrigation, and

natural geography and soil fertility—reflect these differences in Green Revolution

diffusion. Each extension of the Green Revolution technologies, from their home base in

Japan and the U.S., to Mexico, India, East Asia, Latin America, and Africa, has depended
5
    Norman Borlaug, who was instrumental to this effort, won the 1970 Nobel Peace Prize for his role.


                                                                                                        8
on local research undertakings to adopt high-yield technologies to local crops, pests, and

farm systems (e.g. rain-fed versus agricultural). Africa has been a very late beneficiary

of the Green Revolution, because of its distinctive mix of crops (so that successful

breeding in other parts of the world were relatively difficult to transfer to Africa), its very

high dependence on rain-fed agriculture (while the first generation of high-yield varieties

depended on irrigation), and the chronically low levels of spending on research and

development on African crop improvements.6

                   [TABLE ONE ABOUT HERE; FIGURE FOUR ABOUT HERE]

        Among those countries that have experienced the benefits of Green Revolution

technologies, this increased caloric production should have both income and substitution

effects. That is, the increased income from better yields should allow for women to

support more children; however, we argue here (and show empirically) that the

substitution effect should swamp this effect, whereby women shift from the household

labor of childrearing to more productive farm work and agro-processing. Moreover,

there is a more subtle but very important effect stressed by Rosenzweig (1982). The

high-yield varieties required higher skills from farmers, and thus raised the marginal

returns to education. Therefore, with a higher return to extra schooling, the advent of the

Green Revolution tilted the quality-quantity tradeoff to lesser quantity and towards

greater quality.

        Further, since high yield crops—a central component of the Green Revolution—

were developed by and for rich countries initially, we argue that among lower income

countries, the availability of such seed varieties was largely exogenous to local

6
 U.S. funding for Asian crop improvements was higher than for African crop improvements in part
because the U.S. Government and influential foundations viewed Asian food security as part of the U.S.’s
Cold War challenge. Africa’s food insecurity elicited much less geopolitical concern.


                                                                                                           9
demographic conditions. In other words, the adoption of high yield grains was not

demand driven. For example, the first grains for which high yield crops were engineered

were wheat (developed originally by Japan and the United States) and irrigated paddy

rice (developed mainly by Japan in the first instance). Maize came later, and later still

came Africa’s distinctive tropical crops, including sorghum, dry rice, millet, teff, and

cassava. So countries like India, Taiwan, Korea, and China, which had climatic

conditions appropriate for the first high yield crops enjoyed the cereal yield boons;

something which we argue helped them undergo the demographic transition before those

which had had to wait for the global network of agricultural research units to develop

varieties later.

        Indeed, Evenson and Gollin (2003) have found that the Green Revolution

occurred in two phases. The first, in the late 1960s and early 1970s, consisted mainly of

the diffusion of improved varieties of wheat and rice in Asia and Latin America. For

crops that are not grown in the developed countries, however, modern varieties were

developed later. Although the rate of development of improved crop varieties has

increased since the 1960s, disparities still remain. Relatively few improved varieties of

crops such as millet and barley, which are grown primarily in semiarid and dry-land

areas, existed until the 1980s. Before the 1980s, only a few improved varieties had been

developed specifically for regions such as the Middle East and North Africa and sub-

Saharan Africa. Before we discuss our variables in more detail and our attempts to

isolate the causality of these relationships, we first review the literature on the

relationship between fertility and child mortality, economic growth, and the status of

women.




                                                                                            10
Mortality

        Chowdhury (1988) identifies three possible relationships between fertility and

mortality: a lagged causal relationship from mortality to fertility (the theory of

demographic transition and choice theory) whether through child “hoarding” (as a

precautionary insurance mechanism to guarantee surviving heirs) (Heer 1968) or direct

replacement (for a discussion see, e.g., Cleland 2001); a causal relationship from fertility

to mortality (the Ricardian theory); and an interdependent relationship between mortality

and fertility (the modern economic theory of population). Perhaps the most influential

recent model of fertility choice among economists is the economic theory of fertility

offered by Becker and Barro (1988). Assuming stable wage rates and interest rates,

falling child mortality lowers the costs average cost of raising surviving children since a

greater proportion of the total investment in childrearing costs realizes a benefit

(assuming little or no benefits from non-surviving children). Therefore, the authors argue

that fertility rates will initially rise as child mortality declines (and cite evidence to this

effect). However, if there is no accompanying change in the parents’ interest or wage

rates, they argue that there is no cumulative effect. Thus, in the Becker-Barro model, any

reduction in fertility resulting from a decline in child mortality would have to work

indirectly through wage or interest rates.

        Many have attempted to elaborate on the Barro and Becker model theoretically as

well as empirically. For example, Doepke seeks to understand whether “stochastic

outcomes and fertility choice are quantitatively important.” (p. 337) He differentiates

between total fertility rate and net fertility rate, that latter being the average number of




                                                                                                  11
children per woman surviving to age five. Doepke concludes that child mortality is

causally related to declining fertility rates, but that other factors are responsible for

declines in net fertility. With replacement as the mechanism, each family has a target

number of children. The death of one child induces the family to replace that child and,

as a result, mortality directly affects total fertility rate. However, for mortality to affect

the net fertility rate, the hoarding motive would have to take place. Parents would

preemptively increase their fertility to protect against potential loss. If this mechanism is

present, then a decline in mortality would result in a decline in net fertility. Doepke tests

three models. He reports that “all three models are consistent with declining total fertility

rates (i.e. number of births) in response to falling mortality. However, we are left without

a clear-cut prediction for the relationship of child mortality to net fertility (i.e. the number

of survivors).” (344)

        In his attempts to test for causality, Chowdhury (1988) finds no consistent results

across his thirty-five country sample. Fourteen of his cases support the hypothesis that

infant mortality causally impacts fertility, while only two cases support the opposite

hypothesis. The remaining cases indicate feedback between the two variables, or the

absence of a relationship between fertility and mortality. His results provide stronger

support for the hypothesis that mortality effects fertility, but they are notably (and

admittedly) inconclusive. In contrast to Chowdhury, Zakir and Wunnava (1999) found

that fertility rates impact mortality rates, and not vice-versa. Their model employs simple

GLS regression on cross-sectional data (and furthermore fails to distinguish between low-

and high-income countries). The simplicity of their equations (and the fact that they do

not distinguish between low- and high-income countries, which probably experience very




                                                                                                 12
different dynamics) fails to acknowledge the endogeneity of fertility and mortality,

leading to a model that is notably mis-specified.

           Some strategies for isolating the child mortality-fertility causal pathway have

relied on using adult (male) mortality as an instrument. For example, Galloway et al.

(1998) use adult male mortality to instrument infant mortality in a historical analysis of

Prussian data from 1875 to 1910. They claim that this measure of mortality may reflect

other societal influences on child mortality (i.e. standard of living, nutrition, etc.), but

should not reflect particular influences on breastfeeding associated with fertility.

However, the common factors affecting both adult male mortality and child mortality are

most likely correlated with fertility; furthermore, Lorentzen, McMillan, and Wacziarg

(2005) have shown that adult mortality should have an independent effect on fertility

(and child human capital investment) by changing the discount rate of mothers and

fathers.

            Seeking to better address the endogeneity of child mortality and fertility, Schultz

(1997) instruments mortality using calorie availability. However, the validity of his

instrument is open to question, as one can imagine a direct, negative causal impact of

calorie availability on fertility. In another attempt to deal with endogeneity concerns,

Benefo and Schwartz (1996) instrument child mortality using variables for community

health services and environment. (These include: living farther from a market; living

close to a clinic; amount of rainfall; malaria/measles.) However, the authors discover

that child mortality is only statistically significant if treated as an exogenous variable, but

when instrumented by community health services and environment, mortality is not a

statistically significant determinant of fertility. Likewise, Dreze and Murthi (2001)




                                                                                               13
instrument mortality using the variable access to safe drinking water, claiming that the

later variable should be unrelated to fertility except through its effect on mortality—again

a questionable assumption since safe drinking water is related to economic development,

which should have an independent effect on fertility. Finally, a recent paper by Kalemli-

Ozcan (2006) examines the impact of AIDS mortality on halting the demographic

transition in Sub-Saharan Africa by using circumcision prevalence as an instrument for

AIDS risk. She finds that the AIDS mortality crisis has indeed led to high fertility rates

and less human capital investment in offspring.



Economic Development and Total Fertility Rates

       In the Standard Growth Model (SGM), increased population growth lowers

income because of capital dilution (Ahituv 2001: 51-52). However, the Endogenous

Fertility Growth Model (EFGM) links fertility to growth by endogenizing the fertility

variables. Ahituv (2001) seeks to compare the EFGM and the SGM to understand the

interplay between economic development and fertility. He “investigates the empirical

consistency of the endogenous fertility growth model” and finds “strong evidence that the

negative relations between fertility and GDP growth are a result of a bi-directional

causality.” (68) Although the author recognizes the importance of finding a suitable

instrument to address such endogeneity, his dataset offers no suitable instrument. Others,

however, have gone further in empirically specifying the bi-directionality of this

relationship. For example, Chen and Fang (2000) use 1980 fertility rates to instrument

subsequent fertility rates and show that lower fertility rates spur increased economic

growth.




                                                                                           14
         However, high levels of economic growth simultaneously cause declines in

fertility rates, of course. Back in 1982, Rosenzweig found that households exposed to the

technologies of the Green Revolution experienced a significant reduction in fertility. His

estimation approach relied on experiments in which households were the randomly

exposed to programs introducing new high-yield technologies and thus present powerful

evidence of the effect of (agriculturally-based) growth on fertility.

         Demonstrating this relationship on a macro, cross country level has been more

difficult, of course.7 Dreze and Murthi (2001), for instance, found “no significant

relations between fertility levels and general indicators of development and

modernization such as the poverty index, male literacy, and urbanization” (2001: 46).8

This should not, however, be the end of the story: While finding suitable instruments for

overall income levels may be an impossible feat to accomplish, finding a plausible source

of exogenous variation in rural incomes, and more specifically, farm productivity, should

not be impossible (as argued above).9 In fact, it is among rural farmers where fertility is

generally the highest and where the returns to female labor (the substitution effect)



7
 Further complicating the story is evidence that the distribution of economic (and human capital) resources
within a society matters. For instance, de la Croix and Doepke (2002) argue that it is essential to account
for a country’s fertility differential because it effects the formation of human capital (education). The
authors use an “endogenous fertility differential” in their models of economic development. They find that
when the variance of human capital rises (in other words, inequality is high), fertility of low-skilled
households rises and fertility of high-skilled households falls, leaving the total effect in doubt.
8
  They did find female literacy had a negative effect and was statistically significant, and the son-preference
index had a positive and significant effect.
9
  Beyond explicit fertility models, other researchers have successfully employed instrumental variable
techniques to determine the effects of economic development indicators on various health outcomes (which
of course, may be related to fertility themselves). Pritchett and Summers (1996), for example, utilize four
instruments for economic development (terms-of-trade shocks, the ratio of investment to growth, the black
market premium for foreign exchange, and the deviation of the official exchange rate from its purchasing
power parity level) and find a significant relationship between with measures of infant and child mortality
(which, in turn, should affect fertility).



                                                                                                           15
should be the most visible. Thus, in trying to understand the impact of economic

development, we focus on rural development, and more specifically, land productivity, as

influenced by technological innovations in seed yields (developed outside the countries

of interest).



Status of Women

        Demographers and economists have longed searched for variables to measure the

status of women in modeling fertility patterns. Female education has become a popular

proxy for measuring the status of women (Schultz 1994; Al-Qudsi 1998) since female

education putatively works to change the opportunity cost of childbearing for women.

Positive changes in female education are likely to impact fertility decisions through

several interrelated mechanisms: first, increased education, on average, raises a woman’s

age at marriage; second, gains in educational attainment increase the economic value of

women’s time; third, positive change in female education increases women’s self-esteem

and desire for family improvement (i.e. favoring of ‘quality’ children over ‘quantity’)

(Al-Qudsi 1998). However, these negative associations between fertility and female

education are not universally accepted. Some of the earliest models posited positive

fertility effects of increased female education (Barro and Lee 1994; Barro and Sala-i-

Martin 1995).

        Several authors have reported substantial negative fertility effects of increased

female education. Schultz (1994) finds that an additional year of schooling is associated

with a twelve percent reduction in total fertility and Klassen (1999) reports that a one-

year increase in female education reduces the fertility rate by 0.25. Despite these reports




                                                                                            16
of negative fertility effects from gains in female education, the returns are not consistent

across studies. Lorgelly, Knowles and Owen (2001) find a very weak relationship

between female education and fertility. Others, meanwhile, find that education is

associated with reductions in fertility only after the completion of primary schooling

(most likely because wage returns from primary schooling are low or the content of

primary schooling is poor) (Benefo and Schwartz 1996).

       The endogeneity of female education in fertility models is well-documented

throughout the literature, and several authors have attempted to overcome this

simultaneity problem through the use of instrumental variables. Breierova (2004) uses a

school construction program in Indonesia to measure the effects of education on both

fertility and mortality outcomes. Using school construction as an instrument for average

parental education, Breierove (2004) reports that mother’s education has a strong

negative effect on fertility, while father’s education does not. Dreze and Murthi (2001)

make a strong claim for a causal relationship between fertility and education through

fixed effects models examining female literacy. After controlling for economic

development indicators (i.e. male literacy, poverty, urbanization), their variable for

female literacy remains robust. Although the authors don’t link literacy rates and the

status of women, they claim a direct causal relationship between literacy and fertility,

rather than the influence of a third variable on these outcomes.

       Other changes in the status of women are also hypothesized to impact fertility by

raising women’s age at marriage, changing the gender preferences of child bearers, and

altering the value of children vis-à-vis work (Mason 1987). Several authors have

constructed variables directly measuring the status of women (Balk 1994; Morgan and




                                                                                           17
Niraula 1995; Hindin 2000). Hindin (2000) examines survey responses from

Zimbabwean women to measure women’s contribution to household decisions as

indicators of their autonomy and status. Morgan and Niraula (1995) use a quasi-

experimental comparison of two Nepali villages to demonstrate the impact of women’s

autonomy on their fertility choices. Although both Hindin (2000) and Morgan and

Niraula (1995) demonstrate correlations between increased autonomy and declining

fertility, their analyses suffer from problems of endogeneity. Balk (1994) constructs four

classifications to measure the status of women: women’s mobility, authority, and

attitudes, and the leniency of her household towards her. She uses village-level women’s

status variables as instruments, claiming that these variables reflect village norms, rather

than individual status, and should therefore be exogenous to fertility. In comparison to

these instruments, Balk finds that traditional measures that serve as proxies for the status

of women underestimate the impact of women’s status on fertility.

       Amin and Lloyd (2002) challenge the literature purporting a causal relationship

between the status of women and fertility rates by reporting recent fertility decline in

Bangladesh and Egypt. They argue that major declines in fertility in those two countries

occurred in the absence of changes in the status of women, thereby questioning the

latter’s validity as a determinant of fertility transition. The authors claim that “low levels

of women’s autonomy have been no barrier to fertility decline” (Amin and Lloyd 2002:

309) in Bangladesh and Egypt.



Family Planning Efforts




                                                                                            18
        As explained in Bongaarts (1984), family planning through contraception, sexual

behavior and abortion, are proximate determinants of fertility which are affected by

socioeconomic variables such as income, education, and health. The availability of

family planning services, therefore, is crucial for the demographic transition to occur; if

socioeconomic and policy variables are to successfully trigger a transition, then the

change in desired fertility must be allowed to translate into a change of actual fertility

through the proximate variables (especially contraception use). Thus, while

contraception use and other family planning indicators cannot be included directly in the

regression (usage is strongly driven by demand, thus causing endogeneity problems), the

availability of contraception and others services to those who wish to plan their families

is a necessary element in the demographic transition.

        Some empiricists have attempted to estimate the impact of family planning

efforts. Insofar as family planning programs represent the response of government and

non-profit organizations to parental demands for greater fertility control, family planning

measurements will be endogenous to fertility models in developing countries (Schultz

1997). One strategy to overcome this endogeneity has been to instrument family

planning programs based on funding provided by the International Planned Parenthood

Federation (Schultz 1997). Despite the possibility that these programs may be demand-

driven, and therefore endogenous, Schultz (1997) fails to find significant results.10

        Pritchett (1994) argues that the impact of family planning programs is

insignificant after controlling for changes in desired fertility. The analysis demonstrates

10
  Although Schultz cannot reject the null hypothesis that family planning is exogenous using the Wu-
Hausman test, he runs models assuming endogeneity and fails to find significant results. He then runs two
additional models one examining the price of oral contraception and the other using country fixed effects.
Of course, the price of contraception is partially demand driven, so it is endogenous as well.



                                                                                                        19
that family planning programs and contraceptive use has little effect on fertility after

controlling for levels of desired fertility. Gertler and Molyneaux (1994) echo conclusions

about the non-importance of family planning programs. They find that changes in

education and economic development are responsible for observed changes in fertility.

       Reporting research on a random experiment in Bangladesh, Joshi and Schultz

(2005) present evidence suggesting negative fertility effects resulting from access to

family planning programs. Examining two Bangladeshi villages – one in which family

planning programs were established nearly two decades ago, and one in which family

planning programs were not established – the authors found that access to family

planning programs was associated with 0.97 fewer children for women between the ages

of 40 and 50, and about 0.6 fewer children for women between the ages of 30 and 40 and

50 and 55.



Data

       We compiled a national-level, cross-country dataset covering the period 1960-

2004. The demographic data (fertility, infant mortality and child mortality) come from

the U.N. Population Division. All other data sources are described below. (We

excluded high income country-years as well as those with populations less than 500,000

individuals [examples include Anguilla, Barbados, Fiji, the United Arab Emirates before

1975, and Equatorial Guinea].)

       A note on the time series: the time series data we use in this dataset is divided into

quinquennia, beginning in 1960 and ending in 2004. This is determined largely by the

fact that the U.N. Population Division, our main source for demographic data, uses five




                                                                                           20
year averages for several of the key demographic variables considered in our analysis,

such as TFR and infant and child mortality. Whenever we have used yearly time series

data, we compute five year averages for the appropriate quinquennia.11

        The variables used in the analysis are the following:

        TFR: Total fertility rate, or number of children per woman of reproductive age.

Data from the U.N. Population Division reported as 5 year averages.

        CMR: Child mortality rate. Data from the U.N. Population Division on the

mortality rate in children under the age of 5, collected in averages over 5 year periods.

This variable, the most putatively sensitive to malaria ecology, is only available for two

periods, however: 1995-1999 and 2000-2004. Therefore we use it only in the cross

country analysis.

        IMR: Infant mortality rate, or number of infant deaths per thousand live births.

Data from the U.N. Population Division reported as 5 year averages. This is available for

all periods, so when we shift to a country fixed-effects framework, we substitute this

variable for CMR. However, this varies quite systematically with CMR, such that the

correlation in the overlapping periods is .98.

        Index of malaria ecology. Malaria Ecology is an ecologically-based spatial index

of the stability of malaria transmission based on the interaction of climate with the

dominant properties of anopheline vectors of malaria that determine vectorial capacity

(Kiszewski et al., 2004). The index is constructed on a 0.5 degree spatial grid to derive

the climatic characteristics of individual months, and then averaged over a 12-month


11
  The quinquennia are the following: 1960 through 1964; 1965 through 1969; 1970 through 1974; 1975
through 1979; 1980 through 1984; 1985 through 1989; 1990 through 1994; 1994 through 1999; 2000
through 2004.



                                                                                                     21
period. For a complete description of the ME variable see

http://www.earthinstitute.columbia.edu/about/director/malaria/index.html. Note that the

index does not rely on disease incidence or human mortality or morbidity, but instead

only on biophysical factors, and therefore provides a variable that is ideally exogenous to

human intervention.

       Area weighted Green Revolution modern variety crops, aggregate for all crops.

The data gives Green Revolution modern variety crops planted as a percentage of all

crops planted, weighted by area planted to those crops. The data covers observations

from 1960 to 2000, taken in five-year averages. These estimates were provided by

Robert E. Evenson at Yale. We include this variable in a reduced form equation, rather

than use it as an instrument, since the pathways by which higher crop yields should affect

fertility are manifold. Specifically, there are efficiency gains for women’s labor and

some evidence that Green Revolution technologies such as modern crops raise female

returns to schooling. There are also, however, income effects as well, since these crops

increase total caloric availability to the household. That said, the relationships may be

contingent on other factors of production such as fertilizer inputs, farm size, irrigation

and mechanization. Given these multiple determinants of the effect of modern crops, we

chose to use it in a reduced form model rather than trying to explicitly test various

pathways with poorly measured variables.

       Percent of the population at risk of malaria: We overlay maps of the geographic

extent of malaria risk in 1965, 1975, 1994 and 2002 from Hay (2004) with a high-

resolution (2.5 arc-minutes) map of 2005 human population from CIESIN (2005). We

then calculate the percentage of each country’s population at risk of malaria in 1965,




                                                                                             22
1975, 1994 and 2002, and interpolate to arrive at values for each period in our dataset.

Note that these percentages are only approximations, since high-resolution maps of

human population are not available as far back as 1965. For this reason we decided to

overlay all of the malaria maps on the 2005 population map. The variable nevertheless

captures the changing geographic extent of malaria risk in each country over time.

       Abortion upon request: Abortion is considered legal for our purposes only if the

UN deems abortion to be legal and to be available upon request. Our data for this

variable was taken from a series of country profiles from the United Nations Population

Division “Abortion Policies: A Review” (2002), available online at

http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/abortion/.

The variable has a value of 0 unless abortion is legal upon request for every single year in

a given five year period, in which case it is assigned a value of 1.

       While obviously “abortion upon request” is acting as a very imperfect proxy for a

more contraceptive-friendly climate, we believe that using explicit policy changes within

countries over time mitigates the concern that it is merely acting as a proxy for general

cultural attitudes toward birth control. We can be less certain that policy changes are not

demand-driven. However, to mitigate the possibility that contraceptive (and thus

fertility) changes within countries are driving policy changes with respect to abortion, we

score the abortion variable prior to the period for which we are measuring fertility.

Further assuaging endogeneity concerns within a fixed effects framework is the fact that

the direction of change is not monotonic. Four countries (Bulgaria, Hungary, Poland, and

Romania) ban and then re-legalize abortion in the sample; such bi-directional policy

shifts suggest that ideology and politics at the state level are driving legal changes rather




                                                                                            23
than some “bottom up” demand-driven dynamic. Figure Six, below, shows the

distribution of abortion upon request legality over our time series.

       Finally, since “abortion upon request” is a strict definition of the legality of

abortion, we also tried alternatives: whether abortion was legal if the requester provided a

social or economic reason, whether abortion was legal for health reasons or whether

abortion was allowed at all. The problem with these more refined specifications is that

this multi-category variable was only available for the latest wave of data and hence was

tested only in the cross-sectional analysis. However, readers should take comfort in the

fact that alternative specifications were equally robust within this framework, and, more

importantly, the parameter estimates of our other variables of interest did not change

substantially when we altered the abortion variable specification.

                       [FIGURE SIX ABOUT HERE]

        Log of GDP per capita, measure at purchasing-power-parity, in 2000

international dollars. Yearly data are taken from the World Bank’s World Development

Indicators database (2005). We calculate our own averages for each 5 year period.

       Female literacy (ages 15-24): Yearly data taken from the World Bank’s World

Development Indicators database (2005). We calculate our own averages for each five-

year period. We chose this age band to measure female literacy since it was presumed

that post-puberty adolescence and young adulthood were the critical time periods during

which “fertility engines” would ignite (Wu 2005) and thus the correct population to

measure. Alternate measures for this population such as secondary schooling enrollment

rates did not change the results for our main variables of interest and truncated the

number of valid country-years, so we chose to use the literacy rate instead.




                                                                                          24
       Region: We use the World Bank regional classifications, with a dummy variable

for Sub-Saharan African countries. Please see the World Bank, World Development

Indicators (2005) for more information regarding how specific countries are classified.

       Population: Total population by country in thousands. Five year averages

calculated from U.N. Population Division yearly data. We use this variable as a weight

for weighted least squares sensitivity analysis.

       Means and standard deviations for the sample of country-years are presented in

Table 2, below. We present un-weighted values, as well as values obtained using weights

by population size. Weighting by population size diminishes mean TFR in our sample

by more than one child per woman, and reduces the mean infant mortality rate by almost

8 deaths per 1,000 live births. Mean modern variety crop diffusion is also significantly

higher (roughly 46% versus 17%), driven by high diffusion in populous countries such as

India and China. Abortion upon request also increases significantly (from 0.06 to 0.34),

again because of China. For obvious reasons, mean values of region dummies also

change considerably when we weight by population. Analysis is robust to weighting by

population size; however, we present un-weighted regressions.

                       [TABLE TWO ABOUT HERE]



Methods and Findings

       In order to evaluate the effects of child mortality, income, female literacy,

abortion policy, and agricultural technology on fertility we employ several statistical

models on our panel. We first use reduced form OLS, then OLS with fixed effects, and

then test which of those two models is preferred. We then move to an instrumental




                                                                                           25
variables framework (instrumenting for child mortality). First we use a cross-section,

using the malaria ecology instrument that does not vary over time. Next we move to a

fixed-effects framework by inserting country dummies and replacing the time-invariant

instrument with one that varies over time (percentage of the population at risk of

malaria). In both instrumental variable frameworks, we run formal tests of the presence

of endogeneity and the strength of the instrument.

       First, it is worth discussing why we use the infant (under age 1) mortality rate

instead of the child (under-5) mortality rate in some of our analysis. Conceptually, the

effect of child mortality on fertility choices is probably better captured by an under-5

mortality rate than by an infant mortality rate, since children dying at ages 1-5 would

impact their parents’ fertility choices. Further, the impact of malaria on child morbidity

and mortality is greatest in years 1 to 5 of life. However, data for IMR are much more

widely available than for CMR, which means that using CMR would have led us to

discard a lot of observations which had data on all other variables and IMR. Thus we

chose to proceed with IMR as a proxy for CMR for the within-country analysis and stick

with the conceptually superior measure of CMR for cross-section analysis (though

substituting IMR into these models does not significantly alter our results).

                                [TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE]

       We begin the reduced form OLS analysis looking simply at regional deviations

from a baseline time trend (regression (i) in Table 3). Since are interested in sub-Saharan

Africa, we collapse the other World Bank regions into the suppressed category in order to

interpret the difference between sub-Saharan Africa and the rest of the developing world.

From regression (i) we see that sub-Saharan Africa has a TFR that is roughly 2.1 births




                                                                                           26
above the sample average. Regression (ii) then looks at the controls we are interested in.

The regression surely suffers from endogeneity (we have discussed above how high

fertility can impact some of the right hand side variables, especially income and child

mortality), so while it is not a perfect model and does not allow us to deduce causality or

interpret coefficients, it is enlightening to see the strength of the correlations between

these variables and fertility. In this simplified framework, all of the variables come out

as significant and with predicted signs (high infant mortality are associated with higher

fertility, while increasing income, increasing women’s literacy and better agricultural

technology, and availability of abortion all are associated with lower fertility). Note that

there are several observations for every country in the sample, so we estimate Huber-

White standard errors robust to clustering within countries in all regressions except (vi),

since it’s fixed-effects. Regression (iii) uses the same specification but with IMR instead

of CMR, in order to use the full time series. IMR is in fact stronger than CMR in this

framework, but female literacy is no longer significant. All the other variables still

maintain their significance and sign. Regressions (iv and v) look at the sub-Saharan

Africa dummy with the controls in these “naïve” models, and finds it to have come down

to 0.4 or 0.6, respectively, depending of whether we are controlling for CMR or IMR.

[The high African fertility rates, according to this model, are caused mainly by the high

CMR]. Regression (vi) then looks at a fixed-effects framework by inserting country

dummies (this now discards all cross-country variation and uses the controls only to

explain within-country variation in TFR). All the variables, including female literacy, are

now significant, although interestingly the income variable has switched sign, so that

increasing income is now associated with increased fertility (as predicted by the Barro-




                                                                                             27
Becker model). A Hausman test to compare the two specifications (OLS in regression

(iii) and fixed-effects in regression (vi)) rejected the null that the OLS model in (iii) is

valid, leaving us with the fixed effects specification in (vi) as preferred among the

reduced form models.

        We tested the robustness of the FE regression (vi) by running some alternatives.

As a first test, we omit the income variable, since the purported endogeneity of the

income variable might be biasing other coefficients. All variables except literacy remain

significant, and the coefficient on IMR remains at 0.1. As a second test, we reran

regression (vi) using an alternative definition of the abortion variable (defining abortion

as being legal in the 5 years only if it is legal in all 5 years). The results do not change.

                                 [TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE]

        We next move to the instrumental variables framework in a cross-section (with

time invariant instruments, as explained above). Table 4 shows the regression results of

both the first stage and the second stage least squares. As before, we estimate Huber-

White standard errors robust to clustering within countries. The results show CMR

(instrumented by Malaria Ecology), legality of abortion, and modern variety crops to be

significant, while literacy and income are not. We tested the strength of the instrument

with an F-test in the first stage, and following the convention that an F value greater than

5 is necessary for the instrument to be strong, we concluded from our F of 11.5 that the

instrument is strong enough.

                                 [TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE]

        We test robustness of this instrumental variables model by running some

alternatives, as shown in Table 5. First, in regression (ii), as with the FE robustness tests,




                                                                                                28
we omit the income variable in regression (ii) to get a range for the point estimates of the

other coefficients. The CMR coefficient doubles in magnitude (to 0.02), suggesting that

low income and high CMR are both correlated with, and perhaps caused by, malaria.

Next, regression (iii) we limit the sample to low-income countries, and the results are

roughly consistent—again here the coefficient on CMR is double that of the base model

(i), and the coefficient on the abortion variable rises in magnitude; however, the modern

variety crops variable is no longer significant (though the point estimate is the same and

the standard error is higher thanks to the smaller sample size). The problem is likely that

the cross-country variation in the crop variable is too small in the restricted sample. Most

importantly, the effect of CMR on TFR is robust across all specifications, and the effect

holds if CMR is replaced with IMR (not shown). The legality is abortion variable is

similarly robust and, in fact, appears to be stronger for low income countries. Finally, it

is notable that income and literacy do not play a statistically significant role in any of

these models.

                                [TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE]

       Our last set of models use a fixed-effects framework by adding country dummies,

and an instrument that varies over time (the percentage of population at risk of malaria).

(We now shift to IMR, since that allows for longer panels rather than just the two periods

for which CMR is available.) Results of the first stage and 2SLS are shown in Table 6,

and show that IMR, income and crops planted to modern varieties have a statistically

significant effect on determining within-country variation of TFR (abortion legality and

literacy are now not significant). Note that the coefficient on income is positive and

significant in the structural model. We test the endogeneity of the IMR variable (the null




                                                                                             29
of exogeneity can be rejected at a one percent alpha level) and for the strength of the

instrument (the F-test yields a value of 17.24, so we can conclude that the instrument is

strong).

       Looking across the various models employed, we can summarize by saying that

the effect of these variables on TFR have shown various degrees of significance. The

most important effect has come from the child survival variable. The coefficients on

IMR have ranged between 0.01 in the non-IV fixed-effects specification to 0.06 in the IV

fixed-effects specification. This range corresponds to having a decrease of TFR of 0.7 to

4.4 if IMR is to decrease by 66% from its 1990 value in sub-Saharan Africa (the

Millennium Development Goal for child mortality). The coefficient on CMR of 0.01

from the IV specification (without fixed effects) passed all robustness tests, and this value

would correspond with a decrease of TFR of 1.2 if CMR is reduced by 66%. Even this

conservative value is a powerful effect; a more plausible point estimate based on the

range of results is that TFR would decrease by 2 with a 66% decrease in child mortality.

The coefficient on the modern variety crops stays at around -0.01 for all specifications,

which would indicate that a 50% higher use of modern variety crops would be associated

with a TFR value lower by 0.5. Finally, the coefficient on the abortion legality variable

hovers at around -0.9 across models, which would mean that legalizing abortion on

request is associated with a 0.9 lower TFR. Literacy, on the whole, did not have

significant explanatory power on TFR, and the income variable switched signs between

across specifications (negative in the cross-country, positive in the fixed-effects).



Discussion: Babies Rule?




                                                                                            30
          While we find some evidence for direct government policy (“abortion”) and for

quality-quantity tradeoff via agricultural productivity improvement (Green revolution),

the biggest driver quantitatively remains child survival. This is where the theory of the

demographic transition started: save the children and families will choose to have fewer

children. GDP per capita, urbanization, female literacy, and so on all seem to be less

important. This is surprising, on the one hand, but not in contradiction with the fact that

the demographic transition has proceeded in the widest range of social settings: rural and

urban, male-dominated and gender equal, impoverished and middle-class (Cleland 2002).

Since the child mortality transition has also proceeded in a wide range of settings, it is

plausible that fertility has been driven more by child mortality than by socioeconomic

status.

          If this conclusion is correct, it heralds the possibility of a rapid fertility transition

in Africa. Child survival can be dramatically improved in a short period of time (Lancet,

2005; UN Millennium Project, 2005). It is indeed possible, even in a very low income

setting and within a five-year period, to reduce the child mortality rate from 150 per

1,000 or above, to well below 100 per 1,000. Similarly, other determinants of fertility,

such as adoption of high-yield crop varieties and public policies in support of family

planning, may change in just a few years, in contrast with many socioeconomic variables.

Sub-Saharan Africa’s TFR in 2004 was 5.3. If the Millennium Development Goals are

achieved and child mortality is decreased by two-thirds, our results would predict a

decrease in TFR of 2 babies. A 50% increase in use of modern variety crops would

decrease TFR by .5, and a less pro-natalist environment (proxied by legalized abortion

upon request) would decrease TFR by 0.9. These reductions would correspond to a new




                                                                                                  31
TFR in sub-Saharan Africa of just below 2 (replacement rate). While these predictions

are very crude, nevertheless the prospect for a rapid, policy-supported transition to lower

fertility in Africa, say a TFR of less than 3.0 by 2015, looks reasonable. This will be the

subject of a follow-up policy analysis.

       More research is needed to continue exploring the causes of rapid fertility

transitions seen in some countries in the last few decades. In particular, our models do

not attempt to understand the lag structure in changes to the independent variables. A

future paper will look intensively at case studies of rapid fertility declines and attempt to

better model lagged effects of the determinants of TFR.

       The discussion here may also shed light on the role of ecology versus institutions

in economic development. To the extent that malaria ecology affects the demographic

transition as well as mortality rates, the observed high settler mortality rates used by

Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001) as an instrumental variable for current

economic institutions would not be appropriate. The high mortality rates would be

correlated with an underlying disease ecology which in turn is a direct contributor to

economic performance through its depressing effect on the demographic transition.

There are other reasons, too, why malaria can cripple economic development, beyond the

effects on demography, though the demographic effects are likely to be among the most

powerful. In a similar way, settle mortality may be correlated with timing and pathways

of agricultural transformation as well. The Green Revolution came first to the temperate

and sub-tropical regions, and latest to the tropics, the places where settler mortality was

the highest. In short, settler mortality is correlated with ecological variables that have a

direct reach into modern economic development, so that settler mortality can not be




                                                                                           32
deemed to be an appropriate instrument. This topic is worthy of a longer discussion,

which we will take up on another occasion.12




         12
            Indeed, their measures (and those of Easterly and Levine, 2002 & Rodrik, Subramanian and
Trebb 2002, who also do not control for child or infant mortality in their models) are strongly correlated
with the prevalence of high-yield seed variety usage, with total fertility rates, with infant mortality, with
infant mortality net of adult mortality (which is key to the AJR argument), and with infant mortality as
instrumented by malaria ecology. We are not the first to hint at a direct effect of climatically determined
health variables on economic growth. Lorentzen, McMillan and Wacziarg (2005) use a similar strategy to
show that adult mortality has a direct effect on economic growth, net of institutional context. However,
institutional context remains significant in their model; and the adult mortality story is plausibly orthogonal
to settler mortality given the survivorship story that AJR told. The same cannot be putatively assumed for
infant or child mortality.


                                                                                                            33
References

Acemoglu, Daron, Johnson, Simon and Robinson, James. 2001. The Colonial Origins of
Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation. The American Economic Review,
v. 91, no. 5, pp. 1369-1401.

Ahituv, Avner. 2001. Be fruitful or multiply: On the interplay between fertility and
economic development. Journal of Population Economics, v. 14, pp. 51-71.

Albouy, David. 2005. The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: A
Reexamination Based on Improved Settler Mortality Data.

Al-Qudsi, Sulayman. 1998. The demand for children in Arab countries: Evidence from
panel and count data models. Journal of Population Economics, v. 11, pp. 435-452.

Amin, Sajeda and Lloyd, Cynthia B. 2002. Women's lives and rapid fertility decline:
Some lessons from Bangladesh and Egypt. Population Research and Policy Review, v.
21, pp. 275-317.

Balk, Deborah. 1994. Individual and Community Aspects of Women's Status and
Fertility in Rural Bangladesh. Population Studies, v. 48, pp. 21-45.

Bates I, Fenton C, Gruber J, Lalloo D, Medina Lara A, Squire SB, Theobald S, Thomson
R, Tolhurst R. 2004. Vulnerability to malaria, tuberculosis, and HIV/AIDS infection and
disease. Part 1: determinants operating at individual and household level. Lancet
Infectious Disease, May; 4(5): 267-77.

Becker, G. and Barro, R. . 1988. A Reformulation of the Economic Theory of Fertility.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, v. CIII, no. 1, pp. 1-25.

Benefo, Kofi and Schultz, T. Paul. 1996. Fertility and Child Mortality in Cote d’Ivoire
and Ghana. The World Bank Economic Review, v. 10, no. 1, pp. 123-158.

Ben-Porath, Yoram. 1976. Fertility Responses to Child Mortality: Micro Data from
Israel. The Journal of Political Economy, v. 84, no. 4, pp. S163-S178.

Black R.E., Morris S.S., and Bryce J. 2003. Where and why are 10 million children
dying every year? Lancet, v. 361, pp. 2226-2234.

Blackburn, K. and Cipriani, G. P. 1998. Endogenous fertility, mortality and growth. .
Journal of Population Economics, v. 11, pp. 517-534.

Bongaarts, John. 1990. The Measurement of Wanted Fertility. Population and
Development Review, v. 16, no. 3, pp. 487-506.




                                                                                          34
Bongaarts, John, Odile Frank and Ron Lesthaeghe. 1984. The Proximate Determinants
of Fertility in Sub-Saharan Africa. Population and Development Review, v. 10, no. 3
(Sept), pp. 511-537.

Breierova, Lucia and Duflo, Esther. 2004. The Impact of Education on Fertility and Child
Mortality: Do Fathers Really Matter Less Than Mothers? NBER Working Papers Series.

Carstensen, Kai and Gundlach, Erich. 2006. The Primacy of Institutions Reconsidered:
Direct Incoem Effects of Malaria Prevalence. The World Bank Economic Review, v. 20,
no. 3, pp. 309-339.

Casterline, John B.. 2001. The Pace of Fertility Transition: National Patterns in the
Second Half of the Twentieth Century. Population and Development Review,
Supplement: Global Fertility Transition, v. 27, pp. 17-52.
Center for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN), Columbia
University; United Nations Food and Agriculture Programme (FAO); and Centro
Internacional de Agricultura Tropical (CIAT). 2005. Gridded Population of the World:
Future Estimates (GPWFE). Palisades, NY: Socieconomic Data and Applications Center
(SEDAC), Columbia University. Available at http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/gpw.
Downloaded March 2006.

Chen, M., P. Xie, J. E. Janowiak, and P. A. Arkin, 2002: Global Land Precipitation: A
50-yr Monthly Analysis Based on Gauge Observations, J. of Hydrometeorology, 3, 249-
266

Chowdhury, A. 1988. The Infant Mortality-Fertility Debate: Some International
Evidence. Southern Economic Journal, v. 54, no. 3, pp. 666-674.

Conley, D. and R. Glauber. 2006. “Parental Educational Investment and Children’s
Academic Risk: Estimates of the Impact of Sibship Size and Birth Order from Exogenous
Variation in Fertility.” Journal of Human Resources.

de la Croix, David and Doepke, Matthias. 2002. Inequality and Growth: Why Differential
Fertility Matters.

Dodoo, F. Nii-Amoo. 1998. Marriage Type and Reproductive Decisions: A Comparative
Study in Sub-Saharan Africa. Journal of Marriage and the Family, v. 60, no. 1, pp. 232-
242.

Doepke, Matthias. 2005. Child mortality and fertility decline: Does the Barro-Becker
model fit the facts? Journal of Population Economics, v. 18, pp. 337-366.

Dreze, Jean and Murthi, Mamta. 2001. Fertility, Education, and Development: Evidence
from India. Population and Development Review, v. 27, no. 1, pp. 33-63.




                                                                                       35
Easterly, William and Ross Levine. 2002. Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How
Endowments Influence Economic Development. NBER Working Paper #9106.

Eckstein, Z., Mira, P., and Wolpin, K. 1999. A Quantitative Analysis of Swedish Fertility
Dynamics: 1751-1990. Review of Economic Dynamics, v. 2, pp. 137-165.

Etard, J.F., Kodia, B. and Ronsmans, C. 2003. Seasonal Variation in Direct Obstetric
Mortality in Rural Senegal: Role of Malaria? American Journal of Tropical Medicine
and Hygiene, v. 68, no. 4, pp. 503-504.

Evenson, R. E. and Gollin, D. 2003. Assessing the Impact of the Green Revolution,
1960-2000. Science, v. 300, no. 5620, pp. 758-762.

Feng, Yi, Kugler, Jacek, and Zak, Paul. 2000. The Politics of Fertility and Economic
Development. International Studies Quarterly, v. 44, pp. 667-693.

Franz, Jennifer and FitzRoy, Felix. 2006. Child mortality, poverty, and environment in
developing countries.

Gatti, Roberta. 1999. A Cross-country Analysis of Fertility Determinants.

Gertler, Paul J. and Molyneaux, John W. 1994. How Economic Development and Family
Planning Programs Combined to Reduce Indonesian Fertility. Demography, v. 31, no. 1,
pp. 33-63.

Gillepsie, Peter, Michael Tobias, Elizabeth Hughes, and Jane Gray Morrison. 2006. No
Vacancy: Global Responses to the Human Population Explosion. Hope Publishing
House.

Guyatt, H.L., and Snow, R.W. 2001. Malaria in pregnancy as an indirect cause of infant
mortality in sub-Saharan Africa. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine
and Hygiene, v. 95, n. 6, pp. 569-576.

Hay, S.I., Guerra, C.A., Noor, A.M., and Snow, R.W. 2004. The global distribution and
population at risk of malaria: past, present and future. Lancet: Infectious Diseases, v. 4
(June), pp. 327-336.

Hazan, Moshe and Berdugo, Binyamin. 2002. Child Labour, Fertility, and Economic
Growth. The Economic Journal, v. 112, pp. 810-828.

Heer, David M. and Smith, Dean O. 1968. Mortality Level, Desired Family Size, and
Population Increase. Demography, v. 5, no. 1, pp. 104-121.

Hindin, Michelle J. 2000. Women's autonomy, women's status and fertility-related
behavior. Population Research and Policy Review, v. 19, pp. 255-282.




                                                                                         36
Jain, Anrudh K. 1989. Fertility Reduction and the Quality of Family Planning Services.
Studies in Family Planning, v. 20, no. 1, pp. 1-16.

Johnson, D. Gale. 1999. Population and economic developmenet. China Economic
Review, v. 10, pp. 1-16.

Joshi, Shareen and Schultz, T. Paul. 2005. Evaluating the Long-Term Consquences of a
Family Planning Program Intervention for the Women and their Children in Matlab,
Bangladesh.

Kiszewski, Anthony, Mellinger, Andrew, Spielman, Andrew, Malaney, Pia, Sachs, Sonia
Ehrlich, and Sachs, Jeffrey. 2004. A Global Index Representing the Stability of Malaria
Transmission. American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, v. 70, no. 5, pp. 486-
498.

Klasen, Stephan. 1999. Does Gender Inequality Reduce Growth and Development?
Evidence from Cross-Country Regressions. Policy Research Report on Gender and
Development, The World Bank, Working Paper Series, no. 7.

Kaufmann, D., Kraay, A., Zoido-Lobaton, P. 1999. Governance Matters. World Bank
Policy Research Working Paper 2196.

Lorentzen, Peter, John McMillan, and Romain Wacziarg. 2005. “Death and
Development.” NBER Working Paper No. 11620.

Maglad, Nour Eldin. 1994. Fertility in Rural Sudan: The Effect of Landholding and Child
Mortality. Economic Development and Cultural Change, v. 42, no. 4, pp. 761-772.

Martina, Alan. 1996. The quantity/quality of children hypothesis in developing countries:
testing by considering some demographic experiences in China, India and Africa. Health
Transition Review, Supplement to Volume 6, pp. 191-212.

Mason, Karen Oppenheim. 1987. The Impact of Women's Social Position on Fertility in
Developing Countries. Sociological Forum, v. 2, no. 4, pp. 718-745.

Maubert, Bertrand, Fievet, Nadine, Tami, Germaine, Cot, Michel, Boudin, Christian, and
Deloron, Philippe. 1999. Development of Antibodies against Chondroitin Sulfate A-
Adherent Plasmodium falciparum in Pregnant Women. Infection and Immunity, v. 67, n.
10, pp. 5367-5371.

McDonald, Peter. 2000. Gender Equity in Theories of Fertility Transition. Population
and Development Review, v. 26, no. 3, pp. 427-439.

Menken, Jane, Trussell, James and Watkins, Susan. 1981. The Nutrition Fertility Link:
An Evaluation of the Evidence. Journal of Interdisciplinary History, v. XI, no. 3, pp.
425-441.



                                                                                         37
Morgan, S. Philip and Niraula, Bhanu B. 1995. Gender Inequality and Fertility in Two
Nepali Villages. Population and Development Review, v. 21, no. 3, pp. 541-561.

Moav, Omer. 2005. Cheap Children and the Persistence of Poverty. The Economic
Journal, v. 115, pp. 88-110.

Okun, Barbara S. 1997. Innovation and adaptation in fertility transition: Jewish
immigrants to Israel from Muslim North Africa and the Middle East. Population Studies,
v. 51, pp. 317-335.

Qian, Nancy. 2004. Quantity-Quality and the One Child Policy: The Positive Effect of
Family Size on School Enrollment in China.

Pritchett, Lant and Summer, Lawrence H. 1996. Wealthier is Healthier. Journal of
Human Resources, v. XXXI, no. 4.

Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian and Francesco Trebb. 2002. “Institutions Rule: The
Primacy of Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development.”
NBER Working Paper No. 9305.

Rosenzweig, Mark R. 1982. Educational, Subsidy, Agricultural Development and
Fertility Change. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, v. 97, no. 1, pp. 67-88.

Sachs, J.D. 2003. Institutions Don’t Rule: Direct Effects of Geography on Economic
Development. NBER Working Paper 9490.

Sachs, J.D., and McArthur, J.W. 2001. Institutions and Geography: Comment on
Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson. NBER Working Paper 8114.

Sartelet, H., Rogier, C., Milko-Sartelet, I., Angel, G., and Michel, G. Malaria associated
pre-eclempsia in Senegal. 1996. Lancet, v. 347, n. 9008, p. 1121.

Schultz, T. Paul. 1994. Human Capital, Family Planning, and Their Effects on Population
Growth. The American Economic Review, v. 84, no. 2, pp. 255-260.

Schultz, T. Paul. 1997. Demand for Children in Low Income Countries. in Rosenzweig,
M. R. and Stark, O. (eds.) Handbook of Population and Family Economics.

Shiva, Vandana. 2005. Earth Democracy: Justice, Sustainibility and Peace. London:
South End Press.

Subbarao, K. and Raney, Laura. 1995. Social Gains from Female Education: A Cross-
National Study. Economic Development and Cultural Change, v. 44, no. 1, pp. 105-128.




                                                                                        38
Thirumurthy, Harsha, Zivin, Joshua Graff and Goldstein, Markus. 2005. The Economic
Impact of AIDS Treatment: Labor Supply in Western Kenya. NBER Working Papers
Series.

United Nations Population Division. 2004. World Population Prospects: the 2004
Revision.

United Nations Population Division, Department of Economic and Social Affairs. 2002.
Abortion Policies: A Global Review.

Wang, Ping, Yip, Chong K. and Scotese, Carol. 1994. Fertility Choice and Economic
Growth: Theory and Evidence. The Review of Economics and Statistics, v. 76, no. 2, pp.
255-266.

World Bank. 2005. World Development Indicators.

Zakir, M. and Wunnava, P. 1999. Factors affecting infant mortality rates: evidence from
cross-sectional data. Applied Economics Letters, v. 6, pp. 271-273.




                                                                                      39
Table 1: Regional Averages of Area Weighted Aggregates of Modern Variety Crop
Adoption (Percentages of Crop Coverage)

Regional Averages of Area Weighted Aggreates of % Green Revolution Modern Variety Crop Adoption

                               1960   1965    1970    1975    1980    1985    1990    1995    2000
East Asia and Pacific            0     1        7      15      21      26      33      40      48
Europe (Turkey only)            0      0        7      21      28      29      29      39      45
Latin America and Caribbean      0     1        3       6      11      14      19      22      27
Middle East and North Africa    0      0        2       8      10      13      16      24      32
South Asia                       0     0       13      29      41      45      54      62      68
Sub-Saharan Africa               0     0        0       0       1       3       5       8      11
Source: Robert E. Evenson




                                                                                                  40
Table 2: Means and Standard Deviations of Variables Used in Analysis

                             Variable                                                              Mean                                         Standard Deviation
                                                                           Un-weighted             Population weighted                 Un-weighted Population weighted
TFR                                                                            4.89                         3.99                           1.96                1.73
Infant mortality rate                                                          84.2                        74.93                           50.3               40.15
Female Literacy (Ages 15-24)                                                  73.04                        75.21                           28.3               24.07
Log of GDP per capita, PPP                                                      7.9                         7.72                           0.84                0.75
Share of crops planted to modern varieties                                    10.64                        35.26                           17.9               29.24
(MVs)
Abortion on request                                                              0.21                          0.38                           0.41            0.49
Malaria Ecology Index                                                             4.6                           2.2                           7.14             4.9
Percentage of population at risk of malaria                                      0.58                          0.66                           0.41            0.31
Sub-Saharan Africa dummy                                                         0.33                          0.11                           0.47            0.32
Year                                                                            1980.2                       1983.13                         12.89           12.58
*Means and standard deviations computed for entire sample, excluding high income countries and countries with populations smaller than 500,000 individuals
Figure 1: Total Fertility in 2000, by Country




                                                42
Figure 2: Malaria Ecology, by Country




                                        43
Figure 3: Malaria Risk by Year




                                 44
Figure 4: High Yield Crop Variety Diffusion, 1975 – 80 and 1995 - 2000




                                                                         45
Figure 5: Abortion on Demand by Country




                                          46
Table 3: Reduced Form OLS and Fixed-Effects Regressions of Total Fertility Rates
                                    (i)       (ii)     (iii)      (iv)         (v)                                        (vi)
               Dependent Variable: TFR       TFR      TFR         TFR         TFR                                         TFR
      Independent Variables
Sub-Saharan Africa dummy            2.08                           0.38        0.56
                                                   (8.27)                                     (1.44)         (2.31)
Literacy of females ages 15-24                                   -0.01         -0.01          -0.01         -0.01          -0.01
                                                                 (-1.33)       (-1.10)       (-1.85)        (-1.43)       (-2.71)
Log GDP per capita, at PPP prices                                -0.54         -0.37           -0.6         -0.32          0.36
                                                                 (-2.99)       (-2.43)       (-3.29)        (-2.16)        (2.64)
Child Mortality Rate                                              0.01                         0.01
                                                                 (4.89)                       (2.86)
Infant Mortality Rate                                                           0.02                         0.02          0.01
                                                                                (4.41)                       (3.42)        (5.05)
Legality of Abortion on demand                                   -0.85         -0.89          -0.79         -0.82          -0.61
                                                                 (-3.14)       (-2.79)        (3.28)        (-2.72)       (-3.06)
% crops planted to modern varieties                              -0.01         -0.02          -0.01         -0.01          -0.02
                                                                 (-2.49)       (-3.40)       (-2.14)        (-2.54)       (-4.53)
Year                                              -0.08          -0.03         -0.03          -0.03         -0.04          -0.04
                                                 (-12.84)        (-3.70)       (-3.67)       (-4.11)        (-4.57)       (-5.87)
constant                                        165.98          65.18          62.42         72.64         78.24          79.86
                                                  (13.13)        (4.26)         (3.93)        (4.69)         (4.83)        (6.19)
                                      N=            415            140           415            140           415          415
                              R-squared =          0.54           0.86          0.79           0.86          0.80          0.95
t-statistics in parentheses
Sample excludes high-income countries and countries with populations below 500,000
Regressions (i) through (v) have robust standard errors through clustering by country, while regression (vi) includes country
dummies




                                                                                                                                 47
Table 4: IV-Regressions (no Fixed-Effects) of Total
Fertility Rate – First and Second Stages
                                          (i)       (ii)
                   Dependent Variable: CMR        TFR
         Independent Variables
Literacy of females ages 15-24           -0.54     -0.01
                                                        (-3.48)      (-0.72)
Log GDP per capita, at PPP prices                      -42.40          -0.4
                                                       (-10.13)      (-1.47)
Child Mortality Rate                                                  0.01
(instrumented)                                                        (2.70)
Legality of Abortion on demand                           4.02        -0.86
                                                         (0.43)      (-3.37)
% crops planted to modern varieties                     -0.28        -0.01
                                                        (-2.56)      (-2.03)
Malaria Ecology                                          2.16
                                                         (5.39)
Year                                                    -0.03        -0.03
                                                        (-0.03)      (-3.66)
constant                                              517.82        65.30
                                                         (0.26)       (4.21)
                                          N=             138           138
                                  R-squared =            0.82         0.86
Regression (i) is the first-stage regression, (ii) is the 2SLS
Instrument for CMR is Malaria Ecology
F-test of the null of the instruments' effects on CMR yields an F of 11.47.
Instrument is therefore found to be strong.
Sample excludes high-income countries and countries with populations
below 500,000
Regression has robust standard errors through clustering by country




                                                                               48
Table 5: Alternate and Sub-sample Specifications of the IV Model
                                           (i)      (ii)      (iii)
                      Dependent Variable: TFR      TFR       TFR
          Independent Variables
Literacy of females ages 15-24            -0.01    -0.01       0.00
                                                            (-0.72)         (-0.89)        (-0.34)
Log GDP per capita, at PPP prices                             -0.4                          -0.56
                                                            (-1.47)                        (-1.08)
Child (under-5 Mortality Rate)                               0.01            0.02            0.02
(instrumented)                                               (2.70)          (4.13)         (2.12)
Legality of Abortion on demand                              -0.86           -0.83           -1.20
                                                            (-3.37)         (-3.90)        (-2.59)
% crops planted to modern varieties                         -0.01           -0.01           -0.01
                                                            (-2.03)         (-2.04)        (-1.53)
Year                                                        -0.03           -0.03           -0.03
                                                            (-3.66)         (-3.27)        (-1.88)
constant                                                    65.30          59.51           63.48
                                                             (4.21)          (3.56)         (2.10)
                                              N=             138             138               67
                                      R-squared =            0.86            0.84            0.75
t-statistics in parentheses
Instrument for CMR is Malaria Ecology

Sample excludes high-income countries and countries with populations below 500,000
Regression has robust standard errors through clustering by country
(i) is the original specification; (ii) excludes the income variable; (iii) limits the sample to low-
income countries




                                                                                                        49
Table 6: First Stage and Second Stage IV Regressions
with Country Fixed Effects
                                       (i)      (ii)
                  Dependent Variable: IMR      TFR
        Independent Variables
Infant Mortality Rate                           0.06
                                                                    (3.67)
Log GDP per capita, at PPP prices                     -0.82          0.40
                                                      (-0.30)       (2.03)
Literacy of females ages 15-24                        -0.26          0.00
                                                      (-2.88)       (0.28)
Legality of Abortion on demand                        -5.39         -0.31
                                                      (-1.36)      (-1.03)
% crops planted to modern varieties                   -0.07         -0.01
                                                      (-0.96)      (-2.01)
% population at risk of malaria                      15.04
                                                       (4.15)
Year                                                  -1.19          0.02
                                                    (-10.32)        (0.95)
constant                                          2432.62         -45.01
                                                     (11.00)       (-0.99)
                                        N=              415          415
                                R-squared =            0.96          0.90
t-statistics in parentheses
Regression (i) is the first-stage regression, (ii) is the 2SLS
IMR instrumented with % population at risk of malaria
F-test of the null of the instrument's effects on IMR yields an F of 17.24.
Instrument is therefore found to be strong.
Regression includes country dummies, not reported
Sample excludes high-income countries and countries with populations
below 500,000




                                                                              50
