NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ANTITRUST AND REGULATION
Dennis W. Carlton
Randal C. Picker
Working Paper 12902
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12902

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2007

Respectively, Professor of Economics, The University of Chicago Graduate School of Business and
Research Associate, NBER, and Paul and Theo Leffmann Professor of Commercial Law, The University
of Chicago Law School and Senior Fellow, The Computation Institute of the University of Chicago
and Argonne Na-tional Laboratory. Carlton is currently serving as Deputy Assistant Attorney General
in Antitrust Division at the Department of Justice. The views expressed here do not necessarily represent
those of the Antitrust Division or Department of Justice. Picker thanks the Paul Leffmann Fund, The
Russell J. Parsons Faculty Research Fund and the John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics at
The University of Chicago Law School for their generous research support, and through the Olin Pro-gram,
Microsoft Corporation and Verizon. We thank Andrew Brinkman for research assistance and Timothy
Bresnahan, Richard Epstein, Jacob Gersen, Al Klevorick, Gregory Pelnar, Sam Peltzman, Richard
Posner, Nancy Rose, and the participants of the NBER Conference on Regulation for their helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Dennis W. Carlton and Randal C. Picker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Antitrust and Regulation
Dennis W. Carlton and Randal C. Picker
NBER Working Paper No. 12902
February 2007
JEL No. K2,K21,K23,L4,L43,L44,L5,L51
ABSTRACT
Since the passage of the Interstate Commerce Act (1897) and the Sherman Act (1890), regulation and
antitrust have operated as competing mechanisms to control competition. Regulation produced cross-subsidies
and favors to special interests, but specified prices and rules of mandatory dealing. Antitrust promoted
competition without favoring special interests, but couldn't formulate rules for particular industries.
The deregulation movement reflected the relative competencies of antitrust and regulation. Antitrust
and regulation can also be viewed as complements in which regulation and antitrust assign control
of competition to courts and regulatory agencies based on their relative strengths. Antitrust also can
act as a constraint on what regulators can do. This paper uses the game-theoretic framework of political
bargaining and the historical record of antitrust and regulation to establish and illustrate these points.
Dennis W. Carlton
Graduate School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
dennis.carlton@chicagogsb.edu
Randal C. Picker
University of Chicago
r-picker@uchicago.edu

2

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

Antitrust and Regulation
Dennis W. Carlton & Randal C. Picker*
Within a brief span, Congress adopted the Interstate Commerce
Act (1887) and the Sherman Act (1890). In imposing federal
regulation on railroads, the Interstate Commerce Act inaugurated the era of substantial federal regulation of individual industries, while the Sherman Act created a baseline for the control of competition in the United States by generally barring
contracts in restraint of trade and forbidding monopolization.
The rise of the railroads and the great trusts raised concerns
about economic power and spurred politicians to formulate a
national policy toward competition. Since 1890, policy makers
have been forced repeatedly to work through how to interleave
a fully general approach to competition under the antitrust laws
with industry-specific approaches to competition under regulatory statutes.
That has been a process of learning, but even without learning, shifting political winds would naturally lead to fits and
starts as antitrust and specific regulatory statutes have jostled
and combined and sometimes even competed in establishing a
* Copyright © 2005-06, Dennis W. Carlton and Randal C. Picker. All Rights Reserved. Respectively, Professor of Economics, The University of Chicago Graduate
School of Business and Research Associate, NBER, and Paul and Theo Leffmann
Professor of Commercial Law, The University of Chicago Law School and Senior
Fellow, The Computation Institute of the University of Chicago and Argonne National Laboratory. Carlton is currently serving as Deputy Assistant Attorney General
in Antitrust Division at the Department of Justice. The views expressed here do not
necessarily represent those of the Antitrust Division or Department of Justice.
Picker thanks the Paul Leffmann Fund, The Russell J. Parsons Faculty Research
Fund and the John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics at The University of
Chicago Law School for their generous research support, and through the Olin Program, Microsoft Corporation and Verizon. We thank Andrew Brinkman for research
assistance and Timothy Bresnahan, Richard Epstein, Jacob Gersen, Al Klevorick,
Gregory Pelnar, Sam Peltzman, Richard Posner, Nancy Rose, and the participants of
the NBER Conference on Regulation for their helpful comments.

Carlton & Picker

Antitrust and Regulation

3

framework for controlling competition. After more than a century of effort, it is possible to advance a few general conclusions. Antitrust can say no but struggles with saying yes. Less
cryptically, antitrust is a poor framework for price setting or
for establishing affirmative duties toward rivals. Price setting
in a non-market context often requires detailed industry knowledge and often turns on political decisions about levels of service and the rate of return to capital needed to provide those
services. The virtue and vice of federal judges is they are generalists, not industry specialists, and, once appointed, they are
insulated from the political process. If there is a natural monopoly and prices need to be set or we are going to create a
duty to, say, share an incumbent’s phone network with an entrant, the evidence suggests that it is generally best to do that
through (enlightened) regulation, not antitrust, though obviously poor regulation can impose enormous costs.
But antitrust says no very well, while regulators often have
a hard time saying no. Area-specific regulation through special
agencies gives rise to the fear that the regulators will be captured by the regulated industry (or other interest groups). Regulators will have come from industry or will dream of exiting to
private sector salaries. Regulators won’t say no often enough to
proposals that benefit special interests. But federal judges are
genuinely independent (or, at least, more so than regulators)
and the docket of the federal judiciary is completely general. A
general antitrust statute, implemented by independent federal
judges—limited to issues within their competence—can protect
the competitive process, especially with the rise of economic
reasoning in antitrust.
Our main conclusion is that in the century-long seesaw battle over how to design competition policy, the Sherman Act has
turned out to be more enduring than regulation. As the difficulties of regulation have emerged and as economic reasoning has
improved the effectiveness of the Sherman Act, enforcement of

4

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

the Sherman Act through an independent judiciary has shown
itself to deliver lower prices and less promotion of special interests than regulation, causing a shift away from regulation.
This does not, of course, mean that all regulation should vanish, especially for industries with natural monopoly characteristics, but rather that, when necessary, regulation should try to
allow as much competition as possible, constrained only by the
Sherman Act. Where activities in an industry remain partially
regulated, antitrust and regulation can be used together in a
complementary way to control competition and, in some cases,
it is possible to use antitrust as a constraint on regulators.
This Chapter is divided into three sections. First, we consider the general question of how competition policy should be
implemented. We do that by considering possible roles for
courts and regulatory agencies as set out in the modern political science literature on legislative bargaining. We analyze the
relative advantages and disadvantages of regulation versus antitrust as a means of formulating antitrust policy. We then consider one particular question: exclusion from antitrust, or put
differently, antitrust immunities. Second, we return to the beginning of the formulation of competition policy by considering the period starting with the Interstate Commerce Act and
the Sherman Act. This history illustrates the initial view of
regulation and antitrust as two competing alternatives to control competition, but with some recognition that the two would
interact in unforeseen ways. We pursue the central question
that dominated early competition policy and remains a central
policy question, namely, how should prices be set? Third, we
turn our attention to a group of industries that have been a focus of regulation for over a hundred years—network industries—and analyze their recent deregulation. We address the
fundamental question that has occupied and continues to occupy regulatory and antitrust decisions in those industries: how
should those markets be structured and specifically what sort of

Carlton & Picker

Antitrust and Regulation

5

interconnection rights should be established? We use this recent history to illustrate the movement away from regulation
toward antitrust, with the two being used as complements to
control competition in some industries.
I. Assigning Responsibility for Controlling Competition
We start by framing the general problem faced by Congress
and the President in choosing whether and to what extent to
delegate implementation of a policy to a third party. The delegation will take the form of legislation and the scope of the
delegation may be determined in part by the specificity of the
language used in the statute. We want to address that problem
generally and then turn to what that means for the interaction
of antitrust and regulation.
A. The General Setting
Under the U.S. Constitution, laws are enacted when the Senate,
the House and the President each vote in favor of a proposed
bill. That statement simplifies in that it ignores the possibility
that Congress has sufficient votes (two-thirds in each chamber)
to override a veto by the President, and it also skips over the
interesting and tricky issue of the extent to which domestic legislation can be set through the treaty-making power, where the
President is empowered to make treaties, provided that twothirds of the Senate vote in favor.
Following McCubbins, Noll & Weingast (1989), we treat
the process of creating legislation as a principal/agent problem
or, more precisely and more interestingly, as a three principal/multiple agents problem. It is conventional (see, e.g., Shepsle & Bonchek, 1997, pp. 358-68) in the rational choice literature in political science to model legislation as a principal delegating power to an agent, where either a court or an agency
acts as the agent in implementing the legislation. In the princi-

6

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

pal/agent problem faced in creating legislation, Congress and
the President typically delegate to one of two agents: Article III
courts or specialized agencies subject to court oversight. By
institutional design, Congress and the President have relatively
weak controls against the judiciary—we call this separation of
powers—but, together and separately, the House, Senate and
President can choose to retain stronger control over agencies.
Focus on a standard principal/agent problem, namely that
the agent will depart from the principal’s goals and pursue his
own. In the political science literature, this is labeled the problem of bureaucratic drift. For legislation to get passed, the
House, Senate and President negotiate over potential policies.
But delegation is inevitable: judges decide actual cases, not
Congress or the President, and with the rise of the administrative state, implementation of legislation can be delegated directly to courts or first to agencies with appeals to courts (and
judicial review of agency action need not be a given).
The negotiation process that results in unanimous agreement by the House, Senate and President on new legislation
has to take into account what will happen in the subsequent
delegation to courts or agencies. Each player in the negotiation
game should do backwards induction looking forward to see
how the agent will actually implement the enacted legislation,
and in light of that, design the legislation. (The players could
just care about enactment and not about implementation if that
is how their constituencies keep score, but we will assume that
all participants are interested in actual results, and not just appearances.) To match the political science literature, treat the
House (H), Senate (S), President (P) and agent as each having
preferences over the particular policy in question and focus on
the essential dynamic that takes place among our four players.
After negotiation, unanimity is reached and a bill is passed (absent unanimity nothing happens). The agent now implements
the legislation.

Carlton & Picker

Antitrust and Regulation

7

What constrains how the agent does so? Consider possible
sources of restrictions: the original legislation; oversight and
monitoring; internal agency norms; and the threat of subsequent legislation. Focus initially on the possibility of constraint
through subsequent legislation that overturns the decision of
the agent. Note that this legislation requires a unanimous vote
among H, S and P, as any one of them has the power to block a
change from the new status quo defined by the agent’s decision. As an initial cut, the agent then has a free hand to implement her policy preferences rather than implement with fidelity
the deal struck among H, S and P. So if the agent’s policy preferences matched more closely, say, P, the agent could implement a policy that P would find superior to the deal captured in
the negotiated legislation, and P would veto any subsequent
legislative effort to overturn the agent’s decision.
That doesn’t mean that the new status quo would remain,
but any new law negotiated among H, S and P would need to
make P better off than he is under the agent’s decision. And in
the face of that law, the agent could once again refuse to implement the deal negotiated and instead implement her policy
preferences. Of course, none of this should be lost on H, S and
P when they negotiate the original law. Again, they will care
about how the legislation is actually implemented, not the deal
cut. H, S and P can anticipate bureaucratic drift. If H and S
know that the agent will deviate from the original statute in the
direction of P with the agent’s action protected by P’s veto, H
and S will never make the deal in the first place. A little bit of
backwards induction goes a long way.
We quickly see the complexities of having a process involving delegation. The agent can try to implement his own
agenda, deviating from the original intent, but not enough to
induce intervention by the principals. Moreover, if H has been
delegated control over the agent, H can cheat on the agreement
with HSP and deviate from the original agreement. If a Con-

8

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

gressman wants to try to cheat on the original legislative deal,
he can do so if he can exert power over his agent. As Landes
and Posner (1979) argued in their explanation of the role of an
independent judiciary, the congressman can commit to not
cheating by relinquishing his power over the agent. At the
same time, giving up control over the agent means that the
agent now has freedom to implement her own policy preferences. Hands-tying at the front-end equals loss of control at the
back end. If the agent doesn’t face meaningful discipline, why
should the agent pay much (any?) attention to the statute at all?
But at the same time, independence means that the agent
can implement her preferences in the veto zone, that is, the
spots in the policy space where Congress and the President will
not agree unanimously to overturn the agent’s decision. And
the fact will be anticipated by the institutional players who will
be disadvantaged by the deviation. They will not want independence in their agent and will instead want to design controls
over the agent that make fidelity to the original deal possible.
That would be true if H, S and P were just seeking to implement their own independent policy preferences, but would
also be true if we think of the lawmakers as just selling off legislation to the highest bidder (or as having preferences that
value both legislative outcomes and transfers from legislation
buyers). H, S and P will also want controls on themselves, at
least as a group, so that they can ensure that their control over
the agent doesn’t allow them to cheat on the original deal that
was cut amongst themselves or with the legislation purchaser.
After the fact, they would like to cheat, either individually or
as a group, but that too will be anticipated by the legislation
purchaser, so H, S and P need a commitment mechanism to
maximize the amount that they can charge legislation purchasers.
We can sketch out what such a system might look like.
Consider a basic public choice model with an interested party

Carlton & Picker

Antitrust and Regulation

9

simply purchasing legislation that will be implemented by an
agent. We can offer H, S and P each some levers of oversight
over the agent. That may be enough to solve the problem of the
agent cheating. H needs to have sufficient individual power to
block moves by the agent away from the original law, and so
too for S and P. Or we need to make sure that the legislation
purchaser can exercise oversight powers against H, S and P to
make sure that they faithfully implement the original deal
bought and paid for by the legislation purchaser.
What should our legislation purchaser fear most, cheating
by the principal or cheating by the agent? Purchasers have little
control over Article III judges and much more control over
congressional principals and agency agents. Both of these
should push the legislation purchaser towards favoring a captive agency. Legislation purchasers are well-situated to punish
a member of Congress who cheats on the original deal by imposing her will on the agency. Members of Congress run every
two years (House) or six years (Senate) and are constantly raising money for reelection (the best way to discourage competing candidates is to amass a large pile of money). A member
who cheats on a deal with a legislation purchaser reveals himself to be a poor candidate for future deals and future campaign
contributions. The need to return to the market for campaign
funds disciplines members of Congress from using their influence on agents to cheat on the original deal that was cut. In
contrast, legislation buyers can exercise little indirect or direct
control over judges, since Congress and the President both lack
control over Article III judges.
We should make one other point about this structure.
Agency decisions are typically subject to appeals to independent federal judges. That would seem to make the judges the
ultimate authority but that depends importantly on what judges
do with agency actions. Under the Supreme Court’s Chevron
doctrine (Chevron, Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council,

10

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

467 U.S. 837 (1984)), judges give agencies wide-latitude in
interpreting federal statutes. Not unlimited latitude, but Chevron is a policy of substantial deference to agencies. Chevron
deference creates an agent largely outside of judicial control,
and therefore subject to meaningful congressional control. That
in turn means that Congress and the President can more credibly commit to those seeking legislation by delegating to independent agencies than it can to Article III courts. Chevron preserves broad independence for agencies as against the courts—
thereby making them into actors that elected officials can control—while appeals to courts operate as a hedge against agents
who have deviated too far from what their principals wanted.
B. Agent Choice in Antitrust and Regulated Industries
On July 2, 1890, Congress passed the Sherman Act and in so
doing created a baseline for the control of competition in the
United States. To the modern eye, the Sherman Act is notable
for its simultaneous brevity and comprehensiveness. The entire
statute is set forth in eight sections and barely covers more than
one page in the Statutes at Large. Section 1 condemned every
contract in restraint of trade and Section 2 made a criminal of
every person who monopolized. Consider two questions:
(1) Why was the Sherman Act implemented in the federal
courts, and not through a federal agency?; and (2) Given the
breadth of the Sherman Act, what else would we need to regulate competition? Why doesn’t the Sherman Act suffice, or,
given our description of the legislative process above, when
and how should we expect to add new laws regulating competition?
1. WHO INITIALLY GETS THE SHERMAN ACT?

On the first question, a little history may help. At the time that
the Sherman Act was passed, the Interstate Commerce Commission was still a baby, a bold experiment in a highlyspecialized but central industry. It would have been a sizeable

Carlton & Picker

Antitrust and Regulation

11

leap of faith to apply the same mechanism to the entire economy. The natural, conservative move was to use the federal
courts. Moreover, to fast forward twenty-five years to 1914, we
did make that jump when we created the Federal Trade Commission (more on that at the end of Section III).
The agency choice literature (Fiorina (1982), Stephenson
(2005)) compares the relative stability of decision-making in
agencies and courts. Commissions typically are small and are
controlled by the party of the President; the President also
chooses the chair of the commission (this was roughly how the
ICC worked and is how the FCC and FTC work today). Turnover of the presidency means turnover of the Commission.
Commissions therefore may exhibit high-variance across periods of time—a Democratic FTC looks different from a Republican FTC—but greater coherence among related decisions
made within a particular window. In contrast, the federal courts
are quite stable over time, but are subject to very little control
at any point in time. But the sheer number of judges means that
two contemporaneous decisions may reach quite different outcomes.
This helps to explain why in 1887 an agency was a relatively more attractive choice for railroads than it was for the
general economy. The railroads were the first great network
industry (we could fight about canals). The nature of a network
is that regulatory decisions in one part of the network can have
large effects in other parts of the network. If one regulator sets
a track gauge of 5 feet, while another sets it at 4 feet, 6 inches,
the network will operate inefficiently. This was precisely the
issue in the fierce fight over constitutional protection in ratesetting for railroads. State regulators were setting low rates for
intrastate shipments, hoping to keep the railroads solvent on
the back of interstate rates. The Supreme Court understood that
fully when it decided Smyth v. Ames in 1898 (169 U.S. 466

12

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

(1898)) and imposed limits on state rate-making for railroads
that could be deemed confiscatory.
But outside of railroads, in the rest of the economy around
the beginning of the 20th century, regional inconsistencies in
industry practices were less important. If the Second Circuit
reached one antitrust outcome, and the Seventh Circuit another,
the greater the extent to which economic activity was local or
regional, the less that these regulatory differences mattered.
Local (uncoordinated) antitrust enforcement, whether federally
at the circuit level or by states, was less costly to the economy
when the economy was a local economy—the 1900s and the
early 20th Century—than it is today.
When many parts in the economic system need to move at
the same time—when we are speaking of co-evolution, as it
were, rather than just evolution—it may be very hard for lower
federal courts to coordinate decision-making, and Supreme
Court decisions are rare and slow to come. The inefficiency in
a network industry of having uncoordinated decision-making
could be very high. Plus courts are passive when it comes to
agenda-setting: they can only decide the cases that come before
them. In contrast, agencies expressly control their own agendas, subject to the original statute to be sure, but tied down often by nothing more than a public interest standard. The ability
to set agendas means that agencies can push forward on all
parts of the economic system at the same time. Agencies can
do punctuated equilibria: leaps from one spot to another, while
courts are normally limited to smaller moves within established
frameworks. Our logic predicts that as policy concerns with
competition arise in particular industries, all else being equal,
network industries are more likely than non-network industries
to see their competition regulated by agencies, rather than the
courts.

Carlton & Picker

Antitrust and Regulation

13

2. WHEN IS THE SHERMAN ACT NOT THE BEST TOOL FOR COMPETITION
POLICY IN PARTICULAR INDUSTRIES?

Once the ICC and Sherman Act were established, how should
we expect the evolution of competition policy in particular industries to proceed? Every attempt to control competition after
1890—whether within antitrust proper or outside of antitrust in
the form of area-specific regulation—has to be understood in
the context of the Sherman Act. Given its breadth, we might
ask why weren’t the antitrust laws sufficient to regulate all industries? The prevailing—but, to be sure, not universallyheld—view of antitrust law in the U.S. is that it is designed to
promote efficiency by protecting the competitive process to
benefit society. Why shouldn’t that be enough?
As noted in the introduction, antitrust and regulation have
different comparative advantages. To grossly simplify, while
both antitrust and regulation are a mix of economics and politics, antitrust is now organized around an economic core, while
regulation is frequently shaped by the political process. To
draw that out, while the decision by the Antitrust Division in
the Department of Justice or by the Federal Trade Commission
to bring a case may be influenced by politics, once a case is
brought, the ultimate decision regarding the case is made by a
federal judge.
Federal courts are a poor forum for reflecting democratic
values. Federal judges are supposed to enforce the law, not
make political judgments. Judges implementing the Sherman
Act are poorly situated to make assessments about the “right”
price or quality for anything, be it a cup of coffee or a kilowatt
of electricity. Pricing in electricity, for example, will depend
on our willingness to endure blackouts, and if we think that at
least parts of the electricity system are a natural monopoly—
the transmission grid itself—the government will almost certainly be involved in price setting. Judges have little if any
ability to determine the public’s tolerance for blackouts and we

14

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

should want that to be determined as part of a political process.
That means industry-specific regulation and accountable regulators, and not general rules for competition implemented by
judges separated from democratic forces.
But we should entrust to the political process only that
which needs to be there. If we don’t have judges as independent decision-makers, we have regulators beholden either to the
industries that they regulate or to other special interests. Competition is diverted from the marketplace to the regulator’s office, and the tools for success—ranging from subtle influence
to out-and-out bribery—may be very different. Instead, we
should regulate only when we must—natural monopoly being
the core case—and leave general antitrust doctrine and the
court system to handle the rest. The case of natural monopoly
initially was often dealt with by explicit price regulation,
though the optimal form of regulation has evolved over time
(e.g., price caps) in recognition of the need to create incentives
for regulated firms to act efficiently.
C. Antitrust Immunities
An unregulated industry subject only to the antitrust laws
might seek an exemption from those laws for one of two reasons. The industry might want to avoid inefficiencies that the
antitrust laws create. Alternatively, the industry might want to
avoid the constraints of the antitrust laws and want to engage
in anticompetitive behavior such as cartelization. Policing that
line—separating good antitrust immunities from the bad—can
be tricky.
In some circumstances, collective action might be required
to achieve efficiency, but Section 1 flatly forbids any contract
in restraint of trade. Many R&D and information gathering activities, as well as sports leagues organized as joint ventures,
create a high risk of antitrust liability, as the history of antitrust

Carlton & Picker

Antitrust and Regulation

15

cases demonstrates.1 Farmer cooperatives are another example
in which small firms may be able to achieve some economies
by collective action but still remain independent firms that
compete against each other. Often, these collaborative activities created no market power and only efficiencies but these
could have faced Sherman Act actions, especially in the early
days of antitrust. Indeed Bittlingmayer (1985) has argued that
the Sherman Act created antitrust liability for cooperative activities among horizontal competitors and thereby encouraged
the massive merger wave around 1900.
We may be able to solve this problem within antitrust
proper through careful development of doctrine, but beneficial
activity that is close to the antitrust line risks treble damages.
Plus firms face individual liability if they end up on the wrong
side of the line, while an improvement in antitrust doctrine
benefits the industry as a whole. This mismatch between private costs and industry benefits means that for a particular industry, exemption from antitrust might be easier to implement
than internal reform of antitrust doctrine through the courts.
Antitrust immunities also serve a channeling function for
activities to influence competition policy. Absent the immunity, activity that influences competition policy takes place in
the courts, before the Federal Trade Commission, and in Congress through the pursuit of new legislation. Immunity channels this competition, mainly to Congress. We can think of antitrust immunity as a commitment about how the policy game
will be played, a commitment about where the next move will
be made. It means that courts and agencies don’t get to move,
and that instead the next move will be made by the legislature,
though, of course, that could be a future legislature, rather than
the current legislature.
1 See e.g. Maple Flooring Manufacturers Association v. United States, 268 U.S. 563

(1925); and Carlton, Frankel, and Landes (2004).

16

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

But there, of course, is a more pernicious reason that we
should expect exemptions to our competition law: interest
groups pursue benefits from legislatures and many of those
benefits take the form of legislation. Firms may want to cartelize an industry to reap profits. The Sherman Act would block
that, hence an exemption from antitrust might be required. But
exemption may not be enough for the serious cartelizer: a cartel cannot succeed in raising price unless entry can be restricted. With free entry it does little good to obtain an antitrust
exemption.
We therefore expect that where an interest group is powerful but cannot control entry it will combine an antitrust exemption with legislation that restricts entry (or just have the entry
restriction built into the legislation through a tariff or licensing
restriction). Failing that, the industry may prefer regulation to
competition, with the regulator controlling entry and perhaps
price. But as we know from the theory of political regulation,
there are many interest groups that will have a voice in the
regulatory process. Different groups of consumers and firms
will have their own interests and compromises amongst them
will be up to the regulator. It is unusual for a regulator to favor
one group to the exclusion of all others, as Peltzman (1976)
especially has shown (see also Stigler (1971), Posner (1974),
and Becker (1983)). Therefore, a very powerful interest group
would obtain exemption with legislative entry restrictions,
rather than regulation.
There are many important parts of the economy which have
received exemptions from the antitrust laws. The major areas
are:
• Agriculture and Fishing. The exemption allows cooperatives to form and even have joint marketing.
Section 6 of the Clayton Act (15 U.S.C. § 17) protected certain labor, agricultural and horticultural
organizations and the 1922 Capper-Volstead Act (7

Carlton & Picker

•

•

Antitrust and Regulation

17

U.S.C. §§ 291-292) addressed joint marketing associations. Section 1 of the Sherman Act is odd in that
it does not allow two firms, each with no market
power, to set price, even though together they have
no ability to raise price. The per se treatment of
such price fixing is presumably justified by the belief that such price setting can have no procompetitive purpose. One consequence of such a rule, especially when the interpretation of antitrust was unclear, was to promote mergers (Bittlingmayer
(1985)). Another is for the industry to receive an
antitrust exemption.
R&D Joint Ventures. Similar to the case of agricultural cooperatives, the cooperation of rivals to
achieve efficiencies in R&D can raise antitrust issues. Under the National Cooperative Research Act
of 1984 (15 U.S.C. §§ 4301-4306) certain of those
activities are exempt from challenge as per se illegal and antitrust’s treble damage rule is called off.
Sports Leagues. Sport leagues consist of competing
teams that must cooperate in order to have a viable
league. There have been numerous antitrust cases in
sports because of the peculiar combination of competition and cooperation needed for a successful
league. Today sports leagues often start as a separate single firm so as to avoid antitrust challenge.
When Curt Flood sued baseball commissioner
Bowie Kuhn to try to end baseball’s reserve clause,
the Supreme Court confirmed that the antitrust laws
did not apply to baseball (though they apply to
other sports) (Flood v. Kuhn, 407 U.S. 258 (1972)).
The Sports Broadcasting Act of 1961 (15 U.S.C.
§ 1291) allows leagues to act as one entity in negotiations with the media without antitrust liability.

18

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

•

•

•

•

Ocean Shipping. International cartels set rates for
certain ocean shipping routes. Entry is not typically
controlled, though on some routes entry is unlikely.
The industry’s antitrust exemption (46 U.S.C.
§ 1706) is sometimes defended (Pirrong (1992)) on
the grounds that the core does not exist and that,
without the cartel, chaos would reign with frequent
bankruptcies and unreliable service.
Webb-Pomerene. Added in 1918, this act allows
cartels to set the price for exports, presumably on
the logic that the antitrust laws do not protect foreign consumers (15 U.S.C. § 61).
Colleges. In response to an antitrust suit alleging
that the top colleges agreed on a financial aid formula to use to give out scholarship aid, Congress
passed the Higher Education Amendments of 1992
(Pub.L. 102-235) to allow colleges to agree on a
common formula for financial aid free of possible
antitrust liability without allowing colleges to discuss aid for any particular applicant.
Professional Societies. Many societies such as those
involving doctors and lawyers have the ability to influence entry into their profession. Although Professional Engineers (435 U.S. 679 (1978)) has limited the scope of the exemption, it is still the case
for example that medical societies control the number of doctors by specialty and limit the number of
medical schools that can receive accreditation. The
professional societies are given this exemption because they are also regulating the quality of the profession. In a recent antitrust attack on parts of the
medical profession, a group of residents brought an
antitrust suit aimed at the medical schools, teaching
hospitals and professional societies for the medical

Carlton & Picker

•

Antitrust and Regulation

19

residency system. In that system, doctors seeking
advanced training are assigned one hospital to work
at. There is limited competition for the resident.
Legislation (Section 207 of the Pension Funding
Equity Act of 2004 (Pub. L. 108-218)) was passed
to declare that no antitrust liability results from the
administration of the medical residency system, but
the original litigation continues.
Labor. Unfavorable court decisions led eventually
to the labor exemption. In 1908, the Supreme Court
found a union liable under the antitrust laws for organizing a boycott of a particular firm’s product
(Lowe v. Lawlor, 208 U.S. 274 (1908)). This decision caused labor to pressure Congress to declare in
1914 in the Clayton Act that labor organizations
were exempt from the antitrust laws. A subsequent
decision (Duplex Printing Company v. Deering, 254
U.S. 433 (1920)) found that the unions could still be
liable if they assisted other unions at another firm.
This led to pressure to pass the Norris-La Guardia
Act in 1932 which removed virtually all jurisdiction
over labor from the federal courts (Benson et al.
(1987)).2

2 This pattern of legislation and antitrust interacting, and specifically an antitrust
case being a stimulus for either immunity or regulation applies also to other industries that we do not discuss herein. For example, the Southeastern Underwriters case
(322 U.S. 533 (1944)) found that insurance companies had antitrust liability for rate
agreements even in states that regulated rates. This discussion led to the passage of
the McCarron-Ferguson Act, granting antitrust immunity where states regulated
insurance. Similarly, Otter Tail (410 U.S. 366 (1973)) found antitrust liability for an
electric utility company for failure to interconnect with another utility even though
the Federal Power Commission (FPC) could order such interconnection. The Court
ruled that the FPC’s powers were too limited. This decision led to legislation giving
the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (the renamed FPC) greater powers to
force interconnection.

20

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

As a mechanism to establish an efficient competition policy,
the use of immunities may be socially desirable in those instances where some collective action is needed for efficiency.
Although some immunities may be described that way, others
confer market power on the exempted industries to the detriment of society.
II. Control over Rates: The Rise of Antitrust and the Regulation of Railroads
We return to the early period of antitrust and regulation because it illustrates the interaction between explicit regulation
and the Sherman Act. The Sherman Act was passed three years
after the Commerce Act. The interaction between the two and
the results of that interaction not only illustrate the economic
forces at work that we have discussed, but also have shaped the
subsequent development of competition policy for the century.
The history highlights the early view of regulation and antitrust
as substitutes for each other with a recognition that the two
might interact through unforeseen ways.
The Interstate Commerce Act was adopted on February 4,
1887. The new law addressed the operation of interstate railroads and limited rates to those that were “reasonable and
just.” The statute barred more general “unjust discrimination”
and “undue or unreasonable preferences,” and made unlawful
long-haul/short-haul discrimination. The act also addressed
directly competition among railroads by barring contracts
among competing railroads for the pooling of freight traffic.
Pools dividing freight and profit had been common before
the passage of the Commerce Act and indeed had been created
openly in an effort to control competition among railroads
(Grodinsky (1950)). The structure of the railroad business prior
to the Commerce Act created incentives to raise and stabilize

Carlton & Picker

Antitrust and Regulation

21

rates through cartels and pools (Hilton (1966)). The number of
railroads competing on a particular route was usually small and
fixed costs were high. The former meant that the costs of
agreeing and monitoring that agreement were relatively low.
The irreversibility of the investments in the track meant that
competitors were locked into place and couldn’t exit if the
level of demand wouldn’t support multiple competitors. Absent
cartels, the incentive to have rate wars was great.
We can think of the initial regulation of railroads as a
search for an institutional structure that protected shippers from
monopoly power and discrimination while making it possible
for railroad investors to earn competitive rates of return. The
Interstate Commerce Act limited competition among railroads,
while also protecting local shippers against perceived discrimination in rates. (Whether this was a net plus or minus for the
railroads is an issue we do not address here—for a discussion
of this issue see Gilligan, Marshall & Weingast (1989)). The
Sherman Act was passed three years after the Commerce Act,
without a clear indication of how the two Acts should interact.
We now turn to that interaction and its consequences.
A. The Interaction of the Sherman Act with the Interstate Commerce Act—The Problem of Trans-Missouri
The Sherman Act said nothing specific about railroads. Did the
Sherman Act cover railroads, too, or should we think that the
more specific, if somewhat earlier, provisions of the Interstate
Commerce Act controlled? These questions were posed to the
courts in January, 1892, when the United States brought an action to dissolve the Trans-Missouri Freight Association. The
Trans-Missouri Association had been formed in March of 1889
as a joint rate-setting organization. While Section 5 of the Interstate Commerce Act barred contracts regarding pooling of
freight or division of profits, it said nothing about rate-setting
organizations. Indeed, the Trans-Missouri group filed its

22

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

agreement with the ICC as required by Section 6 of the Commerce Act.
The Supreme Court decided Trans-Missouri on March 22,
1897. In a 5-4 decision, the Court rejected both the idea that
railroads were somehow exempt from the Sherman Act given
the more direct regulatory structure set forth in the Commerce
Act and that the Sherman Act condemned only unreasonable
restraints of trade. Understanding the language of the Sherman
Act to have meant what it “plainly imports”—condemning all
restraints of trade—the Court condemned the private ratesetting of the railroad association and squarely inserted the
Sherman Act into the everyday economic life of the country.
Where did that leave rate-setting for railroads? Two months
later, on May 24, 1897, the Court announced its opinion in
Cincinnati, New Orleans and Texas Pacific Railway (167 U.S.
479 (1897)). That case considered whether the ICC had the
power to set rates. Yes, the Commerce Act required rates to be
“reasonable and just” and declared unreasonable and unjust
rates unlawful. Yes, the Interstate Commerce Commission was
to enforce the act, but the statute only expressly authorized the
commission to issue a cease-and-desist order. The Supreme
Court held that the ICC could do no more than that and that the
ICC lacked the affirmative power to set rates. The power to set
rates, said the Court, was “a legislative, and not an administrative or judicial, function” and given the stakes, that meant that
“Congress has transferred such a power to any administrative
body is not to be presumed or implied from any doubtful and
uncertain language.”
So Trans-Missouri turned private collective railroad ratesetting into an antitrust violation, and under the Cincinnati ruling, the ICC could do no more than reject rates. Where would
rate-setting authority lie? The Sherman Act was to be enforced
in the courts, and through its decisions, the Supreme Court had
severely constrained the ICC (Rabin (1986)). At one level, the

Carlton & Picker

Antitrust and Regulation

23

Trans-Missouri decision dominated railroad and antitrust policy for the next decade; at another level, the decision was
largely irrelevant. As to the latter, the Interstate Commerce
Commission stated in its 1901 Annual Report:
It is not the businesses of this Commission to enforce the anti-trust act, and we express no opinion
as to the legality of the means adopted by these associations. We simply call attention to the fact that
the decision of the United States Supreme Court in
the Trans-Missouri case and the Joint Traffic Association case has produced no practical effect upon
the railway operations of the country. Such associations, in fact, exist now as they did before those decisions, and with the same general effect. In justice
to all parties we ought probably to add that it is difficult to see how our interstate railways could be
operated, with due regard to the interests of the
shipper and the railway, without concerted action of
the kind afforded to these associations.
But in another way, the Trans-Missouri decision framed the
country’s consideration of the trust question and the related
question of how to grapple with large agglomerations of capital, as Sklar (1988) demonstrates in his history of the period.
This decision seemingly satisfied no one.
B. Solving Trans-Missouri
If the ICC was right—if the economic structure of railroads
required coordinated rate-setting, either privately or through
the government—the path forward was through revised legislation. Theodore Roosevelt had become president when
McKinley was assassinated in September 1901. In February
1903, Roosevelt moved forward on two fronts. The Elkins Act
of 1903 gave the Interstate Commerce Commission the independent authority to seek relief in federal courts in situations in

24

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

which railroads were charging less than published rates or were
engaging in forbidden discrimination. Under the original
Commerce Act, the ICC could act only on the petition of an
injured party. The Elkins Act increased the ICC’s power, but it
still didn’t have an independent rate-setting power. Three years
later, the Hepburn Act of 1906 took a first step in that direction. It added oil pipelines to the substantive scope of the act,
and gave the ICC the power to set maximum rates, once it had
found a prior rate unjust and unreasonable.
But Roosevelt, unwilling to rely solely on the Sherman Act
to control general competition policy, was also looking for a
way to exert more regulatory pressure on the rest of the economy. On February 14, 1903, Congress created a new executive
department to be known as the Department of Commerce and
Labor. Within the new department, the statute created the Bureau of Corporations. The bureau was designed to be an investigatory body with power to subpoena whose mission was to
investigate any corporation engaged in interstate commerce to
produce information and recommendations for legislation. But
all of this information was to flow through the President who in
turn had the power to release industries from scrutiny. Railroads were expressly excluded. The design of the Bureau of
Corporations matched Roosevelt’s conception of the presidency as the bully pulpit. The bureau would give Roosevelt the
information that he needed to go to the public or to Congress,
plus the fact that the release of the information was within
Roosevelt’s power gave Roosevelt leverage in negotiations
with corporations.
After winning the presidency in 1906, Roosevelt continued
to pursue his progressive agenda. Roosevelt called for an expansion of federal control over railroads—greater control over
entry and issuance of securities, while allowing private railroad
agreements on rates subject to approval by the Interstate Commerce Commission. At the same time, Roosevelt wanted a

Carlton & Picker

Antitrust and Regulation

25

broad expansion in federal powers over large corporations engaged in interstate activities. He called for a federal incorporation law, or a federal licensing act, or some combination of the
two. But by 1909, the Hepburn Bill, Roosevelt’s vehicle for
these changes, was dead in committee, and with it died Roosevelt’s attempt for greater direct federal regulation of competition policy.
William Howard Taft succeeded Roosevelt as President in
1909. Taft supported the Mann-Elkins Act of 1910, which created a new, limited-subject matter jurisdiction court, the United
States Court of Commerce. It was staffed with five judges from
the federal judiciary. The new Commerce Court was given exclusive jurisdiction of all appeals from ICC orders and appeals
from the Commerce Court went to the Supreme Court.
Consider the Commerce Court in light of our prior general
analysis of the choice between agencies and courts. Our discussion above suggested that federal courts of general
jurisdiction would be poorly situated to deal with network
industries. As Frankfurter and Landis (1928, p. 154)
recognized, federal courts of general jurisdiction resulted in
“conflicts in court decisions begetting territorial diversity
where unified treatment of a problem is demanded,
nullification by a single judge, even temporarily, of legislative
or administrative action affecting whole sections of the country.” A federal court of specialized jurisdiction would make
possible many of the benefits of agencies—in particular, the
ability to make coherent, contemporaneous decisions—while
creating more independence than an agency would have.
The new Commerce Court took over a large number of
cases then spread throughout the federal judiciary. The court
was instantly busy and, almost as quickly, reviled by the public
(Ripley, 1910). The Commerce Court became the flashpoint for
the “railroad problem”; as Frankfurter and Landis (1928,
p.164) put it, “(p)robably no court has ever been called upon to

26

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

adjudicate so large a volume of litigation of as far-reaching
import in so brief a time.”
The Commerce Court failed. The public saw the ICC as
protecting shoppers from the power of the railroads, while the
Commerce Court frequently overturned ICC decisions to the
detriment of shippers. As Kolko (1965, p. 199) puts it in describing a series of Commerce Court decisions that were seen
to benefit the railroads, “… the Commerce Court proceeded to
make itself the most unpopular judicial institution in a nation
then in the process of attacking the sanctity of the courts.”
When Woodrow Wilson became President, he quickly signed
legislation ending the Commerce Court, which came to final
death on December 31, 1913. Its demise illustrates the power
of shippers to protect themselves in ways that antitrust could
not.
Wilson’s presidency brings the process of structural reform
to a close. The Supreme Court’s 1911 decision in Standard Oil
had already muted some of the pressure for antitrust reform.
That decision abandoned the literalism of Trans-Missouri and
introduced (restored?) the common law distinction between
reasonable and unreasonable restraints of trade. (And, by the
way, also broke up Standard Oil.) Early in his first term, on
January 20, 1914, Wilson delivered a special message to Congress on antitrust. Wilson had two principal aims. First he
wanted to make explicit the nature of antitrust violations:
Surely we are sufficiently familiar with the actual
processes and methods of monopoly and of the
many hurtful restraints of trade to make definition
possible—at any rate up to the limits of what practice has disclosed. These practices, being now abundantly disclosed, can be explicitly and item by item
forbidden by statute in such terms as will practically
eliminate uncertainty, the law itself and the penalty
being made equally plain.

Carlton & Picker

Antitrust and Regulation

27

Wilson then turned to the idea of an interstate trade commission:
And the businessman of the country desire something more than that the menace of legal process in
these matters be made explicit and intelligible. They
desire the advice, the definite guidance and information which can be supplied by administrative
body, an interstate trade commission.
Later that year, Wilson got exactly what he wanted with the
enactment of the Federal Trade Commission Act (FTCA) and
the Clayton Act. Adopted on September 26, 1914, the FTCA
brought to a close Roosevelt’s efforts to extend the Interstate
Commerce Act to the general economy. The Bureau of Corporations, designed by Roosevelt as the President’s private investigatory arm, was to become the back-office of the new Federal
Trade Commission. The Commission itself was to parallel the
Interstate Commerce Commission: an independent agency of
five commissioners appointed by the President on the advice
and consent of the Senate.
Section 5 of the FTCA declared unlawful “unfair methods
of competition” and empowered the FTC to prevent the use of
such methods other than by banks, subject to the new banking
act, and common carriers subject to the Commerce Act. In so
doing, Section 5 tracked the Commerce Act in two ways: the
FTCA focused on unfairness—typically measured by comparing the treatment of two similarly situated market participants—while denying broader rate-setting power to the FTC.
And the Clayton Act forbade specific practices, including tying
and price discrimination. So Wilson got the specificity he
wanted through the Clayton Act, and a general regulatory
agency devoted to all industry through his new Federal Trade
Commission. Industry would have a regulatory agency that it
could turn to and perhaps even influence. The FTC, unlike industry-specific regulatory bodies, deals with industry in gen-

28

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

eral. Perhaps this explains why, at least today, we are unaware
of claims that the FTC has been captured by any industry or
special interest group. Its structure raises the issue as to
whether a combination of antitrust and industry-specific regulation in one agency, as occurs today in Australia or Europe for
certain functions, is desirable—an issue we leave for future
research.
***
With the 1914 legislation, the key institutional features that
still dominate U.S. antitrust law were established: the Sherman
Act, the Clayton Act, and the FTC Act. The balance between
antitrust and regulation still had to be worked out. The resolution of the issue of Trans-Missouri still would take some time.
The Transportation Act of 1920—finally—gave the Interstate
Commerce Commission full control over rates, requiring the
Commission to ensure that rates permitted carriers to receive “a
fair return upon the aggregate value of the railway property of
such carriers held for and used in the service of transportation.”
As to the fight over whether antitrust or regulation ultimately
controlled rate setting for railroads, in 1948, more than a halfcentury after the Supreme Court’s original decision in TransMissouri, Congress finally put the decision to rest by exempting joint setting of railroad rates from the antitrust laws, so
long as the ICC approved the rates.3
III. Interconnection in Network Industries
We now jump from the formative years of the creation of competition policy to more recent times. Just as the initial battles
between regulation and the Sherman Act illustrate the battle
between antitrust and regulation as two methods to control
competition, so too do more recent events—particularly the
3 Pub. L. 80-662, 62 Stat. 472 (June 17, 1948).

Carlton & Picker

Antitrust and Regulation

29

recent shift away from regulation to reliance on the Sherman
Act. We focus our attention on network industries, since those
are the ones where the case for regulation was often thought to
be the strongest. If rate-setting was the first great issue of competition policy for network industries, the leading issue today is
interconnection and mandatory access.4
This recent history highlights a move away from regulation
towards antitrust as a means to control competition and reveals
how regulation and antitrust can be both substitutes and, in
some settings, complements. The substitution involves the
complete replacement of regulation with antitrust, as occurs
when industries become deregulated (e.g., airlines and trucks).
The complementarity between regulation and antitrust can arise
in two ways. In an industry that becomes partially deregulated,
antitrust can be used to control the unregulated segments, while
regulation controls the rest. Indeed, partial deregulation of an
industry can increase the importance to a rival’s survival of
rules of interconnection.
In structuring an efficient partial deregulation of an industry, the assignment of tasks to antitrust versus regulation is key.
We shouldn’t ask antitrust and federal judges to perform tasks
for which they are ill-suited—namely price setting and crafting
affirmative duties because those tasks require specialized industry knowledge that judges lack. If we need government involvement in those tasks, they should be assigned to regulators
with specialized industry knowledge, though in making that
judgment we need to recognize the inefficiencies that can arise
as regulators cater to special interests or make mistakes. That is
an especially strong problem in industries undergoing rapid
technological change, where mistakes can impose huge costs.
4 The issue of interconnection is much more general than the text indicates because
it applies to any industry (not just network industries) in which one firm relies on a
rival for an input or in which a rival can influence the conditions of the input supply
of another firm. The Microsoft case provides a good illustration.

30

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

But it may be a mistake to just trump antitrust entirely, as we
should fear capture of regulators, and that leads to a second
type of complementarity.
The second form of complementarity between antitrust and
regulation involves the use of antitrust as a constraint on how
regulation is implemented. This is often implemented through a
double filter or double-veto process, as we see in telecommunications mergers. The FCC evaluates telecom mergers under a
public interest standard and that empowers the FCC to consider
a wider range of issues than we typically entrust to federal
judges. This would include, for example, whether and how to
implement cross-subsidies. But given the fear of regulatory
capture, we apply a second, antitrust filter to these mergers by
allowing the Department of Justice to sue under the antitrust
laws to block an anticompetitive merger that the FCC has approved. Exactly how much scrutiny should be applied to regulatory decisions turns on a trade-off between allowing expertise
to work—FCC expertise and knowledge—versus fearing biased decision-making from an agency subject to capture. Even
if no antitrust suit occurs, the threat of such a suit can influence
FCC policy.
In this section, we address the fundamental question that
has occupied and continues to occupy regulatory and antitrust
decisions in network industries: how should those markets be
structured and specifically how should firms interact in those
industries? We focus our analysis on telecommunications and
transportation (planes, trains and trucks), though we note that
interconnection issues are important in other industries such as
electricity, where generators must have access to the transmission grid.
As already explained, a regulation may allow elevated pricing in return for some other objective that the regulator is
likely to have to satisfy, such as a cross subsidy to different
customer groups. But in order to achieve its objectives, the

Carlton & Picker

Antitrust and Regulation

31

regulator may need to also control entry. Otherwise there may
be no way to maintain the elevated price. This means that the
regulator wants to limit competition and for that reason will be
hostile to being constrained by the antitrust laws.
The regulators’ concern with entry is especially acute in
network industries in which firms must interconnect with each
other, such as airlines, trucking, electricity, railroads, and telecommunications. In such industries, the regulator needs to administer the price and quality of the interconnection. If two
firms compete in the end market and one competitor supplies
the other a key input, the regulator must worry that the supplier
will misuse its control over the input to harm his rival. This
concern vanishes if the regulated firms are not allowed to vertically integrate. In the absence of regulation, competition
would likely lead to massive vertical and horizontal merger and
a concentrated market structure. In contrast, regulation should
lead to many vertically disintegrated firms. (See Carlton and
Klamer (1983)).
Moreover when regulated firms must interconnect, the
price of interconnection will typically be regulated to be above
marginal cost. If so, there will be an efficiency motivation for a
firm to vertically integrate to avoid double marginalization.
But such mergers would eliminate firms and ultimately lead to
one firm. Regulators might prefer to avoid this outcome to prevent one firm from becoming a potent political force in regulatory battles.5 By observing what happens when regulations are
lifted, we can get a sense for why it was important for the regulators to constrain the forces of competition. We look at a few
regulated network industries below. They all show a similar
5 In an industry with high sunk costs but low marginal costs, interconnection fees

based on models of contestability fail to reward carriers adequately for risk, since
contestability ignores sunk costs. In such situations, not only is price above marginal cost, but investment is deterred. This may have been the case in telecommunications. See Pindyck (2005).

32

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

pattern: after either partial or complete deregulation, there is
massive consolidation, increased industry concentration, an
end to cross subsidy, often a decline in employment or wages,
and a fall in price. Deregulation can be seen as the result of a
consensus that regulation imposed high costs on the economy
and that courts are sensibly applying the antitrust laws. Indeed,
there is a recognition that the use of economics has revolutionized and made more sensible the antitrust laws.6 In light of the
costs of regulation and the improvement in antitrust, a movement away from regulation towards antitrust has occurred. In
this view, regulation and antitrust are substitutes. But in some
cases we also see regulation and antitrust being used together
in an industry, illustrating the possible complementarity use of
the two.
A. Telecommunications
1. EARLY INTERCONNECTION BATTLES

The telephone system is about interconnection, as a singlephone phone system is worthless. In the early days of the industry, as Mueller (1997) describes, different local companies
competed with each other. A customer of one company could
reach other customers of only that company; you might need to
have multiple phones to reach everyone. (This is very much
like instant messaging today, where America Online has resisted attempts by Yahoo, Microsoft and others to create a unified IM system.) American Telephone and Telegraph—the Bell
System—was the dominant firm of the day, but local competition was widespread; indeed, during the early 1900s, half of the
6 As Posner (2003) explains in the preface to the second edition of his primer Anti-

trust Law:
Much of antitrust law in 1976 was an intellectual disgrace. Today, antitrust law is a body of economically rational principles largely though not
entirely congruent with the principles set forth in the first edition. The
chief worry at present is not doctrine or direction, but implementation ... .

Carlton & Picker

Antitrust and Regulation

33

cities with populations larger than 5,000 had competing local
firms (Mueller, p. 81). This competition almost certainly had
benefits—on price and service—but came with a loss of network externalities. AT&T set out to build a universal system
and started by purchasing competing telephone companies.
In 1912, that led to an antitrust suit in Portland, Oregon and
to calls by the Postmaster General to nationalize the telephone
and telegraph system—presumably to unify the messaging systems of the day (postal, telegraph and phone) into one set of
hands. Faced with these two threats, AT&T agreed to, in the
words of N.C. Kingsbury, an AT&T vice-president, to “set its
house in order.” In what is now known as the Kingsbury
Commitment, AT&T agreed to divest itself of control over
Western Union; to stop acquisitions of competing lines; and to
give access to Bell’s long distance lines to competing local
phone companies, that is, to interconnect the Bell system’s
long distance lines with the local competitor’s network.7
The Kingsbury Commitment might be framed as a victory
for local phone competition but for two factors. First, few
phone users made long-distance calls, so the local line/longdistance line interconnection may not have been an important
competitive factor. Second, the size of the local network did
matter, and AT&T aggressively moved forward on local interconnection, something outside the scope of the Kingsbury
Commitment.
As is so often the case, antitrust action—here the settlement—sets the stage for the next round of legislation and that
emerged in the form of the Willis-Graham Act of 1921. The
new law entrusted telephone mergers to the Interstate Commerce Commission and authorized approval if doing so would
“be of advantage to the persons to whom service is rendered
7 See “Government Accepts an Offer of Complete Separation,” New York Times,

Dec. 20, 1913, p. 1 (setting forth terms of Kingsbury Commitment).

34

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

and in the public interest.” The Act also displaced the antitrust
laws: once the ICC had said yes, the Department of Justice and
the Federal Trade Commission could do nothing. With the new
act in place, AT&T moved swiftly to create local interconnection through acquisition, with the ICC approving 271 of 274
AT&T acquisitions over a thirteen-year period (Starr, 2004, p.
209).
2. INTERCONNECTION AGAIN: MCI’S ENTRY INTO LONG DISTANCE

We jump ahead to consider the entry of MCI into long distance. We start with a single integrated phone system, with local and long-distance controlled by AT&T. MCI entered in a
very limited way, by building microwave towers to enable private within-firm phone calls between St. Louis and Chicago
(say between Walgreens’s home office in Chicago and a district office in St. Louis). MCI didn’t need access to the public
network to make this work. Even this limited entry required an
initial 1959 order and a subsequent 1969 ruling from the Federal Communications Commission.
Unlike entry into private lines, entry into the public market
for long distance required MCI to interconnect with AT&T, or
in the alternative, simultaneous entry by MCI into local and
long-distance. And if MCI had been forced to build the entire
network, it could not likely have entered the market. The local
network was seen as a natural monopoly. It clearly would have
been inefficient to build a second local network—that just says
again that the local network was a natural monopoly—and it
was also probably the case that it was a money-losing proposition for MCI to build a local network.
Bundling entry—forcing MCI to enter on the scale of having to build a local network if it wanted to enter the longdistance business—would probably have prevented the longdistance entry. Unbundling entry—giving MCI access to the
local network while allowing entry only in long-distance—

Carlton & Picker

Antitrust and Regulation

35

meant that MCI could just compare the much more limited
capital costs of building the second piece with the profits associated with that piece rather than the costs of both pieces with
the profits associated with both pieces.
MCI moved against AT&T on both regulatory and antitrust
fronts. In 1970, the FCC had concluded that some entry was
appropriate, but when push came to shove, the FCC backtracked. In February 1978, the FCC rejected MCI’s request that
AT&T be ordered to provide local physical interconnections
for MCI’s intended public long-distance service. AT&T successfully persuaded the FCC that MCI would target high-profit
routes and that that would destabilize the existing structure of
rates, contrary to the public interest. MCI successfully appealed to the D.C. Circuit, which concluded that the consequences of entry could be dealt with on a case-by-case basis. In
a subsequent proceeding, in 1978, the D.C. Circuit ordered
AT&T to make interconnection for MCI’s long-distance service.
MCI filed a private antitrust suit against AT&T in 1974.
That case eventually went to a jury trial in the first half of
1980. The jury ultimately found AT&T liable on ten of fifteen
charges, and awarded $600 million in actual damages, then
trebled to $1.8 billion under Section 4 of the Clayton Act. On
interconnection, MCI successfully argued that AT&T’s refusal
to interconnect constituted an impermissible refusal of access
to an essential facility. The Seventh Circuit sustained the jury
finding that that refusal constituted monopolization in violation
of Section 2 of the Sherman Act.
We should step back from the details of this fight over entry and interconnection to focus on the interaction between
regulation and antitrust. In general we know that regulation can
lead to cross subsidy. Cross subsidies create entry incentives.
General antitrust law will often facilitate entry but will do so
with little regard for the cross-subsidy issues. MCI’s entry into

36

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

long distance probably fits in this framework. The D.C. Circuit
expressly considered the cross-subsidy issues as part of its review of the FCC’s regulatory proceedings, but concluded that
those issues could be dealt with in subsequent proceedings. In
contrast, the Seventh Circuit, faced with antitrust claims (and
not regulatory claims) couldn’t consider what its interconnection ruling might mean for the existing set of cross-subsidized
rates. This is an excellent illustration of the use of antitrust in a
regulated industry to control competition, where antitrust constrains what regulation can do.
Whether we should have welcomed MCI’s entry is a separate question. To assess that, we need to assess what goals the
regulators were pursuing and if those goals were sensible.
MCI’s entry precipitated a decline in long distance rates. If
prior to that decline, the regulators were pursuing the “public
interest,” then MCI’s entry constrained the regulators from
pursuing their desired policy. If we start with a regulated monopolist offering services to different customers, the regulator
will need to set prices for each group of customers. The standard response in theory is Ramsey pricing. The regulator sets a
series of prices—prices for long distance and for local service,
for business customers and consumers, for urban and rural users—to minimize social loss while hitting a revenue target. The
Ramsey approach is about allocating the fixed costs of production among the different groups using the service. The simple
theory says that inelastic demanders should pay a larger share
of the fixed costs. Inelastic demanders won’t change their purchases much in the face of higher charges, and it is the reduced
consumption when we push prices above marginal cost that
causes the social loss. So elastic demanders should not bear too
many fixed costs, inelastic demanders should pay a big chunk
of those costs.
Now assume that we have put Ramsey prices into place.
Those prices can create arbitrage opportunities: indeed, the

Carlton & Picker

Antitrust and Regulation

37

whole vision behind Ramsey pricing is that inelastic demanders bear the brunt of fixed costs, while elastic demanders bear
few of those costs. Ramsey pricing is precisely about price discrimination. If the regulators got the prices “right” in the first
instance, entry that emerges because of regulator-created price
gaps that get eliminated by the entry, is entry we do not want if
we accept the regulators’ goals. This concern with “cream
skimming” was prevalent in contemplating long-distance entry.
The regulators may not have implemented Ramsey prices
in the first instance, but they clearly had created an elaborate
pattern of cross-subsidies, and that pattern would become more
difficult to sustain after entry. How should we evaluate entry,
whether facilities-based competition or otherwise, where the
entry opportunity is created by cross-subsidy driven pricing?
To some extent, this requires a political account—a public
choice account—about the nature of subsidies. If we thought
that the subsidies were appropriate, then we should bar entry
occurring just because of the opportunity created by the cross
subsidy. So if the incumbent charges a higher price in urban
areas than costs would warrant but does so because of a requirement that the price structure force urban users to subsidize
rural users, entry targeted at urban users should be seen as
problematic. In contrast, if we think of cross-subsidies as inappropriate, entry may be useful in that it may make those subsidies unsustainable.
3. THE 1996 ACT’S INTERCONNECTION RULES AND TRINKO8

With the rise of AT&T’s dominance, despite the passage of the
Communications Act of 1934, antitrust became the main vehicle for altering the structure of AT&T. In 1949, the federal
government brought an antitrust action against AT&T, which,

8 Carlton has served as a consultant for major telecommunications companies in-

cluding Verizon, and consulted on Trinko.

38

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

in turn, resulted in a 1956 consent decree and final judgment.
In 1974, the government brought a new action against AT&T,
and in 1982, a new consent decree emerged as a modification
of the 1956 decree. That decree resulted in the break up of
AT&T: long-distance was separated from local and regional
local companies were established. (Though we will not discuss
it, the break-up of AT&T has received much attention. See
Noll and Owen (1989).)
We want to focus on the next important event, namely the
Telecommunications Act of 1996. The 1996 Act is wideranging but we address only its efforts to produce local competition through interconnection policy and focus on the interaction of antitrust and regulation. The 1996 Act seeks to facilitate
competition in local telephone markets by making it easier for
entrants to compete with incumbents. It does so by creating a
series of mandatory dealing obligations, that is, ways in which
the incumbent is required to share its facilities with an entrant.
This includes an obligation of interconnection; a requirement
to sell telecommunications services to an entrant at wholesale
prices, so that the entrant can resell those services at retail; and
an obligation to unbundle its local network and sell access to
pieces of the network at a cost-based price.
As to the intersection of the 1996 Act and antitrust, the
1996 Act contains a “savings” clause:
Nothing in this Act or the amendments made by this
Act ... shall be construed to modify, impair, or supersede the applicability of any of the antitrust
laws. (47 U.S.C. § 152, Historical and Statutory
Notes.)
In January 2004, the Supreme Court announced its opinion
in Trinko. AT&T wanted to enter Verizon’s local markets in
New York and sought access pursuant to the terms of the thenapplicable rules under the 1996 Act. When the access granted
was seen as inadequate, both state and federal communications

Carlton & Picker

Antitrust and Regulation

39

regulators acted and monetary penalties were imposed against
Verizon. Enter Curtis Trinko, a New York lawyer. He brought
an antitrust class action against Verizon alleging that, as a local
customer of AT&T, he was injured by Verizon’s actions and
that those actions violated Section 2 of the Sherman Act. The
federal district court would have none of that and booted the
complaint, but the Second Circuit reversed.
Justice Scalia, for the Court, noted that the situation
seemed to call for an implicit antitrust immunity. The 1996 Act
created interconnection duties and those duties could be enforced—and were enforced here—through the appropriate
regulators. That would seem to suffice, and there would be
some risk that additional antitrust enforcement would interfere
with the regulatory scheme. So the Court might have held, but
for the savings clause, which precluded such a claim of implicit
immunity.
Instead, the Court turned to the question of whether antitrust law, as distinct from regulation, imposed on Verizon a
duty to deal with entrants. Antitrust rarely imposes mandatory
obligations, other than as a remedy for an independent antitrust
violation. The Aspen Skiing case represents one prominent exception to that statement, and whatever the merits of Aspen
(see Carlton (2001) for criticism), the Court saw little reason to
expand mandatory obligations here. Indeed, just the opposite:
“The 1996 Act’s extensive provision for access makes it unnecessary to impose a judicial doctrine of forced access.” The
Court ruled that the antitrust laws imposed no duty to deal on
Verizon.
The savings clause reflects the idea of antitrust and regulation as complementary mechanisms to control competition. As
suggested in the introduction to this section, Congress might
want to implement complementarity as a way of imposing a
check on the regulatory agents that implement particular industry legislation. The continuing applicability of antitrust law

40

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

notwithstanding, the existence of industry-specific legislation
imposes limits on how far industry regulators can deviate from
the principles at stake in antitrust. The difficulty is in implementing that idea in a particular situation. In Trinko itself, the
Court recognized that antitrust has only weakly embraced affirmative duties, with Aspen Skiing seemingly representing the
outer limits for antitrust itself. Given antitrust’s own deficits in
the area of affirmative dealing, the Court wisely decided that
Trinko would have represented a particularly poor situation to
try to use antitrust to police errant telcom regulators.
B. Airlines
Congress established the Civil Aeronautics Administration,
which later became the Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB), in
1938. The CAB regulated fares and entry. They crosssubsidized low-density short-haul routes with revenues from
low-cost long-haul routes. The CAB rarely allowed mergers
unless bankruptcy was imminent (Morrison and Winston
(2000), p. 9). By the 1970s, the CAB began to allow entry.
Several airlines were in the process of initiating lawsuits
against the CAB for violating its Congressional mandate, when
the Airline Deregulation Act of 1978 was passed. (Interestingly, the largest domestic carrier at the time, United, favored
deregulation.) Airline regulation was phased out and the CAB
was abolished in 1984 (see Carlton and Perloff (2005)).
In response to widespread criticism of regulation, airline
competition was deregulated and controlled only by antitrust.
Deregulation set in motion forces that are still working their
way through the airline system. Fares fell substantially after
deregulation with typical estimates being 20% or more (see
e.g., Morrison and Winston (2000, p. 2)). The menu of fares on
a typical route grew. Cross subsidies were eliminated (the CAB
had eliminated cross subsidies based on distance in the 1970s).
There has been a virtual flood of entry and exit since deregula-

Carlton & Picker

Antitrust and Regulation

41

tion. For example, of the 58 carriers that began operations between 1978 and 1990, only one (America West) is still operating (Morrison and Winston (2000, p. 9)).
Airlines developed hub-and-spoke networks (with Southwest being a notable exception) through merger and internal
expansion and as a result reduced their need to rely on another
airline for interconnection. For example, in 1979 25% of trips
involved connections and of those 39% involved another airline. By 1989, there were more connecting flights as a result of
the hub-and-spoke system, with the effect being that 33% of
trips involved connections and of those less than 5% involved
an interconnection with another airline.
There was considerable merger activity and agreements
among airlines to cooperate on flight schedules and the setting
of through-fares when a passenger travels on two airlines to
reach his final destination. (These agreements are called alliances or code-sharing agreements.) The Department of Justice
challenged several mergers and alliances and its opposition recently ended the attempt of United to merge with US Air, and
also ended the proposed alliances between American and US
Air and between Delta and United.9
As a result of mergers and firm expansion, concentration
has risen nationally. The four-firm concentration ratio has risen
from 56% in 1977 to 71% in 2003 (Wessel (2004)). But concentration at hubs has behaved very differently than concentration at non-hubs. At hub airports, the HHI rose from a median
of under 2200 pre-deregulation to a median of 3700 by 1989,
while at non-hub airports, the HHI fell from 3200 in 1979 to
about 2200 in 1989 (Bamberger and Carlton (2002)).
Despite regulation, airlines proved to be a poor investment.
During regulation, especially the 1970s, service competition
9 Carlton has served as a consultant for the major airlines in mergers and other pro-

ceedings.

42

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

eroded a significant portion of airline earnings. Since deregulation, fierce price competition has led to the bankruptcy of several airlines and indeed several major airlines were recently
either in bankruptcy or are close to it. (“As of 1992 ..., the
money that has been made since the dawn of aviation by all of
this country’s airline companies has been zero. .... . If I’d been
at Kitty Hawk in 1903, I would have been farsighted enough
and public spirited enough—I owed this to future capitalist—to
shoot him down.” Warren Buffet as reported in Wessel
(2004)). Deregulation also led to lower wages for employees
and increased productivity.
The behavior of the airline industry post-deregulation illustrates that a once regulated industry may be prone to antitrust
violations in the aftermath of regulation. This could occur because collective action is needed for efficiency or simply because firms in the industry have gotten used to acting in concert during regulation. We think the airline industry illustrates
well the heightened antitrust liability that can attend a network
industry when it is deregulated.
Prior to deregulation, airlines relied on each other to interconnect passengers. That meant that airlines would have to set
some fares jointly and decide how to split the revenue. So, for
example, if airline 1 flies from A to B, and airline 2 flies from
B to C, the two airlines could coordinate their flight times so
that a traveler could conveniently go from A to C (with a
change of plane at B). The two airlines would collectively set a
fare for A to C travel and share it in some way. Also, airlines,
post-regulation, developed sophisticated pricing methods requiring booking agents to keep track of multiple fares and seat
availability.
This created two problems. First, travel agents needed
complex software to allow them to book tickets. Second, travel
agents had to have up-to-date information on pricing and seat
availability. Thousands of fares existed and many changed

Carlton & Picker

Antitrust and Regulation

43

daily. The pricing of airlines sometimes involved large swings
in price and its pricing is more complicated than pricing in
many other markets. These characteristics created the incentive
for certain acts that could achieve efficiencies but might also
be used to harm competition. Significant antitrust litigation
against the airlines ensued post-deregulation.
The tendency of airlines to cooperate in the setting of
through-fares when traffic is shared can be a natural and desirable way for two airlines to provide a service to consumers that
neither airline, on its own, could provide. It could also be a
ploy by which one airline bribes another to prevent expansion
of competing routes. (If you don’t enter route BC, where I fly, I
will interline with your AB route and let you keep a large fraction of the through-fare from A to C. In that way, you have no
incentive to enter BC and compete with me on that route.) This
last concern has caused the Department of Justice to investigate several proposed domestic airline alliances. And, as already mentioned, these investigations have scuttled proposed
alliances between American and US Airways, and between
Delta and United.
The need to have software to book tickets led to several
cases and investigations into computer reservation systems
(CRS) where the concern was that the CRS system used by a
travel agent favored the airline that produced the CRS system.
So, for example, if a travel agent used the Sabre system originally developed by American Airlines, that system displayed
information about American Airlines flights more prominently
than other airlines. As a result of the government investigation,
detailed rules on “unbiasedness” were agreed to (See GuerinCalvert and Noll (1991)). Today, CRS systems are no longer
privately owned by the airlines.
The need to have updates of the massive number of daily
fare changes led to a Department of Justice investigation of
information sharing amongst the airlines. Most of the airlines

44

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

would provide information each day on all their fares by route.
The information in a “notes section” would contain relevant
fare restrictions (e.g., weekend stays, advance purchase requirements) as well as the date the fare became effective and
expired. This information on fares was transmitted to The Airline Tariff Publishing Company (ATPCO) which then made a
master computer tape and distributed it to all airlines and travel
agents. ATPCO was owned by the airlines.
The Department of Justice alleged that ATPCO was being
used as a mechanism to coordinate pricing. One allegation was
that the notes section was used to communicate price signals.
So for example if airline 1 cut price on an important route of
airline 2, airline 2 would retaliate and cut price on an important
route of airline 1. To make sure airline 1 understood why it had
cut fares, airline 2 could put a note to indicate why it had cut
price in an attempt to convince airline 1 to withdraw its low
fares on airline 2’s routes.
A related allegation was that the first effective and last effective ticket date were used to make it easier to coordinate
pricing. So, for example, if airline 1 wanted to raise fares, it
would announce an increase to take effect in say two weeks. If
other airlines did not match, or only partly matched, airline 1
could rescind or revise its fare increase and not suffer any loss
of business because the fare increase had not yet gone into effect. The airlines denied the government allegations.10 The airlines settled the case by agreeing to eliminate extraneous notes
and by abandoning the use of first ticket dates. Interestingly,
analysis of fares post-settlement show no effect from the settlement (Borenstein (2004)).
The sometimes wild price swings that occur when new entrants start servicing a route has led to both litigation and government investigations. In a city pair that can support only one
10 Carlton worked on behalf of the airlines.

Carlton & Picker

Antitrust and Regulation

45

or a few carriers, competition from a new rival not only can
expand capacity a lot but can induce responses from the incumbents. In response to an aggressive price and output response by an incumbent, allegations of predation are often
made. The precise definition of predation in an industry such as
airlines with large fixed costs on a route but small variable
costs is not well established, especially on a route where only
one carrier can survive (Edlin and Farrell (2004)). But the observation that fares frequently plummet below levels that are
financially viable has led to demands for government intervention.
In U.S. v. AMR et al. (140 F. Supp. 2d 1141 (2001), aff’d,
335 F.3d 1109 (10th Cir. 2003)), the Department of Justice accused American Airlines of practicing price predation. American Airlines competed out of Dallas Fort Worth with several
low cost airlines (Vanguard, Western Pacific, Sun Jet). American lowered its fares, and increased its seat availability in response to these low cost airlines, causing them to abandon their
routes. After the low cost airlines exited, American reduced the
number of flights and raised prices to roughly their initial levels. American responded that its prices exceeded average variable costs, and moved for summary judgment which was
granted.
Just prior to the Department of Justice case, the Department
of Transportation initiated an investigation of predation in the
airline industry. It investigated several incidents in which it
was alleged that incumbents routinely responded to entry of
low cost carriers by lowering fares, expanding output and driving them out of business, at which point fares rose. In a detailed study of entry and exit patterns (submitted to the Department of Transportation on behalf of United), Bamberger
and Carlton (2006) found that entry and exit on routes were
extremely common amongst both low cost carriers and established carriers. Moreover, with the exception of Southwest Air-

46

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

lines, there were very high exit rates amongst both low cost
and regular carriers. The Department of Transportation
dropped its attempt to define predation standards. As an aside,
between 2000 and 2005, the share of passengers served by lowcost airlines has risen from 23% to 26%.
C. Railroads11
As Gilligan, Marshall and Weingast (1989) note, the consequences of the Interstate Commerce Act are complex. One
view is that it was a mechanism to benefit the railroads. But as
with most regulated industries the regulators had other interest
groups to satisfy and did. Cross subsidy to high-cost, lowdensity routes and to short-haul shippers emerged; indeed, that
was one of the central designs of the law, as it banned longhaul/short-haul discrimination. Price discrimination in which
high value-added products had higher rates than bulk also
emerged to placate certain shipper interest groups. In what was
to be important later, regulators controlled not only entry but
also exit from a route. The emergence of the truck (and airplanes) complicated the regulatory calculations.
Control of trucking became necessary to protect railroads
and did occur in the Motor Carrier Act of 1935. As trucking
(especially its union, the Teamsters) developed as its own powerful interest group, the interest of railroads waned and railroads got clobbered financially, resulting in numerous bankruptcies. Trucks siphoned off the profitable high value-added
shipments and eroded this source of revenue that railroads used
for cross subsidy. The restrictions on abandonment of routes
created enormous inefficiencies. The deregulation of the railroads in 1976 (4R Act) and in 1980 (Staggers Act) removed
most regulations but placed merger control in the hands of the
11 This section draws heavily from Peltzman (1989) and Grimm and Winston

(2000).

Carlton & Picker

Antitrust and Regulation

47

Surface Transportation Board (STB), not the Department of
Justice. It streamlined the process for merging.
After deregulation, there was massive abandonment of
track, reductions in employment, decline in certain rates, and
massive consolidation that is still ongoing. Roughly one third
of tracks was abandoned, real operating costs fell in the 20year period following deregulation by about 60 percent, employment has been estimated to be about 60 percent lower as a
result of deregulation (Davis and Wilson (1999)), rail volumes
started to grow again, and industry profitability improved.
Rates fell (Burton (1993)), especially for high value-added
products, and service improved.
“Before deregulation, mergers typically involved railroads
with substantial parallel trackage … . In contrast, mergers in
the post-Staggers period have been primarily end-to-end”
(Vellturo et al. (1992), pp. 341-42). Mergers in the first six
years of deregulation reduced the number of large railroads
(Class I) from 36 to 16 (Grimm and Winston (2000), pp. 45-46
citing Chaplin and Schmidt (1999)). Continued merger activity
has left only two railroads servicing the West and also the East
(see also Ivaldi and McCullough (2005)). Using figures from
the Association of American Railroads, the number of Class I
railroads declined from 40 in 1980 to 7 in 2004. According to a
study by the Department of Agriculture, the HHI of railroads in
the East has increased from 1364 in 1980 to 4297 in 1999 and
in the West from 1364 to 4502. (Source: Comments of the U.S.
Department of Agriculture before the Surface Transportation
Board, STB Docket No. 34000, Canadian National Railway
Co. et al—Control—Wisconsin Central Railway Co., June 25,
2001).
Despite opposition from The Department of Justice to
many of the major mergers, STB has approved them. We believe that the reason the STB was given merger authority rather
than the Department of Justice is precisely because mergers

48

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

were anticipated that would lead to increased rates from reduced competition, and this was perceived as a benefit by the
proponents of deregulation (which included the railroads).
“The railroad industry is perhaps the only U.S. industry that
has been, or ever will be, deregulated because of its poor financial performance under regulation” (Grimm and Winston
(2000), p. 41). Indeed, although railroads rates in general have
declined, captive shippers now have much less protection than
before deregulation and pay substantial rate differentials compared to non-captive shippers.
In March 2000, the STB issued a moratorium on mergers.
In June 2001, it issued new merger regulations in which
merged carriers would have an increased burden to show that
the proposed merger would not harm competition. There have
been no mergers among Class I railroads since. Recently, there
have been congressional attempts to remove the antitrust immunity of railroads regarding mergers and other pricing matters (Gallagher (2006)).
D. Trucks
As already discussed, trucking regulation emerged under the
Motor Carrier Act of 1935 partly as an attempt to control competition with railroads. The trucking industry, especially its unions, was able to become a powerful interest group whom regulators protected from competition. (Estimates are that wages
were 30 percent higher or more than otherwise, and that this
premium accounted for the bulk of the regulatory rents to
trucking. (See Rose (1987) and Moore (1978).)) Entry was
controlled with carriers needing certificates to carry certain
commodities on particular routes. Rates were regulated.
The trucking industry is composed of two very different
segments, truck load (TL) and less than truck load (LTL). The
TL segment consists of firms that ship in truckloads from origin to destination. In contrast, the LTL segment consists of

Carlton & Picker

Antitrust and Regulation

49

firms that will pick up several small shipments, and deliver
them to their final destinations after making several stops to
either pick up or drop off other shipments. Therefore, the LTL
segment is a network industry where scale (or geographic
scope) matters, while the TL segment is not. Deregulation had
very different effects on these two segments.
Deregulation led to an increase in the total number of
trucking firms. For example, the number of certified carriers
rose from about 18,000 in 1980 to about 40,000 by the end of
the 1980’s (Nebesky et al. (1995)). In sharp contrast, the number of LTL carriers fell from around 600 firms in the late 1970s
to 237 firms in the late 1980s and to 135 firms by the early
1990s (Feitler et al. (1997)). Moreover, there was evidence that
pre-deregulation, LTL carriers earned rents that were eliminated after deregulation.
Although LTL carriers have increased in size, they did not
rely on merger but rather on expansion of the territory of individual carriers. (Mergers were not used in order to avoid being
struck with unfunded pension liabilities. Post deregulation, the
value of an active firm was negative after the value of its operating certificate fell (Boyer (1993))). Although the evidence
seems to confirm that regulation forced the LTL sector to have
too many firms, evidence on scale in the LTL sector (Giordono
(1997)) supports the view that there will remain a sufficient
number of efficient LTL carriers to preserve competition.
The deregulation of trucking applied to interstate but not
intrastate shipments. States were able to, and some did, regulate rates and entry of intrastate trucking. Some states explicitly
granted antitrust immunity, while others did not. (In the 38
states that regulated trucking under 500 pounds, 22 had granted
antitrust immunity to truckers as of 1987.) Econometric analysis (Daniel and Kleit (1995)) of rates in the states that still
regulated trucking showed that in the LTL segment entry regulation raised rates by over 20 percent, rate regulation by over 5

50

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

percent and antitrust immunity by about 12 percent. In the TL
segment, only rate regulation had a statistically significant effect on price -- more than 32 percent. As of 1994, Congressional legislation forbids states from regulating trucking rates,
except for moving companies.
Although employment in trucking continued to grow after
deregulation, one estimate finds that deregulation caused a reduction of 250,000 to 300,000 union jobs, or about 20 percent
of total workers in trucking (Hunter and Mangum (1995)). This
is further evidence that trucking regulation was heavily influenced by the powerful Teamsters Union. Moreover the wage
effect in the LTL segment was small but wages declined significantly in the TL sector (Belzer (1995)).
***
Although we have not examined all regulated industries,
we have looked at several. Regulation created numerous inefficiencies and benefited special groups. In response to criticisms
of regulation, antitrust either completely or partially replaced
regulation and antitrust was used as a complement and sometimes as a constraint on regulators in many industries. The deregulated network industries that we examined all show a similar pattern: after deregulation, there is massive consolidation, a
lessening of the reliance on interconnection from other firms, a
decline in either wages or employment or both, and a fall in
prices with a reduction or end to any cross subsidy. Consumers
benefit, special interests are harmed.
Conclusion
More than a century ago, the federal government started controlling competition, first railroads through the Interstate
Commerce Act and then the general economy under the
Sherman Act. The Commerce Act assigned primary responsibility to the first great federal agency, the Interstate Commerce

Carlton & Picker

Antitrust and Regulation

51

Commission, while the Sherman Act relied for its implementation on federal courts of general jurisdiction. Since that time,
there has been an ongoing struggle to formulate the appropriate
policy for controlling competition and to determine the right
balance between antitrust and regulation for implementing that
policy.
Regulation and antitrust are two competing mechanisms to
control competition. The early history in which special courts
were established and then abolished, and in which the FTC was
created illustrate this point. The relative advantages and disadvantages of each mechanism became clearer over time. Regulation produced cross-subsidies and favors to special interests,
but was able to specify prices and specific rules of how firms
should deal with each other. Antitrust, especially when it became economically coherent within the past 30 years or so,
showed itself to be reasonably good at promoting competition,
avoiding the favoring of special interests, but not good at formulating specific rules for particular industries. The partial and
full deregulation movement was a response to the recognition
of the relative advantages of regulation and antitrust. This does
not mean that no sector will be regulated, but rather that competition, constrained only by antitrust, will be used over more
activities, even in regulated industries.
Aside from being viewed as substitutes, antitrust and regulation can also be viewed as complements in which the activities of an industry can be subject to both regulatory and antitrust scrutiny. In this way, the complementary use of regulation
and antitrust can assign control of competition to courts and
regulatory agencies based on their relative strengths, and in
some settings, antitrust can act as a constraint on what regulators can do. The trends in network industries indicate that regulators, not antitrust courts, will bear the responsibility for formulating interconnection policies in partially deregulated industries, but antitrust will remain in the background as a club

52

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

that firms can use if regulators allow incumbents to acquire
market power either through merger or predatory acts.
The history shows that at least for the United States, the increased use of the Sherman Act instead of regulation to control
competition, and when necessary, the complementary use of
the two, has brought benefits to consumers.

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007:2:41 PM5:12 PM

References
Bamberger, Gustavo and Dennis Carlton. “Predation and
the Entry and Exit of Low-Fare Carriers,” in Lee, ed., Advances in Airline Economics: Competition Policy and Antitrust, Elsevier, 2006.
Bamberger, Gustavo and Dennis Carlton. “Airline Networks and Fares,” in Jenkins, ed., Handbook of Airline Economics, Aviation Week, second edition (2002).
Becker, Gary. “A Theory of Competition Among Pressure
Groups for Political Influence,” 98 Quarterly Journal of Economics 371 (1983).
Belzer, Michael. “Collective Bargaining After Deregulation: Do The Teamsters Still Count?” 48 Industrial and Labor
Relations Review 636 (1995).
Benson, Bruce, M. Greenhut and Randall Holcombe. “Interest Groups and the Antitrust Paradox,” 6 Cato Journal 801
(1987).
Bittlingmayer, George. “Did Antitrust Policy Cause the
Great Merger Wave?” 28 Journal of Law & Economics 77
(1985).
Borenstein, Severin. “The Airline Tariff Publishing Case,”
in Kwoka and White, eds., The Antitrust Revolution, Oxford
University Press, fourth edition, 2004.
Bork, Robert H. The Antitrust Paradox: A Policy At War
With Itself, Basic Books, 1978.
Boyer, Kenneth. “Deregulation of the Trucking Sector:
Specialization, Concentration, Entry and Financial Distress,”
59 Southern Economic Journal 481 (1993).
Burton, Mark. “Railroad Deregulation, Carrier Behavior,
and Shipper Response: A Disaggregated Analysis,” 5 Journal
of Regulatory Economics 417 (1993).

54

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

Carlton, Dennis. “A General Analysis of Exclusionary
Conduct and Refusal to Deal: Why Aspen and Kodak Are Misguided,” 68 Antitrust Law Journal 659 (2001).
Carlton, Dennis, Alan Frankel and Elisabeth Landes. “The
Control of Externalities in Sports Leagues: An Analysis of Restrictions in the National Hockey League,” 112 Journal of Political Economy S268 (2004).
Carlton, Dennis and J. M. Klamer. “The Need for Coordination Among Firms With Special Reference to Network Industries,” 50 University of Chicago Law Review 446 (1983).
Carlton, Dennis and Jeffrey Perloff. Modern Industrial Organization, Pearson, fourth edition, 2005.
Chaplin, Alison and Stephen Schmidt. “Do Mergers Improve Efficiency? Evidence From Deregulated Rail Freight,”
33 Journal of Transport Economics and Policy 147 (1999).
Daniel, Timothy and Andrew Kleit. “Disentangling Regulatory Policy: The Effects of State Regulations on Trucking
Rates,” 8 Journal of Regulatory Economics 267 (1995).
Davis, David and Wesley Wilson. “Deregulation, Mergers,
and Employment in the Railroad Industry,” 15 Journal of
Regulatory Economics 5 (1999).
Edlin, Aaron and Joseph Farrell. “The American Airlines
Case: A Chance to Clarify Predation Policy (2001),” in Kwoka
and White, eds., The Antitrust Revolution, fourth edition, 2004.
Feitler, Jane, Thomas Corsi and Curtis Grimm. “Measuring
Strategic Change in the Regulated and Deregulated Motor Carrier Industry: An 18 Year Evaluation,” 33 Transportation Research - E 159 (1997).
Fiorina, Morris. “Legislative Choice of Regulatory Forms:
Legal Process or Administrative Process?” 39 Public Choice
33 (1982).

Carlton & Picker

Antitrust and Regulation

55

Frankfurter, Felix and James M. Landis. The Business of
the Supreme Court: A Study in the Federal Judicial System,
Macmillan (1928).
Gallagher, John. “Justice for the Railroads,” Traffic World
27 (July 17, 2006).
Gilligan, Thomas W., William J. Marshall and Barry R.
Weingast. “Regulation and the Theory of Legislative Choice,”
32 Journal of Law & Economics 35 (1989).
Giordano, James. “Return to Scale and Market Concentration Among the Largest Survivors of Deregulation in the U.S.
Trucking Industry,” 29 Applied Economics 101 (1997).
Grimm, Curtis and Clifford Winston. “Competition in the
Deregulated Railroad Industry: Sources, Effects, and Policy
Issues,” in Peltzman and Winston, eds., Deregulation of Network Industries: What’s Next?, AEI-Brookings Joint Center for
Regulatory Studies (2000).
Grodinsky, Julius. The Iowa Pool: A Study in Railroad
Competition, 1870-84, University of Chicago Press (1950).
Guerin-Calvert, Margaret and Roger G. Noll. "Computer
Reservation Systems and Their Network Linkages to the Airline Industry,” in Wildman and Guerin-Calvert, eds., Electronic Service Networks: A Business and Public Policy Challenge, Praeger (1991).
Hilton, George W. “The Consistency of the Interstate
Commerce Act,” 9 Journal of Law & Economics 87 (1966).
Hunter, Natalie J. and Stephen L. Mangum. “Economic
Regulation, Employment Relations, and Accumulent Rates in
the U.S. Motor Carrier Industry,” 20 Labor Studies Journal 48
(1995).
Ivaldi, Marc and Gerard McCullough. “Welfare Tradeoffs
in U.S. Rail Mergers,” C.E.P.R. discussion paper (2005).
Kolko, Gabriel. Railroads and Regulation, 1877-1916,
Princeton University Press, 1965.

56

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

Landes, William and Richard Posner. “Adjudication as a
Private Good,” 8 Journal of Legal Studies 235 (1979).
McCubbins, Matthew, Roger Noll and Barry Weingast.
“Structure and Process, Politics and Policy: Administrative Arrangements and the Political Control of Agencies,” 75 Virginia
Law Review 431 (1989).
Moore, Thomas Gale. “The Beneficiaries of Trucking
Regulation,” 21 Journal of Law & Economics 327 (1978).
Morrison, Steven and Clifford Winston. “The Remaining
Role for Government Policy in the Deregulated Airline Industry,” in Peltzman and Winston, eds., Deregulation of Network
Industries: What’s Next?, AEI-Brookings Joint Center for
Regulatory Studies (2000).
Mueller, Milton L. Universal Service: Competition, Interconnection, and Monopoly in the Making of the American Telephone System, MIT Press (1997).
Nebesky, William, B. Starr McMullen and Man-Keung
Lee. “Testing for Market Power in the U.S. Motor Carrier Industry,” 10 Review of Industrial Organization 559 (1995).
Noll, Roger and Bruce Owen. “The Anticompetitive Uses
of Regulation: United States v. AT&T,” in Kwoka and White,
eds., The Antitrust Revolution, Scott, Foresman, first edition
(1989).
Peltzman, Sam. “Toward a More General Theory of Regulation,” 19 Journal of Law & Economics 211 (1976).
Peltzman, Sam. “The Economic Theory of Regulation After a Decade of Deregulation,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity: Microeconomics 1 (1989).
Peltzman, Sam and Clifford Winston, eds. Deregulation of
Network Industries: What’s Next?, AEI-Brookings Joint Center
for Regulatory Studies (2000).
Peoples, James. “Deregulation and the Labor Market”, 12
Journal of Economic Perspectives 111 (1998).

Carlton & Picker

Antitrust and Regulation

57

Pindyck, Robert. “Sunk Costs and Real Options in Antitrust”, in W. Collins, ed., Issues in Competition Law and Policy, ABA Monograph, 2005.
Pirrong, Stephen Craig. “An Application of Core Theory to
the Analysis of Ocean Shipping Markets,” 35 Journal of Law
& Economics 89 (1992).
Posner, Richard. “Theories of Economic Regulation,” 5
Bell Journal of Economics 335 (1974).
Posner, Richard. Antitrust Law: An Economic Perspective,
University of Chicago Press, second edition, 2003.
Rabin, Robert L. “Federal Regulation in Historical Perspective,” 38 Stanford Law Review 1189 (1986).
Rose, Nancy. “Labor Rent Sharing and Regulation: Evidence from the Trucking Industry,” 95 Journal of Political
Economy 1146 (1987).
Shepsle, Kenneth and Mark Bonchek. Analyzing Politics:
Rationality, Behavior, and Institutions, Norton (1997).
Sklar, Martin J. The Corporate Reconstruction of American
Capitalism, 1890-1917, Cambridge University Press (1988).
Starr, Paul. The Creation of the Media: Political Origins of
Modern Communications, Basic Books, 2004.
Stephenson, Matthew. “Legislative Allocation of Delegated
Power: Uncertainty, Risk, and the Choice Between Agencies
and Courts,” Harvard Law and Economics Discussion Paper
No. 506 (2005).
Stigler, George. “The Theory of Economic Regulation,” 2
Bell Journal of Economic and Management Science 3 (1971).
Vellturo, Christoper, Ernst Berndt, Ann Friedlander, Judy
Chiang, and Mark Showalter. “Deregulation, Mergers and Cost
Savings in Class I U.S. Railroads, 1974-1986,” 1 Journal of
Economics and Management Strategy 339 (1992).
Wessel, Kirk. “Case 3 - The U.S. Airline Industry”, at People.Westminster College.edu, 2004.

58

February 13, 2007January 25, 2007

