                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  FINANCIAL INTEGRATION, FINANCIAL DEEPNESS AND GLOBAL IMBALANCES

                                         Enrique G. Mendoza
                                          Vincenzo Quadrini
                                        Jose-Victor Rios-Rull

                                        Working Paper 12909
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12909


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2007




We would like to thank Manuel Amador, David Backus, Linda Goldberg, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas,
Gita Gopinath, Ayse Imrohoroglu and Alessandro Rebucci for insightful comments, and Gian Maria
Milesi-Ferretti and Philip Lane for sharing with us their cross-country data on foreign asset positions.
We also thank participants at presentations in Carlos III in Madrid, European University Institute,
Federal Reserve Board, IIES in Stockholm, Macroeconomics Without Frontiers conference in Minneapolis,
IFM Program Meeting and Summer Institute of the NBER, IMF Annual Research Conference, Philadelphia
Fed, Research on Money and Markets conference at Univ. of Toronto, San Francisco Fed, Seoul National
University, University of Oslo, University of Porto and Wharton School. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2007 by Enrique G. Mendoza, Vincenzo Quadrini, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Integration, Financial Deepness and Global Imbalances
Enrique G. Mendoza, Vincenzo Quadrini, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull
NBER Working Paper No. 12909
February 2007
JEL No. E21,F3,F32,F41

                                                   ABSTRACT

Large and persistent global financial imbalances need not be the harbinger of a world financial crash.
Instead, we show that these imbalances can be the outcome of financial integration when countries
differ in financial markets deepness. In particular, countries with more advanced financial markets
accumulate foreign liabilities in a gradual, long-lasting process. Differences in financial deepness also
affect the composition of foreign portfolios: countries with negative net foreign asset positions maintain
positive net holdings of non-diversifiable equity and FDI. Abstracting from the potential impact of
globalization on financial development, liberalization leads to sizable welfare gains for the more financially-developed
countries and losses for the others. Three empirical observations motivate our analysis: (1)financial
deepness varies widely even amongst industrial countries, with the United States ranking at the top;
(2) the secular decline in the U.S. net foreign asset position started in the early 1980s, together with
a gradual process of international capital markets liberalization; (3) net exports and current account
balances are negatively correlated with indicators of financial development.

Enrique G. Mendoza                                         Jose-Victor Rios-Rull
Department of Economics                                    University of Pennsylvania
University of Maryland                                     Department of Economics
College Park, MD 20742                                     3718 Locust Walk
and NBER                                                   Philadelphia, PA 19104
mendozae@econ.umd.edu                                      and NBER
                                                           vr0j@econ.upenn.edu
Vincenzo Quadrini
Department of Finance and Business Economics
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
701 Exposition Boulevard
Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER
quadrini@usc.edu
1       Introduction

At the end of 2006 the current account deficit of the United States reached
2 percentage points of the world’s GDP and the country’s net foreign liabil-
ities reached 8 percent of global output. The IMF (2006) expects the U.S.
current account to remain in the red through 2011. By then, U.S. net for-
eign liabilities will be about 15 percent the size of the global economy. The
composition of the US foreign portfolio has also changed during the last two
decades: While net foreign liabilities have reached one-third of the U.S. GDP,
portfolio equity and FDI have climbed to one-tenth of GDP.
    These imbalances are fueling heated debates in academic and policy cir-
cles. On the one hand there is the view that, unless major policy actions
are taken, the imbalances will generate global financial turbulence and, pos-
sibly, a world economic crisis.1 On the other hand, there is the view that the
imbalances are the harmless outcome of various events such as differences
in productivity growth or business cycle volatility, demographic dynamics, a
‘global saving glut’, or valuation effects. This view is summarized in Backus,
Henriksen, Lambert & Telmer (2005).2
    This paper proposes an explanation of global imbalances that has not
been explored in this debate. We argue that both the large, persistent global
imbalances and their portfolio composition could be the result of interna-
tional financial integration among countries with heterogeneous domestic
financial markets. The far-reaching reforms that liberalized international
capital markets during the 1980s and 1990s were predicated on the benefits
that financial integration would have for efficient resource allocation and risk-
sharing across countries. But these arguments generally abstracted from the
fact that financial systems differed substantially across countries, and those
differences have remained largely unaltered despite the globalization of cap-
ital markets. In short, financial integration was a global phenomenon but
financial development was not.
    The motivation for studying global imbalances from this perspective de-
rives from three observations:
    1
     See, for example, Summers (2004), Obstfeld & Rogoff (2004), Roubini & Setser (2005),
Blanchard, Giavazzi & Sa (2005), Krugman (2006).
   2
     See also Bernanke (2005), Croke, Kamin and Leduc (2005), Gourinchas and Rey
(2005), Hausmann & Sturzenegger (2005), Henriksen (2005), Lane and Milesi-Ferretti
(2005), Caballero, Farhi & Gourinchas (2006), Cavallo and Tille (2006), Engel and Rogers
(2006), Fogli and Perri (2006), Ghironi, Lee and Rebucci (2006).



                                           1
  1. Measures of financial development or financial deepness differ sharply
     across countries, even across industrialized countries, and the differ-
     ences have changed little during the past 10 years (Figure 1).
  2. The net foreign asset position of the country with the highest level
     of financial development—the United States—shows a secular decline
     starting in the early 1980s, at roughly the same time when many coun-
     tries started to liberalize their capital accounts (Figures 2 and 3).
  3. Net exports and current account balances, as a share of GDP, are neg-
     atively correlated with proxies for the degree of financial development
     (Figure 5).

    These empirical observations raise three important questions that this
papers seeks to answer. First, if countries involved in the process of financial
integration are characterized by different financial structures, do we expect to
see the type of imbalances and portfolio composition we observe in the data?
Second, are the imbalances temporary or permanent? Third, are policies
aiming at correcting the imbalances desirable?
    We address these questions with a multi-country dynamic general equi-
librium model with incomplete asset markets. Countries are inhabited by
a continuum of ex-ante identical consumers who face two types of idiosyn-
cratic shocks: endowment and investment shocks. ‘Financial development’ is
defined by the extent to which financial contracts are enforceable. This can
range from the case of perfect enforceability—allowing for the full insurance
of the idiosyncratic risk (complete markets)—to the case in which enforce-
ment is so limited that the only mechanism for consumption smoothing is
the accumulation of non-contingent assets.
    Analytical characterizations as well as numerical simulations of a two-
country version of the model show that, if country U (say the United States) is
more financially developed than country E (Europe or emerging economies),
financial integration causes U’s net foreign asset position to decline sharply
in the long-run. In fact, moderate differences in financial deepness can easily
lead to net foreign asset positions larger than domestic production. Moreover,
this is a gradual and long-lasting process that can take more than 30 years.
    The model also predicts that countries with different financial markets
characteristics choose different compositions for their foreign asset portfolios,
in a pattern that broadly resembles the portfolio compositions observed in
the data. In particular, country U invests in foreign risky assets and finances

                                       2
this investment with debt, so its net foreign asset position features a large
negative position in riskless bonds and a positive position in risky assets.
This is in line with the structure of the U.S. external position documented
by Gourinchas and Rey (2005) and Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2005).3
    Large and persistent global imbalances in our model are fully consistent
with intertemporal solvency conditions and do not lead to a financial crash
or a ‘Sudden Stop’. The model’s welfare implications, however, suggest that
capital markets liberalization is not always beneficial for all countries. In
particular, countries with less developed financial markets experience wel-
fare losses. Our model, however, ignores other potential gains from capital
markets liberalization such as the transfer of technology, speedier financial
markets development and risk-sharing benefits. With the consideration of
these other benefits, the net welfare consequences of financial globalization
could still be positive for all countries.
    There are few papers that investigate global imbalances with quantita-
tive dynamic models. Among these are Chapter 1 of IMF (2005), Hunt and
Rebucci (2005) and Faruqee, Laxton, Muir & Pesenti (2005). These studies
conduct simulations based on multi-country, multi-sector models with nom-
inal rigidities, in line with the New Open Economy Macroeconomics. Their
main focus is on the analysis of alternative policy scenarios for the unwinding
of the imbalances, rather than explaining the imbalances themselves. Global
imbalances emerge as the outcome of a combination of exogenous shocks,
such as a permanent increase in the U.S. fiscal deficit, a permanent decline
in the rate of time preference in the U.S., and a permanent increase in foreign
demand for U.S. financial assets. In contrast, the model developed in this
paper predicts a reduction in U.S. savings and an increase in the foreign de-
mand for U.S. assets endogenously, after financial integration, because of the
different characteristics of the U.S. financial system. This occurs even if all
countries have identical preferences, resources and production technologies.
    The premise that differences in domestic asset markets can produce ex-
ternal imbalances has precedent in the literature. Willen (2004) studied the
qualitative predictions of a two-period endowment-economy model with ex-
   3
    According to the March 2006 version of the Lane-Milesi database, the U.S. net foreign
asset position fell from a share of GDP of 4 percent in 1980 to -23 percent in 2004. This
resulted from a sustained widening in the net debt position, from near zero to about -32
percent, and an increase in the net position in portfolio equity and FDI, from 3.7 to 9
percent. In contrast, in the1970s, the decade before financial integration started, the U.S.
net foreign asset position and its components remained relatively stable.


                                             3
ponential utility, heterogenous agents, and normal-i.i.d. shocks. He showed
that, under incomplete markets, trade imbalances emerge due to reduced
savings by the agents residing in countries with ‘more complete’ asset mar-
kets. Our model embodies this mechanism but also differs in two key re-
spects. First, we allow for endogenous production with ‘production risks,’
which is crucial for explaining the composition of asset portfolios in addi-
tion to net foreign asset positions. Second, we study an infinite horizon
model with standard constant-relative-risk-aversion preferences and serially-
correlated shocks, exploring both the qualitative and quantitative predictions
of the model as well as its welfare implications.
    The study by Caballero et al. (2006) also emphasizes the role of heteroge-
neous domestic financial systems in explaining global imbalances, but using
a model in which financial imperfections are captured by a country’s ability
to supply assets in a world without uncertainty. In our framework, instead,
financial imperfections have a direct impact on savings, and therefore, on
the demand for assets. Uncertainty is crucial in our framework: without risk
there are no imbalances even if financial markets are heterogeneous. The
two papers also differ in the main driving forces for global imbalances. In
Caballero et al. the imbalances are generated by differential shocks to pro-
ductivity growth and/or to the financial structure of countries. Our explana-
tion, instead, relies on the international integration of capital markets, given
the differences in the characteristics of domestic financial markets. These
differences started to matter for global imbalances after the liberalization of
the 1980s and 1990s.
    Some recent studies emphasize the role of demographic differences for the
emergence of the imbalances. Henriksen (2005) shows that a two-country
model calibrated to the population dynamics of the U.S. and Japan can
capture the observed magnitude and persistence of current account imbal-
ances between these two countries. Attanasio, Kitao & Violante (2006) focus
instead on the demographics dynamics of developing countries. Although
demographic differences is a compelling mechanism for capturing differences
in saving patterns, they do not account for the international portfolio com-
position outlined above. The ability to explain the portfolio composition of
observed foreign asset positions is a key feature that distinguishes our theory
from other theories.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews the em-
pirical motivation of the paper. Section 3 describes the model and defines
the competitive equilibrium under autarky and under free mobility of capi-

                                       4
tal. Section 4 characterizes analytically the key properties of both equilibria.
Section 5 conducts the quantitative analysis. Section 6 extends the model
by introducing capital accumulation. Section 7 concludes.

2   Empirical motivation

The first fact that motivates our analysis is the observation that countries
differ significantly in the deepness of their financial markets, even industrial
countries. A recent study by the International Monetary Fund (IMF (2006))
constructs an index of financial markets development for industrial countries.
The index combines information from three core sub-indexes: an index of tra-
ditional bank intermediation, an index of new financial intermediation (i.e.
intermediation through direct market instruments, such as asset-backed secu-
rities and derivatives, and/or non-bank intermediaries, such as hedge funds)
and an index of general characteristics of financial markets (e.g. stock market
turnover, investor protection, bond market capitalization, etc.). Countries
with a higher index undertake a larger volume of financial intermediation
through direct market instruments, and thus are viewed as having attained
a higher degree of financial development. Figure 1 shows that the United
States has the highest score and that the gaps of other countries relative to
the the U.S. have not changed substantially during the last decade.
    The second key observation motivating our work relates to international
financial integration. Chinn and Ito (2005) compiled an index of the degree
of capital account openness for 163 countries from 1970 to 2004. The index
is based on binary dummy variables that codify the tabulation of restric-
tions on cross-border financial transactions reported in the IMF’s Annual
Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER).
The dummy variables reflect the four major categories of restrictions: multi-
ple exchange rates, restrictions on current account transactions, restrictions
on capital account transactions, and requirements for the surrender of export
proceeds. The index is the first standardized principal component of these
four variables and it takes higher values for countries that are more open to
cross-border capital transactions.
    Figure 2 shows the Chinn-Ito financial openness index for the United
States, the group of industrialized countries excluding the U.S., and all coun-
tries except the U.S. The indices are computed as means of individual country
indices, weighted by GDP. Although the U.S. has always been open during
the last three decades, most of the other countries have been opening their

                                       5
             1995                          2004
       .75




        0 AUS   BEL   DEN   ESP     FRA   GRC    JPN   NOR   SWE
             AUT   CAN   DEU    FIN    GBR   ITA    NLD   PRT   USA


Figure 1: Financial index score for advanced economies. Source: IMF (2006).

capital accounts gradually since the beginning of the 1980s, starting first with
the industrial countries and moving on to emerging economies in the 1990s.
What is remarkable is that the timing of the gradual, but sustained, capi-
tal account liberalization coincides with the deterioration of the U.S. foreign
asset position, as shown in the next figure.
    Figure 3 plots the net foreign asset positions as a share of GDP for the
United States, the group of industrialized countries excluding the U.S., and
the group of emerging economies using the Lane-Milesi-Ferretti database.
Clearly, the deterioration of the U.S. external position is not a recent phe-
nomenon: It has been declining almost uninterrupted since the first half of
the 1980s. This is right after industrial countries started to liberalize their
capital accounts, as show in Figure 2. In addition, Figure 4 shows that the
decline in the U.S. net foreign asset position has been accompanied by a
change in the portfolio composition of foreign assets. In particular, while
the net position in debt instruments has declined sharply, the net position in
FDI and portfolio equity has increased.
    The third fact that motivates our paper is the negative relation between
international flow imbalances and financial development. As a proxy for the
latter we use ‘Domestic Credit to the Private Sector.’ This is the proxy often
used in the finance-development literature (see, for example, Demirguc-Kunt


                                       6
              United States                        Industrial countries except US
              All countries except US

       3




       2




       1




       0




      -1
            1970     1975      1980     1985       1990       1995      2000        2005


Figure 2: Financial openness index, 1970-2004. Source: Chinn and Ito (2005)
and www.ssc.wisc.edu/∼ mchinn/research.html.


              United States                        Industrial countries except US
              Emerging economies

       .1




       0




      -.1




      -.2




      -.3
            1970     1975      1980     1985       1990       1995      2000        2005


Figure 3: Net foreign asset position relative to GDP, 1970-2004. Source:
Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006).


                                               7
                           Net FDI and portfolio equity          Net debt assets
                           Net foreign assets

                 10




                     0
       Percent GDP




            -10




            -20




            -30

                         1970     1975      1980          1985   1990      1995    2000   2005


Figure 4: Composition of US foreign assets: Net positions in FDI and eq-
uities, and debt instruments, 1970-2004. Source: Lane and Milesi-Ferretti
(2006).

and Levine (2001)), and is defined as the financial resources provided to the
private sector, such as loans, purchases of nonequity securities, and trade
credits and other accounts receivable, that establish a claim for repayment.
We study whether private credit is correlated with international flow imbal-
ances, either ‘Net Exports of Goods and Services’ or the ‘Current Account
Balances’. To this end, we run the following regression:

                          N EXit = α0 + α1 · CREDITit + α2 · CGDPit + εit                        (1)

where N EX is net exports (or current account) in percentage of GDP;
CREDIT is domestic credit to the private sector also in percentage of GDP;
CGDP is per-capita GDP. The subscripts identify country and year. The
inclusion of per-capita GDP controls for the stage of economic development.
We would like to emphasize that in running this regression we are not trying
to establish a causal link. We are simply looking for conditional correlations.
    We use yearly data for OECD countries for the period 2000-2004. The
results are reported in the first column of Table 1. Figure 5 shows that
the conditional correlation between domestic credit and net exports is neg-
ative and statistically significant. This suggests that countries with deeper

                                                             8
    Table 1: Financial deepness and foreign imbalance in OECD countries

                                      Net Exports                        Current Account
                        2000-2004      1995-2004  1990-2004      2000-2004  1995-2004  1990-2004


Pooled regression

    CREDIT                -0.0598        -0.0509     -0.0457      -0.0349      -0.0269      -0.0224
                         (0.0088)∗      (0.0068)∗   (0.0056)∗    (0.0099)∗    (0.0069)∗    (0.0055)∗

    CGDP                  0.00063        0.00058      0.00054      0.00041      0.00039      0.00035
                        (0.00004)∗     (0.00003)∗   (0.00003)∗   (0.00005)∗   (0.00004)∗   (0.00003)∗

    CON ST AN T           -8.287         -7.589       -6.867       -7.053       -6.713       -6.073
                         (0.950)∗       (0.688)∗     (0.539)      (1.121)∗     (0.722)∗     (0.538)∗

    R2                     0.633          0.525       0.468        0.353        0.318        0.285
    Obs.                    144            289         432          145          289          428


Fixed effect regression
    CREDIT                               -0.0406     -0.0448                   -0.0370      -0.0505
                                        (0.0085)∗   (0.0066)∗                 (0.0092)∗    (0.0077)∗

    CGDP                                 0.00029      0.00043                  -0.00003      0.00014
                                       (0.00006)∗   (0.00004)∗                (0.00006)    (0.00005)∗

    CON ST AN T                           -1.620      -4.442                     3.897       0.913
                                         (1.191)     (0.833)∗                  (1.304)∗     (1.028)

    R2 (within)                           0.121       0.233                     0.079        0.099
    R2 (between)                          0.541       0.543                     0.100        0.010
    R2 (overall)                          0.472       0.461                     0.049        0.013
    Obs.                                   289         432                       289          428


Notes: Data is from the World Bank, World Development Indicators. The countries included in
the sample are: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherland,
New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovak Republic, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey,
United Kingdom, United States.

∗   Significant at 1 percent level.




                                                     9
                          coef = -.05976515, se = .00878629, t = -6.8

                    12
                                                NOR
                                                 NOR
                                                    TUR      IRL
                                                               IRL
                     9                                         IRL   IRL
                           NOR                       NOR
                                                FINNOR
                                                 FIN
                                                  FIN
                     6                             TUR                  KOR
                                                                   SWE KOR
                                                MEX
                                                 MEX               SWE
                                                                   SWE   KOR
                                                MEX
                                                MEX
                                                  FIN
                                                  TUR
                                                MEX               SWE     KOR
                                      LUX SWE                             KOR
      Net Exports




                     3                   DNK
                                           DNK POL
                                       DNKDNK     SVK
                                                  POL
                                                      CAN
                                                   FIN CAN SVK         DEU  NZL
                                                                             NZL
                                                                         DEUNZL
                                                                                    CHE
                                                  HUN                   DEU       CHE
                                                   POL
                                                   POLBEL                      NLD
                                                                               NLD     NLD
                                                                                     CHE
                                              CZESVK
                                             DNK  HUN
                                                   TUR CAN       AUT             NLDNLD
                                   LUXLUX            BEL
                                                       CAN       AUT
                                              CZE
                                               LUXCZE BEL
                                                       BEL       AUT          NZL
                     0                        CZEHUN   CZE
                                                     TUR                 DEU       CHE
                                    LUX            BEL
                                                     HUN
                                                     HUN  ITA
                                                         ITA
                                                           FRA     JPN
                                                   POL     ITA
                                                             FRA
                                                            FRA        JPN
                                                                     JPN
                                                              ITAAUT ISL
                                                            FRA
                                                             ITA      JPNDEU
                                                             AUS
                                                             FRA
                                                             AUSAUT     ESP
                                                      SVK             ESP ESP
                     -3                               SVK            ESP
                                                                               ESP
                                                                              GBR         PRT
                                                              AUSISL
                                                                AUS             GBR
                                                                                 GBR
                     -6                                                            GBR     PRT
                                                          GRC                 ISL    GBR PRT
                                                           GRC
                                                            GRCGRC
                                                      GRC                                PRT
                     -9
                                                                                       PRT             USA
                                                                                                        USA
                                                                                          ISL    USA
                                                                ISL                                     USA
                    -12
                          -110    -80      -50   -20       10        40      70                  100          130
                                             Domestic Credit to Private Sector


Figure 5: Net exports and domestic credit in OECD countries, 2000-2004.
Source: See notes on Table 1.

financial markets tend to experience trade deficits while countries with lower
financial deepness experience trade surpluses. Given the resource identity
S = I + N EX, this can be restated as saying that countries with deeper fi-
nancial markets save less than their domestic investment while countries with
lower financial deepness save more. The variation of net exports accounted
by domestic credit and per-capita GDP is quite high (R2 above 60 percent).
    The finding that countries with more developed financial markets tend to
experience larger external deficits (i.e. the negative cross-country correlation
between domestic credit and net exports) is robust to several changes in the
estimation shwon in Table 1. First, we re-estimate equation 1 for 1995-2004
and 1990-2004 and obtain similar results, although the R2 tends to decline
as we extend the sample to earlier years. Second, the results are robust to
the use of the current account as a measure of foreign imbalances. Finally,
we estimate equation 1 with country fixed effects and largely confirm the
findings from the pooled regression. The fixed effects results for 2000-2004
are not shown because of the short sample.




                                                             10
3   The model

Consider an economy composed of I countries or regions, indexed by i, all
with identical characteristics except for the deepness of domestic financial
markets. Financial deepness is captured by a parameter φi as specified below.
    Each country is populated by a continuum of agents of total mass 1 who
maximize expected lifetime utility E ∞            t
                                           P
                                             t=0 β U (ct ), where ct is consumption
at time t and β is the intertemporal discount factor. The utility function is
strictly increasing and concave with U (0) = −∞ and U 000 (c) > 0.
    Each country is endowed with unit supply of a non-reproducible, inter-
nationally immobile asset, traded at price Pti . The asset can be used by each
individual agent in the production of a homogeneous good. The production
function is yt+1 = zt+1 ktν , where kt is the quantity of the asset used at time t,
zt+1 is an idiosyncratic shock and yt+1 is the output produced at time t + 1.
We will refer to zt+1 as the investment shock as it determines the return on
the investment kt . Because the productive asset is internationally immobile,
when agents buy the foreign asset they have to produce abroad.
    In addition to production/investment income, agents receive an idiosyn-
cratic stochastic endowment, wt , that follows a discrete Markov process.
Therefore, there are two types of uncertainty or risk: from endowment and
from investment shocks.
    One key difference between endowment and investment risks is that the
first is beyond the control of the agent while the second can be avoided by
choosing not to produce, that is, by choosing not to purchase the productive
asset. The consideration of investment shocks allows us to distinguish risky
from riskless investments so that agents face a nontrivial portfolio choice.
We can then study not only how financial markets heterogeneity affects net
foreign asset positions but also their composition.
    It is important to emphasize that production is individually run and
shocks are idiosyncratic. There are no aggregate shocks. Therefore, cross-
country risk-sharing is not an issue here. Also notice that there is no aggre-
gate accumulation of capital. This assumption is relaxed in Section 6 and we
find that our key findings remain unaltered.
    Let st ≡ (wt , zt ) be a pair of endowment and investment shocks and
g(st , st+1 ) their conditional probability distribution. Agents can buy contin-
gent claims, b(st+1 ), that depend on the next period’s realizations of these
shocks. Because there is no aggregate uncertainty, the price of one unit
of consumption goods contingent on the realization of st+1 is qti (st , st+1 ) =

                                        11
g(st , st+1 )/(1 + rti ), where rti is the equilibrium interest rate.
   Define at as the end-of-period net worth before consumption. The budget
constraint is:
                          at = ct + kt Pti +    b(st+1 )qti (st , st+1 )
                                             X
                                                                         (2)
                                          st+1

The net worth evolves according to:
                                         i
                  a(st+1 ) = wt+1 + kt Pt+1 + zt+1 ktν + b(st+1 )                (3)

    If asset markets were complete (i.e. without restrictions on the set of
feasible claims), agents would be able to perfectly insure against the endow-
ment and investment risks. Because of market frictions, however, the set
of feasible claims is constrained in each country. We consider two types of
constraints. First, an enforceability constraint that is derived from the as-
sumption that shocks are not verifiable and agents can divert part of the
incomes from endowment and production. Agents loose a fraction φi of the
income they divert, so φi measures the degree of enforcement of financial
contracts in country i. Second, a limited liability constraint: contracts are
not exclusive and there is limited liability. This implies that the end-of-
period net worth cannot be negative. Appendix A shows that, under these
conditions, incentive-compatibility imposes the following constraints:
                                                                            
                                      i
          a(sj ) − a(s1 ) ≥ (1 − φ ) · (wj +     zj ktν )   − (w1 +   z1 ktν )   (4)

                   a(sj ) ≥ 0                                                    (5)

for all j ∈ {1, ..., N }. Here N denotes the number of possible realizations of
the two shocks and s1 is the lowest (worse) realization.
    The first condition requires that the variation in net worth, a(sj ) − a(s1 ),
cannot be smaller than the variation in income, scaled by 1 − φi . When φi
is sufficiently large, agents are able to maintain constant consumption (full
insurance). When φi = 0—implying that income can be diverted without
losses—only non-state-contingent claims are feasible. The second constraint
imposes limited liability.
    Two key points of this setup are worth emphasizing. First, φi pertains to
the residency of the agents, regardless of the geographic location of the assets
they own. In particular, if asset markets are globally integrated, domestic
agents can buy foreign productive assets and receive foreign income, but still

                                          12
their feasible claims are determined by the domestic, not the foreign φ. This
assumption implies that the ability of an agent to divert investment incomes
generated abroad depends on the institutional, legal and contractual envi-
ronment of the residence country.4 Second, what is crucial for our results is
the limited ability to insure idiosyncratic risks, and not the specific source of
markets incompleteness. We chose here a setup based on limited verifiabil-
ity of shocks and limited liability because of its analytical simplicity. Other
frictions, such as information asymmetries, would lead to similar results as
long as they limit the agents’ ability to insure away idiosyncratic risk.

3.1    Optimization problem and equilibrium
Let {Pτi , qτi (sτ , sτ +1 )}∞
                             τ =t be a (deterministic) sequence of prices in country i.
A single agent’s optimization problem can be written as:
                                         (                                         )
                                                                         
            Vti (s, a) =                                    i
                                                               s0 , a(s0 ) g(s, s0 )
                                                     X
                             max         U (c) + β        Vt+1                          (6)
                            c,k,b(s0 )
                                                     s0

                            subject to

                            (2), (3), (4) and (5)
where we have used the convention of denoting current ‘individual’ variables
without subscript and next period ‘individual’ variables with the prime su-
perscript. Notice that this is the optimization problem for any deterministic
sequence of prices, not only steady states. This motivates the time subscript
in the value function.
    The solution to the agent’s problem provides the decision rules for con-
sumption, cit (s, a), productive assets, kti (s, a), and contingent claims bit (s, a)(s0 ).
These rules determine the evolution of the distribution of agents over s, k
and b, which we denote by Mti (s, k, b). The definition of equilibria with and
without international mobility of capital are as follows:

Definition 1 (Autarky) Given the financial deepness, φi , and initial dis-
tributions, Mti (s, k, b), for i ∈ {1, .., I}, a general equilibrium without mobil-
ity is defined by sequences of: (i) policies {ciτ (s, a), kτi (s, a), biτ (s, a)(s0 )}∞
                                                                                      τ =t ;
   4
    One way to think about this assumption is that agents repatriate the incomes earned
abroad. Once the incomes are transferred back to the home country, the verifiability of
these incomes is determined by the local institutions.

                                              13
 (ii) value functions {Vτi (s, a)}∞                          i i       i     0 ∞
                                      τ =t ; (iii) prices {Pτ , rτ , qτ (s, s )}τ =t ; (iv) dis-
                    i         ∞
 tributions {Mτ (s, k, b)}τ =t+1 . Such that: (i) the policy rules solve problem
 (6) and {Vτi (s, k)}∞  τ =t are the associated value functions;          (ii) prices satisfy
                0
qR τ = g(s, s )/(1 + rt ); (iii) asset markets clear, s,k,b kτ (s, a)Mτi (s, k, b) = 1,
   i                     i                                           i
                                                           R
            i         0    i                0
  s,k,b,w0 bτ (s, a)(w )Mτ (s, k, b)g(s, s ) = 0 for all τ ≥ t and in each country
i ∈ {1, .., I}; (iv) the sequence of distributions is consistent with the initial
distribution, the individual policies and the idiosyncratic shocks.

Definition 2 (Financial integration) Given the financial deepness, φi ,
and initial distributions, Mti (s, k, b), for i ∈ {1, .., I}, a general equilib-
rium with mobility of capital is defined by sequences of: (i) agents’ poli-
cies {ciτ (s, a), kτi (s, a), biτ (s, a)(s0 )}∞                               i       ∞
                                               τ =t ; (ii) value functions {Vτ (s, a)}τ =t ; (iii)
prices {Pτi , rτi , qτi (s, s0 )}∞                                 i        ∞
                                  τ =t ; (iv) distributions {Mτ (s, k, b)}τ =t+1 . Such that:
                                                                i      ∞
(i) the policy rules solve problem (6) and {Vτ (s, k)}τ =t are the associated
value functions; (ii) prices satisfy qτi = g(s, s0 )/(1R+ rti ), Pτi = Pτ and rτi = rτ ,
for Rall i ∈ {1, .., I}; (iii) asset markets clear, i s,k,b kτi (s, a)Mτi (s, k, b) = I,
                                                               P
              i           0     i                 0
  i s,k,b,s0 bτ (s, a)(s )Mτ (s, k, b)g(s, s ) = 0 for all τ ≥ t; (iv) the sequence of
P

distributions is consistent with the initial distribution, the individual policies
and the idiosyncratic shocks.

    The only difference in the two definitions is that with financial integration
there is a global market for assets, and hence asset prices are equalized across
countries (conditions (ii) and (iii)). This also implies that the assets owned by
a country are no longer equal to the assets located in the country. Therefore,
foreign asset positions are not necessarily zero. Also notice that one country
may hold a larger share of the world productive asset than its domestic share.
In this case a fraction of this country’s agents will be producing abroad.
However, the set of feasible claims still depends on the domestic φi .

4    Characterization of the equilibrium

This section characterizes the properties of the equilibrium with and without
international financial integration. To illustrate these properties, it is conve-
nient to consider first the special cases with only endowment or investment
risks. This clarifies the different role played by these two shocks.




                                               14
4.1    Endowment shocks only
Consider first the case in which z is not stochastic, that is, z = z̄ and the
only source of idiosyncratic uncertainty is the endowment w. Denote by φ̄ a
sufficiently high value of the enforcement parameter so that the enforcement
constraint (4) is not binding. When shocks are iid, this is obtained by setting
φ̄ = 1. With persistent shocks, however, φ̄ must be strictly greater than 1. To
show the importance of financial deepness, we compare the limiting cases of
complete markets (φ = φ̄) and non-state-contingent assets only (φ = 0). First
we look at the autarky regime and then the regime with financial integration.
    When φ = φ̄, constraint (4) is not binding by definition. Therefore, the
first-order conditions with respect to k and b(w0 ) are:

             U 0 (c) = β(1 + rt )U 0 (c(w0 )) + (1 + rt )λ(w0 ) ,         ∀ w0           (7)

             U 0 (c) = βRt (k, z̄)EU 0 (c(w0 )) + Rt (k, z̄)Eλ(w0 )                      (8)

where λ(w0 ) is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the limited liability
constraint (5) and Rt (k, z̄) = (Pt+1 + ν z̄k ν−1 )/Pt is the gross marginal return
from the productive asset. Notice that Rt (k, z̄) is strictly decreasing in k.
    The first condition holds for any realization of w0 , which implies that next
period consumption, c(w0 ), must be the same for all w0 (full insurance).5
    The second condition, together with the first, implies Rt (k, z̄) = 1 + rt ,
that is, the marginal return from the productive asset is equal to the interest
rate. Because Rt (k, z̄) is strictly decreasing in k, this implies that all agents
choose the same input of the productive asset, that is, k = 1. Given that
the supply of the productive asset is fixed, total output is also fixed. The
following lemma establishes that the equilibrium must satisfy β(1 + rt ) = 1.

Lemma 1 Consider the autarky regime and assume φ = φ̄. Then the inter-
est rate and the price of the asset are constant and equal to r = 1/β − 1 and
P = ν z̄/r.

Proof 1 If β(1 + rt ) = 1 is not satisfied, condition (7) implies that the
consumption growth of all agents will be either positive or negative. This
cannot be an equilibrium because aggregate output is constant. Therefore, rt =
   5
     This is obvious when the limited liability constraint is not binding so that λ(w0 ) = 0.
It can be shown that this also holds when λ(w0 ) > 0.

                                             15
1/β − 1. Using the fact that all agents use the same units of the productive
asset, k = 1, conditions (7) and (8) imply (Pt+1 + ν z̄)/Pt = 1 + rt . The only
stationary solution for this difference equation is Pt = Pt+1 = ν z̄/rt . Q.E.D.

    This establishes that with φ = φ̄ we are in an economy with complete
markets. Let’s look now at the other limiting case in which φ = 0. The
enforceability constraint (4) imposes that b(w1 ) = ... = b(wN ) = b, that is,
claims cannot be state-contingent. The first-order conditions are:

              U 0 (c) = β(1 + rt ) EU 0 (c(w0 )) + (1 + rt )Eλ(w0 )         (9)

              U 0 (c) = βR(k, z̄)EU 0 (c(w0 )) + R(k, z̄)Eλ(w0 )           (10)


    In this case we have again that Rt (k, z̄) = 1 + rt and the input of the
productive asset is the same for all agents. Individual consumption, how-
ever, is not constant but depends on the realization of the endowment. This
is a standard Bewley (1986) economy with uninsurable endowment risks.
Because all agents use the same input of the productive asset, which is in
limited supply, they get the same investment income. As it is known from the
savings literature (see Huggett (1993), Ayagari (1994) and Carroll (1997)),
the uninsurability of the idiosyncratic risk generates precautionary savings
and in the steady state β(1 + rt ) < 1.

Lemma 2 Consider the autarky regime and assume φ = 0. Then the interest
rate satisfies rt < 1/β − 1 and the steady state price is P = ν z̄/r.

Proof 2 Suppose that β(1 + rt ) ≥ 1. Because U 0 (.) is convex, condition (7)
implies that, for all agents, the expected next period consumption is bigger
than current consumption. Therefore, next period aggregate consumption will
also be greater than today consumption. This cannot be an equilibrium be-
cause aggregate income is constant. Therefore, rt < 1/β − 1. Using the fact
that all agents employ the same productive asset, k = 1, conditions (7) and
(8) imply (Pt+1 + ν z̄)/Pt = 1 + rt . In the steady state the price and the
interest rate are constant. Therefore, P = ν z̄/r.                    Q.E.D.

    Lemmas 1 and 2 establish that in autarky the economy with lower finan-
cial deepness (φ = 0) has a lower interest rate and, at least in the steady

                                       16
state, a higher price for the asset. Let’s consider now the regime with capital
mobility between two countries with different financial deepness. Suppose
that country 1 has φ1 = φ̄ and country 2 has φ2 = 0. The following proposi-
tion characterizes the steady state equilibrium with capital mobility.

Proposition 1 Suppose that φ1 = φ̄ and φ2 = 0. In the equilibrium with
financial integration, rt < 1/β − 1 and country 1 accumulates a negative net
foreign asset position but holds a zero net position in the productive asset.
Proof 1 Appendix B.


    The case with φ1 = φ̄ and φ2 = 0 allowed us to establish analytical re-
sults. From these results we can infer the properties of the equilibrium for
intermediate values of φ. In general, lower values of φ increase precautionary
savings and reduce the equilibrium interest rate. Figure 6 shows the equilib-
rium of the model under autarky and under financial integration. The figure
plots the aggregate demand for assets (i.e. savings) in each country as an
increasing, concave function of r.6 Country 1 has deeper financial markets
(φ1 > φ2 ), and hence lower asset demand for each interest rate. Because the
supply of the productive asset is fixed, aggregate net savings (in terms of the
productive asset) must be zero under autarky in each country. This requires
a higher autarky interest rate in country 1 (r1 > r2 ).
    When the countries become financially integrated, the prices of the pro-
ductive asset and the interest rates are equalized. Compared to autarky, the
interest rate and the demand for assets (in units of K) fall in country 1 and
rise in country 2, and hence the country with deeper financial markets ends
up with a negative foreign asset position.
    A similar result is obtained by Willen (2004) in a two-period endowment
economy with incomplete asset markets and trade, but without investment
shocks. However, as stated in Proposition 1, endowment shocks alone cannot
generate differences in portfolio composition between financial and produc-
tive assets. As we will see in the next section, it is the presence of investment
shocks that generates differences in portfolio composition.
   6
    The asset demand curves in Figure 6 correspond to the well-known average asset de-
mand curve from the closed-economy heterogenous agents literature (e.g. Aiyagari (1994)).
Average asset demand diverges to infinity as the interest rate approaches the rate of time
preference from below, because agents need an infininte amount of precautionary savings
as they aim to attain non-stochastic consumption while their income remains stochastic.

                                           17
                        Supply of K                                Supply of K
           6                                            6
                                          K 1 (r)                                    K 1 (r)
      r1                                    K 2 (r) r                                  K 2 (r)
      r2




                                          -                                          -
                                         K                                           K
                   a) Autarky                                 b) Mobility


 Figure 6: Steady state equilibria with heterogeneous financial conditions.

   To summarize, the analysis of this section shows that the economy with
only endowment shocks can generate nonzero foreign asset positions but can-
not account for differences in the composition of foreign portfolios. For this
we need investment shocks.

4.2   Investment shocks only
We now consider the case in which the productivity z is stochastic while the
endowment is constant, that is, w = w̄. The assumption that investment
income is stochastic allows us to distinguish debt instruments from risky
investments such as FDI. Also in this case it will be convenient to compare
the limiting cases of φ = φ̄ and φ = 0, starting with autarky.
   When φ = φ̄, the first order conditions are:

               U 0 (c) = β(1 + rt )U 0 (c(z 0 )) + (1 + rt )λ(z 0 ) ,         ∀ w0       (11)

               U 0 (c) = βERt (k, z 0 )U 0 (c(z 0 )) + Eλ(z 0 )Rt (k, z 0 )              (12)

   The first condition holds for any realization of z 0 . Therefore, the next
period consumption, c(z 0 ), must be the same for all realizations of z 0 (full
insurance). Because next period consumption is not stochastic, conditions
(11) and (12) imply that ERt (k, z 0 ) = 1 + rt . Therefore, there is no marginal
premium for investing in the productive asset and k is the same for all agents.
Thus, Lemma 1 also applies here and the only equilibrium is characterized

                                              18
by β(1 + rt ) = 1. Intuitively, because agents can insure perfectly against the
idiosyncratic risk, there are no precautionary savings and in equilibrium the
interest rate must be equal to the intertemporal discount rate.
    Let’s look now at the case with φ = 0. The incentive-compatibility con-
straint (4) imposes that b(z1 ) = ... = b(zN ) = b, that is, claims cannot be
state contingent. The first order conditions are:

                  U 0 (c) = β(1 + rt ) EU 0 (c(z 0 )) + (1 + rt )Eλ(z 0 )                (13)

                  U 0 (c) = βEU 0 (c(z 0 ))Rt (k, z 0 ) + Eλ(z 0 )Rt (k, z 0 )           (14)

    Lemma 2 also applies here, that is, the equilibrium interest rate is smaller
than the intertemporal discount rate when φ = 0. This can be proved by
following the same steps of the proof of Lemma 2. The main difference
with the case of endowment shocks is that now there is a premium over the
interest rate for the expected marginal return from the risky asset. To see
this, consider the case in which the borrowing limit is not binding. Then
conditions (13) and (14) imply:
                                                                                        
              0       0                    0     0    0                     0    0   0
  (1 + rt )EU (c(z )) = ERt (k, z )EU (c(z )) + Cov Rt (k, z ) , U (c(z ))

    Because U 0 (c(z 0 )) is in general negatively correlated with Rt (k, z 0 ), the
last term on the right-hand-side is negative. Therefore, ERt (k, z 0 ) > 1 + rt ,
that is, there is a marginal premium for investing in the risky asset.
    Now suppose that the two countries become financially integrated. The
first country has φ1 = φ̄ and the second φ2 = 0. The following proposition
characterizes the new steady state equilibrium with capital mobility.

Proposition 2 Suppose that φ1 = φ̄ and φ2 = 0. In the steady state with
financial integration, r < 1/β − 1. Country 1 has a negative net foreign asset
position but a positive position in the productive asset. The average return
of country 1’s foreign assets is larger than the cost of its liabilities.

Proof 2 Appendix B.

    The proposition shows that, with investment shocks, countries with deeper
financial markets invest in foreign (high return) assets and finance the invest-
ment with foreign debt. In the particular case in which the most developed

                                               19
country has φ1 = φ̄, this country ends up with a negative net foreign asset
position. The negativity of the net position, however, cannot be generalized
to any values of φ. Intuitively, if country 1 has a greater ability to insure
than country 2 but the insurance is not perfect, then it will continue to buy
some of the foreign risky asset. By purchasing more of the risky asset, how-
ever, agents take more risk. This in turn may generate enough precautionary
savings up to the point in which the foreign borrowing of country 1 becomes
smaller than the value of the risky assets held abroad. Still, the foreign
position in productive assets is always positive, so this is a general result.7
   Another important point is that, if country 1 cannot insure perfectly
against the investment risk, there will be a marginal risk premium also for
country 1. This further increases country 1’s return from the foreign invest-
ment relative to the cost of its foreign liabilities.

4.3    Both endowment and investment shocks.
With both endowment and investment shocks, the first order conditions with
φ = φ̄ and φ = 0 are also given by (11)-(14). The only difference is that next
period consumption depends on both shocks, that is, c(s0 ). Lemmas (1) and
(2) also apply to this case. We then have the following proposition.

Proposition 3 Suppose that φ1 = φ̄ and φ2 = 0. In the steady state with
capital mobility, r < 1/β − 1. Country 1 has a negative net foreign asset
position but a positive position in the foreign productive asset. The average
return of country 1 foreign ownership is bigger than the cost of its liabilities.

Proof 3 Same as in Proposition 2.

   This is a restatement of proposition 2. In the extreme case of φ1 = φ̄
and φ2 = 0, the addition of endowment shocks does not change the main
properties of the equilibrium. Some of these properties, however, cannot be
generalized to any value of φ1 < φ2 . In particular, while it is always true that
the steady state interest rate is smaller than the intertemporal discount rate
and country 1 always acquires a positive net position in foreign productive
   7
    The concavity of the production function, ν < 1, is crucial here. With a linear
technology, as in Angeletos (2006), the most developed country would own all of the
world’s risky asset. This implies that the less developed country does not face any risk,
and therefore, has no incentive to save.


                                           20
assets, its total net foreign asset position is not necessarily negative. This
depends on the relative importance of the two shocks: as long as the endow-
ment shock is sufficiently large, compared to the investment shock, country
1 holds a negative net foreign asset position.

5       Quantitative analysis

In this section we parameterize the model and show its quantitative proper-
ties. The analysis is limited to two countries: the first is representative of
the United States while the second aggregates all other countries.

5.1      Calibration
We calibrate the model to match the U.S. share of world GDP, which is about
30 percent. The model can be calibrated to reflect this fact in two ways: by
fixing the population size and supply of the productive asset in country 1 to
30 percent of the worldwide quantities, or by setting the average endowment
and productivity of country 1 to 30 percent of the worldwide values. These
two approaches lead to the same results, but the first approach is easier to
work with because differences in size matter only for the market-clearing
conditions.8
    The stochastic endowment takes two values, that is, w = w̄(1 ± ∆w ), with
symmetric transition probability matrix. The investment shock also takes
two values, that is, z = z̄(1 ± ∆z ) but it is assumed to be iid. Interpreting
w as labor income and y as net capital income, we set w̄ = 0.85 and then we
parameterize the production function so that y = z̄k ν = 0.15. Because per-
capita assets are k = 1, this requires z̄ = 0.15. The return to scale parameter
is set to ν = 0.75.
    For the calibration of the stochastic component of the endowment we
follow recent estimates of the U.S. earning process and set the persistence
probability to 0.95 and ∆w = 0.6. These values imply an autocorrelation
coefficient of 0.9 and a standard deviation of log-earnings of 0.30. This is in
the ranges of values estimated by Storesletten, Telmer & Yaron (2004). The
    8
    Let µi be the share of country i and define B i and K i as the per-capita financial
claims and productive assets owned by agents in country i. The worldwide market clearing
conditions are B 1 µ1 + B 2 µ2 = 0 and K 1 µ1 + K 2 µ2 = 1. With productivity differences the
per-capita aggregates B i and K i would be rescaled by the relative productivity.



                                             21
variation in the investment shock is set to ∆z = 2.5. With this parameteri-
zation, the return on the productive asset fluctuates between -6% and 15%.
This approximates the observed volatility of firm-level profits.
    Next we choose the parameters of the financial structure, φ1 and φ2 .
Several indicators, such as those reported in Figure 1, suggest that financial
markets are significantly different across countries. However, it is difficult to
derive a direct mapping from these indicators to actual values of φi . Given
these difficulties, we take a pragmatic approach. We begin by assigning
φ1 = 0.4 and φ2 = 0 but then we conduct a sensitivity analysis. These
values imply that contingent claims are not feasible in country 2 while they
are partially feasible in country 1. The equilibrium allocation in country 1
is similar to the allocation that would be achieved if contingent claims were
not available but the volatility of the endowment was 40 percent lower. In
this sense we can say that the financial structure of country 1 is about 40
percent more advanced than country 2.9
    The utility function is CRRA with the coefficient of risk aversion set to
σ = 2.5. The intertemporal discount rate is chosen to obtain a worldwide
wealth-to-income ratio of 3.5 in the steady state with financial integration.
This is the approximate value resulting from survey data such as the Survey
of Consumer Finances for the US. The required value of β is 0.915.

5.2     Results
Table 2 reports some key variables in the steady state equilibria before and
after international financial integration. Three cases are considered: A) the
baseline model with both shocks, B) endowment shocks only, and C) in-
vestment shocks only. The transition dynamics following capital markets
liberalization are plotted in Figures 7 and 8. For the description of the com-
putational procedure see the appendix.

5.2.1    Case A: Both Shocks
Long Run Properties. The stationary equilibrium with capital mobility
is characterized by country 1 having a positive position in productive assets
   9
     According to the data shown in Figure 1, the difference between the financial index
for the US and the average index for all other advanced economies is about 40 percent.
Therefore, it seems reasonable to start with φ1 = 0.4 and φ2 = 0.




                                          22
but a much larger negative position in riskless bonds. The country net po-
sition in bonds is measured as the sum of the claims b of all agents in the
country. As a percent of income, country 1’s debt position is nearly -168
percent and its position in foreign risky assets is 117 percent. As a result,
the net foreign asset position is negative and quite large, at about -50 per-
cent of income. Because of the higher return from the foreign holdings of
risky assets, country 1 receives positive factor payments, equivalent to 0.27
percent of income, despite the negative net foreign asset position. Moreover,
these large changes in asset positions are accompanied by small changes in
asset prices and the risk free interest rates. The interest rate in country
1 falls by just 70 basis points relative to its autarky value. Interestingly,
Warnock and Warnock’s (2006) estimated the effect of foreign purchases on
the yield for 10-year U.S. Treasury bills and showed that foreign purchases
have contributed to a decline of about 50 basis points on average between
1984 and 2005. Thus, the model is consistent with the data in that the large
decline in the U.S. net foreign assets coincided with the globalization of cap-
ital markets, and with a negative but small effect of foreign inflows on the
U.S. risk-free interest rate.

Transition after liberalization. Figure 7 plots the dynamics of several
variables. Before financial integration, both countries were in the autarky
steady state and the opening of world capital markets is not anticipated. As
can be seen from the first panel, the decline in the net foreign asset position
of country 1 is a slow, gradual process. The current account drops to a deficit
of 4 percent of output on impact and remains in deficit for many periods until
it balances in the limit.
    The pattern of a large initial deficit followed by gradual recovery is a con-
sequence of the particular exercise we are conducting, where capital markets
are fully integrated overnight. In reality, the process of financial integra-
tion has been gradual (see Figure 2). With gradual integration, the current
account dynamics would been more in line with the U.S. data.10
    Figure 7 also plots the composition of foreign assets and the current
  10
    In the data, there are also well-known shocks driving U.S. current account deficits, such
as oil price shocks and the collapse of investment rates in Asia after the 1997-98 Sudden
Stops. However, the goal of our analysis is not to track the cyclical pattern of the U.S.
current account, but to explain the secular decline in its net foreign assets since the mid
1980s. Because flows are usually more volatile than stocks, we believe that understanding
the dynamics of net foreign assets is a more fundamental question.


                                             23
  Table 2: Steady state with and without capital mobility.

                                     Autarky                 Capital mobility

                            Country 1     Country 2        Country 1     Country 2


A) Both shocks

   Asset price                3.24           3.69            3.54          3.54
   Interest rate              3.08%          2.30%           2.56%         2.56%
   Return on risky asset      4.57%          3.94%           3.89%         4.28%

   Foreign asset position        -             -           -50.31%        21.31%
   Foreign bonds                 -             -          -167.62%        70.98%
   Foreign risky asset           -             -           117.31%       -49.68%

   Net exports                   -             -            -0.27%          0.11%
   Net factor payments           -             -             0.27%         -0.11%

B) Endowment shocks only

   Asset price                3.08           3.44            3.33          3.33
   Interest rate              3.66%          3.27%           3.38%         3.38%
   Return on risky asset      4.87%          4.36%           4.50%         4.50%

   Foreign asset position        -             -            -45.85%       19.65%
   Foreign bonds                 -             -           -45.85%        19.65%
   Foreign risky asset           -             -             0.00%         0.00%

   Net exports                   -             -             1.55%         -0.66%
   Net factor payments           -             -            -1.55%          0.66%

C) Investment shocks only

   Asset price                1.23          1.17             1.20          1.20
   Interest rate              8.31%         7.02%            7.58%         7.58%
   Return on risky asset     12.18%        12.66%           11.54%        12.99%

   Foreign asset position        -             -           -17.78%         7.51%
   Foreign bonds                 -             -           -62.43%        26.36%
   Foreign risky asset           -             -            44.64%       -18.85%

   Net exports                   -             -            -0.42%          0.18%
   Net factor payments           -             -             0.42%         -0.18%


Notes: Foreign asset positions, current account, net exports and net factor payments
are in percentage of domestic income (endowment plus domestic dividends).




                                        24
Figure 7: Transition dynamics after capital markets liberalization.




                                25
account. Immediately after financial integration, country 1 purchases a large
quantity of foreign productive assets financed with foreign debt. As the
country’s wealth declines (due to lower savings), the foreign exposure to
the risky investment is partially reduced. Despite the negative foreign asset
position, country 1 receives net factor payments from abroad due to the
higher return on the productive assets. These payments, however, are more
than compensated by negative net exports and thus the country experiences
current account deficits until it reaches the steady state. Notice that the
portfolio adjustment is very drastic. The reallocation of the portfolio across
debt and risky investments would be smoother if there were adjustment costs
and/or the liberalization of capital markets was gradual.
    In summary, the results for case A) highlight three important points.
First, the country with deeper financial markets takes a positive position
in foreign risky assets. Because this position is more than compensated
by foreign borrowing, the country’s net foreign asset position is negative.
Still, the higher return from the risky assets allows this country to receive
net positive factor payments from abroad. Second, the magnitude of the
total net foreign liabilities can be large, about half the value of domestic
production. Third, the formation of the external imbalances is a gradual
process that takes a long period of time: only 2/3 of the long-run net foreign
asset position is accumulated in the first 15 years.

5.2.2   Cases B and C: One shock only
Long Run Properties. Endowment shocks alone can produce a large neg-
ative foreign asset position (of roughly -46 percent of output). However, they
cannot explain the observed shift in the composition of the portfolios of for-
eign assets. By contrast, the setup with only investment shocks does produce
a portfolio with a substantial increase in debt and a positive position in for-
eign risky assets. However, the total net foreign asset position at steady state
(-18 percent of output) is small compared to what we see in U.S. data.

Transition after liberalization. Figure 8 plots the transition dynamics
in country 1 following financial integration in cases A), B), and C). As can
be seen, the dynamics with only one shock are qualitatively similar to those
with both shocks. They only differ in magnitude.
  In summary, as anticipated in Section 4, the economy with only endow-
ment shocks generates large net foreign asset positions but cannot capture

                                      26
   Figure 8: Transition dynamics in country 1 for different type of risks.

the fact that a share of US foreign holdings are in high-return assets in the
form of portfolio equity and FDI. On the other hand, the economy with
only investment shocks accounts for the US foreign ownership of high-return
assets but it generates a small net foreign asset position.11 By combining
endowment and investment shocks, we can capture both features of the US
  11
     For some parameterizations, country 1 may accumulate positive asset positions. This
seems to contradict Proposition 2. This proposition, however, applies only to the case with
φ1 = φ̄. As remarked in Section 4.2, the country with better financial markets invests more
in the risky asset. By doing so, it also takes more risk which increases the incentive to save.
As a result, the country may end up accumulating a positive net foreign asset position.


                                              27
international asset position: large net foreign liabilities and a portfolio com-
position tilted toward high-return assets.

5.3    Welfare consequences of financial integration
We examine next the normative implications of the model. We are interested
in answering two questions: Is international financial integration welfare en-
hancing for the participating countries?, and how are the welfare effects dis-
tributed amongst the population of each country?
    Figure 9 plots the welfare consequences of financial integration in coun-
tries 1 and 2 as a function of net worth, a, and for different realizations of
the endowment.12 We show the results for the same three cases reported
in Table 2: the model with endowment and investment shocks, endowment
shocks alone and investment shocks alone. The welfare effects are computed
as the percentage increase in consumption in the autarky steady state that
makes agents indifferent between remaining in autarky and shifting to the
regime with financial integration.
    All three charts show that agents with lower initial wealth gain in country
1 and lose in country 2. This is a consequence of the changes in interest rates
after financial integration. The interest rate falls in country 1, and this is
beneficial for poorer agents because they are net borrowers and harmful for
wealthy agents because they are net lenders. The opposite is true in country
2 where the interest rate increases after financial integration.
    The aggregate welfare effects are computed using an equally weighted wel-
fare function. Because all agents are weighted equally, the aggregate welfare
effects depend on the initial distribution over net worth and endowments.
The equally-weighted welfare effects are reported in Table 3. Because most
of the agents are concentrated on the left-hand side of the distribution, the
aggregate welfare effects are dominated by the effects on poorer agents. As a
result, country 1 gains on average while country 2 is worse off independently
of the types of shocks affecting the economy. For the economy with both
shocks, country 1’s welfare increases by 2.7 percent of consumption while
country 2 experiences a welfare loss of 1.0 percent.
    The fact that country 1 gains and country 2 loses on average can be
explained as follows. Without financial integration, aggregate savings must
be zero because our model is essentially a Lucas-tree economy without capital
  12
    The current realization of the endowment is a state variable because endowment shocks
are persistent. Investment shocks, instead, can be ignored because z is iid.

                                           28
                Figure 9: Welfare effects of financial integration.

accumulation. The interest rate will adjust so that this holds at equilibrium.
With financial integration, however, each country can access the global asset
markets. In particular, country 2 can access higher returns by lending to
country 1. The higher return induces country 2’ agents to save more. But
each individual agent does not internalize that, by saving more, the initial
interest rate received from country 1 is going to fall. This will move the
‘terms of trade’ in favor of country 1 as this country can now borrow at a
cheaper price (lower interest rate).13
    It is important to emphasize that in this model financial integration has
only a secondary effect on efficiency. Although country 2 can benefit from
  13
     This can be easily seen in a simple example that can be solved analytically. Suppose
that there are only two periods and agents in both countries receive the same sequence
of non-stochastic endowments. Differential incentives to save are generated by assuming
that in each country there is a different saving subsidy, γ i . This subsidy generates similar
effects on savings as income uncertainty. Further assume that γ 2 > γ 1 ≥ 1. It can then
be shown that financial liberalization generates welfare gains for country 1 and losses for
country 2.


                                             29
      Table 3: Equally weighted welfare gains (percent of consumption).

                                                  Country 1   Country 2


                  Economy with both risks           2.71        -1.00
                  Economy with endowment risks      2.86        -1.33
                  Economy with investment risks     0.47        -0.18




disinvesting in the risky asset, and therefore, from the lower risk, this is
more than compensated by the lower investment income. Thus, if one coun-
try gains, the other must lose. It should be noticed, however, that we are
abstracting from possible dynamic gains that may arise with capital markets
integration such as those associated with technological adoption, risk-sharing,
capital accumulation, and efficient re-allocation of factors of production. In
addition, capital markets integration may contribute to deepen financial mar-
kets in countries where they are less developed. The effects reported above
were derived keeping constant the financial structure before and after liber-
alization. For these reasons, the results of our welfare analysis should not be
taken as suggesting that financial globalization is detrimental for countries
with less developed financial markets. Still, the results do suggest that, in
order to argue that financial globalization is welfare improving for all partic-
ipating countries, one has to show that the dynamic gains not captured in
our analysis are large.

5.4    Sensitivity analysis: changes in financial deepness
Table 4 reports steady state values for different parameterizations of φ1 and
φ2 . In the top section of the table we reduce φ1 from 0.4 to 0.2, keeping φ2 at
the original value of zero (i.e. we narrow the gap between φ1 and φ2 to 0.2).
In the second panel we increase φ1 to 0.8 with φ2 still at zero (i.e. the gap
between φ1 and φ2 widens to 0.8). In the third panel we study what happens
if financial integration implies an increase in φ2 from 0 to 0.2.
     The impact of these changes on the equilibrium outcomes is as expected.
More (less) heterogeneity in financial deepness leads to larger (smaller) global
imbalances. In particular, the country with more advanced financial markets
accumulates larger (smaller) positions in the productive asset and borrows
more (less) from abroad. The welfare effects also become bigger (smaller).


                                          30
Table 4: Steady state with and without capital mobility. Sensitivity analysis.

                                            Autarky                 Capital mobility

                                   Country 1     Country 2        Country 1     Country 2


       A) φ1 = 0.2, φ2 = 0.0

          Asset price                3.46           3.69            3.62          3.62
          Interest rate              2.68%          2.30%           2.42%         2.42%
          Return on risky asset      4.25%          3.94%           3.90%         4.10%

          Foreign asset position        -             -           -22.74%         9.68%
          Foreign bonds                 -             -           -81.89%        34.86%
          Foreign risky asset           -             -            59.16%       -25.18%

          Welfare gains                 -             -            1.23%         -0.48%

       B) φ1 = 0.8, φ2 = 0.0

          Asset price                2.81           3.69            3.37          3.37
          Interest rate              3.92%          2.30%           2.88%         2.88%
          Return on risky asset      5.33%          3.94%           3.95%         4.69%

          Foreign asset position        -             -          -121.54%       51.13%
          Foreign bonds                 -             -          -330.47%      139.03%
          Foreign risky asset           -             -           208.94%      -87.90%

          Welfare gains                 -             -            6.72%         -2.09%

       A) φ1 = 0.4, φ2 = 0.2

          Asset price                3.24           3.46            3.39          3.39
          Interest rate              3.08%          2.68%           2.81%         2.81%
          Return on risky asset      4.57%          4.25%           4.22%         4.41%

          Foreign asset position        -             -           -26.84%        11.43%
          Foreign bonds                 -             -           -78.03%        33.24%
          Foreign risky asset           -             -            51.19%       -21.80%

          Welfare gains                 -             -            1.34%         -0.53%


       Notes: Foreign asset positions, current account, net exports and net factor payments
       are in percentage of domestic income (endowment plus domestic dividends).




                                               31
Still, even in the case with φ1 = 0.2 and φ2 = 0, financial integration results in
sizable global imbalances, with country 1 holding a net foreign asset position
of -23 percent of GDP, a debt position of -82 percent, and a position in foreign
risky assets of 60 percent. The welfare gain for country 1 remains large at 1.23
percent of consumption. Note that introducing differences in the variance of
income fluctuations across countries would have analogous effects. Countries
with more volatile income profiles will look similar to countries with lower
values of φ (i.e., they would be countries with stronger precautionary needs).
    The results reported at the bottom of Table 4, where φ1 = 0.4 and φ2 =
0.2, are similar to those reported in the top section of the Table (which
assumes φ1 = 0.2 and φ2 = 0). This shows that differences in the values of φ
are more important than the absolute values. Hence, as long as one country,
or group of countries, are more financially developed than the rest, the model
predicts that financial globalization produces a large decline in net foreign
assets for the most financially developed area and a welfare loss for the less
financially developed area.
    The case with φ1 = 0.4 and φ2 = 0.2 can be interpreted as capturing
the situation in which financial integration facilitates financial development
in country 2. The idea is that country 2 starts with φ2 = 0 but, after
liberalization, the enforcement parameter increases to φ2 = 0.2. We can see
that the consequences of liberalization are smaller but still significant.

6        Global imbalances with capital accumulation

The model studied so far abstracts from the aggregate accumulation of capi-
tal. The goal of this section is to extend the model to allow for the endogenous
supply of productive assets (i.e. the capital stock).
    We make the following changes. First, we assume that production requires
both capital and labor. Without the input of labor, the cross-country location
of capital would not be determined.14 The production function is yt+1 =
zt+1 (ktθ lt1−θ )ν , where kt is the input of capital and lt is the efficiency units
of labor. Both capital and labor are chosen one period in advance, and
therefore, before observing the shock. Capital depreciates at rate δ. Because
capital is reproducible, its price is Pt = 1.
    14
    New capital could be allocated at home or abroad. Without the labor input, the
return from the investment is independent of the international location. By having labor
as a complementary input of production, the returns from investments depend on wages.
This guarantees that the aggregate cross-country location of capital will be determined.

                                          32
    The second change is that the previous endowment shocks are now in-
terpreted as shocks to the efficiency units of labor. The price of labor—the
wage rate—will be determined in equilibrium to clear the labor market.
    Denote the efficiency units of labor and the wage rate by εt and wti respec-
tively. The idiosyncratic shocks are st = (εt , zt ) with conditional probability
distribution g(st , st+1 ). The agent’s problem is:
                                           (                                                      )
                                                                                       
                                                                               0    0         0
           Vti (s, a)                                                i
                                                             X
                        =     max          U (c) + β               Vt+1       s , a(s ) g(s, s )          (15)
                            c,l,k,b(s0 )
                                                              s0

                            subject to

                                                   b(s0 )qti (s, s0 )
                                           X
                   a = c+k+
                                           s0
               a(s0 ) = ε0 wt+1
                            i
                                + (1 − δ)k + z 0 (k θ l1−θ )ν − lwt+1
                                                                  i
                                                                      + b(s0 )
                                                                                                     
      a(sj ) − a(s1 ) ≥ (1 − φi ) · (εj − ε1 )wt+1
                                               i
                                                   + (zj − z1 )(k θ l1−θ )ν
               a(s0 ) ≥ 0

    Given the sequence of wages and interest rates, the problem solved by
each individual agent is similar to the problem solved in the previous setup.
The only difference is that now there is also a choice for the input of labor.
However, because the optimal capital-labor ratio only depends on the wage
and the interest rate, the individual problem is analogous to (6).
    The definition of equilibria provided in Section 3.1 requires only two minor
changes: instead of the price for the productive asset we now have the price
for labor (the wage rate) and the market-clearing condition for the productive
asset is replaced with the market-clearing condition in the labor market.

6.1   Quantitative results
The parametrization of the model uses, when possible, the same parameters
used in the previous model. The risk aversion is σ = 2.5 and the efficiency
units of labor follow the same stochastic process as the previous endowment.
    In the production function we set ν = 0.75 so that at the individual level
production has the same returns to scale as in the previous model. Then
we choose θ to have an average capital income share of 0.36. The variability
in the investment shock, ∆z , is set to 0.5. This leads to similar volatility

                                                     33
of capital returns as in the previous model. The targeted wealth-to-income
ratio can now be achieved by choosing either β or δ (in the previous model
there was no depreciation). We proceed by fixing β to 0.94 and then we
choose δ so that the wealth-to-income ratio in the economy with mobility is
3.5. This requires δ = 0.024.
    Table 5 compares stationary equilibria before and after financial integra-
tion for the three cases examined in Table 2. Qualitatively, the properties of
the model are similar with and without endogenous accumulation of capital.
Because the capital-labor ratio is the same in the two countries, country 1
owns part of the capital located in country 2. At the same time, country
1 borrows heavily from country 2 and the net foreign asset position is neg-
ative. Although not reported, country 1 receives positive factor payments
from abroad because of the much higher return from risky capital.
    Quantitatively, the economy with both investment and earning shocks
generates a negative net foreign asset position in country 1 that is nearly
twice as large as the one obtained with the previous model without capital
accumulation. The positions in bonds and risky capital are both smaller with
capital accumulation than without (-130 instead of -168 percent for debt and
33 instead of 117 percent for risky capital), but since the difference is larger,
the net foreign asset position falls more. The welfare consequences are still
sizable: the welfare gain for country 1 measures 2.1 percent and the loss for
country 2 is almost 0.6 percent. Notice that, with capital accumulation, lib-
eralization does not generate capital gains or losses as in the previous model.
This also contributes in differentiating the welfare consequences between the
two models. Finally, the combination of the two shocks is still crucial for
reproducing the fact that the large negative foreign asset position of country
1 features a portfolio composed of a large debt position and a positive po-
sition in foreign risky capital. In short, our main findings are robust to the
introduction of capital accumulation.
    We do not report the transition dynamics because they are similar to
those for the economy without capital accumulation. The only important
difference is that in the first period after financial integration, there is a large
reallocation of capital from country 2 to country 1. This is because the stock
of capital of country 1 in the autarky equilibrium is smaller than in country
2. Because factor prices are equalized immediately, so does capital. The
reallocation of capital in the first period implies a trade deficit and a jump
in net foreign liabilities for country 1 above 20 percent of GDP. Of course,
changing the cross-country location of installed capital may be costly. So it

                                        34
Table 5: Steady state with endogenous accumulation of capital.

                                       Autarky                  Capital mobility

                               Country 1    Country 2         Country 1     Country 2


 A) Both shocks

    Wage                         0.702          0.693           0.697         0.697
    Interest rate                1.56%          0.55%           0.83%         0.83%
    Return on risky capital     11.63%          9.19%           9.24%        10.19%

    Foreign asset position         -              -           -97.10%        40.33%
    Foreign bonds                  -              -          -129.76%        53.90%
    Foreign risky capital          -              -            32.66%       -13.57%

    Welfare gains                  -              -            2.07%         -0.58%

 B) Endowment shocks only

    Wage                         0.704           0.710         0.708          0.708
    Interest rate                2.68%           2.32%         2.43%          2.43%
    Return on risky capital     14.23%          13.06%         13.40%        13.40%

    Foreign asset position         -              -           -33.75%        14.46%
    Foreign bonds                  -              -          -33.75%         14.46%
    Foreign risky capital          -              -             0.00%        0.00%

    Welfare gains                  -              -            0.41%         -0.17%

 C) Investment shocks only

    Wage                         0.657           0.643         0.649          0.649
    Interest rate                4.77%           3.07%         3.60%          3.60%
    Return on risky capital     22.59%          19.12%         19.13%        20.79%

    Foreign asset position         -              -           -81.92%        34.06%
    Foreign bonds                  -              -          -98.41%         40.91%
    Foreign risky capital          -              -            16.48%        -6.85%

    Welfare gains                  -              -            1.14%         -0.28%


 Notes: Foreign asset positions, current account, net exports and net factor payments
 are in percentage of domestic income (endowment plus domestic dividends).




                                           35
would make sense to assume the presence of adjustment costs. This would
make the transition to the steady state equilibrium smoother.

7   Conclusion

This paper shows that international financial integration can lead to large
and persistent global imbalances when countries differ in the degree of do-
mestic financial development. Financial integration induces countries with
deeper financial markets to reduce savings and accumulate a large stock of
net foreign liabilities in a long and gradual process. Financial heterogeneity
also affects the composition of the portfolio of net foreign assets. Coun-
tries with deeper financial markets borrow heavily from abroad and invest in
high-return foreign risky assets. As a result, they may receive positive factor
payments even if the net foreign asset position is negative. These patterns are
consistent with the features of the U.S. external imbalances observed since
the beginning of the 1980s. Moreover, we can explain these facts solely as the
outcome of financial integration in a world with heterogeneity in domestic
financial markets, even if the income process of all countries is the same, the
agents’ preferences are identical, and the structure of domestic asset markets
remains unchanged.
    Our explanation of large and persistent global imbalances implies that
these imbalances are consistent with intertemporal solvency conditions, so
our analysis predicts that the large negative net foreign asset position of the
U.S. is fully ‘sustainable’ and does not lead to a worldwide financial crisis.
Yet, we also find that financial integration could be undesirable for countries
with poorly developed financial systems. We estimated nontrivial welfare
costs for these countries, and the costs are larger for their poorer residents.
However, if financial globalization promotes financial development and al-
lows for other benefits we abstracted from (e.g., technological diffusion, risk
sharing, resource allocation), then the integration of world capital markets
can still be beneficial for all participating countries.




                                      36
A    Appendix: Set of feasible contingent claims

Suppose that agents have the ability to divert part of their income. Diversion
is observable but not verifiable in a legal sense. If an agent diverts x, he or
she retains (1 − φ)x while the remaining part, φx, is lost. We allow φ to be
greater than 1. This can be interpreted as a fine or additional punishment.
A similar assumption is made in Castro, Clementi & MacDonald (2004) but
in an environment with information asymmetry.
    Contracts are signed with financial intermediaries in a competitive en-
vironment. Financial contracts are not exclusive, meaning that agents can
always switch to another intermediary from one period to the other. The set
of state-contingent claims that an intermediary is willing to offer must be
incentive-compatible.
    Let Vt (s, a) be the value function for an agent with current realization of
endowment and investment shocks s, and current net worth a. The net worth
is before consumption. After choosing the contingent claims b(sj ), the next
period value is Vt (sj , a(sj )), where a(sj ) = wj + zj k ν + kPt+1 + b(sj ). In case
of diversion, the agent would claim that the realizations of the endowment
and productivity were the lowest levels s1 and divert the difference wj − w1 +
(zj − z1 )k ν . In this process the agent retains (1 − φ)[wj − w1 + (zj − z1 )k ν ]
and receives b(s1 ). Therefore, the net worth after diversion is:

         w1 + z1 k ν + (1 − φ) · [wj − w1 + (zj − z1 )k ν ] + kPt+1 + b(s1 ) =
         a(s1 ) + (1 − φ) · [wj − w1 + (zj − z1 )k ν ]

and the value of diversion is:
                                                                      
               Vt sj , a(s1 ) + (1 − φ) · [wj − w1 + (zj − z1 )k ν ]

    Incentive-compatibility requires:
                                                                            
      Vt sj , a(sj ) ≥ Vt sj , a(s1 ) + (1 − φ) · [wj − w1 + (zj − z1 )k ν ]

which must hold for all j = 1, .., N .
    It is important to emphasize that the financial intermediary can tell
whether the agent is diverting but there is no court that can verify this and
force the repayment of the diverted funds. Compared to the standard model
with information asymmetries, this assumption is convenient because it sim-
plifies the contracting problem when shocks are persistent. Also convenient

                                         37
is the assumption that financial contracts are not exclusive and agents can
switch to other intermediaries without a cost. This further limits the pun-
ishments available to the current intermediary. Also notice that, although
the new level of wealth after diversion is verifiable when a new contract is
signed, this does not allow the verification of diversion because the addi-
tional resources could derive from lower consumption in previous periods,
which is not observable and verifiable. Again, the intermediary knows that
the additional resources come from diversion but it cannot legally prove it.
    The last assumption is limited liability for which agents renegotiate neg-
ative values of net worth, and therefore, a(sj ) ≥ 0. The agent’s problem can
be written as:
                                         (                                              )
                                                                           
                                                                    0   0           0
                                                       X
             Vt (s, a) =     max          U (c) + β         Vt+1 s , a(s ) g(s, s )
                            c,k,b(s0 )
                                                       s0

                            subject to

                                         b(s0 )q(s, s0 )
                                   X
                    a = c+
                                   s0

                a(s0 ) = w0 + z 0 k ν + kPt+1 + b(s0 )
                                                                                         
       Vt sj , a(sj )   ≥ Vt sj , a(s1 ) + (1 − φ) · [wj − w1 + (zj − z1 )k ν ]

                a(sj ) ≥ 0
    Using standard arguments for recursive problems, we can prove that there
is a unique solution and the function Vt (s, a) is strictly increasing and con-
cave in a.15 The strict monotonicity of the value function implies that the
incentive-compatibility constraint can be written as:
                                                   h                            i
                 a(sj ) ≥ a(s1 ) + (1 − φ) · wj − w1 + (zj − z1 )k ν
for all j = 1, .., N . This is the constraint we imposed on the original problem.
    We shall remark that we arrived at this simple formulation of the con-
straints because of the particular environment. With the alternative assump-
tion of information asymmetries and persistent shocks, the characterization
  15
    The proof is facilitated by defining the variable x = k ν . After making the change of
variables k = x1/ν , it can be easily proved that this is a standard concave problem.

                                                 38
of the optimal contract becomes more complicated. Because the qualita-
tive properties are similar to the model considered here (see, for example,
Fernandes and Phelan (2000)), we opted for the simpler route.

B   Appendix: Analytical proofs

Proof of Proposition 1 In both economies we have that R(k, z̄) = 1 + rt .
Because with capital mobility there is a single worldwide interest rate, all
agents employ the same input of capital k = 1. Therefore, the net posi-
tion in the productive asset is zero. We want to show now that the interest
rate is smaller than the intertemporal discount rate. Suppose, on the con-
trary, that β(1 + rt ) ≥ 1. Under this condition agents in country 1 will have
non-negative consumption growth (see Lemma 1) and agents in country 2
will have positive consumption growth (see Lemma 2). This implies that
worldwide consumption growth is positive which cannot be an equilibrium
because aggregate income is constant. Therefore, the equilibrium must sat-
isfy β(1 + rt ) < 1. Under this condition, agents in country 1 will experience
negative consumption growth (see again Lemma 1). Therefore, consumption
in country 1 keeps falling until the limited liability constraint (5) binds for
all agents, that is, the net worth becomes zero. Because country 1 holds the
whole amount of domestic productive asset, the zero net worth implies that
the foreign liabilities are equal to the value of the domestic asset. Therefore,
the net foreign asset position of country 1 is negative.                Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 2 Suppose that β(1 + r) ≥ 1. Under this con-
dition agents in country 1 will have non-negative consumption growth and
agents in country 2 will have strictly positive consumption growth (Lemmas
1 and 2 apply also to the case with only investment shocks). This implies
that worldwide consumption growth is positive which cannot be a steady
state equilibrium. Therefore, β(1 + rt ) < 1. Under this condition agents in
country 1 will experience negative consumption growth (see again Lemma
1). Therefore, consumption keeps falling until the limited liability constraint
(5) binds for all agents. This implies that the net foreign asset position of
country 1 will be negative.
    To show that country 1 has a positive net position in the productive asset,
consider again the first order conditions (11)-(14). From these conditions we
have that ERt (k, z 0 ) = 1 + r in country 1 and ERt (k, z 0 ) > 1 + r in country 2.


                                        39
The monotonicity of Rt with respect to k implies that the productive asset
used by agents in country 1 must be greater than the productive asset used
by any agent in country 2. Because the supply is the same, country 1 must
own part of the productive asset of country 2.
    What remains to be shown is that for country 1 the average return from
the foreign productive investment is higher than the cost of its foreign liabili-
ties. Even thought the marginal return from the productive asset is equalized
to the interest rate, the concavity of the production function implies that the
average return is higher than the interest rate (liability cost).       Q.E.D.

C     Appendix: Computational procedure

We show first that the economy with contingent claims is equivalent to an
alternative economy where contingent claims are not allowed but agents face a
different process for the exogenous shocks. We can then solve this equivalent
economy where the agents’ problem is a standard portfolio choice between
risky and riskless assets. After showing this, we describe the computational
procedures used to solve for the steady state and transitional equilibria of
the equivalent economy.

C.1    Equivalent economy
Let b̄t be the expected next period value of contingent claims, that is, b̄t =
P
    st+1 b(st+1 )g(st , st+1 ). Then a contingent
                                         P
                                                  claim can be rewritten as b(st+1 ) =
b̄t + x(st+1 ) where, by definition, st+1 x(st+1 )g(st , st+1 ) = 0. The variable b̄t
can be interpreted as a non-contingent bond and the variable x(st+1 ) is the
pure insurance component of contingent claims.
      The law of motion for the next period assets becomes:

                a(st+1 ) = wt+1 + zt+1 ktν + kt Pt+1 + b̄t + x(st+1 )            (16)

    Consider the incentive compatibility constraint. Because agents choose
as much insurance as possible, the incentive-compatibility constraint will be
satisfied with equality, that is,
                                             h                         i
               a(sj ) = a(s1 ) + (1 − φ) · wj − w1 + (zj − z1 )ktν

    Using the law of motion for a, the constraint can be rewritten as:
                                         h                         i
                 x(sj ) − x(s1 ) = −φ · wj − w1 + (zj − z1 )ktν

                                         40
which must hold for all j > 1. The variables x(sj ) must also satisfy the
zero-profit condition, that is,
                               X
                                    x(sj )g(st , sj ) = 0
                                j

Therefore, we have N conditions and N unknowns. We can then solve for
all the N values of x. The solution can be written as:

                      x(sj ) = −φ · Wj (st ) − φ · Zj (st ) · ktν

where Wj (st ) and Zj (st ) are exogenous variables defined as
                                                X
                         Wj (st ) = wj −                g(st , si )wi
                                                    i
                                                X
                         Zj (st ) = zj −                g(st , si )zi
                                                i

Notice that these variables depend on the current shocks which affect the
probability distribution of next period shocks. We made this explicit by
writing the variables as functions of st .
   Define the following variables:

                           w̃j (st ) = wj − φ · Wj (st )
                            z̃j (st ) = zj − φ · Zj (st )

These are transformations of the shocks. Using these new shocks, the law of
motion for next period assets can be written as:

                    a(sj ) = w̃j (st ) + z̃j (st )ktν + kt Pt+1 + b̄t

where now agents no longer choose state contingent assets. Therefore, by
redefining the new shocks w̃j (st ) and z̃j (st ), the problem becomes a standard
portfolio choice between a risky asset, kt , and a riskless asset, b̄t . Differences
in financial deepness are captured by difference in the stochastic properties of
the transformed shock. So, for example, if φ = 0, we go back to the original
shock because contingent claims are not feasible. If φ = 1 and shocks are
iid, the transformed shock becomes a constant. We are in the case of full
insurance. Any intermediate values allow only for partial insurance. In the
computation we will solve the portfolio choice of the transformed model.

                                           41
C.2   Steady state equilibrium
  1. Choose a grid for asset holdings a.

  2. Guess the steady state values of the interest rate, r, and the price P .

  3. Using the first-order conditions, solve for the optimal portfolio choices
     at each grid point of a and for each s, by iterating on the policy rules.
     The solutions are combined using piece-wise linear functions.

  4. Find the steady state distribution of agents using the decision rules and
     compute the clearing conditions for the risky and riskless assets.

  5. Update the guesses for the interest rate and the price of the productive
     asset (step 2) until the market clearing conditions are satisfied.

C.3   Transitional equilibrium
  1. Solve for the initial and final steady states (autarky and mobility).

  2. Choose the number of transition periods T . This number should be
     sufficiently large to allow the economy to reach, approximately, the
     new steady state in T periods.

  3. Guess transition sequences for the interest rates, {rt }Tt=1 , and for the
     price of the productive asset {Pt }Tt=1 .

  4. Using the first-order conditions, solve for the optimal portfolio choices
     backward starting from T . This provides the sequence of optimal de-
     cision rules at t = 1, 2, .., T .

  5. Using the optimal decision rules, find the sequence of distributions and
     compute the market-clearing conditions at time t = 1, 2, .., T .

  6. Update the guess for the sequences of the interest rates and the prices
     of the productive asset (step 3) until the market-clearing conditions are
     satisfied at all points in time t = 1, 2, .., T .




                                     42
References

Angeletos, G.-M. (2007). “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Investment Risk and
   Aggregate Saving”. Review of Economic Dynamics, 10(1), 1-30.

Attanasio, O., Kitao, S., Violante, G. (2006). “Quantifying the Effects
    of the Demographic Transition in Developing Economies”. The B.E.
    Journal of Macroeconomics (Advances), 6(1), Article 2.

Backus, D., Henriksen, E., Lambert, F., & Telmer, C. (2005). “Current
    Account Fact and Fiction”. Unpublished manuscript, New York Uni-
    versity.

Bernanke, B. S. (2005). “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Ac-
    count Deficit”. Speech at the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association
    of Economists, March 10, 2005.

Bewley, T. F. (1986). “Stationary Monetary Equilibrium with a Continuum
   of Independent Fluctuating Consumers”. Contributions to Mathemat-
   ical Economics in Honor of Gerard Debreu, Werner Hildenbrand and
   Andreu Mas-Colell editors, North-Holland, Amsterdam.

Blanchard, O., Giavazzi, F., & Sa, F. (2005). “The U.S. Current Account
    and the Dollar”. NBER Working Paper No. 11137, February 2005.

Caballero, R. J., Farhi, E., & Gourinchas, P. O. (2006). “An Equilibrium
   Model of ”Global Imbalances” and Low Interest Rates”. NBER Work-
   ing Paper No. 11996, February 2006.

Carroll, C. D. (1997). “Buffer-Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent
    Income Hypothesis”. Quarterly Journal of Economics CXII(1), 1-56.

Castro, R., Clementi, G., & MacDonald, G. (2004). “Investor Protection,
    Optimal Incentives, and Economic Growth”. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics, Vol. 119(3), 1131-75.

Cavallo, M. and Tille, C. (2006). “Could Capital Gains Smooth a Cur-
    rent Account Rebalancing?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff
    Report 237, January 2006.



                                  43
Chinn, M. and Ito, H. (2005), “What Matters for Financial Development?
    Capital Controls, Institutions, and Interactions”, NBER Working Pa-
    per No. 11370.

Croke, H., Kamin, S. B., & Leduc, S. (2005). “Financial Market Devel-
    opments and Economic Activity during Current Account Adjustments
    in Industrial Economies”. International Finance Discussion Papers No.
    827, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 2005.

Demirguc-Kunt, A. and Levine, R. (2001). “Financial Structure and Eco-
   nomic Growth”. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Engel, C. and Rogers, J.H. (2006), “The U.S. Current Account Deficit and
    the Expected Share of World Output,” Board of Governors of the Fed-
    eral Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Papers No. 856,
    April 2006.

Faruqee, H., Laxton, D., Muir, D., & Pesenti, P. (2005).“Smooth Landing
    or Crash? Model-Based Scenarios of Global Current Account Rebal-
    ancing”, in Clarida, Richard, editor, G7 Current Account Imbalances:
    Sustainability and Adjustment, University of Chicago Press, forthcom-
    ing.

Fernandes, A. and Phelan, C. (2000). “A Recursive Formulation for Re-
    peated Agency with History Dependence”. Journal of Economic The-
    ory, 91(2), 223-247.

Fogli, A. and Perri, F. (2006). “The great moderation and the US exter-
     nal imbalance,” mimeo, Department of Economics, University of Min-
     nesota.

Ghironi, F., J. Lee, and A. Rebucci (2006), “The Valuation Channel of Ex-
    ternal Adjustment,” mimeo, Research Department, International Mon-
    etary Fund.

Gourinchas, P. O. and Rey, H. (2005). “From World Banker to World
   Venture Capitalist: US External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Priv-
   ilege”. NBER Working Paper No. 11563, August 2005.




                                  44
Hausmann, R. and Sturzenegger, F. (2005), “U.S. and Global Imbalances:
   Can Dark Matter Prevent a Big Bang?”. Center for International De-
   velopment, Harvard University, Working Paper No. 124, January 2006.

Henriksen, E. R. (2004), “A Demographic Explanation of U.S. and Japanese
    Current Account Behvaior.” mimeo, Carnegie-Mellon University.

Huggett, M. (1993). “The Risk Free Rate in Heterogeneous-Agents, In-
   complete Markets Economies”. Journal of Economic, Dynamics and
   Control, 17(5/6), 953-70.

Hunt, B. and Rebucci A. (2005), “The US Dollar and the Trade Deficit:
   What Accounts for the Late 1990s?,” International Finance 8:3, 2005:
   pp. 399–434.

IMF (2005). “Global Imbalance: A Saving and Investment Perspective”
   World Economic Outlook, Chapter 2, September 2005.

IMF (2006). “How Do Financial Systems Affect Economic Cycles?” World
   Economic Outlook, Chapter 4, September 2006.

Krugman, P. (2006), “Will there be a Dollar crisis?,” mimeo.

Lane, P. R. and Milesi-Ferretti, G. M. (2005). “A Global Perspective on
    External Position”. NBER Working Paper No. 11589, September 2005.

Lane, P. R. and Milesi-Ferretti, G. M. (2006). “The External Wealth of
    Nations Mark II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets
    and Liabilities, 1970-2004”. IMF Working Paper 06/69.

Obstfeld, M. and Rogoff, K. (2004). “The Unsustainable US Current Ac-
    count Position Revisited”. NBER Working Paper No. 10869, Novem-
    ber 2004.

Quinn, D. P., Inclan, C., & Toyoda, A. M. (2001). “How and Where Capi-
    tal Account Liberalization Leads to Economic Growth”. Unpublished
    manuscript, Georgetown University.

Roubini, N. and Setser, B. (2005). “Will the Bretton Woods 2 Regime
   Unravel Soon? The Risk of a Hard Landing in 2005-2006”, Unpublished
   manuscript, New York University and Oxford University.


                                   45
Storesletten, K., Telmer, C. I. and Yaron A. (2004). “Cyclical dynamics in
    idiosyncratic labor market risk”Journal of Political Economy, 112 (3),
    695-717.

Summers, L. H. (2004). “The United States and the Global Adjustment
   Process”. Speech at the Third Annual Stravos S. Niarchos Lecture,
   Institute for International Economics, March 23, 2004.

Warnock, F.E. and Warnock V.C. (2006). “International Capital Flows and
   U.S. Interest Rates,” NBER Working Paper 12560, National Bureau of
   Economic Research.

Willen, P. S. (2004). “Incomplete Markets and Trade”. Working Paper
    Series No. 04-8, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.




                                   46
