NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE AMERICAN FAMILY AND FAMILY ECONOMICS
Shelly Lundberg
Robert A. Pollak
Working Paper 12908
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12908

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2007

We are grateful to the members of the MacArthur Network on the Family and the Economy, and to
Joanne Spitz, Dick Startz, Meredith Startz, James Hines, Michael Waldman, and especially Timothy
Taylor for their helpful comments. Pollak is grateful to the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation
for their support and Lundberg to the Castor Professorship. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Shelly Lundberg and Robert A. Pollak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The American Family and Family Economics
Shelly Lundberg and Robert A. Pollak
NBER Working Paper No. 12908
February 2007
JEL No. D1,J1,J2
ABSTRACT
The twenty-fifth anniversary of the publication of Gary Becker's path-breaking "Treatise on the Family"
provides an occasion to reexamine both the American family and family economics. We begin by
discussing how families have changed in recent decades: the separation of sex, marriage, and childbearing;
fewer children and smaller households; converging work and education patterns for men and women;
class divergence in partnering and parenting strategies; and the replacement of what had been family
functions and home production by government programs and market transactions. After discussing
recent work in family economics that attempts to explain these changes, we point out some challenging
areas for further analysis, and highlight issues of commitment in two primary family relationships:
those between men and women, and those between parents and children. We conclude by discussing
the effectiveness of policies to target benefits to certain family members (e.g., children) or to promote
marriage and fertility.
Shelly Lundberg
Department of Economics
227 Savery Hall
Box 353330
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195-3330
LUNDBERG@U.WASHINGTON.EDU
Robert A. Pollak
Washington University in St. Louis
Faculty of Arts and Sciences
and the John M. Olin School
Campus Box 1133
1 Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
and NBER
pollak@wustl.edu

Gary Becker’s path-breaking Treatise on the Family subjected individuals’ decisions
about sex, marriage, childbearing, and childrearing to rational choice analysis. Becker’s aim was
to use the foundational assumptions of “maximizing behavior, market equilibrium, and stable
preferences” (1991, Enlarged edition, p. 5) to explain the basic empirical patterns of family life.1
According to Becker (p. 135), “[T]he main purpose of marriage and families is the production
and rearing of own children . . .” and in his model of marriage, the gains to marriage depend on
specialization and exchange within the family. When Treatise was published in 1981, it was
already apparent that the American family had entered a period of rapid change: birth rates had
been falling for 20 years; cohabitation and childbirth without legal marriage had risen; divorce
had become commonplace; and women, including mothers of young children, were entering the
labor force in record numbers. Becker wrote in his “Introduction” that “the family in the Western
world has been radically altered—some claim almost destroyed—by the events of the last three
decades” (p. 1).
The American family has not been destroyed by these changes, but it has been radically
altered. Family structure has become more heterogeneous and less stable. Long-term marriage
combined with childrearing is no longer a near-universal adult experience, and the intense gender
specialization that characterized the traditional nuclear family of the 1950s now seems archaic.
In a continuation of a long-term trend noted by Becker, the economic role of the family
continued to decrease as the market and the state supplemented or replaced more and more
family functions, from food preparation to old-age support.
We begin by discussing how families have changed in recent decades: the separation of
sex, marriage, and childbearing; fewer children and smaller households; converging work and
education patterns for men and women; class divergence in partnering and parenting strategies;
and the replacement of what had been family functions and home production by government
2
programs and market transactions. After discussing recent work in family economics that

1

Although Becker began with three foundational assumptions, in his more recent work—for example, Becker
(1996)—he relaxes the assumption of stable preferences. For a discussion, see Pollak (2003).
2

Betsey Stevenson and Justin Wolfers (2007) provide additional evidence on trends in marriage and divorce.

2

attempts to explain these changes, we point out some challenging areas for further analysis, and
highlight issues of commitment in two primary family relationships: those between men and
women, and those between parents and children. We then consider the effectiveness of policies
to target benefits to certain family members (like children) or to promote marriage and fertility.

Changes in the American Family, 1960–2006
The Separation of Sex, Marriage, and Childrearing
In the early days of family economics, models of marriage and fertility reflected widely
accepted social norms that were broadly consistent with social reality. Men were supposed to
finish school, get a job, marry, and have children. Educational attainment and employment were
less important for women, for whom the crucial steps were marriage, childbearing, and
childrearing. Economists assumed that decisions about goods purchases, labor supply, fertility,
and child investments maximized a family utility function subject to family resource constraints.
Single-parent families were the result of divorce, which economists assumed must be due to an
unhappy surprise in the realized value of marriage. Nonmarital childbearing was an anomaly.
Since the 1960s and 1970s, however, a framework that considered sex and childbearing
only within the context of a committed partnership has become increasingly disconnected from
reality. Reliable and convenient contraception and the availability of safe and legal abortion
permitted sex with minimal risk of childbearing and the concomitant long-term commitment to
parenting. These developments reduced the cost of premarital sex and, hence, the cost of
remaining single. Combined with rising income and the increasing independence of women, this
encouraged delayed marriage and delayed childbearing. As an alternative to marriage,
cohabitation provided increasing numbers of couples with the benefits of coresidence per se,
including economies of scale in consumption. In the 2000 Census, unmarried couple households
made up 9 percent of all coupled households, with 11 percent of these being same-sex couples
(Simmons and O’Connell, 2003, p. 1 and table 1).
Nonmarital fertility has risen dramatically in the past quarter century. According to the
CDC National Center for Health Statistics, 37 percent of U.S. births were out-of-wedlock in

3

2005.3 Though fertility outside legal marriage has become commonplace in many developed
countries, especially in northwestern Europe, most unmarried European couples are living
together when their child is born. In contrast, in the United States, the majority of nonmarital
births are to lone mothers, although the proportion of nonmarital births to cohabiting couples is
increasing (Bumpass and Lu, 2000). This emergence of nonmarital childbearing reflects, to a
large extent, the decline of the social imperative that premarital pregnancy should lead to
marriage. For many men, paternity has been separated from parenting responsibilities other than
financial obligations, which are increasingly enforced by the state.
The increase in nonmarital childbearing and in divorce rates has altered the living
arrangements of children. The proportion of children under age 18 who are living with only one
parent rose from 9 percent in 1960 to 28 percent in 2005. These children also experience many
transitions in where and with whom they live, since most unmarried mothers eventually marry,
4
and the divorced remarry. With multiple, serial partnerships between parents, families have

become more complex, with uncertain implications for parent–child relationships and
investments in children. Using a recent sample of births to unmarried women, Mincy (2002)
found that the majority of mothers with two or more children had at least one child whose
biological father was not the father of their most recent child. He found that this “multiple
partner fertility” compromised the marriage prospects of these new mothers.
All these factors have combined to increase the heterogeneity of families and to decrease
the stability of the living arrangements in which children are reared. Moreover, with increased
cohabitation, childbearing that frequently precedes the establishment of a long-term partnership,
and an increased propensity for adult children to move back in with parents during extended
education or early parenthood, “the sequencing of adult transitions has become increasingly
complicated” (Furstenberg et al., 2004).

Smaller Families and Longer Lives

3

The percentage of nonmarital births differs by race and ethnicity: 25 percent of non-Hispanic white births, 48
percent of Hispanic births, and 70 percent of non-Hispanic black births were nonmarital.
4
Before the twentieth century, serial partnerships and “blended” families arose from the remarriage of widows and
widowers with children. In the late twentieth century, they arose from the remarriage of divorced men and women
with children, or from the marriage of those who become parents in nonmarital relationships.

4

The traditional nuclear family—children living with married biological parents—has
been the implicit household norm in the economics of the family. It is often the backdrop for
discussions of specialization and the division of labor between spouses, and of childrearing and
parental investments in children's human capital. Nuclear families, however, make up a
decreasing proportion of American households. Average household size has dropped from 3.4
people to 2.6 people between 1960 and 2005 (U.S. Census Bureau, 2006.)5 Declining fertility
was the principal cause of the shrinking number of people per household during this period,
though the average number of adults per household also fell due to an increase in single-parent
households and a decline in three-generation households.
As the postwar baby boom waned, birth rates for women aged 15 to 44 fell from 118
births per 1,000 women in 1960 to 68 births per 1,000 women in 1980. The birth rate has
remained relatively constant since then, although women have continued to delay births; since
1980, birth rates have risen for women over 30, and fallen for women under 25. Birth rates for
teenagers aged 15 to 19 fell dramatically from 89 per 1,000 women in 1960 to 53 in 1980, and
has since fallen to the current level of 41 per 1,000, after an increase in the late 1980s and early
1990s (Child Trends DataBank, 2006). Current U.S. birth rates imply a total fertility rate
approximately at the replacement rate of 2.1 children per women—a higher fertility rate than any
other major developed country. The fertility rate of native-born women, however, is below the
replacement rate; that of foreign-born Hispanic women is 2.8, while that of foreign-born nonHispanic women is 2.2 (Dye, 2005, p. 3). Thus, current population growth in the United States is
attributable to immigrants and their children.
In the second half of the twentieth century, estimated life expectancy at birth in the
United States rose from 65 to 74 years for men and from 71 to 80 for women, primarily due to a
reduction in death rates for the elderly (Arias, 2006, p. 5 and table 11). Improved nutrition,
behavioral changes, and medical progress against degenerative disease have improved the overall
health of the elderly, so that disability and death now occur at more advanced ages. Remaining
life expectancy at age 65 rose from 12.7 to 16.3 years for men and from 15.0 to 19.2 years for
women after 1950, and Cutler (2001) documents a corresponding decline in age-specific
5

“Household” refers to individuals who live in the same residence and are related by birth, marriage, or adoption.
We use the term “family” more broadly to include closely-related individuals whose decisions to live together or
independently are one of the outcomes we are interested in explaining.

5

disability rates. Declining birth rates and age-specific death rates imply an aging population,
though projections of the population age structure depend not only on assumptions about future
fertility and mortality, but also on assumptions about future immigration. The ratio of economic
dependents—children plus the elderly—to the working-age population is a measure of the
burden of care that families and the state will have to bear. Census population projections imply
child “dependency ratios” that remain roughly constant through 2050, but the ratios of both the
old (65+) and the extremely old (85+) to adults under 65 are projected to rise dramatically during
this period (U.S. Census Bureau, 2004). If these projections are correct, then in the future, the
focus of family ties will inevitably shift from working-age adults looking after their young
children to working-age adults looking after their elderly parents.

The Converging Economic Lives of Men and Women
During the baby boom years that followed World War II, intense gender specialization
was the norm, with married women performing almost all household work and married men
focusing on market work. Substantial specialization remains in married-couple households,
particularly those with young children, but individual men and women have become increasingly
similar as economic actors during the past four decades. Figure 1 shows converging patterns of
time use, human capital investment, and earnings across genders. Women now attend college at
higher rates than men, and this difference is particularly large for those from disadvantaged
backgrounds. The median earnings of full-time, year-round working women have increased from
60 percent of men’s to 76 percent between 1960 and 2003. Winkler, McBride, and Andrews
(2005) find that about a quarter of married working women now earn more than their husbands
and that for 60 percent of such couples this earnings differential persists for at least three years.
The remaining gap between men’s and women’s hourly wages is about 20 percent, and
about half of this gap can be explained by individual characteristics, job experience, and
occupational choices (Blau and Kahn, 2006, table 2a). The source of the unexplained residual—
labor market discrimination or the continuing gender disparity in family and household
responsibilities—remains the subject of considerable controversy. Traditional gender roles do
persist in the allocation of time within households. Total hours of housework in married couple
households fell more than 20 percent between 1965 and 1995 (Bianchi, Milkie, Sayer, and

6

Robinson, 2000) but, though husbands’ hours of housework increased substantially, wives still
performed most of the housework at the end of this period. In the 2005 American Time Use
Survey, married women reported an average of 16 hours per week of “household activities”
compared to less than 11 hours for men.
The convergence in the economic profiles of men and women since 1960, though
incomplete, has changed both the nature of marriage and its prevalence. It seems clear that gains
to marriage based on specialization and exchange within the household have decreased. Becker
(1991, p. 350) writes: “I believe that the major cause of these changes [in the family in the
United States in the last half of the twentieth century] is the growth in the earning power of
women as the American economy developed.” Establishing, in turn, the causes of these changes
in the market and household roles of women is not straightforward. Education, market work, and
fertility are codetermined: women who expect to have fewer children and maintain a consistent
attachment to the work force will rationally invest more in market skills. For these women,
greater investment in education and improved employment opportunities raise the cost of
childbearing and childrearing. To explain the last stage of the “quiet revolution” in women’s
roles, Goldin (2006) emphasizes a change in the career expectations and educational investments
of young women growing up in the 1960s, women who observed the substantial increases in both
full-time work and divorce among their predecessors and who benefited from the availability of
convenient and reliable contraception (“the pill”).

Class Divergence in Partnering and Parenting Strategies
In recent decades, the parenting and partnering experiences of those at the top of the
socioeconomic scale in the United States have diverged from the family life of those at the
bottom. College graduates have deferred marriage and childbearing and college-educated
mothers, even those with infants, have remained in the labor force. Otherwise, however, the
family trajectories of college graduates have deviated little from the family trajectories of the
mid-century: almost all children are born within legal marriages, and these marriages are
relatively stable. On the other hand, high divorce rates and nonmarital childbearing among those
with lower levels of education have resulted in about one-third of all children living in singleparent families. Nonmarital fertility and multiple partner fertility is concentrated among women

7

in the bottom third of the income/education distribution, and the marriages that do take place are
relatively early and relatively unstable.
Because the trajectories of individuals at the top and bottom of the income/education
scale are diverging, trends in average family outcomes in the United States can be misleading.
Lifetime marriage rates are high for Americans at all levels of education, but divorce and
nonmarital childbearing rates have increased much more rapidly for the less-educated. The three
panels of Figure 2 show the diverging family lives of the more- and less-educated, for both men
and women. The marriage-rate trajectories of the more- and less-educated began to diverge in the
mid-1980s. Although college-educated men and women marry later than those with less
education, they are now substantially more likely to be married between ages 30 and 50 than
those without a college degree. For college-educated women, the proportion of mothers who are
single has remained low; for high-school dropouts, high-school graduates, and women with some
college, single-motherhood has increased dramatically.
McLanahan (2004) emphasizes how the disparate patterns in marriage and fertility across
socioeconomic groups affect the inequality of parental resources available to children. Mothers
with lower levels of education have their children at younger ages, are less likely to marry and
more likely to divorce, and have lower levels of employment than highly-educated mothers. A
shift towards smaller, less-stable households at the bottom of the income/education scale
reinforces the increasing income inequality generated by labor market forces since about 1980.
The inequality across families created by increasing selectivity into marriage is further
exacerbated by assortative marriage. For example, men and women with similar educational
backgrounds are increasingly likely to marry each other (Schwartz and Mare, 2005). Becker's
analysis assumes that the gains to marriage are generated by specialization and the division of
labor, implying that those with higher wages will tend to marry those with lower wages. If both
spouses are working, however, then most of the gains to marriage may not arise from
specialization and a division of labor between home and market, but instead from the joint
consumption of household public goods (Lam, 1988). In this case, marriage market equilibrium
implies positive assortative mating. The empirical evidence has always suggested positive
assortative mating on measurable characteristics. Theory suggests that the positive correlation

8

between wives’ and husbands’ preferences and resources should increase as specialization within
marriage declines.

The Shrinking Economic Role of Families
In Chapter 11 of the Treatise, Becker (1991) considers the evolution of the family from
primitive societies to the late twentieth century and concludes that many of the functions that
families performed in traditional societies are now performed by the market or the state. The
market has largely displaced the family in some activities, such as food production, and
continues to encroach on other activities, such as food preparation. Families have become less
important and the state more important as guarantors of security for persons and property,
insurance, care for the disabled, and care and education of children. As Coontz (2005) has
emphasized, these changes have diminished the role of marriage as a tool for forming family
alliances, and increased the importance of love and companionship as a basis for marriage. The
instrumental value of children to their parents has continued to decrease. Replaced long ago as
primary sources of agricultural labor and of old-age support, children are still important
providers of eldercare, but a rapid expansion of government and market substitutes means that
the elderly no longer need to depend on their own children.

Family Economics

Becker’s economic approach to marriage, home production, and fertility has been quite
successful in explaining most of the dramatic changes in family behavior we have documented.
In the broad historical context, Becker identifies increasing levels of income and wealth and the
interrelated development of markets and the state as the key factors altering family functions and
family structure. As the instrumental value of children fell, parents had fewer children and
invested more in each child—a reflection, in Becker's terminology, of the “quantity–quality”
tradeoff. The reduction in household size can be attributed to improvements in technology and
increases in per capita income. Greenwood and Guner (2004) identify technological progress in
home production and the declining prices of household appliances as a source of reduced returns
to living in the same residence. Costa (1998) focuses on increases in per capita incomes, which

9

increase the demand for privacy and decrease the importance of household economies of scale in
home production and consumption. In her historical analysis of the changing economic role of
women, Goldin (2006) emphasizes changes in technology: the increased availability of office
jobs considered suitable for women, the diffusion of the “electric” household, and contraceptive
innovation.
Changes in laws and institutions have also been identified as shifters of family behavior.
Legal changes that have been intertwined with alterations in the family include the move from
fault-based to no-fault divorce; the legalization of abortion; and the 1996 welfare reform, with its
emphasis on child support enforcement, time limits, and work requirements. However, since
laws and institutions adapt to changing conditions, the exogeneity of legal changes in a longterm analysis of family structure or family behavior is questionable. This is also true, of course,
of changes in applied technology (the introduction of oral contraceptives and improvements in
household technology) and of increased market availability of goods and services traditionally
produced within the household (including childcare and prepared food).
Despite the success of family economics in explaining many of the broad patterns of
family change, the complexity and heterogeneity of current family arrangements eludes simple
analysis. We focus here on two key issues that are both of considerable concern to policymakers
and present economists with difficult modeling tasks: the prevalence of childrearing outside
committed partnership and the allocation of eldercare burdens in an aging society. An economic
analysis of either topic requires that we specify what types of credible promises individuals can
make to each other.
Individuals make resource-sharing commitments—often implicitly rather than
explicitly—in their roles as sexual, romantic, and domestic partners, and as parents and children.
Changes in the social and legal environments in which these commitments are made and
6
enforced affect the willingness and ability of individuals to make credible commitments. This

environment includes labor market conditions; prospects in the marriage/partner market; social
norms and penalties for violating them; and the legal and institutional framework within which
families function. To address nonmarital childbearing and eldercare, we consider the changing
6

Same-sex couples face most of the same commitment problems as heterosexual couples, but face different legal
and social environments. Dan A. Black, Seth G. Sanders, and Lowell J. Taylor (2007) provide evidence on and
analysis of same-sex families.

10

nature and scope of the enforceable obligations for the two main sets of implicit family contracts:
those between partners/spouses and those between parents and children.

Partners/Spouses
A retreat from marriage has been observed in most parts of the developed world, but it
has taken very different forms in different countries and among different socioeconomic groups.
As noted above, well-off Americans have delayed marriage and childbearing, while those lower
on the income/education scale have delayed marriage but not childbearing. In many other
countries, and particularly in southern Europe and Japan, both marriage and fertility rates have
fallen to extremely low levels. One explanation of this diversity focuses on the ability of young
men and women to strike bargains involving long-term commitments to joint parenting and how
the ability to strike such bargains differs across economic and social environments.
Individuals’ incentives to establish long-term relationships depend upon relative values of
single and partnered life and on their ability to make long-term commitments. The relative return
to partnership/marriage depends, in turn, on how much a joint household expands production and
consumption opportunities, and on the willingness and ability of partners/spouses to make
commitments about intrahousehold distribution of resources. We will first sketch the existing
models of household production and intrahousehold distribution, and then discuss how focusing
on long-term commitment illuminates some of the observed differences in partnering and fertility
behavior.
In Becker’s (1991, chaps. 1–2) basic household production model, gender specialization
in home and market tasks is an important source of gains to marriage and family membership. If
the time inputs of household members are perfect substitutes in production, and if individuals
have no “process” preferences (that is, “direct” preferences for spending time engaging in some
activities and not engaging in others), then differences in the relative productivities of men and
women in home and market production will result in gender specialization by at least one spouse.
Becker (1991, chaps. 2–3) emphasizes that the division of labor by gender depends not only on
intrinsic differences in productivity, but also on increasing returns to sector-specific investments
in human capital. He also points out that small amounts of market discrimination or biological
differences can give rise to large differences in equilibrium patterns of specialization. If

11

individuals’ preferences and abilities were fixed at birth, then the overlap between men’s and
women’s preferences and abilities might prevent the emergence of a complete sex-segregated
equilibrium. But if preferences and abilities are shaped by socialization and human capital
investments, then complete gender specialization might emerge as the result of premarriage
market socialization and training in market and/or home skills.
The twin assumptions that there are exactly two activities—home and market—and that
husbands and wives provide time inputs that are perfect substitutes (that is, identical on a qualityadjusted basis) to household production is crucial to Becker's specialization results. If household
production involves many different activities requiring different skills or if, for example, mothers
and fathers make distinct contributions to childrearing, then this efficiency rationale for home–
market segregation of the sexes becomes less compelling (Lundberg, 2005).
Becker’s (1974, 1981) first model of intrahousehold allocation was an “altruist model.” It
begins by assuming that one spouse, the “altruist” or “head,” cares about the utility of other
family members and has a privileged position in the family bargaining game. Becker argued that,
under certain assumptions, household members would “automatically” adjust their behavior to
7

maximize the altruist's utility, subject to the family's resource and technology constraints.

Models that imply household behavior consistent with utility maximization are called “unitary
models.” Both the altruist model and its intergenerational generalization, the dynastic model, are
unitary models. Unitary models imply that spouses pool their resources. A couple’s behavior—
for example, its expenditure pattern—depends on prices, wage rates, and total nonlabor income
(the latter assumed to be exogenous). Their behavior, however, is independent of the share of
nonlabor income separately controlled by the wife and by the husband. Because empirical
evidence rejects pooling and, hence, unitary models, economists have turned to other
8

approaches.

Game theoretic models of family bargaining offer alternatives to unitary models and a
different perspective on intrahousehold distribution. Most models of family collective choice
have relied on cooperative game theory, which assumes that players can make binding, costlessly

7

Pollak characterizes the altruist as “husband–father–dictator–patriarch” (1988) or as a “quasi-dictator” (2003) and
suggests interpreting the altruist model as an ultimatum game.
8
We discussed this point in Lundberg and Pollak, 1996; in our entry in The New Palgrave Dictionary of
Economics, we review more recent evidence (Lundberg and Pollak, forthcoming).

12

enforceable commitments. These models provide some help in identifying the determinants of
individuals’ bargaining power. In the earliest family bargaining models, the “divorce threat”
models of Manser and Brown (1980) and McElroy and Horney (1981), bargaining power
depends upon the expected well-being of the spouses outside the marriage. In contrast to this
external threat point, our “separate spheres” model (Lundberg and Pollak, 1993) assumes an
internal threat point, in which husband and wife behave noncooperatively, and treats divorce as
an “outside option.” Bargaining models, even static bargaining models, provide a framework for
thinking about renegotiation and family instability when bargaining power or external
opportunities change unexpectedly.
When current household production affects future production or consumption
possibilities (for example, because of the accumulation of human capital that will increase
productivity in the home or wages in the market), the ability and willingness of family members
to make binding long-term commitments becomes crucial. In the Treatise, Becker (1991, chaps.
3–4) sometimes assumes that prospective spouses can make binding commitments about
allocation within marriage when they meet in the marriage market. Such commitments preclude
a role for any other model of allocation within marriage. But even if individuals can make
binding agreements in the marriage market, they cannot make agreements with partners they
have not yet met. Konrad and Lommerud (2000) begin with the fact that before individuals enter
the marriage market, they make decisions (for example, about human capital investments) that
affect their bargaining power within marriage; hence, individuals will overinvest in education
prior to marriage, even if they expect to bargain cooperatively with their spouses.
The actual gains to marriage depend on the potential gains and on the ability of couples to
enforce agreements that support the generation of these gains. Enforceable agreements
concerning future division of labor and allocation within the family may not be feasible for
modern couples. The opportunities for men and women to make credible commitments that
sustain efficient outcomes within the family depend upon external factors, including laws,
norms, and institutions. Many of the notable changes in American family life—including the
shift to no-fault divorce—have reduced the ability of spouses and prospective spouses to commit.
In the United States, courts will generally enforce prenuptial agreements regarding the
distribution of assets in the event of divorce. They will not, however, enforce agreements

13

regarding the distributions of benefits and burdens in ongoing marriages. Marriage is essentially
a standard form contract specified by state law, although some states offer couples a choice
between two contracts: the standard marriage contract and “covenant marriage,” a contract that
makes divorce more difficult. Individuals are unable to contract around the terms of the marriage
contract offered by the state, although they can choose to opt out and cohabit without marrying.
State law also governs the division of property for cohabiting couples who split up and imposes
child support obligations on parents regardless of their marital relationships. Thus, family law
severely limits the set of legally-enforceable agreements that partners/spouses can make.
Limited commitment can also have efficiency implications. In Lundberg and Pollak
(2003), we model the “two-earner couple location problem”—the problem facing a couple that
must decide where to live and whether to stay together without being able to make binding
commitments concerning their future behavior––as a two-stage game. The first-stage game
which determines location is assumed to be noncooperative. The spouses understand that once a
location is determined, allocation will be determined as the solution to a second-stage game
which is conditionally efficient—that is, efficient given the location determined in the first stage.
The equilibrium of this game need not be efficient even if the second-stage allocation is
conditionally efficient. The two-earner couple location problem provides a paradigm for
situations in which couples face decisions that affect future bargaining power, such as
childbearing, human capital investments, and marriage itself. All of these situations can be
modeled as two-stage games with limited commitment and thus may have inefficient equilibria.
An efficient level of fertility, for example, may require a mechanism for insuring mothers against
future losses due to what Waldfogel (1998) calls the “family gap” between the wages of mothers
and the wages of women without children.
Working within the broad context of rational choice, economists have offered a range of
models to explain the growth of single-parent families and nonmarital childbearing as an
equilibrium outcome. In Willis’s (1999) model, men care about the number of children they
father and the quality of those children, and may be able to free ride on the ability of women to
rear those children on their own at zero cost to themselves. In Neal (2004), the gains to marriage
come only from the role of children as public goods within marriage, and the availability of
government aid to single mothers will cause some women to choose to have children outside

14

marriage. Nonmarital childbearing appears in each model when the relative income of single
mothers (in the form of government aid or market income) is sufficiently high. In yet another
approach, Burdett and Ermisch (2002) show that nonmarital fertility can be an equilibrium
outcome in marriage markets with search frictions. In their model, couples who find each other
mutually acceptable marriage partners will wait for marital fertility, but a woman may decide to
have children nonmaritally when matched with a man she is not willing to marry, or who is not
willing to marry her. In all of these models, nonmarital fertility is more likely for women with
worse marital prospects—that is, poorer women—than for women with better prospects. In
essence, these models depend upon a gain to marriage (and joint childrearing) that is sufficiently
low for women with incomes that are high relative to their current marital opportunities. These
approaches indicate that the deteriorating market prospects of less-educated men during the
1980s and 1990s may have played a role in increasing nonmarital childbearing, but none of the
models seem to provide an adequate framework for analyzing the dramatic changes over time.
In an alternative approach, Akerlof, Yellen, and Katz (1996) attribute the increase in
nonmarital childbearing in the United States to the legalization of abortion and the availability of
oral contraceptives to unmarried women. They argue that the social norm requiring that young
men marry their pregnant girlfriends eroded rapidly when women acquired more control over the
outcome of premarital sex. With more women willing to engage in premarital sex without the
expectation of marriage in the event of pregnancy, even women who were unwilling to abort or
take the pill became unable to rely on the old norm. Thus, technological and legal changes
weakened the old norm. Although a new norm has not yet replaced shotgun marriage, two
contenders have emerged: one is “shotgun cohabitation,” while the other absolves the man of any
responsibility and makes unwanted pregnancy the woman's problem.
Changing social norms, in particular the decreasing stigma associated with cohabitation,
nonmarital childbearing, and lone motherhood, have also reduced the incentive to marry, but
recent evidence suggests some additional normative barriers to marriage. Many contemporary
discussions of family change, and especially analyses of nonmarital childbearing, refer to
increased conflict or lack of trust between men and women as a source of women’s decisions to
forego marriage prior to childbearing. Furstenberg (2001) points to a breakdown in consensus
regarding appropriate gender roles as a barrier to marriage, particularly for African-Americans.

15

Edin and Kefalas (2005, p. 118) report that poor women fear that marriage “activates traditional
gender roles” and so choose to maintain their independence by not marrying the fathers of their
children. Ethnographic studies of unmarried mothers in the Fragile Families Study identify lack
of trust and, in particular, female fear of male infidelity, as a major barrier to marriage (GibsonDavis, Edin, and McLanahan, 2005). These reports suggest that, given community norms and
peer effects on behavior, low-income unmarried parents are unable to negotiate agreements
involving legal marriage that would make both parents better off than remaining unmarried.
Ellwood and Jencks (2004), in an exhaustive examination of alternative explanations for
nonmarital childbearing, point to changing gender roles that facilitate female employment and
changing sexual mores that reduced the social costs of nonmarital sex and cohabitation.
The increased heterogeneity of families may also have reduced community enforcement
of marital obligations, and restricted contracting possibilities for potential partners. Posner
(2000) argues that norms and nonlegal enforcement are more important than legal sanctions in
enforcing marital obligations. Posner goes on to argue that community enforcement depends on a
commonly accepted understanding of the behavior expected of spouses. Thus, he concludes,
increasing heterogeneity is the enemy of community enforcement.
Falling marriage and fertility rates in Japan and parts of Europe may also be related to
normative pressures on young men and women of a different sort. Sevilla-Sanz (2005) shows
that very low fertility and marriage rates are particularly prevalent in countries with developed
economies but less-egalitarian gender norms than the United States. The persistence of these
social norms may have restricted the flexibility of marital arrangements, and thus reduced
marriage and fertility rates. She argues that, as women’s education levels and market wages have
risen in Spain, Italy, and Japan, young men and women have been unable to commit to a
nontraditional division of childrearing responsibilities and other household labor. In the absence
of substantial changes in the norms governing marriage, marriage has become, at present,
relatively unattractive to women in these countries. Consistent with the maintenance of
traditional social standards, however, southern Europe and Japan have very low rates of
nonmarital fertility. Of course norms may change. Weakening of the norms against nonmarital
fertility or husband's participation in housework and childcare would presumably cause an
increase in fertility. Economic theory makes no predictions about the likelihood of such changes

16

in norms, but without substantial increase in fertility or immigration, the populations of these
countries will shrink and grow older.

Parents and Children
Analyses of parent–child relations usually focus on the beginning and the end of the life
cycle. At the beginning, do parents have the socially optimal number of children and do they
invest a socially optimal amount in the human capital of each one? At the end, do adult children
provide socially optimal support for their disabled elderly parents? These questions are closely
linked, because governments tax working-age adults to provide both education for children and
support for the elderly. Folbre (1994) emphasizes that childbearing and childrearing generate
externalities and that parents lack proper incentives to produce the optimal number of children
and to invest optimally in them. The question of whether the number of children is optimal has
been in the public eye because fertility rates in virtually all developed countries except the
United States are below the level that will replace their current populations.
In post-agrarian societies, families do not need children to provide farm labor, and
financial and government infrastructure provide alternative sources of old-age support. In a
world with readily-available contraception and abortion, relatively few children are unintended
consequences of sex. Economic theories of fertility usually interpret women's wage rates as a
measure of the value of time, and thus predict a negative correlation between women's education
or wage rates, and their fertility. In Becker’s model of fertility, children (and their “quality”)
yield parental utility, but that rather begs the question, “Why have children at all?” Taking
preferences as given, the future course of fertility depends on the race between increasing
incomes and the increasing opportunity cost of children. As the narrowly economic motives for
childbearing and childrearing decline in importance, from the parents’ standpoint, children look
less like investments and more like expensive consumer durables. Thus, the future course of the
demand for children depends on the evolution of preferences as well as on income and
9

substitution effects.

9

Evolutionary theory predicts that rising real incomes would lead to a baby boom, and thus finds belowreplacement fertility in developed countries a puzzle. See Bergstrom (forthcoming).

17

The “wealth model” of Becker and Tomes (1976, 1979)—the standard model in which
parents invest in their children's human capital—predicts that parents who are rich enough and
altruistic enough will provide each of their children with the wealth-maximizing level of
education. The argument is straightforward: altruistic parents provide children who have
different abilities with different but efficient amounts of human capital, equating the marginal
returns to investments in schooling with the returns to financial assets. Hence, siblings generally
have different earnings, but parents with “equal concern” for their children use inter vivos gifts
and postmortem bequests to equalize their children's wealth. This argument implies different
investments in the human capital of siblings with different abilities. It also implies a pattern of
unequal transfers that is not supported by the data. McGarry (forthcoming) surveys the evidence
and concludes that “examinations of both actual bequests and existing wills find that equal
division among children is the norm.” Using questions in the National Longitudinal Survey about
bequest intentions, Light and McGarry (2004) found that about 80 percent of respondents
intended to divide their estates equally among their children. The motives expressed by the 20
percent of respondents who intended unequal division revealed no clear pattern, with
approximately equal numbers expressing reasons that could be classified as exchange motives,
altruistic motives, and evolutionary-psychology motives (that is, wanting to leave money to
biological children rather than stepchildren). Parents typically distribute the gifts made during
their lifetimes unequally among their children and these gifts are responsive to need, but the
magnitude of gifts given during the parents’ lifetimes is too small to come close to equalizing the
wealth of the children.
Inadequate investments in children can arise for two reasons. First, investment in children
generates externalities in the sense that much of the benefit may accrue to society as a whole.
Second, children and parents have a limited ability to form contracts obligating children to repay
parents for investments in the children’s human capital. Becker and Murphy (1988) emphasize
that poor families will not provide their children with the wealth-maximizing level of human
capital, and argue that government intervention to provide schooling for such children is
efficiency-enhancing for society as a whole.
Cigno (1993) shows that a self-enforcing “family constitution” can, in some economic
and institutional environments, maintain efficient intergenerational transfers, but that it is

18

vulnerable to the presence of market and state alternatives. The family constitution specifies that
working-age individuals who support their elderly parents will be supported in old age by their
working-age children. As Cigno points out, however, changes in market opportunities or
government programs may cause these arrangements to break down. For example, the opening of
capital markets offering a sufficiently high rate of return will create incentives for working-age
adults to renege on supporting their parents, to save for their own old age and, in the absence of
direct utility from children, to have no children themselves. Similarly, a government social
insurance program which provides an alternative to children as a source of old-age support can
undermine Cigno's family constitution. Becker and Murphy (1988) argue that state expenditures
on the elderly can be viewed as part of an intergenerational “social compact” in which taxes on
working-age adults pay for education for the young and pensions for the old.
Recent changes in the family, such as increased divorce and remarriage and the
prevalence of nonmarital childbearing, may have implications for intergenerational transfers.
Stepparents and noncustodial parents may be less motivated to provide resources to children, and
children less willing to support elderly stepparents or noncustodial parents, especially those with
whom they resided only briefly or not at all. As noted earlier, an increase in the heterogeneity of
family patterns may also reduce the effectiveness of community norms in enforcing
intergenerational obligations.
Children reared in traditional nuclear families tend to fare better (for example, in the
sense of receiving more education) than those who do not. Because family structure is
intertwined with other parental characteristics that affect children, a causal relationship between
family structure and child outcomes is difficult to establish. McLanahan and Sandefur (1994)
compare outcomes of children reared by both biological parents, by a single parent, and by a
stepparent. They find that, on average, children reared with both biological parents do
substantially better than those reared in other family structures. Ginther and Pollak (2004) and
Gennetian (2005) argue that, at least for educational outcomes, the crucial distinction is between
children reared in traditional nuclear families and those reared in other family structures. They do
this by comparing the educational outcomes of the two types of children within “blended” families:
the stepchildren, and their half-siblings who are the joint children of the parents. They find that
within a blended family, educational outcomes for the stepchildren and the joint children are

19

similar to each other and substantially worse than outcomes for children reared in traditional
nuclear families. Cherlin (1978) attributed the poor functioning of stepfamilies to “incomplete
institutionalization”: that is, society lacks well-established social norms concerning appropriate
parental and spousal behavior.
Care of the disabled elderly is the critical issue at the end of the life cycle. Nearly twothirds of the 5.5 million elderly with chronic disabilities rely, often exclusively, on family
members for help with basic activities of daily living. The demand for long-term care will
depend on changes in life expectancy and age-specific disability patterns. The supply of family
members willing and able to act as caregivers will depend on labor force participation, family
size, and family structure. Given current trends, it appears that an increasing fraction of adults
will enter old age without adult children from whom they can expect support (Plotnick, 2006),
and many more will be divorced from their co-parent. Pezzin and Schone (1999) find that marital
disruption reduces transfers by adult children to their disabled elderly parents, especially to
fathers.
Economic analysis sheds some light on the care that family members provide for one
another and helps explain why these caregiving relationships become more tenuous as family
structure changes as the result of divorce and nonmarital fertility. Coordination of care between
siblings has a strategic element because the well-being of the parent is a “family public good.” If
we model the provision of care as a one-shot voluntary contribution game, we conclude that the
public good will be underprovided. But if we model it as a repeated voluntary contribution game,
any individually rational solution may be an equilibrium (as suggested by the folk theorem).
Engers and Stern (2002) develop and estimate a bargaining model of family long-term care
decisions that can have both efficient and inefficient equilibria. Pezzin, Pollak, and Schone
(2007) model family long-term care decisions as a two-stage game in which the first stage
determines living arrangements—like living with one of the children; living in a nursing home;
or living independently in the community—and the second stage determines assistance provided
to the parent by adult children. The stages are related because first-stage decisions affect secondstage bargaining power; the stages are distinct, however, because they assume that family
members cannot or will not make binding commitments regarding their future behavior. They
show that even if the second stage is conditionally efficient (that is, efficient given the living

20

arrangements determined in the first stage), the equilibrium of the two-stage game may be
inefficient.

Family Policy

Many government programs and policies likely to affect family structure and fertility are
not generally regarded as elements of “family policy.” Immigration policy, for example, has both
direct effects and indirect effects on the state of American families. The direct effects include the
fertility of adult immigrants: those who arrive with partners/spouses may have children, those
who arrive without partners or spouses may enter the marriage/mating market and then have
children. Immigrants who arrived as children will grow up and have children of their own. As we
have seen, without the fertility of immigrants, the U.S. population would be declining. The
indirect effects of immigration policy operate through wages and employment which, in turn,
affect marriage prospects and fertility. These indirect effects affect not only the marriage market
prospects and fertility of immigrants, but also those of native-born men and women who
compete with immigrants in the labor market.
A review of empirical evidence on family-relevant policies here is not feasible, but we
can make two general points. First, because transfers to particular family members are not
completely offset by countervailing transfers within the family, policies that target transfers to
particular individuals within the family can have substantial effects. Second, government
attempts to encourage marriage and childbearing with financial incentives have been relatively
unsuccessful.

Targeting
In a highly influential paper entitled “Are Government Bonds Net Worth?” Barro (1974)
argued that if the government finances its current expenditures by borrowing rather than by
taxes, then the current generation will recognize that their future tax liabilities or those of their
children and grandchildren will increase, and will respond by increasing their saving by enough
to offset fully these future tax liabilities. This reasoning implies that fiscal policy is impotent
because it is offset fully by countervailing family transfers. The crucial step in the argument is

21

the claim that the current generation will increase inter vivos transfers and bequests to the next
generation by enough to offset fully their descendants’ increased tax liabilities. Analogous to this
macro application of Ricardian equivalence is a micro application that focuses on specific
government programs intended to benefit particular family members, like children. As in the
macro application, the analytical issue is whether government transfers targeted to particular
individuals within a family will be fully offset by reallocation within that family.
The growing empirical literature linking women’s resources to child well-being has
provided a rationale for targeting transfers to women and provides much of the motivation for
studying intrafamily allocation. A number of studies have found that children do better when
their mothers control a larger fraction of family resources. For example, Lundberg, Pollak, and
Wales (1997), using the natural experiment provided by changes in the British child allowance,
found that the increase in mother's control over resources led to a large and statistically
significant increase in expenditures on children's clothing relative to men's clothing. Much of the
relevant evidence comes from developing countries. For example, Duflo (2000, 2003) studied
the effect of the South African Old Age Pension on grandchildren's weight for height and their
height for age. She found that payments to grandmothers, especially maternal grandmothers, had
a substantial effect on these outcomes for grandchildren, while payments to grandfathers had no
effect. This finding, of course, is also further evidence that families do not pool resources.
Most studies that reject household pooling of targeted transfers have explained the
rejection by invoking bargaining considerations. That is, the person within a household who
actually receives the transfer has greater bargaining power over how that money will be spent.
However, the nonfungibility of money within families may have other sources. For example,
inertia may prevent households from adjusting their spending plans in response to government
programs aimed at particular family members and mental accounting categories may limit their
willingness to reallocate away from particular types of expenditure. Kooreman (2000) finds that
the marginal propensity to consume child goods from Dutch child allowance payments was very
large compared to expenditures out of other income, and interprets this as a “labeling” effect of
policy on intrahousehold allocation.

22

Promoting Marriage and Fertility
Falling fertility rates in most of the developed world have led many countries to institute
deliberate pro-natalist policies, including direct cash subsidies for children, childcare subsidies,
and generous parental leave policies. Many countries provide subsidies to parents through their
tax systems, although such tax-expenditures are usually not part of an articulated pro-natalist
policy. In the United States, both the federal income tax and the Earned Income Tax Credit
(EITC) contain such provisions. However, in the United States, which is virtually the only
developed country with fertility at the replacement level, explicit policy has focused on
discouraging nonmarital childbearing and promoting marriage, particularly among low-income
parents. Restrictions on the eligibility of unmarried mothers for long-term welfare receipt and
stringent enforcement of parental child support obligations were expected to lead to decreases in
nonmarital childbearing, both by encouraging marriage and discouraging nonmarital fertility.
Kohler, Billari, and Ortega (2006) review studies of population policies in low-fertility
countries, including family cash benefits and work–family reconciliation policies such as
parental leave and childcare subsidies. They report that the effects of such policies are at best
only modestly positive and have more influence on the timing of births than on completed family
size. They conclude that policy measures tend to affect reproduction only in the long-term, so
that consistent and credible application of policy over time may be a precondition to
effectiveness. They also suggest that policies reducing economic uncertainty in early
adulthood—for example, reducing high unemployment—may have stronger pro-natalist effects
than subsidizing births or childcare. Children imply very high costs, both in money and time—
particularity mother's time—over many years. Hence, governments can only influence fertility
decisions with very large subsidies, or with credible long-term commitments to support
childrearing.
The potential effectiveness of policies to promote marriage is also questionable. In the
United States, state and federal welfare reforms that imposed time limits and work requirements
dramatically reduced welfare rolls and promoted employment among low-income women. These
policies, however, do not appear to have had significant effects on marriage or the living
arrangements of children. Bitler, Gelbach, Hoynes, and Zayodny (2004) report that welfare

23

reform reduced both marriages and divorces; Bitler, Gelbach, and Hoynes (2006) find that state
welfare waivers had complex and inconsistent effects on children’s living arrangements.
Nor is it clear what the long-term effects of successful marriage promotion policies
would be on child well-being. The correlates of the “diverging destinies” of children born to
parents near the top of the income/education distribution and those near the bottom are well
documented (McLanahan, 2004)—differences in family structure, parents’ incomes, and parents’
education—but the causal pathways are not clear. Thus, a “marriage bonus” that induced
unmarried mothers to marry the unmarried fathers of their children might or might not improve
children's test scores, completed education, or labor market success.

Conclusion

In the tradition of Becker's Treatise on the Family, economists and other social scientists
have continued to analyze partnering, parenting, and care of the elderly as results of maximizing
choices made by individuals. These individual choices, and the outcomes they imply, are
constrained at the family level by the requirements of equilibrium in bargaining and at the
societal level by the requirements of equilibrium in marriage/mating markets.
As families have become more heterogeneous and less stable, economists’ models of the
family have become more complex, attempting to account for a widening range of family
arrangements and life-cycle trajectories. Two factors are primarily responsible for this increased
heterogeneity and instability: 1) a decline in the value of marriage compared to its alternatives
and 2) a decline in individuals’ ability and willingness to make credible long-term commitments
to partners/spouses, children, and parents. But these two factors, together with the foundational
assumptions of maximizing behavior and equilibrium, do not fully explain the current state of the
American family nor enable us to predict whether recent trends are likely to continue or reverse.

24

References
Akerlof, George A., Janet L. Yellen, and Michael L. Katz. 1996. “An Analysis of Outof-Wedlock Childbearing in the United States." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2): 277–
317.
Arias, Elizabeth. 2006. United States Life Tables, 2003. National Vital Statistics
Reports, vol 54, no.14, (April 19). Division of Vital Statistics, National Center for Health
Statistics.
Barro, Robert J. 1974. "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of Political
Economy, 82(6): 1095–1117.
Becker, Gary S. 1974. “Theory of Social Interactions.” Journal of Political Economy,
82(6):1063–93.
Becker, Gary S. 1981. “Altruism in the Family and Selfishness in the Market Place.”
Economica, 48(189): 1–15.
Becker, Gary S. 1991. A Treatise on the Family. Enlarged edition. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard U Press.
Becker, Gary S. 1996. Accounting for Tastes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Becker, Gary S., and Kevin M. Murphy. 1988. “The Family and the State.” Journal of
Law & Economics, 31(1): 1-18.
Becker, Gary S., and Nigel Tomes. 1976. “Child Endowments and the Quantity and
Quality of Children.” Journal of Political Economy, 84(4), Part II: S143–S162.
Becker, Gary S., and Nigel Tomes. 1979. “An Equilibrium Theory of the Distribution
of Incomes and Intergenerational Mobility.” Journal of Political Economy, 87(6): 1153–89.
Bergstrom, Theodore C. Forthcoming. “Some Evolutionary Economics of Family
Partnerships.” American Economic Review.
Bianchi, Suzanne M., Melissa A. Milkie, Liana C. Sayer, and John P. Robinson.
2000. “Is Anyone Doing the Housework? Trends in the Gender Division of Household Labor.”
Social Forces, 79(1): 191–228.
Bitler, Marianne P., Jonah B. Gelbach, and Hilary W. Hoynes. 2006. “Welfare
Reform and Children's Living Arrangements.” Journal of Human Resources, 41(1): 1–27.
Bitler, Marianne P., Jonah B. Gelbach, Hilary W. Hoynes, and Madeline Zavodny.
2004. “The Impact of Welfare Reform on Marriage and Divorce.” Demography, 41(2): 213–36.
Black, Dan A., Seth G. Sanders, and Lowell J. Taylor. 2007. “The Economics of
Lesbian and Gay Families.” (Forthcoming in Journal of Economic Perspectives).
Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2006. “The U.S. Gender Pay Gap in the
1990s: Slowing Convergence.” Industrial & Labor Relations Review, 60(1): 45–66.

25

Bumpass, Larry, and Hsien-Hen Lu. 2000. “Trends in Cohabitation and Implications
for Children's Family Contexts in the United States.” Population Studies, 54(1): 29–41.
Burdett, Kenneth, and John Ermisch. 2002. “Single Mothers.” ISER [Institute for
Social and Economic Research] Working Paper 2002-30, University of Essex.
Cherlin, Andrew. 1978. “Remarriage as an Incomplete Institution.” American Journal of
Sociology, 84(3): 634–50.
Child Trends DataBank. 2006. Birth and Fertility Rates [2006-07-19].
http://www.childtrendsdatabank.org/indicators/79BirthRates.cfm.
Cigno, Alessandro. 1993. “Intergenerational Transfers without Altruism: Family, Market
and State.” European Journal of Political Economy, 9(4): 505–518.
Coontz, Stephanie. 2005. Marriage, A History: From Obedience to Intimacy or How
Love Conquered Marriage. New York: Viking.
Costa, Dora. 1998. The Evolution of Retirement: An American Economic History, 1880–
1990. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Cutler, David M. 2001. “Declining Disability among the Elderly.” Health Affairs, 20(6):
11–27.
Duflo, Esther. 2000. “Child Health and Household Resources in South Africa: Evidence
from the Old Age Pension Program.” American Economic Review, 90(2): 393–8.
Duflo, Esther. 2003. “Grandmothers and Granddaughters: Old-Age Pensions and
Intrahousehold Allocation in South Africa.” World Bank Economic Review, 17(1): 1–25.
Dye, Jane Lawler. 2005. “Fertility of American Women: June 2004.” Current
Population Reports, P20-555. U.S. Census Bureau, December.
Edin, Kathryn, and Maria J. Kefalas. 2005. Promises I Can Keep: Why Poor Women
Put Motherhood before Marriage. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Ellwood, David T., and Christopher Jencks. 2004. "The Spread of Single-Parent
Families in the United States since 1960." In The Future of the Family, ed. Daniel Patrick
Moynihan, Lee Rainwater, and Timothy Smeeding, 25–65. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Engers, Maxim, and Steven Stern. 2002. “Long-Term Care and Family Bargaining.”
International Economic Review, 43(1): 73–114.
Folbre, Nancy. 1994. “Children as Public Goods.” American Economic Review, 84(2):
86–90.
Furstenberg, Frank, Jr. 2001. “The Fading Dream: Prospects for Marriage in the Inner
City.” In Problem of the Century: Racial Stratification in the United States, ed. Elijah Anderson
and Douglas S. Massey, 224–46. New York: Russell Sage.
Furstenberg, Frank, Jr., Sheela Kennedy, Vonnie G. McCloyd, Ruben G. Rumbaut,
and Richard A. Settersten, Jr. 2004. “Growing Up is Harder to Do.” Contexts, 3(3): 33–41.

26

Gennetian, Lisa A. 2005. “One or Two Parents? Half or Step Siblings? The Effect of
Family Structure on Young Children's Achievement.” Journal of Population Economics, 18(3):
415–36.
Gibson-Davis, Christina M., Kathryn Edin, and Sara McLanahan. 2005. “High
Hopes but Even Higher Expectations: The Retreat from Marriage among Low-Income Couples.”
Journal of Marriage and the Family, 67(5): 1301–12.
Ginther, Donna K. and Robert A. Pollak. 2004. “Family Structure and Children’s
Educational Outcomes: Blended Families, Stylized Facts, and Descriptive Regressions."
Demography 41(4), 671–696.
Goldin, Claudia. 2006 “The Quiet Revolution that Transformed Women’s Employment,
Education and Family.” American Economic Review, 96(2): 1–21.
Greenwood, Jeremy, and Nezih Guner. 2004. “Marriage and Divorce since World War
II: Analyzing the Role of Technological Progress on the Formation of Households.” Economie
d’Avant Garde Research Report 8, University of Rochester.
Kohler, Hans-Peter, Francesco C. Billari, and José Antonio Ortega. 2006. “Low
Fertility in Europe: Causes, Implications and Policy Options.” In The Baby Bust: Who Will Do
the Work? Who Will Pay the Taxes? ed. F. R. Harris, 48–109. Lanham, MD: Rowman &
Littlefield Publishers.
Konrad, Kai. A., and Kjell E. Lommerud. 2000. “The Bargaining Family Revisited.”
Canadian Journal of Economics, 33(2): 471–87.
Kooreman, Peter. 2000. “The Labeling Effect of a Child Benefit System.”American
Economic Review, 90(3): 571–83.
Lam, David. 1988. “Marriage Markets and Assortative Mating with Household Public
Goods: Theoretical Results and Empirical Implications.” Journal of Human Resources, 23(4):
462–87.
Light, Audrey, and Kathleen McGarry. 2004. “Why Parents Play Favorites:
Explanations for Unequal Bequests.” American Economic Review, 94(5): 1669–81.
Lundberg, Shelly J. 2005. “Men and Islands: Dealing with the Family in Empirical
Labor Economics.” Labor Economics, 12(4): 591–612.
Lundberg, Shelly J., and Robert A. Pollak. 1993. “Separate Spheres Bargaining and
the Marriage Market.” Journal of Political Economy, 101(6): 988–1010.
Lundberg, Shelly J., and Robert A. Pollak. 1996. “Bargaining and Distribution in
Marriage.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 10(4): 139–58.
Lundberg, Shelly J., and Robert A. Pollak. 2003. “Efficiency in Marriage.” Review of
Economics of the Household, 1(3): 153-167.
Lundberg, Shelly J., and Robert A. Pollak. Forthcoming. “Family Decision-Making.”
In The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. New York: MacMillan.

27

Lundberg, Shelly J., Robert A. Pollak, and Terence J. Wales. 1997. “Do Husbands
and Wives Pool Their Resources? Evidence from the United Kingdom Child Benefit.” Journal of
Human Resources, 32(3): 463–80.
Manser, Marilyn, and Murray Brown. 1980. “Marriage and Household DecisionMaking: A Bargaining Analysis.” International Economic Review, 21(1): 31–44.
McElroy, Marjorie B., and Mary J. Horney. 1981. “Nash-Bargained Household
Decisions: Toward a Generalization of the Theory of Demand.” International Economic Review
22(2): 333–49.
McGarry, Kathleen. Forthcoming. “Inheritances and Bequests.” In The New Palgrave
Dictionary of Economics. New York: MacMillan.
McLanahan, Sara. 2004. “Diverging Destinies: How Children Are Faring under the
Second Demographic Transition.” Demography, 41(4): 607–27.
McLanahan, Sara and Gary Sandefur. 1994. Growing Up With a Single Parent: What
Hurts, What Helps. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Mincy, Ronald B. 2002. “Who Should Marry Whom? Multiple Partner Fertility among
New Parents.” Center for Research on Child Wellbeing Working Paper 02-03-FF.
Neal, Derek. 2004. “The Relationship between Marriage Market Prospects and NeverMarried Motherhood.” Journal of Human Resources, 39(4): 938–57.
Pezzin, Liliana E., and Barbara Steinberg Schone. 1999. “Parental Marital Disruption
and Intergenerational Transfers: An Analysis of Lone Elderly Parents and Their Children,”
Demography 36(3): 287–97.
Pezzin, Liliana E., Robert A. Pollak, and Barbara S. Schone. 2007. "Efficiency in
Family Bargaining: Living Arrangements and Caregiving Decisions of Adult Children and Disabled
Elderly Parents." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 12358. (Forthcoming in
CESifo Economic Studies).
Plotnick, Robert D. 2006. “The Effect of Childlessness on the Health Status of Elders.”
Paper presented at the Annual meeting of the Population Association of American, Los Angeles,
CA, March 2006.
Pollak, Robert A. 1985. “A Transaction Cost Approach to Families and Households.”
Journal of Economic Literature, 23(2): 581–608.
Pollak, Robert A. 1988. “Tied Transfers and Paternalistic Preferences.” American
Economic Review, 78(2): 240–44.
Pollak, Robert A. 2003. “Gary Becker's Contributions to Family and Household
Economics.” Review of Economics of the Household, 1(1–2): 111–41.
Posner, Eric. 2000. “Family Law and Social Norms.” In Law and Social Norms, ed. Eric
A. Posner, 68–87. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

28

Schwartz, Christine R., and Robert D. Mare. 2005. “Trends in Educational Assortative
Marriage from 1940 to 2003.” Demography, 42(4): 621–46.
Sevilla-Sanz, Almudena. 2005. “Social Effects, Household Time Allocation, and the
Decline in Union Formation.” Congressional Budget Office Working Paper 2005-7.
Simmons, Tavia, and Martin O’Connell. 2003. “Married Couple and UnmarriedPartner Households: 2000.” United States Census 2000 Special Reports, CENSR-5.
Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers. 2007. “Marriage and Divorce: Changes and their
Driving Forces.” (Forthcoming in Journal of Economic Perspectives).
U.S. Census Bureau. 2004. U.S. Interim Projections by Age, Sex, Race, and Hispanic
Origin, March 18, 2004. http://www.census.gov/ipc/www/usinterimproj/.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2006. “Households by Size: 1960 to Present.” May 25, 2006.
http://www.census.gov/population/socdemo/hh-fam/hh4.pdf.
Waldfogel, Jane. 1998. “Understanding the ‘Family Gap’ in Pay for Women with
Children.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12(1): 137–56.
Willis, Robert J. 1999. "A Theory of Out-of-Wedlock Childbearing." Journal of
Political Economy, 107(S6): S33–S64.
Winkler, Anne E., Timothy D. McBride, and Courtney Andrews. 2005. “Wives Who
Outearn Their Husbands: A Transitory or Persistent Phenomenon for Couples?” Demography,
42(3): 523–35.

29

Figure 1
Converging Economic Lives of Men and Women: 1960 to the Present
Female/male ratios 1960-present
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980
1985
Years

1990

1995

2000

2005

Median earnings of full-time, year-round workers
Proportion college graduates
Labor force participation rates
Average earnings

Source: March 1961–2005 Supplements to the Current Population Survey.
Notes: Sample includes individuals 25–60 years old (except median earnings). Average earnings
include working and nonworking individuals. Median earnings series includes individuals 15
years and above and, before 1989, includes civilian workers only.

30

Figure 2
Diverging Family Lives of More and Less-Educated

A: Proportion of Men Married at Ages 30–50

Proportion of men married at ages 30-50
1
0.95
0.9
0.85
0.8
0.75
0.7
0.65
0.6
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980
1985
Years

1990

1995

less than high school
high school
some college
college and higher

Source: March 1962–2005 Supplements to the Current Population Survey.
Note: Sample includes men 30–50 years old, not inmates or in armed forces.

31

2000

2005

B: Proportion of Women Married at Ages 30–50
Propotion of women married at ages 30-50
1
0.95
0.9
0.85
0.8
0.75
0.7
0.65
0.6
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980
1985
Years

1990

1995

less than high school
high school
some college
college and higher

Source: March 1962–2005 Supplements to the Current Population Survey.
Notes: Sample includes women 30–50 years old, not inmates or in armed forces.

32

2000

2005

C: Proportion of Mothers Who Are Single at Ages 30 to 50

Propotion of mothers single
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980
1985
Years

1990

1995

2000

less than high school
high school
some college
college and higher

Source: March 1964–2005 Supplements to the Current Population Survey.
Note: Sample includes women 30–50 years old with children under 18 in the household.

33

2005

