NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON CURRENT ACCOUNT SURPLUSES AND THE CORRECTION OF GLOBAL
IMBALANCES
Sebastian Edwards
Working Paper 12904
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12904

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2007

This is a revised version of a paper presented at the Central Bank of Chile Research Conference, November
9-10, 2006. I thank Ed Leamer and Roberto Alvarez for helpful discussions and comments. I am
grateful to Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel for his comments and to Alberto Naudon for his comments and
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Sebastian Edwards. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

On Current Account Surpluses and the Correction of Global Imbalances
Sebastian Edwards
NBER Working Paper No. 12904
February 2007
JEL No. F02,F31,F32
ABSTRACT
In this paper I analyze the nature of external adjustments in current account surplus countries. I ask
whether a realignment of world growth rates -- with Japan and Europe growing faster, and the U.S.
growing more slowly -- is likely to solve the current situation of global imbalances. The main findings
may be summarized as follows: (a) There is an important asymmetry between current account deficits
and surpluses. (b) Large surpluses exhibit little persistence through time. (c) Large and abrupt reductions
in surpluses are a rare phenomenon. (d) A decline in GDP growth, relative to long term trend, of 1
percentage point results in an improvement in the current account balance -- higher surplus or lower
deficit -- of one quarter of a percentage point of GDP. Taken together, these results indicate that a
realignment of global growth -- with Japan and the Euro Zone growing faster, and the U.S. moderating
its growth -- would only make a modest contribution towards the resolution of global imbalances.
This means that, even if there is a realignment of global growth, the world is likely to need significant
exchange rate movements. This analysis also suggests that a reduction in China's (very) large surplus
will be needed if global imbalances are to be resolved.
Sebastian Edwards
UCLA Anderson Graduate School of Business
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C508
Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
sebastian.edwards@anderson.ucla.edu

1
I.

Introduction
During the last few years the United States has run an increasingly large current

account deficit. Forecasts by J.P. Morgan suggest that in 2007 the deficit will reach
almost one trillion dollars, or 7% of GDP. This unprecedented situation has generated
concern among analysts and policy makers. Indeed, many have argued that this deficit is
unsustainable and that, at some point, it will have to decline. Much of the recent research
on the area has inquired whether the U.S. external adjustment will be gradual or abrupt,
and how it will impact on the (real) value of the dollar.1
Of course, one country’s current deficit must be another country, or countries,
surpluses. In that regard, then, any discussion on the decline of the U.S. deficit implies a
discussion of the reduction of the rest of the world’s combined current account surpluses.
This point was made forcefully by the Fed’s Chairman Ben Bernanke in a March 2005
speech – before he became Chairman –, where he argued that the main cause of the U.S.
external deficit was a major “savings glut” in the rest of the world. Bernanke’s words
generated significant controversy, and many newspaper pages and blogs were filled with
commentary on the future Chairman’s views.2
Many of the participants in these current account debates have argued that
regional growth differentials have been at the heart of “global imbalances.” The
argument runs along the following lines: rapid growth in the U.S. has been associated
with an increase in U.S. investment (over savings); at the same time, slower growth in
Europe and Japan has been associated with higher savings (relative to investment) in
those parts of the world.3 Global imbalances, the argument goes, are a reflection of these
growth differentials. An implication of this perspective is that, far from reflecting a
serious problem, the large current account deficits in the U.S. are a sign of strength; they
1

See, for example, recent papers published in the 2005(1) issue of the Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity; see also the articles in the September 2006 issue of the Journal of Policy Modeling.
2
See Bernanke (2005). Some recent theoretical papers have investigated this issue, and have inquired
under what conditions the large U.S. deficit could be maintained through time. See, for example, Dooley,
Folkerts-Landau and Garber (2004 and 2006). See also Caballero, Fahri and Gourinchas (2006), Loayza et
al (2000), and De Gregorio (2005). On the global savings glut view see, also, Clarida (2005a,b), and
Hubbard (2005). One of the few empirical papers on the savings glut is Chinn and Ito (2005). See Chinn
and Lee (2005) for a VAR analysis of two surplus countries. See, also, Gruber and Kamin (2005). Two
important volumes with papers on the U.S. deficit and global adjustment are Bergsten and Williamson
(2003, 2004).
3
Notice that this argument is very general, and refers to the relationship between investment, savings and
growth; in fact, no causality is implied there in the above statement.

2
reflect the fact that during the last few years the U.S. has been the locomotive of global
growth. According to this view a realignment of growth – with an increase in growth in
Europe and Japan and a slowdown in the U.S. – would play an important role in
correcting global imbalances. In a recent interview, U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Hank
Paulson “acknowledged to reporters that …he saw the problem of [the U.S.] deficits as
…part of the problem of other imbalances in other countries.” From here the Secretary
went on to say: “The U.S. has for a good number of years now been growing much faster
than the major developed trading partners, Europe and Japan.” Then he added that for
the imbalances to be corrected, Japan and Europe had “to get the kind of growth on the
consumption side that is going to make the difference.” 4
In the 1940’s Keynes was particularly interested in understanding the role of
surplus countries in global adjustment. Indeed, his proposal for an international Clearing
Union was based on the notion that in the face of large payments imbalances both deficit
and surplus nations should share the burden of adjustment.5 In recent years, however,
there have been very few empirical academic studies that have analyzed, in a systematic
way, the process through which countries with large external surpluses have reduced their
imbalances. This paucity of analyses contrasts with the case of current account deficits, a
topic that has been analyzed extensively.6
The purpose of this paper is to analyze the historical evidence on current account
adjustments in surplus countries. I am particularly interested in investigating whether
large surpluses are persistent, and the process and speed through which large surplus
countries have, in the past, reduced their imbalances. A particularly relevant issue is
whether, historically, there have been large and abrupt declines in current account
surpluses. The importance of this question is that such abrupt surplus adjustments would
be required if, as some fear, the U.S. – and other Anglo Saxon countries, such as the
U.K., Australia and New Zealand, for that matter – experience a sudden stop of capital
inflows and rapid current account reversals. I also investigate the connection between
4

Steven R. Weisman, “Paulson Shows Talent for Deflecting Criticism,” International Herald Tribune,
September 27, 2006; emphasis added.
5
See, for example, the discussion in Chapter 6 of Skidelsky’s (2000) third volume of Keynes’ biography,
and the papers, reports and memoranda by Keynes cited in that chapter.
6
Of course, as pointed out above, at a definitional level the sum of all deficits is equal to the sum of all
surpluses. So, knowing how all deficit countries behave on the aggregate tells us exactly how the sum of
all surpluses behaves on the aggregate. This, however, is not a very interesting proposition.

3
(large) surpluses and the business cycle, and I ask whether it is likely that, as recently
argued by U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Hank Paulson and others, once the non AngloSaxon advanced countries experience an acceleration in their rates of growth, there will
be a decline in their surpluses and, thus, in global imbalances.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section II I analyze the
distribution of current account deficits and surpluses during the last 35 years (19702004). The analysis focuses on the asymmetries between surpluses and deficits. In
Section III I focus on large and persistent current account surpluses, and I inquire
whether large surpluses tend to last for prolonged periods of time. In Section IV I
analyze the relationship between current account balances and the business cycle. In
particular, I ask whether an acceleration in the rate of growth (relative to long term trend)
in advanced countries (other than the U.S.) is likely to reduce their surpluses. In Section
V I deal with the anatomy of large surplus adjustments. I use data for 35 years and over
100 countries to analyze the most important characteristics of rapid and major declines in
current account surpluses. I focus on several aspects of adjustments, including their
frequency and distribution across different groups of countries and regions. In this
Section I also analyze the concomitant behavior of exchange rates, growth, inflation and
interest rates. In particular, I use a battery of non parametric tests to analyze whether the
behavior of these key variables has been statistically different in surplus adjustment
countries and a control group of countries. Finally, Section VI contains some concluding
remarks and discusses directions for future research. The paper also has a Data
Appendix.

II. Current Account Surpluses and the Distribution of Imbalances in the World
Economy
A fundamental accounting principle in open economy macroeconomics is that the
sum of all current account balances (deficits and surpluses) across all countries in a given
year, should add up to zero.7 However, the fact that the value of the sum of all current
account balances adds up to zero, does not mean that the number of deficit countries

7

As is discussed in some detail below, during the last few years the actual sum of balances has become
significantly different from zero.

4
should be equal to the number of surplus countries. Indeed, it is perfectly possible that
the vast majority of countries run deficits, and that only a handful of nations run (rather
large) surpluses. In this section I analyze the distribution of current account balances
(deficits and surpluses) in the world economy during the last thirty-five years, and I
investigate the evolution of this distribution. I am particularly interested in understanding
how the increasingly large U.S. – and more generally, Anglo-Saxon – deficits have been
financed: are they being financed by an increasingly larger number of countries? How
important are surpluses in the emerging countries? What has been the role of
commodity-exporting countries?
The data are taken from the World Bank data set and cover all countries –
advanced, transition and emerging – for which there is information.8 In order to organize
the discussion I have divided the data into six groups: (1) Africa; (2) Asia; (3) Eastern
Europe; (4) Industrialized (or advanced) nations; (5) Latin America and the Caribbean;
and (6) Middle East and Northern Africa. The data set covers 160 countries during the
1970-2004 period. There are over 4,200 observations, and it is the largest data set that
can be used in empirical work on current account balances. Table A.1 in the Appendix
presents a summary on data availability on the current account, both for the complete
sample as well as for the different groups of countries. In most of the empirical exercises
that I report in the rest of this paper I have restricted the data set to countries with
population over half a million, and income per capita above $ 500 in 1985 PPP terms.
Also, the analysis presented in this paper is (mostly) carried out using data on current
account balances as a percentage of GDP; in what follows positive numbers refer to a
current account surplus, while negative numbers refer to deficits.
Tables 1 and 2 summarize the basic data on current account imbalances during the
last thirty-five years. Table 1 contains data on average balances, while Table 2 presents
data on median balances. Several interesting results emerge from these tables.
•

During the period under study current account balances in Asia have
experienced a deep change. As may be seen, until 1998 both the mean and
median reflected the fact that most countries in that region posted large

8

When data from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics are used the results are very similar.

5
current account deficits, and were capital importers. Another way of
saying this is that until that year the Asian nations had positive foreign
savings. As these tables show, things changed drastically after the 199798 Asian debt crises. For the period 1990-1995 the mean current account
balance in Asia was a deficit of 3.3% of GDP. For 1999-2004 the mean
current account balance was a surplus of 2.4%. This represents a
remarkable current account reversal in excess of 5% of GDP!
•

Current account balances also experienced important changes in most
other country groups. In the Middle East, there have been surpluses, on
average, since 1999. These have become more accentuated during 200506, as a result of the higher oil prices.

•

The magnitude of the external adjustment in the Latin American and
Caribbean countries is particularly noticeable from the data on the median
balances (Table 2). As may be seen, the current account deficit declined
from 5.3% of GDP in 2002 to barely 1.0% of GDP in 2004.

•

The data in Tables 1 and 2 also show a difference in the mean and median
behavior in the advanced countries. During the last few years the mean
current account over GDP balance has been a small surplus – below 1% -in the industrial nations. On the other hand, the media balance in 2003
and 2004, was a small deficit.

As pointed out above, even though the value of all current account balances has to
add up to zero, there is no reason why the number of deficit countries should be equal to
the number of surplus countries. Table 3 contains data on the proportion of countries
with current account surpluses in each year. This Table shows an important asymmetry
between surpluses and deficits: many more countries run deficits than surpluses. Indeed,
for the complete sample, only 27.6% of countries experienced surpluses. Moreover, the
percentage of surplus countries has changed significantly through time: during 2003 and
2004, this proportion has been 38.6% and 37.8%. As may be seen from Table 3, these
are the highest figures in the last 25 years, and indicate that the growing U.S. deficit has
been financed by an increasingly larger array of countries. Interestingly, the last time the

6
U.S. experienced large deficits (1985-1987), the proportion of surplus nations was much
lower, ranging from 25.0% to 27.9%. In many ways this is not surprising, as the
magnitude of the U.S. deficit has been significantly larger during the last few years than
in 1985-87. As Table 3 shows, the main difference between these two periods refers to
the Asian countries: in 1985-87 less than 25% of the Asian nations run a current account
deficit; in 2002-04 almost 70% of the Asian nations run a surplus.
It is important to notice that the results discussed above don’t say anything
regarding causal relationships. It is not possible to know if the number of surplus
countries has increased because there is a need to finance an ever growing U.S. current
account deficit, or if the U.S. deficit has expanded because the number of surplus
countries has grown during the last few years.9 As pointed out above, the sum of all
current account balances should add up to zero. However, since these balances are
gathered by independent country agencies, there is bound to be a statistical discrepancy.
In fact, it would be highly unlikely that for any given year the sum of these balances
would be actually identical zero. In the last few years, however, the size of the statistical
discrepancy has been growing, and since 1997 it has become increasingly negative (IMF,
2005). According the 2003 World Economic Outlook, by 2002 the (negative)
discrepancy exceeded 3% of the world’s imports. This might be called “the mystery of
the missing current account surpluses.” Marquez and Workman (2001) have argued that
this may reflect a number of factors, including: (a) cross country differences in the lags
with which actual transactions are recorded; (b) asymmetric valuations of the same
transaction in the two countries involved; and (c) misreporting of investment income.

III.

High and Persistent Large Current Account Surpluses
According to modern intertemporal models of the current account, including the

portfolio-based models of Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996), Kraay and Ventutra (2000, 2002)
and Edwards (2002, 2004), countries will tend to experience short-term deviations from

9

Bernanke’s (2005) view on the “global savings glut” assumes that the causal relationship goes from
higher national savings in the rest of the world to a U.S. increased deficit.

7
their long run sustainable current account levels.10 This implies that large current
account imbalances – or large deviations from sustainability -- should not persist through
time. Once the temporary shocks that trigger the large imbalances have passed, the
current account will return to its long-run sustainable level. In this Section I use the data
set described above to analyze the degree of persistence through time of large current
account surpluses. I am particularly interested in finding out whether some countries
have experienced very high surpluses for very long periods of time.
As a first step I constructed two measures of “high surpluses.” (I also constructed
equivalent measures of “high deficits.”)

•

“High Surplus 1:” This index takes the value of one if, in a particular year, a
country’s surplus is among its region’s 25% highest surpluses. The index
takes a value of zero otherwise.

• “High Surplus 2:” This index takes the value of one if, in a particular year, a
country’s surplus is among its region’s 10% highest surpluses. It takes a value
of zero otherwise.

In Table 4 I list those countries that have had persistently high surpluses. I define
persistently high surpluses as a situation where the country in question has a high surplus,
as defined above, for at least four years in a row. The first column in Table 4 refers to
High Surplus 1 while the second column refers to High Surplus 2. As may be seen, there
are 35 countries with persistently high surpluses according to the “High Surplus 1”
definition, and only 12 according to the more stringent “High Surplus 2” definition.
Some interesting facts emerge from these tables (in what follows I focus on the “High
Surplus 1” definition in Column 1).
•

First, the number of large countries that have had persistently large
surpluses is very small. Only Germany and Japan make the list, among

10

In these models changes in current account balances are (largely) the result of efforts by domestic
economic agents to smooth consumption. The sustainable level of the current account balance, in turn, will
depend on portfolio decisions both by foreigners as well as by domestic investors.

8
the advanced nations, and China and Russia among the emerging and
transition countries.
•

Many oil producing countries are in the list of persistently high surpluses.
This is particularly the case in the years following a major oil price
increase.

•

Many East Asian countries have had persistently large surpluses in the
aftermath of the 1997-1998 debt crises.

•

Only a handful of countries have been truly long term high surplus
nations. The most important ones are Switzerland and Singapore.

Overall, the picture that emerges from Table 4 has two implications. First, the
fact that large countries don’t seem to run high surpluses in a very persistent way, is
consistent with the notion that in order to finance the increasingly large U.S. deficit, more
a more small and medium size countries have to run surpluses. And second, the lack of
persistency suggests that the majority of countries that do run large surpluses, do it for a
rather limited period of time. After posting these large surpluses these countries go
through an adjustment process that reduces their surpluses to more “normal” – or
sustainable – levels. An important question – and one that I address in Section V of this
paper – refers to the nature of these “surplus adjustment” episodes: from a historical point
of view, have these adjustments been gradual or abrupt? Other relevant questions from a
policy perspective include: what has been the behavior of other key macroeconomic
variables during the adjustment? During a surplus adjustment, do macro variables such
as inflation, interest rates, exchange rates and growth, behave differently than in non
adjustment countries?
III.2

The Persistence of High Surpluses: Some Econometric Results
In order to investigate further the degree of persistence of high current account

imbalances I estimated a number of variance component probit regressions of the
following type:

(1)

High jt = α + ∑ β k High jt − k + γX jt + ε jt

9
Where High jt is a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if country j has a high surplus
(as defined above) in period t; X jt , refers to other covariates including time, country
and/or region fixed effects. The error term ε tj is given by a variance component model:

ε tj = ν j + μ tj . ν j is iid with zero mean and variance σ ν2 ; μ tj is normally distributed with
zero mean and variance σ μ2 = 1 . My main interest is on the β k coefficients on lagged
high surpluses: I am interested in finding out whether having had a high surplus in the
past (up to four years) affects the probability of having a high deficit in the current
period. An important question is whether the degree of persistence is similar for high
surpluses and high deficits. In order to address this issue I also estimated equations such
as (1) for deficit countries. 11 The results are in Table 5, where I report the estimated
marginal effects, which capture the change in the probability of a high surplus (deficit) in
period t, if there is a high surplus (deficit) in period t-k.12
As may be seen, these results suggest that the degree of persistence of high
deficits is larger than that of high surpluses; this is particularly the case for the stricter
definition of high imbalances High 2. These results show that beyond the first lag, the
point estimates of the marginal effects are very small, and that in many cases they are not
statistically significant. This confirms the results in Table 4 that indicate that during the
last 35 years the degree of persistence of large current account imbalances has tended to
be low.
III.3

Large and Persistent Surpluses in Absolute Terms

The results presented above on persistently high deficits were constructed on the
bases of current account balances to GDP ratios. From a global financing perspective,
however, what really matters is which countries have large deficits measured in
convertible currency. Table 6 contains data on countries with persistently high surpluses,
measured in absolute terms. As may be seen, this table has some important differences
with Table 4 on surpluses measured as a proportion to GDP. As expected, in Table 6
11

The variables “High Deficit 1” and “High Deficit 2” where computed in a symmetric way to the two
high surpluses variable.
12
The marginal effects dF/dx in Table 5 have been computed for a discrete change in the dummy variables
from 0 to 1, and have been evaluated for the mean values of all the regressors. In addition to these panel
probits I also estimated dynamic linear probability models and dynamic panel probits (Heckman 1981).
The results obtained support those presented here.

10
there is a greater presence of large countries: France and Italy are now “highly persistent
surplus” countries; also, Japan’s streak of high surpluses appears to be much longer than
in Table 4. But the most important difference between both tables is that according to
Table 6, China has run a persistently high surplus for more than a decade. This suggests
that, as many have argued for some time now, an adjustment in China’s large external
surplus will be an important component in solving current global imbalances.

IV.

Current Account Surpluses and the Business Cycle: Will an International

Growth Realignment help solve Global Imbalances?

One of the basic macroeconomic relationships – and one that is taught early on to
undergraduate students – is that the current account is the difference between savings and
investments. This means that countries that experience an investment boom will go
through a deterioration of their current account. Likewise, countries that experience an
increase in savings will tend to post larger surpluses. Of course, this savings-investment
perspective is complementary to the more popular view that focuses on trade flows, net
incomes from abroad and international net transfers. The advantage of concentrating on
the savings-investment relationship is that it allows analysts to focus on the way in which
changes in aggregate demand – and changes in policies that affect aggregate demand, for
that matter -- will affect current account balances.
A practical implication of the savings-investment perspective – and one that has
played an important role in recent debates on global imbalances – emphasizes the role of
differences in regional rates of growth on current account balances. As pointed out
above, the analysis runs along the following lines: During the last few years rapid growth
in the U.S. has been associated with an increase in U.S. investment (over savings); on the
other hand, slower growth in Europe and Japan has been associated with higher savings
(relative to investment) in those parts of the world.13 According to this view, global
imbalances are, to a large extent, a reflection of these growth differentials. Thus, far
from reflecting a serious problem, the large current account deficits in the U.S. are a sign
of strength; they reflect the fact that during the last few years the U.S. has been the

13

Notice that this argument is very general, and refers to the relationship between investment, savings and
growth; in fact, no causality is implied there is in the above statement.

11
locomotive of global growth. An implication of this perspective is that, an international
realignment of growth – with an increase in growth in Europe and Japan and a slowdown
in the U.S. – would play an important role in correcting global imbalances.14 In a 1999
article, the Financial Times summarized the IMF’s World Economic Outlook views on
global imbalances as follows (emphasis added):

“Current account imbalances between the world's three main economic blocks
have widened in recent years, reflecting stronger growth in the US economy than
in Japan and Europe.”15

In a 2004 speech, then Under Secretary of the Treasury John B. Taylor discussed
the relationship between savings, investment, growth differentials and global imbalances.
According to him (emphasis added):

“[The] increase in investment was a key factor in U.S. economic growth during
this period. Over a longer period the increase in investment will expand the
capital stock… [T]he increase of the U.S. current account deficit over more than a
decade has been linked to domestic U.S. capital formation increasing more than
U.S. saving…” (Taylor 2004)

Regarding the correction of global imbalances, in the same speech Taylor said that there
was a need to boost global growth:

“We would certainly not object - in fact, we'd be very pleased - if other countries
strengthened their investment environment, their level of investment, and their
economic growth performance. [Pro growth] policies are those that will raise
global growth…[and] will ameliorate the deficit by raising U.S. exports and
increasing investment opportunities around the globe… [M]ore growth
14

Implicit in this view is the notion that growth realignment would require higher savings (and/or lower
investment) in the U.S. and higher investment (and/or lower savings) in Europe and Japan (and maybe in
other parts of non-China Asia).
15
See, Robert Chote, “IMF: US Slowdown Now Inevitable,” Financial Times, April 21, 1999.

12
throughout the world …[will] reduce external imbalances.” (Taylor 2004,
emphasis added).

In a 2004 article, former IMF’s Chief Economist Michael Mussa wrote:

“With respect to the necessary correction of the U.S. current account deficit,
acceleration of growth in the rest of the world and the depreciation of the U.S.
dollar since 2001 should help to bring an end to further increases in the U.S.
imbalance.” (Mussa 2004, emphasis added).

Many authors have addressed the question of whether large external imbalances
are worrisome by investigating whether they are consistent with intertemporal optimizing
models that posit that savings and investment decisions -- and thus the current account -are the result of optimal decisions by the private sector. If the data support the
intertemporal model, observed current account balances (even very large balances) are
the reflection of optimal decisions and, thus, they should not be a cause for concern. An
important and powerful implication of intertemporal models is that, at the margin,
changes in national savings should be fully reflected in changes in the current account
balance (Obstfeld and Rogoff 1996). Empirically, however, this prediction of the theory
has been systematically rejected by the data.16 Typical analyses that have regressed the
current account on savings have found a coefficient of approximately 0.25, significantly
below the hypothesized value of one. Many numerical simulations based on the
intertemporal approach have also failed to account for current account behavior.
According to these models a country’s optimal response to negative exogenous shocks is
to run very high current account deficits, indeed much higher than what is observed in
reality. Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996), for example, develop a model of a small open
economy where under a set of plausible parameters the steady state trade surplus is equal
to 45 percent of GDP, and the steady state debt to GDP ratio is equal to 15.17
16

See, for example, Aizenman (1983), Ogaki, Ostry and Reinhart (1995), Gosh and Ostry (1997), and
Nason and Rogers (2006).
17
Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996) do not claim that this model is particularly realistic. In fact, they present its
implications to highlight some of the shortcomings of simple intertemporal models of the current account.

13
The rejection by the data of the intertemporal (or Present Value) model of the
current account has generated an intense debate among international economists. Some
have argued that there is a group of “usual suspects” that explain this outcome (Nason
and Rogers 2006); others have argued that the problem resides on the low power of
traditional statistical tests (Mercereau and Miniane 2004). In a series of recent papers
Kraay and Ventura (2000, 2002) and Ventura (2003) have proposed some amendments to
the traditional intertemporal model that go a long way in helping bridge theory with
reality. In their model portfolio decisions play a key role in determining the evolution of
the current account balance. When investors care about both return and risk, changes in
savings will not be translated into a one-to-one improvement in the current account. In
this case investors will want to maintain the composition of their portfolios, and only a
proportion of the additional savings will be devoted to increasing the holdings of foreign
assets (i.e. bank loans). In addition, Kraay and Ventura argue that when short run
adjustment costs in investment are added to the analysis, the amended intertermporal
model traces reality quite closely. In this setting the behavior of countries’ net foreign
assets play an important role in explaining current account behavior. In particular, and as
pointed out by Lane and Milesi-Ferreti (2002, 2003), changes in foreign asset valuation
stemming from exchange rate adjustments will tend to affect the adjustment process and
the evolution of current account balances.
Intertemporal-based models of the current account don’t generate clear-cut
predictions on the relation between growth (or deviations of growth from long term
trend) and the current account balance. Generally speaking, the relationship may be
positive or negative, depending on the source of the shock that affect growth.18 For
instance, if the source of stronger growth is an expansion in exports, the current account
balance will tend to improve. If, on the other hand, growth accelerates due to an
expansion in household expenditure it is likely that the current account will deteriorate.
In this Section I take a somewhat different approach to analyzing the determinants
of the current account, and the mechanisms through which current global imbalances are
likely to be solved. Instead of testing whether the implications of the present value model
of the current account hold for a particular set of countries, I use panel data to investigate
18

See, for example, Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996) and Kraay and Ventura (2000).

14
the relationship between the business cycle and the current account. In particular, I ask
how sensitive have current account balances been to expansions (contractions) in real
GDP growth, relative to its long term trend, in different countries. I also investigate the
way in which current account balances have been affected by terms of trade shocks, fiscal
imbalances, changes in the real exchange rate, and the country’s net external position or
net international investment position. In principle, this analysis should throw light on the
extent to which an expansion that propels growth closer to its long term trend – or, for
that matter, above this trend – in Europe and Japan, will affect global imbalances. The
analysis also allows us to have an idea on the long run relationship between a country’s
net external position and its current account balance.19
IV.1

The Empirical Model

The point of departure of the empirical analysis is the notion that, in the long run,
a country’s current account balance (relative to nominal GDP) should be at its
sustainable level. Modern analyses of current account sustainability are based on the
notion that in equilibrium the ratio of the net external position (NEP) to GDP (or to some
other aggregate) has to stabilize at some level.20 The relationship between the
equilibrium and stable ratio of NEP to GDP – which I will denote as γ – and the
sustainable current account to GDP balance ( SCA ) may be written as follows:21

(2)

SCA = γ ( g T + π ),

where ( g T + π ) is the nominal rate of growth of trend GDP; g T is the long run trend real
rate of growth of GDP, and π is the long run steady-state inflation rate. If a country’s
equilibrium NEP to GDP ratio is negative ( γ < 0 ), then the country is said to be a “net
debtor,” and will run a current account deficit. If, on the other hand, the country is a
global “net creditor,” γ will be positive, and the country will run a sustainable current

19

Recent attempts at estimating current account regressions for a panel of countries include Calderon,
Chong and Loayza (2002), , Chinn and Prasad (2003), Chinn and Lee (2005), Chinn and Ito (2005), and
Gruber and Kamin (2005).
20
See Milesi-Ferreti and Razin (1996) and Edwards (2005).
21
See Edwards (2005) for a detailed analysis along these lines that incorporates the dynamic effects of
changes in γ .

15
account surplus.22 Current account regressions, then, should incorporate this
“sustainability” condition and provide estimates on the long run relationship between the
current account balance and the NEP to GDP ratio. The empirical analysis presented in
this Section is based on the following two-equation formulation:

(

)

CA jt = α 0 + α 1 g Tj − g jt −1 + φNEPGDPj* + ∑ β i Xi jt − k + ε jt

(3)

g Tj = ψ + ∑ δ i Zi j + ∑ θ i Vi j + ξ j .

(4)

Where the following notation was used:
•

CA jt is the current account balance relative to GDP, in country j in year t
(a positive number denotes a current account surplus).

•

g Tj is country j’s long term trend rate of growth per capita, and g jt −1 is

country j’s actual rate of growth per capita in period t-1.
•

Thus, the term ( g Tj − g jt −1 ) is a measure of the growth gap: if the country
in question is growing below trend this term is positive, and if it is
expanding at a rate that exceeds the long term trend, it will be negative.
This term captures the effect of the business cycle on the current account
balance, and is of particular interest for the issues discussed in this paper.
If, economic activity slows down, ( g Tj − g jt −1 ) will become positive.
There are, of course, many reasons for ( g Tj − g jt −1 ) to be positive or
negative. The formulation in equation (3) does not distinguish between
the specific factor driving ( g Tj − g jt −1 ) . In that sense, this analysis is very
general. In long run equilibrium, however, ( g Tj − g jt −1 ) = 0 . An important
question refers to the sign of coefficient α 1 . If, as argued by the policy

22

In rigor the net international investment position refers to all assets and liabilities held by non-nationals.
In that sense, the concept includes equities, and FDI, and goes beyond debt. It is for this reason that in the
paragraph above “net debtor” and “net creditor” are in quotation marks.

16
makers, analysts and scholars cited above, an acceleration in growth
(relative to long term trend) results in a deterioration of the current
account balance, the estimated coefficient of ( g Tj − g jt −1 ) – the coefficient

α 1 – will be positive. In this paper, however, we are not only interested in
the sign of α 1 ; we are also interested in the magnitude of the coefficient.
In equation (3) – as in most panel data equations – the coefficients are
common for all regions/countries. In Section IV.4 on robustness,
however, I present results where I allow some of the coefficients to differ
by region.
•

NEPGDPj* is a measure of the equilibrium (long run) ratio of country’s j’s

net external assets (or NIIP) to GDP. It will be positive if the country is a
“net global creditor,” and negative if it is a “net debtor.” In the estimation
of equation (3) its coefficient should be positive; it will capture the long
run relationship between NEP and the sustainable current account balance.
The way this variable is constructed in the empirical analysis is explained
in detail below.
•

The variables Xi jt − k in equation (3) are other determinants of the current
account, such as: (a) changes in the real exchange rate: (b) the fiscal
balance over GDP: and (c) changes in the international terms of trade.
These Xi jt − k are defined in a way such that in long run steady state
equilibrium their values is equal to zero.

•

The error term ε tj is given by given by: ε tj = ν j + μ tj . ν j is an iid
country-specific disturbance with zero mean and variance σ ν2 ; μ tj is
normally distributed with zero mean and variance σ μ2 = 1 .

Equation (4) is the equation for the long run (trend) rate of growth of real GDP.
The Zi j are economic determinants, while the Vi j are institutional determinants of long
term growth. ξ j is an error term assumed to be heteroskedastic. In determining the

17
specification of (4) I followed the standard literature on growth (Barro and Sala-i-Martin,
1995).
An important property of the model in equations (3) and (4) is that, since in the
long run equilibrium ( g Tj − g jt −1 ) = 0 , and the Xi jt −k = 0 , it follows that:

(5)

CA LongRun
= α 0 + φNEPGDPj* .
j

This is, indeed, an estimate of the long run sustainable current account balance. If the
model given by equations (3) and (4) is estimated for different groups of countries, the
estimated φ coefficients will help provide an estimate for the sustainable current account
balance, for different values of NEPGDPj* . Also, if α 0 = 0 , the estimated coefficient φ
is the average value of ( g T + π ) . In the base run I estimate a common φ for all
countries; in Section IV.4, however, I report different φ for different regions.
The specification in equations (3) - (4) differs from recent papers on current
account behavior in several ways. The most important difference with Chinn and Prasad
(2003) and Chinn and Ito (2005) is that in the current paper the long run current account
balance does converge in the long run towards φNEPGDPj* . Another difference is that
while in this paper I have included the deviations of (per capita) growth from long term
trend, Chinn and Prassd (2003) and Chinn and Ito (2005) focus on average growth.
Chinn and Ito (2005) incorporate governance and institutional variables directly into the
estimation of the current account balance; in this paper, in contrast, institutional variables
play a role through the long run value of NEPGDPj* . Another recent paper similar in
spirit to this one is Gruber and Kamin (2005). As Chinn and Ito (2005), Gruber and
Kamin (2005) incorporate institutional variables directly into the estimation of their
current account equations. Also, Gruber and Kamin (2005) include dummy variables for
crisis periods. Another important difference between this paper and Gruber and Kamin
(2005) refers to the growth terms: in equation (3) the relevant growth variable is
deviations of growth from trend, while in Gruber and Kamin (2005) it is the change in
per capita growth differentials.

18
IV.2

Estimation and Basic Results

I estimated the system (3) - (4) using a two step procedure. In the first step I
estimated the long run growth equation (4) using a cross-country data set. These data are
averages for 1974-2004, and the estimation makes a correction for heteroskedasticity.
First stage estimates are then used to generate long-run predicted growth rates to replace
g Tj in the current account equation (3). In the second step, I estimate equation (3) using

both random effect and fixed effects methods. In estimating equation (4) for long-run per
capita growth, I followed the by now standard literature on growth, as summarized by
Barro and Sala-I-Martin (1995), and use average data for 1974-2004. In terms of the
equation specification, I also follow Barro and Sala-I-Martin (1995), Sachs and Warner
(1995) and Dollar (1992) among others, and assume that the rate of growth of GDP ( g Tj )
depends on a number of structural, policy and social variables. More specifically, I
include the following covariates: the log of initial GDP per capita; the investment ratio;
the coverage of secondary education; an index of the degree of openness of the economy;
the ratio of government consumption relative to GDP; and regional dummies for Latin
American, Sub Saharan African and Transition economies. The results obtained in this
first step estimation of the long run growth equations are not reported due to space
consideration; they are available on request.
The empirical definition of NEPGDPj* in equation (3) poses an interesting
challenge. Conceptually this variable is the equilibrium, or desired, long term ratio of
country j’s net external position relative to GDP. It is not trivial, however, to obtain data
on this “desired” ratio. In the basic specification I proxied NEPGDPj* by the mean value
of the actual net external position to GDP, for the period 1970-2004. In order to check
for the robustness of the results, in Sub-Section IV.3 I report regression estimates using
alternative definitions of NEPGDPj* .
Following the empirical literature on the current account, the following
Xitj covariates were included in the estimation of equation (3), (see the Appendix for data
sources):

19
•

A terms of trade shock defined as the percentage change of the relative
price of exports to imports. A positive (negative) number represents an
improvement (deterioration) in the terms of trade. This variable is
introduced lagged one period. Its coefficient is expected to be positive,
indicating that a positive terms of trade shock results in an improvement in
the current account balance.

•

The accumulated percentage change in the real exchange rate in a threeyear span, lagged one period. The real exchange rate is defined in a way
such that a positive change represents a real exchange rate depreciation.
The coefficient is expected to be positive: a real depreciation results in a
higher (lower) surplus (deficit).

•

The ratio of the public sector deficit to GDP, lagged one period. It is
expected that its coefficient will be negative.

•

In order to check for robustness, alternative specifications and variables
definitions were considered. The results obtained are reported in Sections
IV.3 and IV.4 below, and show that the main findings from the base run
are not affected in a significant way.

In the regression analysis reported in this Section I focus on mid size and large
countries; these are defined as countries with a GDP in 1995 of at least USD 52 billion.23
The sample includes 41 countries over the period 1974-2004. Of these, 20 are advanced
nations and 21 are emerging or transition countries. The size of the sample was
determined by data availability; not all countries have data for all variables (See the
Appendix for a list of countries). I estimated equation (3) for three alternative samples
within the “large countries” group: advanced, non-advanced and all countries.
The base estimates are presented in Table 7, where the first three columns are for
the random effect results and the last three columns are for the fixed effect estimates.
Robust standard errors were used to estimate the z-statistics. As may be seen, all the
estimated coefficients have the expected signs and the vast majority is significant at
expected levels. Moreover, the estimated coefficients are very similar for the random and
23

Below I discuss the results obtained when all countries – large and small – are included in the sample.

20
fixed effect results. The point estimates for the coefficient of ( g T + π ) are very similar
across sample and estimation technique, and range from 0.180 to 0.225. These estimates
indicate that, with other things given, a decline in the rate of growth of GDP per capita of,
say, 1 percentage point below long term trend, will result in an increase in the current
account surplus of at most one quarter of a percent point of GDP.
These results have interesting implications for the analysis of “global
imbalances.” As an illustration, consider the case of Japan: according to my estimates,
during 2003-2004 Japan’s per capita growth was, on average, 3.3 percentage points
below trend. This implies that, had Japan growth been on trend, its current account
surplus would have been between 0.54% of GDP and 0.68% of GDP lower than what it
actually was. During 2003-04 GDP growth was also below trend in other large industrial
countries: In Germany, during 2003-2004 growth was 1% below trend; in France it was
0.6% below trend, and in Italy growth was 1% below trend. In Section IV.5 I present a
more detailed analysis of the effects of a realignment of growth national rates on global
imbalances.
The estimates in Table 7 also imply that improvements in terms of trade result in
larger (smaller) surpluses (deficits); this effect is particularly clear in the advanced
countries. An accumulated real depreciation also improves the current account balance.
The point estimates of this coefficient are significantly higher for the emerging and
transition countries than for the advanced nations. A higher public sector deficit, on the
other hand, tends to reduce the current account surplus, or increase the deficit.
The coefficients of NEPGDPj* are positive, as expected, and significant (Since
NEPGDPj* is, for each country, constant across time, its coefficient cannot be estimated

using fixed effects). The estimated coefficients of NEPGDPj* range from 0.064 to 0.070,
and are similar for the advanced nations and the emerging and transition countries. The
results in this Table suggest that for advanced countries with long run net asset position
of 30% of GDP the sustainable current account balance is a surplus 1.9% of GDP.24 On
the other hand, these results suggest that for an (average) emerging nation with a negative
24

This assumes that all other variables are given at their mean. They use the point estimate for advanced
nations in Table 7.

21
net external position of 40% of GDP – that is, NEPGDPj* = −40 – the long run
sustainable deficit will be, on average, equal to 1.1% of GDP.25
IV.3

Alternative Definitions of NEPGDPj*

The results presented in Table 7 were obtained when the long run equilibrium
NEPGDPj* was proxied by the average ratio of net external assets to GDP over the

sample period. In this Sub-Section I report results obtained when an alternative measure
of NEPGDPj* is used. To generate this new variable I followed a two-step procedure:
First, I used long term averages to estimate a cross-section equation for NEPGDPj* . In
the second step, I used the predicted values obtained from this equation as estimates
of NEPGDPj* . In estimating the cross section equation, the dependent variable is the
actual 1970-2004 average of the net external position for each country. In specifying the
equation I considered the following covariates:26 (a) The degree of trade openness,
measured as exports plus imports over GDP. Its coefficient is expected to be positive. (b)
The ratio of government consumption to GDP. I expect its coefficient to be negative. (c)
A dummy variable for commodity exporting countries (including oil exporters). (d) A
measure of political stability, captured by an index of civil liberties. (e) The average rate
of growth of GDP per capita. (f) A measure of the degree of financial openness,
calculated as the sum of total external liabilities and total external assets (these include
debt, equities, FDI and international reserves) relative to GDP. I expect its coefficient to
be positive. (g) Inflation, measured as the average percentage rate of change of CPI; its
coefficient is expected to be negative. (h) Initial level of GDP per capita, its coefficient is
expected to be positive. And (i) regional dummy variables.
The results obtained from the estimation of this long run cross country regression
of the net external position, for a sample of 130 countries are reported in Table 8; the first
column excludes regional dummies, while the second column includes them. As shown
by the between R 2 , the fit is quite good Moreover, many of the coefficients are
25

Remember that the sustainable surplus/deficit includes the intercept. These computations assume that in
the long run the fiscal deficit is equal to zero. If alternative assumptions are made, the calculated
sustainable balances will be different.
26
For estimations along these lines see, for example, Lane and Milesi-Ferreti (2005, 2006). Aizenman and
Noy (2004) argue that the degree of openness is an important determinant of countries; external position.

22
statistically significant and have the expected signs. Whether a country is a commodity
exporter doesn’t appear to affect the (average) level of NEP over GDP. Interestingly,
there is no evidence that countries with a faster average rate of economic growth have a
higher NEP over GDP ratio.
I used the estimates in Column 2 of Table 8 to generate predicted values of
NEPGDP that include estimates of the country specific error component. I call this

variable NEPGDP_STAR, and I used it as a proxy for NEPGDPj* in a series of
regressions for the current account equation (3). The results obtained when a random
effects procedure was used are in Table 9; z-statistics were computed using robust
standard errors. As may be seen, the overall results are similar to those reported in Table
8: all coefficients have the expected signs and most of them are significant at
conventional levels. Interestingly, the estimated coefficients of NEPGDP_STAR are
lower than those obtained when the average NEP to GD ratio was used (See Table 7).
The difference between these two coefficients is particularly marked for the emerging
and transition countries: 0.070 in Table 7, vs 0.011 in Table 8. This implies that
according to Table 8 the (average) sustainable current account balance for the emerging
and transition countries is smaller than what was previously suggested. A possible
interpretation for this result – and one that I investigate in Sub Section IV.4 – is that this
aggregate estimate is averaging (very) different estimates for the different regions.
An important result from the perspective of the discussion on global imbalances is
that the estimates of the coefficients for ( g Tj − g jt −1 ) in Table 9 are similar to those
reported above, and support the view that current account balances have been quite
sensitive to the business cycle.
IV.4

Potential Endogeneity and Other Robustness Checks

In this Sub Section I deal with potential endogeneity issues and I report the results
from a number of robustness checks. As will be seen, the main results reported above
stand up to this scrutiny.
Potential endogeneity: One of the covariates in the current account equation (3)
is the (lagged) accumulated change in the real exchange rate. It is possible that this

23
variable will be influenced by the perceived (future) evolution of the current account.27
In order to deal with this potential source of endogeneity I re-estimated equation (3) using
an instrumental variables random effects procedure. The following instruments were
used: an index that measures the proportion of countries in the country’s region that were
subject to a sudden decline in capital inflows, lagged one period; a similar index that
measures the incidence of sudden declines in inflows in other regions, also lagged one
period; two periods lagged changes in terms of trade; two periods lagged inflation; initial
(1970) GDP per capita; population growth and regional dummy variables. The results
obtained from this instrumental variables random effects estimation are reported in Table
10. As may be seen, in most respects the results are very similar to those reported above.
Particularly important for the purpose of this discussion in this paper, the estimated
coefficients of NEPGDPj* and ( g Tj − g jt −1 ) continue to have the expected positive sign
and to be significant. Also, their point estimates are quite similar to those reported above.
The most important difference between the instrumental variable random effect estimates
in Table 10 and those in Tables 7 and 9 is that the coefficient of the accumulated change
in the RER is not any longer significant for advanced countries. A possible interpretation
for this result is that the measure of rela exchange rate changes is a poor proxy for real
exchange rate misalignment.
Alternative samples: I also estimated the model in equations (3) and (4) for
alternative samples; the detailed results are not reported here due to space considerations.
Interestingly, for a sample of smaller countries, the point estimate of the ( g Tj − g jt −1 )
variable is significantly smaller, although still significant. Other sample variations,
including the elimination of “outliers” did not alter the main results in significant ways.
Alternative specifications: I considered alternative specifications for the current
account equation (3). In particular, instead of the accumulated change in the RER, I used
a variable that captures the deviation of an estimate of the “equilibrium” RER and the one
period lagged actual RER. I also modeled in greater detail the mechanics of the dynamic
adjustment of the current account. In both cases the results obtained are similar to those
reported above; these results are available on request.
27

Since the change in the RER is lagged one period, it is a predetermined variable. However, if there is
serial correlation, it may still be correlated with the error term.

24
Region-specific coefficients: The results reported above were obtained under the
assumption of common coefficients for all countries. This, of course, needs not be the
case. In this Sub-Section I report the results obtained when different regional coefficients
are allowed for NEPGDPj* and ( g Tj − g jt −1 ) . This is done by interacting regional
dummies with these two variables. The results are reported in Table 11. As may be seen,
the coefficients for the different variables continue to have the same signs as in the
previous tables, and continue to be significant at conventional levels. Notice, however,
that the point estimate of ( g Tj − g jt −1 ) is somewhat smaller than what was reported
earlier. Two of the regional dummies interacted with NEPGDPj* are significant: for
Latin America and Asia. Interestingly, the results in Table 11 suggest that the coefficient
of net external assets for the Latin American region is not different from zero; the χ 2 test
has a value of 0.29 and a p-value of 0.58. The coefficient of net external assets interacted
with the Asia dummy is 0.039 and significant. This implies an overall coefficient for
Asia of 0.095.
The estimate in Table 11 also includes terms that interact regional dummy
variables with ( g Tj − g jt −1 ) . As may be seen, the interactive terms for Asia and Africa
are significant at conventional levels. Their point estimates suggest that the sensitivity of
the current account to changes in growth relative to trend is higher in these two regions
than in the rest of the world.
Interacting growth deviations with net external assets: An interesting question –
and one that has been explored by Kraay and Ventura (2000) – is whether the effects of
different shocks on the current account depend on the country’s net external position. In
order to explore this possibility I included in the estimation of equation (3) a variable that
interacts ( g Tj − g jt −1 ) with the (twice lagged) ratio of net external assets to GDP. The
estimated coefficient was negative --- as suggested by Kraay and Ventura (2000) --, but it
was not significant at conventional levels. The results are not reported, but are available
on request.

25
IV.5

Would Growth Realignment in Japan and the Euro Zone be enough to Correct

Current Global Imbalances?

As pointed out above, many analysts and government officials have argue that a
realignment of regional growth – with Japan and the Euro Zone growing faster, and the
U.S. moderating its rate of growth – would contribute significantly towards solving
current global imbalances. In this Sub-Section I use the econometric estimates reported
above to investigate the extent to which global imbalances would be reduced if growth
moved towards a more “normal” level in a number of key countries. In particular, I
assume that per capita growth increases in Japan and Germany, two countries with a
combined surplus of USD 270 billion that year. More specifically, I assume that Japan’s
growth increases by 3.3% relative to its 2003-04 average, while Germany’s growth
increases by 1%. These higher growth rates would put both of these countries back onto
their long term growth trends. In addition, I assume that France and Italy, two countries
that posted small deficits in 2005, increase their growth by 1% each.28
Using the estimated coefficients from the equations in Table 7, the acceleration in
growth in Japan and the most important Euro countries would result in a surplus
reduction of merely USD 40 billion. Of these, USD 27 billion correspond to surplus
reduction in Japan, and USD 13 billion to surplus reduction in the Euro zone. What will
happen if U.S. growth declines towards its long term trend? According to my estimates,
this would result in a decline in the U.S. deficit of USD 23 billion.
The magnitude of these corrections is quite small when compared with the type of
adjustment that many analysts believe is required. Indeed, if the “sustainable” current
account deficit in the U.S. is in the neighborhood of 3.6% of GDP, the needed correction
would add up to approximately USD 350 billion. These results suggest, then, that
without a significant adjustment in China and the oil exporting countries, global
imbalances will not be corrected. Moreover, these results also support the view that
(significant) exchange rate realignments will be needed to correct global imbalances.29

28
29

Notice that Germany, France and Italy’s GDP add up to the bulk of the Euro Zone’s GDP.
See Blanchard, Giavazi and Sa (2005), Obstfeld and Rogoff (2005), and Edwards (2005).

26
V.

The Anatomy of Major and Rapid “Surplus Adjustments”: Lessons from

Thirty Five Years of History

Since the mid-1990s a number of authors have analyzed episodes of sudden stops
of capital inflows and current account reversals.30 These studies have focused on the
abrupt decline of international financing and the resulting rapid turnaround in the current
account, from a large deficit to a moderate deficit (or, even, to a surplus). Until now
there have been no equivalent studies on episodes of large and sudden adjustments in
surplus countries. The purpose of this Section is to fill this void, and analyze the
anatomy of “surplus adjustment” episodes, or large reductions in current account
surpluses during short periods of time. In particular, I am interested in analyzing how a
number of key macroeconomic variables – including inflation, GDP growth, interest rates
and real exchange rates – behave in the period surrounding these surplus adjustments or
SA. I define “surplus adjustments” in two alternative ways:
•

Surplus Adjustment 2%: Defined as a reduction of a country’s current
account surplus in at least 2% of GDP in one year. In addition to this
requirement, the initial surplus has to be of 3% of GDP or higher.

•

Surplus Adjustment 3%: Defined as an accumulated reduction of a
country’s current account surplus in at least 3% of GDP in three years. In
addition to this requirement, the initial surplus has to be of 3% of GDP or
higher.

Table 12 contains information on the incidence of both definitions of surplus
adjustments for the period 1970-2004. The data are for the complete sample, as well as
for six groups of countries: Advanced, Latin America, Asia, Africa, Middle East and
North Africa and Eastern Europe. As may be seen, “Surplus Adjustment 2%” has been a
more common phenomenon than “Surplus Adjustment 3%.” The overall incidence for
the former is 6.6%; it is only 3.0% for the latter. For both definitions the highest
incidence has been in the Middle East and North Africa region with 19.7% and 10.2%.

30

For recent papers, see Calvo et al (2004) and Frankel and Cavallo (2004). For capital flows and crises,
see Eichengreen (2003).

27
This reflects the important role played by Middle East oil producing countries in the
generation of current account surpluses in the last 35 years. Interestingly, the data in
Table 12 show that the industrial countries have had the lowest occurrence of surplus
adjustments in our sample.
V.1 Surplus Adjustment and Exchange Rates

An important policy question – and one that is particularly relevant within the
context of current policy debate on global imbalances – is whether surplus adjustment
episodes (as defined above) have historically been associated with large exchange rate
appreciations.31 In Figure 1 I present the evolution of the median (bilateral) real exchange
rate in surplus adjustment countries. These data are centered on the year of the surplus
adjustment, and presented as an index with a value of 100 during that year. The indexes
are tracked from three years prior to the current account surplus adjustment to three years
after the adjustment.32 In this Figure a lower value of the index reflects a real exchange
rate appreciation.33 There are three panels in this Figure: one for advanced countries,
one for large countries – as pointed out above, these are defined as those having a GDP in
the top 25% of the distribution in 1995 --, and one for the complete sample. As may be
seen from Figure 1, in the “large” and “advanced” countries samples there appears to be a
visible real exchange rate appreciation in the period surrounding the surplus adjustment
episodes. On the other hand, the figure for “all” countries shows no significant changes
in the period around the surplus adjustments episodes.
Figure 2 shows the behavior of the (median) nominal effective exchange rate
index. As before, a decline in the index is a real appreciation. In this case, the picture is
rather mixed. There is a slight nominal depreciation in the “all countries” sample, a small
appreciation in the “advanced nations” sample and no clear pattern in the “large
countries” sample.
In order to gain further insights on the nature of these surplus adjustment episodes
I estimated χ 2 statistics to test whether the medians in these figures were statistically
31

A related question, of course, has been asked of current account reversal episodes. For the relationship
between depreciations and crises see Eichengreen et al (1996).
32
For the “Surplus Adjustment 3%” episodes, period zero corresponds to the first year of the 3-year
adjustment period.
33
If data for trade weighted RER are used the results are similar. The limitation of using trade-weighted
data is that they are available for a smaller number of countries.

28
different at different points in time. The tests were performed for various comparisons:
(a) Three years after the adjustment relative to three years previous; (b) one year after the
adjustment relative to one year previous; and (c) three years after the surplus adjustment
relative to one year before the adjustment. The results are reported in Table 13a for the
“Surplus Adjustment 2%” episodes, and in Table 13b for the “Surplus Adjustment 3%”
episodes. For the RER the null hypothesis of equal medians is rejected in seven out of
the nine cases in this Table. According to these computations the magnitude of the RER
adjustment may be quite sizable. For instance, for the “Surplus Adjustment 2%” episodes
the median appreciation between one year before and three years after the adjustment is
12.6% ( χ 2 =8.25; p-value 0.004).
V.2

Surplus Adjustments, Interest Rates, Inflation and Real Growth

Figures 3 and 4 present “before” and “after” data for real interest rates and
inflation for our two definitions of surplus adjustments. As may be seen, these figures –
as well as the data on χ 2 statistics in Table 13a and b -- show a small decline in real
interest rates, and no significant trend for inflation in the years following the adjustment.
Figure 5 presents data for GDP per capita growth during the period surrounding our
surplus adjustment episodes. Once again, there is very little action here, and no clear
pattern of behavior can be extracted form this analysis. This impression is largely
supported by the results from the χ 2 tests reported in Table 13a and b.
V.3

Surplus Adjustment and Terms of Trade

An interesting question is whether the surplus adjustment episodes identified in
this paper have been associated with a sudden deterioration in the terms of trade. This is
investigated in Figure 6. As may be seen, in all three samples there is a worsening in the
terms of trade in the year of the adjustment (period 0), relative to the previous year. This
deterioration in the relative price of exports is reverted – in some cases partially and in
others more than fully – in subsequent years. However, and in spite of these changes in
the terms of trade, the data on the formal tests don’t support the hypothesis that surplus
adjustment episodes have been driven by terms of trade shock (see the χ 2 tests in Table
13a and b).

29
V.5

Are Current Account Surplus Adjustment Episodes Different from Deficit

Reversal Episodes?

The picture that emerges in Figures 1- 6 on the evolution of key macro variables
in the period surrounding surplus adjustment episodes is not very sharp, and does not
provide a clear-cut pattern of behavior. There is some evidence that, as one would expect
from theory, there is some real exchange rate appreciation, a slight decline in real interest
rates and, a short lived and modest decline in the terms of trade in the period surrounding
the surplus adjustment. Interestingly, this lack of a well defined and sharp “typical”
behavior in current account surplus adjustment episodes contrasts with the case of large
and abrupt current account reversals. As I document in Edwards (2005), current account
reversal episodes have historically been characterized by sharp depreciations,
significantly higher real interest rates and (very) significant declines in the rate of growth
relative to trend. These differences between current account reversals and surplus
adjustment episodes confirm the notion discussed throughout this paper of the asymmetry
of these two phenomena.

VI.

Concluding Remarks

This paper has dealt with current account surplus. Several questions were asked:
(1) What have been the most important regularities of surpluses during the last 35 years.
More specifically, has there been an asymmetry between surpluses and deficits? (2) How
persistent have large surpluses been? Has their degree of persistence been higher than
large deficits? (3) What has been the relationship between current account balances and
the business cycle? (4) What has been the relationship between external balances and
countries’ net external position? (5) Is a realignment of world growth rates -- with Japan
and Europe growing faster and the U.S. growing more slowly – likely to solve the current
situation of global imbalances? This is a particularly important question, as a number of
analysts and U.S. government officials have argued that a “normalization” of growth
would help solve global imbalances. And, (6) what has been the anatomy of significant
and large surplus adjustments – defined as a decline in the surplus of at least 2% of GDP
in one year?
The results obtained may be summarized as follows:

30
•

There has been an important asymmetry between current account deficits and
surpluses. During the last 35 years, on average, only 27.6% of all countries have
run surpluses during a particular year. This percentage, however, has increased
significantly during the last few years. During 2003-2004 almost 40% of
countries posted surpluses.

•

The most important recent changes in current account balances have occurred in
Asia, where there has been a current account reversal in excess of 5% of GDP
between 1997 and 2003-2004.

•

Large surpluses exhibit very little persistence through time.

•

Very few large countries have had persistently large surpluses to GDP ratios.
Persistency of surpluses is higher in the Middle East; this is mostly a reflection
of the role played by oil exporting countries.

•

Large surpluses are slightly more persistent than large deficits. However, the
degree of persistence of both type of imbalances is low.

•

Large and abrupt reductions in surpluses – what I call “surplus adjustment”
episodes -- are a relatively rare phenomenon. Their incidence fluctuates
between 3.0% and 6.6% of all country years.

•

The incidence of surplus adjustment episodes has been largest in the Middle
East and smallest in the Advanced countries.

•

Surplus adjustment episodes have been associated with real exchange rate
appreciations and with deterioration in the terms of trade.

•

No clear-cut picture emerges regarding the behavior of interest rates, inflation,
and economic growth in the period surrounding major surplus adjustment
episodes.

•

The econometric results reported in this paper indicate that the behavior of the
current account balance can be explained by parsimonious models based on
economic theory.

•

In particular, current account balances have been associated to the business
cycle, real exchange rates, fiscal imbalances and the country’s net external
position. All of these variables enter into the current account equation with the
expected sign, and their coefficients are significant.

31
•

The results obtained suggest that a decline in growth relative to long term trend
of 1 percentage point results in an improvement in the current account balance –
higher surplus or lower deficit – of one quarter of a percentage point of GDP.

•

These results indicate that a realignment of global growth – with Japan and the
Euro Zone growing faster and the U.S. moderating its growth – would only
make a modest contribution towards the resolution of current global imbalances.

•

This suggests that, even if there is a realignment of global growth, the world is
likely to need significant exchange rate movements.

•

This analysis also suggests that a reduction in China’s (very) large surplus will
be needed if global imbalances are to be resolved.

32
Table 1
Current Account Balances as Percentage of GDP in the World Economy:
Means, 1970-2004
Region
Year

Africa

Asia

East
Europe

Industrial

Latin
America

Middle
East

All
Countries

-7.51
-5.53
-3.78
-3.32
-3.20
-2.33
-1.46
-4.08
-3.74
-4.54
-6.91
-10.00
-9.08
-6.53
-4.27
-2.84
-5.44
-5.42
-4.44
-5.22
-4.26
-6.87
-5.59
-6.13
-4.80
-5.10
-5.74
-7.83
-8.09
-6.45
-6.00
-7.61
-7.46
-5.42
-2.97

-6.66
-2.50
3.79
1.82
6.44
8.38
9.42
5.39
-0.46
8.44
9.13
7.61
1.76
-1.03
-0.87
-0.89
-0.58
-0.05
0.03
4.74
4.99
-28.55
-8.93
-7.68
-3.30
-1.42
-0.32
-0.15
-5.48
2.55
6.74
2.53
1.82
3.70
4.00

-2.81
-2.21
-0.68
-0.78
-0.68
-2.20
-1.43
-1.97
-4.06
-2.56
-4.72
-7.15
-7.66
-5.82
-3.56
-3.59
-4.16
-3.48
-3.51
-3.09
-2.86
-5.87
-4.12
-4.30
-3.16
-3.91
-4.42
-4.25
-5.68
-3.63
-2.02
-3.38
-2.96
-1.75
-1.29

-5.71

0.47

-3.73

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004

-3.01
-6.01
-4.44
-5.10
2.25
-4.45
-5.70
-3.63
-8.25
-6.02
-7.05
-9.51
-10.82
-8.22
-5.63
-5.64
-6.00
-4.64
-5.80
-4.42
-4.04
-4.40
-5.33
-5.39
-4.80
-6.66
-6.51
-4.13
-7.36
-6.69
-3.58
-5.99
-4.78
-2.48
-2.07

-0.26
-0.64
-2.43
-1.36
-4.57
-5.46
0.37
0.76
-1.79
1.58
-7.49
-11.63
-10.85
-8.22
-3.07
-5.04
-3.84
-3.20
-2.85
-3.94
-4.50
-2.30
-3.07
-4.32
-2.49
-3.24
-2.95
-3.57
-0.44
1.76
1.87
1.52
2.85
4.80
1.97

-1.50
-3.55
-3.81
-5.14
-1.90
-1.60
-0.02
-1.15
-0.96
-1.26
-0.15
-1.54
-2.80
-0.17
1.05
-0.33
-2.96
-2.70
-0.01
-2.04
-1.37
-3.45
-6.84
-7.31
-9.28
-5.31
-3.02
-3.27
-3.56
-4.40
-4.56

0.05
0.26
1.38
1.15
-2.51
-1.33
-2.00
-1.70
-0.42
-1.30
-2.03
-2.32
-2.23
-1.14
-0.88
-1.01
-0.75
-0.86
-0.71
-0.99
-1.04
-0.71
-0.46
0.42
0.27
0.80
0.69
1.04
0.18
0.03
0.00
0.37
0.72
0.28
0.12

All Years

-5.65

-2.74

-3.89

-0.50

33
Table 2
Current Account Balances as Percentage of GDP in the World Economy:
Medians, 1970-2004
Region
Year

Africa

Asia

East
Europe

Industrial

Latin
America

Middle
East

All
Countries

-4.07
-4.60
-1.45
-1.07
-4.00
-4.09
-1.41
-3.96
-3.95
-4.68
-5.59
-7.80
-7.41
-4.70
-3.96
-2.08
-2.98
-3.95
-2.36
-4.36
-2.78
-4.35
-3.98
-5.47
-3.11
-2.96
-4.50
-5.39
-5.36
-4.33
-4.50
-4.34
-5.31
-3.91
-1.09

-5.90
-7.25
-1.10
-2.18
0.29
3.01
2.19
1.45
-2.76
9.02
3.96
-1.43
1.53
-2.98
-4.84
-2.68
-2.34
-2.07
-2.21
0.47
2.82
-9.38
-9.26
-6.75
-4.60
-1.37
0.36
-0.15
-2.56
0.26
6.74
3.53
5.44
3.53
1.75

-1.10
-1.04
-0.41
-0.86
-2.92
-3.30
-2.94
-2.80
-3.23
-2.73
-4.04
-6.46
-5.81
-4.24
-2.43
-2.37
-2.58
-2.36
-2.61
-2.63
-2.63
-2.83
-3.01
-3.19
-2.28
-2.50
-3.43
-3.74
-4.30
-2.97
-3.18
-2.95
-1.98
-1.65
-2.00

-4.33

-0.58

-2.96

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004

-1.90
-7.53
-0.93
-4.40
-2.71
-6.13
-5.17
-3.39
-9.91
-4.64
-7.21
-9.44
-8.68
-6.35
-2.61
-3.90
-3.95
-4.66
-5.76
-3.52
-3.78
-3.18
-4.51
-4.29
-3.66
-4.48
-4.21
-4.65
-5.68
-6.52
-4.50
-4.79
-2.82
-4.28
-3.28

-0.90
-1.00
-1.55
-0.70
-3.00
-3.64
1.28
0.84
-2.03
-2.67
-3.77
-8.54
-7.77
-6.56
-2.27
-3.59
-2.19
-1.68
-2.57
-3.44
-3.93
-3.10
-3.66
-4.11
-3.49
-4.97
-3.90
-2.82
-0.73
2.73
1.71
1.84
3.15
2.94
1.83

-1.50
-3.55
-3.81
-5.14
-1.90
-1.60
-0.02
-1.15
-1.48
-0.86
-0.63
-1.51
-1.94
-0.76
-0.72
-1.70
-3.69
-0.70
0.10
-2.29
-1.42
-1.89
-5.01
-6.08
-7.21
-5.29
-4.80
-4.74
-5.13
-5.78
-5.18

0.40
0.27
0.71
0.44
-1.90
-1.26
-1.96
-1.89
-0.63
-0.65
-2.29
-2.58
-1.84
-0.77
-0.17
-0.96
0.21
-0.35
-1.03
-1.47
-1.37
-0.88
-0.80
-0.53
0.35
0.73
0.93
0.20
-0.47
0.26
-0.46
-0.06
0.52
-0.10
-0.60

All Years

-4.74

-2.36

-3.47

-0.55

34
Table 3
Current Account Balances as Percentage of GDP in the World Economy:
Proportion of Countries with Surpluses, 1970-2004
Region
Year

Africa

Asia

East
Europe

Industrial

Latin
America

Middle
East

All
Countries

0.000
0.167
0.167
0.333
0.143
0.200
0.412
0.231
0.250
0.233
0.188
0.094
0.031
0.125
0.212
0.303
0.219
0.212
0.242
0.242
0.303
0.152
0.273
0.242
0.212
0.125
0.091
0.030
0.030
0.156
0.156
0.063
0.152
0.241
0.304

0.000
0.250
0.500
0.500
0.600
0.667
0.667
0.500
0.222
0.556
0.600
0.400
0.500
0.400
0.300
0.300
0.200
0.300
0.200
0.545
0.750
0.182
0.182
0.250
0.417
0.417
0.583
0.500
0.333
0.545
0.667
0.583
0.636
0.818
0.727

0.292
0.321
0.433
0.400
0.279
0.258
0.313
0.305
0.264
0.284
0.242
0.165
0.171
0.194
0.278
0.279
0.270
0.250
0.221
0.277
0.303
0.254
0.282
0.274
0.344
0.277
0.275
0.208
0.205
0.290
0.320
0.297
0.351
0.386
0.378

0.185

0.462

0.276

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004

0.333
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.273
0.200
0.083
0.242
0.162
0.237
0.244
0.143
0.116
0.093
0.256
0.311
0.213
0.229
0.167
0.208
0.208
0.250
0.188
0.208
0.333
0.277
0.283
0.200
0.116
0.163
0.256
0.227
0.256
0.297
0.259

0.200
0.200
0.333
0.333
0.143
0.100
0.545
0.500
0.333
0.400
0.125
0.000
0.056
0.222
0.250
0.100
0.250
0.250
0.250
0.250
0.200
0.250
0.286
0.190
0.286
0.200
0.250
0.100
0.450
0.600
0.529
0.647
0.688
0.786
0.583

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.500
0.500
0.333
0.333
0.500
0.000
0.000
0.333
0.333
0.333
0.333
0.429
0.538
0.350
0.391
0.208
0.120
0.120
0.080
0.080
0.200
0.160
0.200
0.160
0.227

0.625
0.600
0.727
0.545
0.333
0.316
0.238
0.304
0.435
0.261
0.217
0.304
0.391
0.348
0.391
0.391
0.565
0.304
0.261
0.348
0.348
0.391
0.391
0.478
0.522
0.542
0.542
0.500
0.478
0.542
0.458
0.480
0.583
0.500
0.458

All Years

0.215

0.305

0.215

0.422

35
Table 4
Countries with “Persistently High” Current Account Surpluses, 1970-2004
High 1
Country

High 2
Years

Country

Years

Industrial
Belgium:
Finland:
Germany:
Japan:
Luxembourg:
Malta:
Netherlands:
Norway:
Switzerland:
United Kingdom:
Guyana:
Panama:
Suriname:
Trinidad and
Tobago:
Uruguay:
Venezuela, RB:

(1989 - 2001)
(1995 - 2004)
(1984 - 1990)
(1983 - 1989)
(1995 - 2004)
(1972 - 1982)
(1972 - 1977) (1981 - 1985) (1987 - 1991) (1993 - 1999)
(1980 - 1985) (1994 - 1997) (1999 - 2004)
(1981 - 2004)
(1980 - 1983)
Latin America
(1986 - 1989)
(1987 - 1990)
(1987 - 1990) (1992 - 1995)

Germany:
Luxembourg:
Malta:
Norway:
Switzerland:

(1986 - 1989)
(1995 - 1999)
(1975 - 1981)
(2000 - 2004)
(1991 - 2001)

Suriname:
Venezuela, RB:

(1987 - 1990) (1992 - 1995)
(1999 - 2004)

Hong Kong, China:
Papua New Guinea:
Singapore:

(1984 - 1990)
(1993 - 1996)
(1989 - 1992) (1994 - 2004)

Botswana:
Gabon:
Gambia, The:
Lesotho:
Libya:

(1985 - 1989) (1991 - 1999)
(1979 - 1984) (1994 - 1997) (1999 - 2003)
(1987 - 1990)
(1990 - 1994)
(1977 - 1980)

Kuwait:

(1980 - 1990) (1993 - 2004)
(1998 - 2004)

(1975 - 1978) (1992 - 1996) (1999 - 2003)
(1988 - 1991)
(1994 - 1997) (1999 - 2004)
Asia

China:
Fiji:
Hong Kong, China:
Korea, Rep.:
Malaysia:
Papua New Guinea:
Singapore:

(1994 - 1997)
(1985 - 1988)
(1970 - 1978) (1983 - 1994) (2001 - 2004)
(1986 - 1989)
(1998 - 2003)
(1992 - 1996)
(1988 - 2004)

Botswana:
Chad:
Gabon:
Gambia, The:
Lesotho:
Liberia:
Libya:
Mauritania:
Namibia:
Nigeria:
South Africa:
Swaziland:
Zimbabwe:

(1985 - 1989) (1991 - 2003)
(1980 - 1984)
(1978 - 1984) (1994 - 1997) (1999 - 2003)
(1984 - 1992)
(1980 - 1984) (1989 - 1994)
(1979 - 1982)
(1977 - 1980) (1994 - 1997)
(1995 - 2001)
(1990 - 2004)
(1989 - 1992) (1999 - 2004)
(1977 - 1980) (1985 - 1993)
(1986 - 1991)
(1986 - 1989)

Kuwait:
Saudi Arabia:

(1975 - 1990) (1993 - 2004)
(1971 - 1974)

Russian Federation:
Ukraine:

(1998 - 2004)
(1999 - 2004)

Samoa:

(1995 - 1998)

Africa

Middle East

East Europe
Russian Federation:
Other

36
Table 5
Persistence in Current Account Imbalances: Marginal Effects
From Variance Component Probits
High1
Surplus
Deficits
Lag 1
Lag 2
Lag 3
Lag 4

Probability

High2
Surplus
Deficits

0.403
0.478
0.137
0.279
(12.53) *** (18.99) *** (4.35) *** (5.66) ***
0.059
0.085
0.040
0.032
(2.62) *** (3.32) *** (2.50) **
(1.92) *
0.008
0.032
0.015
0.003
(0.39)
(1.28)
(1.37)
(0.24)
0.089
0.084
0.025
0.021
(3.75) *** (3.39) *** (1.96) **
(1.36)
0.122

0.788

0.025

0.034

Number of Observations
3415
3415
3415
3415
Number of Groups
161
161
161
161
***,** ,* null is rejected at 1, 5 and 10 percent level. Test - t in parenthesis

37
Table 6
Countries with “Persistently High” Current Account Surpluses, 1970-2004
Country

Years

Belgium:
France:
Germany:
Italy:
Japan:
Netherlands:
Norway:
Switzerland:

Industrial
(1991 - 1997)
(1995 - 2001)
(1973 - 1978) (1983 - 1990)
(1994 - 1998)
(1981 - 2004)
(1981 - 1999)
(1999 - 2004)
(1984 - 2004)

El Salvador:
Trinidad and Tobago:
Venezuela, RB:

Latin America
(1979 - 1984)
(1990 - 1996) (1999 - 2003)
(1999 - 2004)

China:
Hong Kong, China:
Papua New Guinea:
Singapore:

Asia
(1994 - 2004)
(1970 - 1980) (1982 - 1994)
(1993 - 1997)
(1988 - 2004)

Botswana:
Ethiopia:
Gabon:
Namibia:
Nigeria:
South Africa:
Swaziland:

Africa
(1985 - 1989) (1991 - 2001)
(1993 - 1997)
(1978 - 1984) (1999 - 2003)
(1990 - 2004)
(1999 - 2004)
(1985 - 1994)
(1986 - 1991)

Kuwait:
Saudi Arabia:

Middle East
(1977 - 1981) (1983 - 1990) (1993 - 2004)
(1971 - 1977) (2000 - 2004)

Russian Federation:
Ukraine:

East Europe
(1992 - 2004)
(1999 - 2004)

38
Table 7
The Current Account and the Business Cycle: Variance Component Regressions,
1970-2004
Large
Countries
Growth Gap
Change in Terms of Trade
Public Sector Deficit / GDP
Accumulate Change RER
Net External Position / GDP

0.217
(5.72) ***
0.028
(2.25) **
-0.162
(-4.23) ***
0.008
(3.62) ***
0.064
(9.06) ***

Random Effects
Industrial
Non Industrial
Countries
Countries
0.18
(3.21) ***
0.113
(4.74) ***
-0.211
(-4.08) ***
0.004
(3.54) ***
0.069
(5.54) ***

R^2
0.2377
0.3627
Number of Observations
1001
522
Number of Groups
41
20
***,** ,* statistical significant at 1, 5 and 10 percent level.

Large
Countries

Fixed Effects
Industrial
Non Industrial
Countries
Countries

0.207
(4.5) ***
0.013
(0.97)
-0.06
(-1.13)
0.026
(4.44) ***
0.070
(5.66) ***

0.225
(5.8) ***
0.029
(2.24) **
-0.188
(-4.38) ***
0.008
(4.25) ***
--

0.191
(3.3) ***
0.114
(4.75) ***
-0.222
(-4.14) ***
0.004
(4.37) ***
--

0.206
(4.3) ***
0.013
(0.96)
-0.116
(-1.66) *
0.026
(4.47) ***
--

0.184
479
21

0.0628
1001
41

0.0822
522
20

0.0995
479
21

39
Table 8
Net External Position Regressions: 1970-2004

Trade Openness
Gov. Consumption / GDP
Commodity Dummy
Political Stability
GDP per capita Growth
Financial Openness
Inflation
Initial GDP per capita

No Regional Dummies

Regional Dummies

0.293
(2.3) **
-2.488
(-2.48) **
-3.592
(-0.85)
6.616
(1.73) *
-1.622
(-0.71)
0.39
(1.29)
-0.153
(-3.87) ***
28.329
(5.84) ***

0.163
(1.18)
-2.507
(-2.13) **
-5.223
(-1.02)
1.541
(0.33)
-3.159
(-1.31)
0.395
(1.29)
-0.13
(-3.03) ***
29.45
(4.72) ***

R^2
0.1747
Between R^2
0.3986
Number of Observations
2912
Number of Groups
130
***,** ,* statistical significant at 1, 5 and 10 percent level.

0.2104
0.4555
2904
129

40
Table 9
The Current Account and the Business Cycle, Alternative Measure of NEP/GDP:
Variance Component Regressions, 1970-2004

Growth Gap
Change in Terms of Trade
Public Sector Deficit / GDP
Accumulate Change RER
Net External Position / GDP

Large Countries

Industrial Countries

Non Industrial Countries

0.244
(6.00) ***
0.027
(2.06) **
-0.139
(-3.3) ***
0.007
(3.54) ***
0.017
(2.78) ***

0.155
(2.68) ***
0.127
(4.65) ***
-0.138
(-2.79) ***
0.005
(3.92) ***
0.049
(6.83) ***

0.251
(5.17) ***
0.012
(0.84)
-0.04
(-0.67)
0.025
(4.33) ***
0.011
(2.51) **

0.391
488
20

0.1446
461
21

R^2
0.1611
Number of Observations
949
Number of Groups
41
***,** ,* statistical significant at 1, 5 and 10 percent level.

41
Table 10
The Current Account and the Business Cycle:
Variance Component Instrumental Variable Regressions, 1970-2004

Accumulate Change RER
Growth Gap
Change in Terms of Trade
Public Sector Deficit / GDP
Net External Position / GDP

Large Countries

Industrial Countries

Non Industrial Countries

0.067
(2.02) **
0.155
(2.76) ***
0.011
(0.61)
-0.163
(-3.42) ***
0.075
(9.65) ***

-0.001
(-0.04)
0.19
(3.39) ***
0.124
(4.74) ***
-0.190
(-2.4) **
0.069
(5.55) ***

0.111
(0.044) **
1.36
(0.074)
-0.180
(0.019)
0.040
(0.066)
5.590
(0.015) ***

0.3706
0.6783
475
19

0.1069
0.7941
449
21

R^2
0.0916
Between R^2
0.5953
Number of Observations
924
Number of Groups
40
***,** ,* statistical significant at 1, 5 and 10 percent level.

42
Table 11
The Current Account and the Business Cycle:
Variance Component Regressions with Interactions, 1970-2004

Growth Gap
Change in Terms of Trade
Public Sector Deficit / GDP
Accumulate Change RER
Net External Position / GDP

Full Sample
0.124
(2.27) **
0.033
(2.48) **
-0.073
(-1.85) *
0.008
(4.01) ***
0.055
(8.09) ***

Growth Gap / GDP interactions with
Latin America
Asia
Africa
Middle East
East Europe

0.029
(0.33)
0.306
(3.39) ***
0.523
(2.75) ***
0.037
(0.3)
-0.081
(-0.84)

Net External Position / GDP interactions with
Latin America
Asia
Africa
Middle East
East Europe

-0.054
(-7.58) ***
0.038
(2.36) **
-0.036
(-0.85)
-0.004
(-0.22)
-0.001
(-0.02)

R^2
0.3031
Between R^2
0.6068
Number of Observations
949
Number of Groups
41
***,** ,* statistical significant at 1, 5 and 10 percent level.

43
Table 12
Surplus Adjustment Episodes:
Incidence by Region, 1970-2004
2%

3%

Industrial

2.51

1.64

Latin America

5.41

2.15

Asia

6.93

3.43

Africa

6.3

2.51

Middle East

19.69

10.2

East Europe

5.62

2.43

No region

9.49

3.28

All

6.63

3.02

44
Table 13a
Surplus Adjustment 2% Episodes: Non-Parametric Tests

Real Exchange Rate
Nominal Exchange Rate
Real Interest Rate
GDP PC growth
Inflation
Terms of Trade

Real Exchange Rate
Nominal Exchange Rate
Real Interest Rate
GDP PC growth
Inflation
Terms of Trade

All Countries
Chi^2
Obs.

Industrial Countries
Chi^2
Obs.

Large Countries
Chi^2
Obs.

3.6085 *
35.6447 ***
0.0554
6.1089 **
2.8648 *
0.2243

233
258
147
251
238
164

t = +3 v/s t = -3
0
22
0.7273
22
0.0903
13
0
22
0.7273
22
0.0903
13

2.45
9.561 ***
3.4309 *
3.5742 *
0.05
0.0149

80
82
49
81
80
61

257
281
177
278
260
187

t = +1 v/s t = -1
6.042 **
24
2.6853
24
0.2917
14
0.6713
24
0
24
0
16

14.4061 ***
8.3887 ***
0.6676
0.0465
0.1051
14.3338 ***

85
87
54
86
85
67

10.9325 ***
31.2238 ***
2.9858 *
0
0.5547
30.2112 ***

t = +3 v/s t = -1
Real Exchange Rate
5.5415 **
247
2.9091 *
22
8.2488 ***
82
Nominal Exchange Rate
47.9801 ***
273
0.7273
22
9.3386 ***
84
Real Interest Rate
7.1592 ***
171
0.0903
13
3.7692 *
52
GDP PC growth
0.4495
269
0
22
0.9736
83
Inflation
2.4481
255
0
22
0.0488
82
Terms of Trade
13.9164 ***
180
0
14
10.5625 ***
64
***,** ,* null is rejected at 1, 5 and 10 percent level. Null: medians are equal. Groups are 2 in all
cases

45
Table 13b
Surplus Adjustment 3% Episodes: Non-Parametric Tests
All Countries
Chi^2
Obs.

Industrial Countries
Chi^2
Obs.

Large Countries
Chi^2
Obs.

Real Exchange Rate
Nominal Exchange Rate
Real Interest Rate
GDP PC
CPI
Terms of Trade

1.2217
18.9553 ***
0.0607
0
2.421
2.4747

118
129
68
124
119
80

t = +3 v/s t = -3
0.0764
11
0.0764
11
0.5
8
0.8831
11
0.0764
11
0.1094
7

1.316
0.235
1.1494
0.0244
0.0285
0.6154

37
39
21
39
37
26

Real Exchange Rate
Nominal Exchange Rate
Real Interest Rate
GDP PC
CPI
Terms of Trade

6.4127 **
14.3686 ***
0.014
1.2107
2.7507 *
6.7189 ***

131
144
81
139
131
93

t = +1 v/s t = -1
1.1429
14
1.1429
14
0.5
8
0
14
0
14
0.5
8

2.2727
5.5652 **
0.0344
1.3913
0.0909
2.5996

44
46
27
46
44
31

t = +3 v/s t = -1
Real Exchange Rate
1.1616
124
1.3714
12
0.2317
Nominal Exchange Rate
21.3833 ***
136
0
12
5.2122 **
Real Interest Rate
0.4618
78
0.5
8
1.0193
GDP PC
1.0912
132
1.3714
12
0.601
CPI
2.5721
126
1.3714
12
0.0211
Terms of Trade
0.0112
87
0.1094
7
0.5744
***,** ,* null is rejected at 1, 5 and 10 percent level. Null: medians are equal. Groups are 2 in all
cases

41
43
25
43
41
28

46
Figure 1

Real Exchange Rate
Index: Adjustment Year = 100
All Countries
120
110
100
90
80
-4

-2

0

2% adjustment

2

4

3% adjustment

Industrial Countries
120
110
100
90
80
-4

-2

0

2% adjustment

2

4

3% adjustment

Large Countries
120
110
100
90
80
-4

-2
2% adjustment

0

2
3% adjustment

4

47
Figure 2

Nominal Exchange Rate
Index: Adjustment Year = 100
All Countries
110
105
100
95
90
85
-4

-2

0

2% adjustment

2

4

3% adjustment

Industrial Countries
110
105
100
95
90
85
-4

-2

0

2% adjustment

2

4

3% adjustment

Large Countries
110
105
100
95
90
85
-4

-2
2% adjustment

0

2
3% adjustment

4

48
Figure 3

Real Interest rate
Index: Adjustment Year = 100
All Countries
160
140
120
100
80
60
-4

-2

0

2% adjustment

2

4

3% adjustment

Industrial Countries
160
140
120
100
80
60
-4

-2

0

2% adjustment

2

4

3% adjustment

Large Countries
160
140
120
100
80
60
-4

-2
2% adjustment

0

2
3% adjustment

4

49
Figure 4

Inflation
Annual % Change
All Countries
10
8
6
4
2
-4

-2

0

2% adjustment

2

4

3% adjustment

Industrial Countries
10
8
6
4
2
-4

-2

0

2% adjustment

2

4

3% adjustment

Large Countries
10
8
6
4
2
-4

-2
2% adjustment

0

2
3% adjustment

4

50
Figure 5

Per capita Growth
Annual % Change
All Countries
5
4
3
2
1
0
-4

-2

0

2% adjustment

2

4

3% adjustment

Industrial Countries
5
4
3
2
1
0
-4

-2

0

2% adjustment

2

4

3% adjustment

Large Countries
5
4
3
2
1
0
-4

-2
2% adjustment

0

2
3% adjustment

4

51
Figure 6

Term of Trade
Index: Adjustment Year = 100
All Countries
130
120
110
100
90
-4

-2

0

2% adjustment

2

4

3% adjustment

Industrial Countries
130
120
110
100
90
-4

-2

0

2% adjustment

2

4

3% adjustment

Large Countries
130
120
110
100
90
-4

-2
2% adjustment

0

2
3% adjustment

4

52
Table A.1
Current Account Balances as Percentage of GDP in the World Economy:
Data Availability, 1970-2004
Region
East
Europe

Industrial

Latin
America

Middle
East

All
Countriesl

5
6
6
6
7
10
17
26
28
30
32
32
32
32
33
33
32
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
32
33
33
33
32
32
32
33
29
23

3
4
4
4
5
6
9
10
9
9
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
11
12
11
11
12
12
12
12
12
12
11
12
12
11
11
11

24
28
30
30
43
66
83
105
110
116
124
127
129
129
133
136
137
140
140
141
142
142
149
157
160
159
160
159
156
155
153
155
148
140
119

943

338

4225

year

Africa

Asia

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004

3
3
3
3
11
20
24
33
37
38
41
42
43
43
43
45
47
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
47
46
45
43
43
43
44
39
37
27

5
5
6
6
7
10
11
12
12
15
16
18
18
18
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
21
21
21
20
20
20
20
20
17
17
16
14
12

1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
5
5
6
6
6
6
7
13
20
23
24
25
25
25
25
25
25
25
25
22

8
10
11
11
12
19
21
23
23
23
23
23
23
23
23
23
23
23
23
23
23
23
23
23
23
24
24
24
23
24
24
25
24
24
24

1277

558

363

746

All Years

53
Data Appendix
Variable
Civil Liberties
Coverage of Secondary
Education,
Current Account
Current Account Reversal

Domestic Credit Growth
Export
Fiscal Deficit
GDP
Government Consumption
Import
Inflation
Initial GDP per capita
Investment Ratio
Net External Position
Openness
Population
Real Exchange Rate
Surplus Adjustment

Sudden Stops in Region

Terms of Trade

Definition
Index of Civil Liberties,
Total gross enrollment ratio for
secondary education
Reduction in the current account
deficit of at least 4% of GDP in
one year.
Annual growth rate of domestic
credit
Overall Budget

Change in CPI
GDP per capita in 1970
Total investment over GDP

Predicted trade from bilateral
gravity equations
(Nominal Exchange Rate*PPI
US)/CPI
Two definitions: At least 2%
reduction in surplus in one year; a
3% reduction in surplus
accumulated over 3 years
Relative occurrence of sudden
stops in the country’s region
(excluding the country itself)
Change in term of trade export as
capacity to imports (constant
local currency unit)

Source
Freedom House
Barro and Lee (2001)
World Development Indicators
Author’s elaboration based on
data of current account
World Development Indicators
World Development Indicators
World Development Indicators
World Development Indicators
IMF’s International Financial
Statistics
World Development Indicators
World Development Indicators
World Development Indicators
IMF’s International Financial
Statistics
Lane and Milesi – Ferretti (2006)
Author’s elaboration
World Development Indicators
World Development Indicators
Author’s elaboration based on
data of capital flows (World
Development Indicators)
Author’s elaboration.

World Development Indicators

54

REFERENCES

Aizenman, J. 1983. “A theory of current account and exchange rate determinations”.
European Economic Review Vol. 23(3), pp:261-280
Aizenman, J. and I. Noy. 2004. “On the Two Way Feedback Between Financial and
Trade Openness,”, NBER Working Paper # 10496.
Barro, R. and J. Lee. 2001. "International Data on Educational Attainment: Updates and
Implications," Oxford Economic Papers, Vol. 53(3), pp: 541-63.
Barro, R. and X. Sala-I-Martin. 1995. Economic Growth. McGraw Hill, New York.
Bergsten, C. F. and J. Williamson (Editors). 2003. Dollar Overvaluation and the World
Economy. Special Report 16. Institute for International Economics.
Bergsten, C. F. and J. Williamson (Editors). 2004. Dollar Adjustment: How Far?
Against What?. Special; Report 17. Institute for International Economics.
Bernanke, B. S. 2005. “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit”.
Remarks at the Homer Jones Lecture, St. Louis, Missouri. April 14, 2005.
Blanchard, O., F. Giavazzi and F. Sa. 2005. “The U.S. current account and the dollar”.
NBER working paper # 11137.
Caballero, R., E. Farhi and P. Gourinchas. 2006. "An Equilibrium Model of ‘Global
Imbalances’ and Low Interest Rates". NBER Working Papers # 11996.
Calderon, C., A. Chong and N. Loayza. 2002. "Determinants of Current Account
Deficits in Developing Countries". Contributions to Macroeconomics, Vol. 2(1),
pp: 1021-1021.
Calvo, G. A., A. Izquierdo and L.F. Mejia. 2004. “On the empirics of sudden stops: The
relevance of balance-sheet effects”. NBER working paper # 10520.
Calvo, G.A. and E. Talvi, “The Resolution of Global Imbalances,” Journal of Policy
Modeling, September, 2006
Chinn , M. D. and J. Lee. 2005. “Three Current Account Balances: A ‘SemiStructuralist’ Interpretation”. NBER Working Paper # 11853
Chinn, M. D. and E. Prasad. 2003. “Medium-Term Determinants of Current Accounts
in Industrial and Developing Countries: An Empirical Exploration”. Journal of
International Economics, Vol. 59(1), pp: 47-76.
Chinn, M. D. and H. Ito. 2005. “Current Account Balances, Financial Development and
Institutions: Assaying the World ‘Savings Glut’". NBER Working Paper #
11761.
Chote, R. 1999. “IMF: US Slowdown Now Inevitable,” Financial Times, April 21,
1999.
Clarida, R. 2005a. “Japan, China, and the U.S. Current account deficit,” CATO Journal,
Vol. 25(1), pp: 111-114.

55
Clarida, R. 2005b. “Some Thoughts on ‘The Sustainability and Adjustment of Global
Current Account Imbalances’”. Speech given at the Council on Foreign
Relations, March 28.
De Gregorio, J. 2005. "Global Imbalances and Exchange Rate Adjustment,"Economic
Policy Papers Central Bank of Chile 15, Central Bank of Chile
Dollar, D. 1992. “Outward-Oriented Developing Economies Really Do Grow More
Rapidly: Evidence from 95 LDCs, 1976-1985”. Economic Development and
Cultural Change,Vol. 40(3), pp:523-44.
Dooley, M., D. Folkerts-Landau and P. Garber. 2004. "The US Current Account Deficit
and Economic Development: Collateral for a Total Return Swap". NBER
Working Paper # 10727.
Dooley, M., D. Folkerts-Landau and P. Garber. 2005. "Savings Gluts and Interest Rates:
The Missing Link to Europe". NBER Working Paper # 11520.
Edwards, S. 2002. “Does the Current Account Matter?” In Edwards, S. and J. A.
Frankel (Eds.): Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, pp: 21-69.
University of Chicago Press.
Edwards, S. 2004. "Thirty Years of Current Account Imbalances, Current Account
Reversals and Sudden Stops”. IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 51, Special Issue, pp: 149.
Edwards, S. 2005a. “Is the U.S. current account deficit sustainable? And if not, how
costly is adjustment likely to be?”. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
Vol. 2005(1), pp: 211–288.
Edwards, S. 2005b. “The end of large current account deficits, 1970–2002: Are there
lessons for the United States?”. In The Greenspan era: Lessons for the future,
pp. 205–268. The Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
Edwards, S. 2006. “The U.S. Current Account Deficit: Gradual Correction or Abrupt
Adjustment?” Journal of Policy Modeling, September, 2006
Eichengreen, B. 2003. "Three generations of crises, three generations of crisis models".
Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 22(7), pp: 1089-1094.
Eichengreen, B., A. Rose and C. Wyplosz. 1996. " Contagious Currency Crises: First
Tests," Scandinavian Journal of Economics, Vol. 98(4), pp: 463-84.
Frankel, J. A., and E. A. Cavallo. 2004. “Does openness to trade make countries more
vulnerable to sudden stops, or less? Using gravity to establish causality”. NBER
working paper # 10957.
Ghosh, A. R. and J. D. Ostry. 1995. "The Current Account in Developing Countries: A
Perspective from the Consumption-Smoothing Approach". World Bank
Economic Review, Vol. 9(2), pp: 305-333.
Gruber, J. and S. B. Kamin. 2005. “Explaining the Global Pattern of Current Account
Imbalances,” mimeo. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

56
Heckman, J. J. 1981. “The incidental parameters problem and the problem of initial
conditions in estimating a discrete time - discrete data stochastic process”. In
C.F. Manski and D. McFadden (eds.). Structural Analysis of Discrete Data with
Econometric Applications. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Hubbard, R. G. 2005. “A Paradox of Interest” Wall Street Journal, June 23.
Kraay, A. and J. Ventura. 2000. "Current Accounts In Debtor And Creditor Countries".
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 115(4), pp: 1137-1166.
Kraay, A. and J. Ventura. 2002. “Current Accounts in the Long and Short Run”. In M.
Gertler and K. S. Rogoff (eds.) NBER Macroeconomics Annual.. MIT Press.
Lane, P. and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti. 2002. “Long Term Capital Movements” NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2001, MIT Press
Lane, P. and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti. 2003. “International Financial Integration” IMF
Staff Papers, Vol. 50(1), pp: 82-113.
Lane, P. and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti. 2004. "International Investment Patterns," IMF
Working Papers 04/134.
Lane, P. and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti. 2005. "A Global Perspective on External Positions,"
NBER Working Papers # 11589.
Lane, P. and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti. 2006. "The External Wealth of Nations Mark II:
Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities,1970–2004".
The Institute for International Integration Studies Discussion Paper Series
iiisdp126, IIIS.
Loayza, N., K. Schmidt-Hebbel and L. Servén. 2000. "What Drives Private Saving
Across the World?," The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 82(2), pp:
165-181.
Marquez, J. and L. Workman. 2001. "Modeling the IMF's Statistical Discrepancy in the
Global Current Account" IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 48(3), pp: 499 -521
Mercereau , B. and J. Miniane. 2004. “Challenging the Empirical Evidence from
Present Value Models of the Current Account”. IMF Working Papers 04/106.
Milesi-Ferretti, G. M. and A. Razin. 1996. “Sustainability of Persistent Current Account
Deficits.” NBER Working Paper # 5467.
Mussa, M. 2003. “A Global Growth Rebound: How Strong for How Long?”
Presentation given at Institute for International Economics, September 9, 2003
Nason, J. M. and J. H. Rogers. 2006. "The present-value model of the current account
has been rejected: Round up the usual suspects". Journal of International
Economics, Vol. 68(1), pp: 159-187.
Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoff. 1996. Foundations of International Macroeconomics. MIT
Press.
Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoff. 2005. “Global exchange rate adjustments and global
current account imbalances”. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol.
2005(1), pp: 67–146.

57
Ostry , J. D., C. Reinhart and M. Ogaki. 1995. "Saving Behavior in Low- and Middle Income Developing Countries: A Comparison". IMF Working Papers 95/3.
Sachs, J.D. and A.M. Warner. 1995. “Economic Reform and the Process of Global
Integration,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Vol. 1995(1), pp: 1–118.
Skidelsky , R. 2000. John Maynard Keynes, Volume 3: Fighting For Britain, 19371946. Macmillan Co. London
Taylor, John B. 2004. “The U.S. Current Account: Recent Trends and Policies”
Keynote address at American Enterprise Institute Conference on Policy
Challenges of Global Payment Imbalances. Washington, D.C. November 4,
2004
Ventura , J. 2003. “Towards a Theory of Current Accounts” The World Economy, Vol.
26(4), pp: 483-512
Weisman, S. R. 2006. “Paulson Shows Talent for Deflecting Criticism”. International
Herald Tribune, September 27.

