                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              ANTI-DEPRESSANTS AND SUICIDE

                                            Jens Ludwig
                                          Dave E. Marcotte
                                           Karen Norberg

                                        Working Paper 12906
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12906


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2007




The research reported here was supported by small grants to Marcotte and Ludwig from UMBC and
the Georgetown University Graduate School of Arts and Sciences. Norberg was supported with funding
from NIH grant 5K08MH001809, and the Center for Health Policy at Washington University. None
of the authors have received funding from pharmaceutical companies or other entities with financial
interests relevant to the paper's topic. Thanks to Jonathan Caulkins, Philip Cook, Jeff DeSimone, William
Dickens, Carlos Dobkin, Dan Feenberg, Ted Gayer, Chris Hansen, Jeffrey Kling, Alain Lesage, Byron
Lutz, Sara Markowitz, James Mercy, Matthew Miller, Steve Pischke, Steve Raphael, David Salkever,
Eric Slade, Betsey Stevenson, Justin Wolfers, and seminar participants at the CDC, NBER and APPAM
for assistance and helpful comments. IMS Health, Inc. was very generous and helpful in providing
necessary data. Steve Hemelt and Ozlen Luznar provided excellent research assistance. Comments
can be directed to any of the paper's authors at ludwigj@georgetown.edu, marcotte@umbc.edu, or
norberg@nber.org. Any errors and all opinions are of course our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2007 by Jens Ludwig, Dave E. Marcotte, and Karen Norberg. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Anti-depressants and Suicide
Jens Ludwig, Dave E. Marcotte, and Karen Norberg
NBER Working Paper No. 12906
February 2007
JEL No. I12,I18

                                               ABSTRACT

Does drug treatment for depression with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) increase or
decrease the risk of completed suicide? The question is important in part because of recent government
warnings that question the safety of SSRIs, one of the most widely prescribed medications in the world.
While there are plausible clinical and behavioral arguments that SSRIs could have either positive
or negative effects on suicide, randomized clinical trials have not been very informative because of
small samples and other problems. In this paper we use data from 26 countries for up to 25 years to
estimate the effect of SSRI sales on suicide mortality using just the variation in SSRI sales that can
be explained by cross-country variation in the growth of drug sales more generally. We find that an
increase in SSRI sales of 1 pill per capita (about a 12 percent increase over 2000 sales levels) is associated
with a decline in suicide mortality of around 5 percent. These estimates imply a cost per statistical
life far below most other government interventions to improve health outcomes.

Jens Ludwig                                           Karen Norberg
Georgetown University                                 Washington University School of Medicine
Public Policy Institute                               Department of Psychiatry
3520 Prospect Street, NW                              Campus Box 8134
Washington, DC 20007                                  660 South Euclid
and NBER                                              St. Louis, MO 63110
ludwigj@georgetown.edu                                and NBER
                                                      norberg@nber.org
Dave E. Marcotte
Department of Public Policy
UMBC
1000 Hilltop Circle
Baltimore, MD 21250
marcotte@umbc.edu
                                            I. INTRODUCTION

        Does anti-depressant drug treatment increase or decrease the risk of completed suicide?

Since major depression is a leading risk factor for suicide, and because antidepressant drugs are

generally effective in treating depression [Goldsmith et al., 2002], it might be expected that

increasing use of antidepressants would reduce suicide. 1 However a number of recent studies

suggest that the most commonly used class of antidepressant drugs – selective serotonin reuptake

inhibitors (SSRIs) – might actually increase the risk of suicidal behavior [FDA, 2006, Hammad

et al., 2006]. One candidate explanation is heterogeneity in psychopharmacological effects:

some patients might experience a worsening of mood from SSRI treatment. Another candidate

explanation comes from the possible behavioral responses of patients and medical practitioners

to the improved safety and reduced side effects of SSRIs relative to older tri-cyclic

antidepressants (TCAs), a version of what Viscusi [1984, 1985] terms the “lulling effect.” In

response to these recent studies, regulatory agencies in both the US and UK have issued

warnings about the use of SSRIs first for people under 18 years of age [U.K. Department of

Health, 2003; FDA 2003, 2004; Goode 2003] and more recently for adults as well [FDA, 2005].

        This topic is of interest to economists for at least two reasons. First, it is important.

Suicide increased dramatically for youth starting in 1950 and is now the third leading cause of

death among persons age 15-24 in the US [Cutler, Glaeser and Norberg, 2001; Goldsmith et al.,

2002]. Suicide is an important cause of death in all age groups, claiming the lives of around

30,000 Americans every year and another one million people or so worldwide [Goldsmith et al.,

2002]. Recent estimates suggest the lifetime prevalence of major depressive disorders is on the


1
  In their seminal paper Hamermesh and Soss [1974] present a model in which individuals commit suicide if the
present value of expected lifetime utility is zero. Within their framework SSRIs might reduce suicide by changing
the technological relationship that determines the cost of maintaining some minimum subsistence quality of life, by
changing the enjoyment people obtain from any given level of consumption, or improving people’s productivity.


                                                         1
order of 17 percent [Kessler, Berglund et al., 2005]. 2 In 2000, SSRIs were the second most

commonly prescribed drug class in the U.S., and the third best-selling drug class in the world

[IMS Health, 2006]. Understanding how SSRIs affect suicide is relevant for policy decisions

about whether to restrict or encourage access to these drugs, and about how to regulate their use.

        A second reason this question is of interest to economists is that the standard empirical

tools of medical and public health research have not been very informative about the effects of

SSRIs on the outcome of arguably greatest medical and policy concern – suicide mortality.

Randomized clinical trials (RCTs) employ sample sizes that are too small to detect effects on

rare health outcomes such as suicide completion. As a result most previous studies, and even

meta-analyses of studies, rely on measures of non-lethal “suicidality,” [e.g., Fergusson et al.,

2005; Hammad et al., 2006], but the association between these indicators and actual suicide

mortality remains unclear [Cutler, Glaeser and Norberg, 2001; Baldessarini et al., 2006a]. In

addition the subjects enrolled in RCTs typically exclude subjects at highest risk for suicide, and

the conditions under which both treatment and control subjects receive treatment in clinical trials

may differ from the standard level of care provided to patients outside of such trials. The lack of

evidence about completed suicide has generated intense controversy about the FDA warnings, in

part because the warnings could create harm by deterring SSRI use among patients who might

benefit from antidepressant treatment. As one researcher involved in the FDA review panels told

the New York Times, “Sitting up there and having the public yell that you’re killing their children

is no fun.” A medical historian told the Times “It’s like a religious war,” with a level of

argument not seen since “the 1960s and 1970s, when scientists were challenging psychoanalysis”

[Carey, 2006].

2
 These disorders also impose substantial costs on society beyond their impact on suicide, such as by affecting
human capital accumulation, employment, productivity, crime, child abuse, accidents, homelessness and divorce
[Frank and McGuire, 2000; Marcotte and Wilcox-Gök, 2001; Currie and Stabile, 2004].


                                                        2
       In principle analysis of population-level data could provide the statistical power needed

to detect relationships between SSRI use and suicide mortality. Yet existing epidemiological

studies have employed weak research designs, typically before-after comparisons using data

from one or a few countries, which provide limited power to rule out the influence of

confounding factors. More recently a few studies have drawn on county- or country-level panel

data to at least control for shared period effects or time-invariant attributes of these jurisdictions

[Dahlberg and Lundin, 2005; Gibbons et al., 2005; Ludwig and Marcotte, 2005]. Despite these

improvements causal inference from these studies remains difficult because variation in SSRI

drug sales over time and across jurisdictions may be simultaneously determined with changes in

the prevalence of mental disorders: SSRI sales might increase in response to increases in the

prevalence of depression. Even the timing of when SSRIs are approved for sale may be

endogenous, given that previous studies find time-to-approval is shorter for important drugs that

treat high-visibility health problems [Dranove and Meltzer, 1994; Carpenter, 2002].

       The contribution of the present paper is to provide new empirical estimates for the effects

of SSRIs on suicide mortality by combining the statistical power associated with analysis of

population-level data together with a plausibly exogenous source of identifying variation in SSRI

sales. Specifically, we construct a panel dataset for 26 countries for up to 25 years, and exploit

just the variation in SSRI sales across countries over time that can be explained by differences

across countries in how quickly they usually bring new drugs in general to market, and by

differences in how rapidly new drug sales typically increase. We show that differences across

countries in the rate of sales growth for the other major new drugs that were introduced in the

1980s for treatment of non-psychiatric health conditions can explain a substantial amount of

variation in SSRI sales. This source of variation would not seem to be susceptible to bias from




                                                   3
reverse causation (SSRI sales increase because of increasingly prevalent mental health

disorders), or from bias due to correlations between adoption of SSRIs and general

improvements in mental health care systems.

        We estimate that an increase in SSRI sales of 1 pill per capita (around a 12 percent

increase over 2000 sales levels) would reduce suicide mortality rates by around 5 percent. These

estimates imply that around 1 suicide is averted for every 200,000 pills sold. 3 Commonly used

SSRIs can currently be obtained in the United States for around $0.10 per pill, which suggests a

cost per statistical life saved from increasing SSRI use of around $20,000 – far below most other

government regulations or policies to improve health. A formal benefit-cost analysis requires

grappling with difficult conceptual and normative questions about how to value safety gains

among a population at high risk of attempting self injury. We briefly discuss these important

issues in the concluding section, although a full treatment is beyond the scope of this paper.

        A more practical concern with our instrumental variables (IV) research design stems from

the possibility that countries where new drug sales increase at different rates might differ in other

ways that are relevant for mental health and suicide. One way we address these concerns is to

control for country and year fixed effects and even country-specific linear trends. We also show

that our point estimates are hardly affected by also controlling for each country’s population age

structure, unemployment rate, and real GDP per capita. The estimates are also quite similar

when we restrict our analytic sample just to member countries of the Organization for Economic

Co-Operation and Development (OECD), which may be less dissimilar than our broader sample

of countries with respect to potential confounding factors.


3
 In Table 1 below we show that the mean suicide rate for our sample over the study period is about 10 per 100,000.
Our point estimate thus implies that an increase in SSRI sales of 1 pill per capita reduces suicide mortality by
5%*(10 / 100,000) = .000005 deaths per capita. So an increase in SSRI sales of 200,000 pills would reduce
mortality by 1 statistical life.


                                                        4
        As another specification check we show that our IV estimates suggest no relationship

between SSRI sales and accident deaths, which should not be affected by SSRI drug treatment.

Finally, we demonstrate that countries with high versus low rates of growth in drug sales more

generally experienced very similar trends in suicide mortality during the 1980s, when SSRIs

were not widely used. The differences in suicide mortality trends between high- and low-drug-

growth countries are instead concentrated in the 1990s, when SSRI use became widespread.

        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section briefly summarizes

previous empirical work in this area; Section 3 describes our data; Section 4 presents our

empirical methods and results, and the final section discusses implications of the results.

                                             II. BACKGROUND

        The concern that antidepressant drugs could increase, rather than decrease, the risk of

suicide dates back to the introduction of the first tri-cyclic antidepressants (TCAs) in the 1950’s.

Long before the FDA’s recent “black box” warning for SSRIs, the agency required that

antidepressant drugs include some standard warning language for patients. 4 There are both

clinical and behavioral arguments for why TCAs might increase the risk of suicide. One clinical

mechanism has to do with the slow therapeutic effects of these drugs. Most antidepressants

(including both SSRIs and TCAs) take at least four or more weeks to result in a clinically

significant improvement in depressed mood. However, other psychopharmacological effects

may occur within the first few days of treatment. As early as the 1960’s, psychiatry textbooks

warned that the risk of suicide may increase during early phases of treatment because the

medications may give depressed patients the energy to follow through on a suicidal motive, long


4
  “The possibility of a suicide attempt is inherent in major depressive disorder and may persist until significant
remission occurs. Close supervision of high-risk patients should accompany initial drug therapy. Prescriptions for
Drug X should be written for the smallest quantity of tablets consistent with good patient management, in order to
reduce the risk of overdose.”


                                                         5
before they lead to an improvement in mood [FDA 2006]. A second clinical concern stems from

the possibility of heterogeneity in drug effects across patients. Specifically, recent studies

suggest antidepressants might worsen mood in patients with undiagnosed bipolar disorder

[Baledessarini et al., 2006b]. There is also growing evidence that the effects of antidepressants,

as well as their side effects, may differ for children, adolescents, and adults [FDA 2006].

         The behavioral mechanism through which antidepressant drugs might increase suicide

risk stems from the potential of TCAs to be highly toxic in overdose. As a result, a prescription

for these drugs might lower the “price” of suicide by providing easy access to an effective

method of self harm. This type of “instrumentality effect” would imply that suicide methods are

not perfectly substitutable and that people at high risk for suicide are at least somewhat

responsive to the availability of different methods. 5

         A major technological innovation in the treatment of depression (and the focus of the

present study) occurred in 1984 with the introduction of the selective serotonin reuptake

inhibitors (SSRIs). SSRIs are described as “selective” because they affect only the reuptake

pumps responsible for serotonin, a small molecule that serves as a neurotransmitter, or “chemical

messenger,” in the brain. SSRIs increase the amount of the neurotransmitter serotonin that is

active in the synapses between cells, thereby enhancing neuronal activity and improving mood.

In contrast to SSRIs, the TCAs affect multiple neurotransmitters. While the SSRIs seem to be

similar to the older TCAs in their ability to reduce depression (e.g., Trindade et al. [1998],



5
  Suicide methods may not be perfect substitutes in part because of considerable variability in skill required,
physical pain, likelihood of rescue, likelihood of a fatal outcome, and likelihood of permanent injury if the outcome
is not fatal. Different methods of suicide are not readily available to everyone at all times – for example, “only”
around one-third of American households own guns [Cook and Ludwig, 1996], tall buildings or bridges are more
common in some places than others, and some people are more likely to receive prescription medications than
others. Research provides at least qualified support for the idea that changing access to suicide methods – such as
reduced access to guns, or reducing the carbon monoxide content of domestic gas – may achieve at least temporary
reductions in suicide [Krietman, 1976; Ludwig and Cook, 2000; Goldsmith et al., 2002; Duggan, 2003].


                                                          6
Mallick et al., [2003], Ryan [2003], Green [2003], Vaswani et al. [2003]), 6 they are more

selective in their operation and therefore have fewer physical side effects (such as dry mouth,

drowsiness, or cardiac arrhythmia) and are less toxic in overdose.

         The introduction of SSRIs may have reduced the population suicide rate in two ways.

First, SSRIs reduced the “price” of treating depression. The milder physical side-effect profile

may increase the willingness of patients to start and continue taking medication, and has also led

antidepressant drugs to be prescribed for a much wider range of patients by a wider range of

practitioners [Guze, 1996; Lawrenson et al., 2000]. It is true that some of the increase in SSRI

use could have been substitution from talk therapy, and current research is ambiguous about the

relative effectiveness of the two forms of treatment [e.g., Klein, 2000]. But overall SSRIs have

probably played a role in the increase in the number of people receiving treatment for depression

in the U.S. [Kessler, Demler et al., 2005; Thorpe et al., 2004].

         A second mechanism through which SSRIs might reduce suicide comes from the fact that

SSRIs might partially substitute for the older TCAs. The lower toxicity of SSRIs relative to

TCAs could reduce the risk of suicide through an instrumentality effect. The improved ratio of a

therapeutic dose to a toxic dose of SSRIs means that an act of intentional self harm by

swallowing, say, a one-month supply of SSRIs is probably less lethal than swallowing a one-

month supply of TCAs. 7 The introduction of SSRIs might therefore increase the “price” of

completed suicide, if substitutes for TCAs as a method of relatively “painless” suicide were less

easily available.




7
 However, little is known about the actual case fatality rates for overdoses with SSRIs versus TCAs, and it is an
open question whether persons attempting self harm via overdose are aware of the relative toxicity of one
medication over another.


                                                          7
        However there are also clinical and behavioral arguments to suggest that SSRIs could

potentially lead to an increase in the risk of suicide to patients using antidepressant drugs and

overall suicide rates. The clinical concern stems from the possibility of heterogeneity in

psychopharmacological effects, and in particular the possibility that the risk of an adverse effect

of antidepressant drug treatment on mood may be more pronounced with SSRIs than TCAs.

Even if SSRIs and TCAs had the same effects on suicidal states, the increased prevalence of drug

treatment following the introduction of SSRIs could have led to an increased number of persons

at risk for an adverse drug reaction.

        It is also possible that SSRIs could potentially increase suicide risk through a “lulling

effect” [Viscusi, 1984, 1985]. Economists have long been concerned about the possibility that

consumers will reduce safety precautions in response to the introduction of new, safer consumer

products [see for example Peltzman, 1975]. Viscusi’s [1984, 1985] elaboration of this idea

raises the possibility that improved product safety could increase product injury rates if

consumers misperceive risks.

        In the case of SSRIs the increased safety of these drugs relative to TCAs may have led a

broader (and perhaps less experienced or qualified) set of health practitioners to be willing to

provide drug treatment for depression, and may also have led payers, clinicians, and patients to

accept a shortening of in-patient hospital stays and reduction of intensity of outpatient treatment 8

with a consequent drop in the vigilance of patient monitoring. In many countries there have been

dramatic changes in the locations of psychiatric service provision over the past 40 years, with

state psychiatric hospitalization being replaced by treatment in community settings. The

development of safer and more effective drug treatments is thought to have contributed to this

8
 Many studies find that a combination of drug treatment and psychotherapy is more effective than either treatment
alone [eg, March et al., 2004], so SSRIs might increase the risk of suicide among those patients who would formerly
have been referred for more intensive treatment and supervision.


                                                        8
shift in the location of care. But there is a long history of concern that the deinstitutionalization

process may have led to a higher suicide rate [e.g. Hansen et al., 2001; Flechner, Wolf and

Priebe, 1995; Salzer et al., 2006] for much the same reasons that improved product safety could

increase the risk of product injury rates if consumers (or clinicians or policy makers) have

misperceived the actual risks. While little is known about perceptions of the risk of SSRI use or

overdose, it is possible that the risk of death from overdose with SSRIs is low enough (either

absolutely or relative to that of TCAs) so that users or providers engage in what Kahneman and

Tversky [1979] call “editing” and ignore these risks altogether [see also Kunreuther, 1978]. 9

        Another “lulling effect” might stem from the fact that some self-injury attempts may be

motivated by reasons other than the desire to end life, including to signal for help, punish family

or friends, or secure resources more generally [Rosenthal, 1993; Cutler, Glaeser and Norberg,

2001; Marcotte, 2003]. The introduction of a safer overdose alternative – SSRIs – could

paradoxically lead to an increase in the number of suicide attempts, thus increasing the number

of unintentional deaths resulting from self-injury attempts without lethal intent.

        The question of whether antidepressant drugs might actually increase suicide risk first

came to national attention in 1990, with the publication of a report describing six adult patients

who apparently became suicidal as a result of being treated with fluoxetine (Prozac). The

ensuing debate led the FDA to review the issue, with hearings in 1991. A review of all of the

clinical trials conducted by the manufacturer revealed no sign of increased suicidality associated

with the use of Prozac [Beasley et al, 1991].

        Over the next several years, as newer drugs came to market, pooled analyses of

individual clinical trials were updated in order to search for possible signs of risk. In May of

9
 This is also in some ways analogous to what Akerlof, Dickens and Perry (ADP) [2000] argue workers and firms
might do in low-inflation environments. ADP also note that the salience of an event might also be relevant in
whether individuals pay attention versus ignore some factors; see for example Gleitman [1996].


                                                       9
2003, GlaxoSmithKline reported an increased risk of suicide-related adverse events in a pediatric

trial of paroxetine (Paxil). This led to an analysis of all available pediatric trials, and finally to an

FDA “black box” warning of increased risk of suicidal behavior associated with antidepressant

use in pediatric patients. Since then, the FDA has commissioned several large pooled studies, the

first covering pediatric clinical trials of new antidepressants, and the most recent covering adult

trials. Taken together, these studies have found a plausible and statistically significant

association between assignment to SSRI (versus placebo) and non-lethal suicidal behavior in

adolescents [Hammad et al 2006] and in young adults, as well as a statistically significant

decrease in suicidal ideation and behavior from drug treatment in older adults [FDA 2006].

        There are several reasons why RCTs will have difficulty identifying the relationship

between SSRIs and the outcome that is arguably of greatest medical and policy concern –

completed suicide. The most important limitation of the clinical trial study is sample size: even

studies with the largest pooled RCT samples have had sample sizes too small to detect

differences in important but rare outcomes such as suicide [Deyo, 2004]. For example, a recent

meta-analysis involving a total of 87,650 patients found just 24 completed suicides, and so relied

on an outcome measure that pools together fatal and non-fatal attempts [Fergusson et al., 2005].

This study found a statistically significant increase in the risk of (lethal plus non-lethal) suicide

attempts for patients receiving SSRIs compared to placebo, and no difference in the risk of

suicide attempts between patients receiving SSRIs and tricyclic antidepressants. However as

Baldessarini et al. [2006a, p. 246-7] note, only a small fraction of patients with suicidal thoughts

attempt suicide, few attempts prove to be fatal, and, importantly, the risk factors for suicide

attempts versus completions differ markedly [see also Cutler, Glaeser and Norberg, 2001].




                                                   10
       The second problem with RCTs is that the participants who are enrolled may be

unrepresentative of the average patient. For ethical and practical reasons, most clinical trials

avoid enrolling subjects with prior histories of suicide attempts or current histories of suicidal

ideation [Pearson et al., 2001]. As a consequence, these studies exclude those people at highest

risk for suicide [Goldsmith et al., 2002; Zimmerman et al, 2002; Baldessarini, 2005; Ferguson et

al., 2005, Baldessarini et al., 2006a; Khan et al., 2000, 2001]. In addition the type of treatment

offered in RCTs may be unrepresentative of the usual community levels of care. For example,

they may take place in academic medical centers and outpatient settings, with structured

protocols and better staffing than may be available in non-academic mental health settings. A

final problem is that most new drug trials involve comparisons between the new drug and

placebo, but providers and policy analysts may also be most interested in the comparison

between newer drugs and those already on the market.

       To study questions that cannot be addressed by RCTs, investigators have used a variety

of “non-experimental” research designs. However, most previous population-based studies of

SSRIs and suicide have used research designs with limited power to rule out the influence of

competing explanations. Specifically, most of these studies have simply compared suicide rates

before and after SSRIs become available in a particular jurisdiction. Studies of Sweden, Finland,

Norway, Hungary and Australia using this “interrupted time series” design have found that

suicide rates declined as SSRI use increased [Isacsson, 2000; Rihmer et al., 2001; Ohberg et al.,

1998; Hall et.al., 2003], although a study in Italy found no effect [Barbui et al., 1999]. Yet the

independent effects of SSRI use are difficult to infer from studies that rely on simple before-and-

after comparisons within a given country. The overall problem with this study design is that it

cannot distinguish the effects of the policy change – in this case, the introduction of SSRIs –




                                                 11
from the effects of other factors such as deinstitutionalization that might be changing over the

same time period.

        One way to improve on this before-and-after design is to compare suicide outcomes

across multiple jurisdictions that have changed their policies regarding SSRI use at different

times in a standard fixed-effects setup with panel data. 10 Two studies have used this approach to

examine variation in SSRI sales across jurisdictions over time within a single country. Using

data for the U.S. for the years 1996 to 1998, Gibbons et al. [2005, 2006] find that increases in

prescriptions for SSRIs and other newer anti-depressants are associated with lower suicide rates

both within and between counties, including for children and adolescents. The authors note that

this is consistent with anti-depressant efficacy and low toxicity in the event of a suicide attempt,

but also with the possibility that local SSRI sales levels may be positively correlated with the

quality of local mental health care. Dahlberg and Lundin [2005] examine variation in SSRI sales

across counties and age groups in Sweden, and find no significant association between SSRI

sales and suicide rates.

        A third study using this same basic approach examines variation in use of SSRIs across

countries over time. Ludwig and Marcotte [2005] use data from 27 countries over 20 years, and

condition on country-specific linear trends as well as country and year fixed effects. They find

that an increase in SSRI sales of one pill per capita is associated with a 2.5 percent decline in

suicide rates. That study serves as the launching-off point for the current research.

        The obvious concern is that even standard “fixed effects” estimates that compare trends

across countries over time may be susceptible to bias from other unmeasured factors that affect

both changes in SSRI use and suicide mortality. For example, if countries try to improve access

10
  A different approach adopted by Jurrlink et al. [2006] is to use individual-level data from medical records and
compare suicide rates for those who receive SSRI treatment versus others, using propensity-score matching methods
to control for selection into SSRI treatment on the basis of observable background characteristics.


                                                       12
to psychiatric medications in tandem with other improvements to their mental health systems, a

standard panel-data analysis may overstate any socially beneficial effect of SSRIs on suicide

mortality. Alternatively, the movement towards deinstitutionalization, or other forces leading to

increases in the prevalence of mental health problems, may have driven increased anti-depressant

drug sales, or caused government regulators to bring SSRIs to market sooner. 11 In this case, any

beneficial effect of SSRI sales on suicide risk might be masked by the positive correlation

between suicide rates and market demand for drug treatment of depression.

        In the present study, we seek to overcome this source of bias by using a research design

that relies on just the variation in SSRI sales that can be predicted from the rate of growth in

sales of the major non-psychiatric medications that were introduced over the same time period

(the 1980s) in which SSRIs were introduced. The next section describes our data while the

subsequent section discusses our methods and findings.

                                                  III. DATA

        In this paper we examine country-level data in order to take advantage of both the

statistical power of population data for studying suicide mortality and the variation across

countries in both the levels and trends of sales of SSRI and other drugs.

        Annual data on suicide mortality is widely available for a large sample of countries from

the World Health Organization (WHO), which in turn obtains these data from national vital

statistics reporting systems. Data for each country include the annual number of total suicides

and by gender and age, as well as relevant population counts. We have these data for at least

1980 through 1999 for all countries, and have been able to extend the panel through at least 2000

for about half of our countries. Most of these suicide reports were recorded by local medical or


11
  Previous research suggests that more important drugs that address more high-visibility health problems seem to be
approved by the FDA more quickly [Kaitin et al., 1991 ; Dranove and Meltzer, 1994 ; Carpenter, 2002].


                                                        13
public health officials using the International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision (ICD-9)

system for coding cause of death, although by the end of the panel some countries use the newer

ICD-10. While data from the United States suggests that both coding schemes capture suicides

in a consistent fashion [Anderson et al., 2001], in our analysis we accounted for the possibility

that a shift from ICD-9 to ICD-10 may produce changes in recorded suicide rates in some

countries within our sample. Our analytical methods also account for the possibility of fixed

cultural or institutional differences across countries in how suicides are officially recorded.

        The main constraint on the construction of our country-level sample is the availability of

data on SSRI sales. Our core analytic sample consists of the 26 countries for which we have

been able to obtain annual SSRI sales data from IMS Health, Inc., a commercial firm that

provides data on international pharmaceutical sales to manufacturers and health care providers.

The diverse set of countries in our main analytic sample are: Argentina; Australia; Austria;

Belgium; Brazil; Canada; Chile; Columbia; Ecuador; Finland; France; Greece; Ireland; Israel;

Italy; Japan; Luxembourg; Mexico; Netherlands; New Zealand; Norway; Portugal; Spain; United

Kingdom; United States; and Venezuela. One possible concern is that our sample of countries is

too diverse, although we demonstrate below that our results are similar when we restrict attention

to just member nations of the Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development

(OECD). 12 We exclude countries that transitioned from Communist to other forms of

government during our sample period (including Germany) to avoid confounding the

introduction of SSRIs with the profound social changes that accompanied these transitions. 13


12
  This restriction drops Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Israel, and Venezuela.
13
   For example in the Ukraine suicide mortality rates per 100,000 declined steadily from 1981 to 1991 from 23.7 to
20.5, but following the replacement of the USSR by the Commonwealth of Independent States in 1991, when
Ukraine became an independent country, suicide rates increased steadily and by 2000 equaled 29.3, perhaps related
to increases in heavy drinking [Webb et al., 2005]. For Germany the challenge is that we cannot obtain annual
suicide mortality data for East Germany prior to 1989; in that year suicide rates per 100,000 are more 1.5 times as


                                                        14
Another practical motivation for excluding former Communist countries is limited availability of

data on drug sales, and in some cases also limited data on suicides in the pre-transition period.

         For each of these countries we have information about drug approval dates back to 1980

for all SSRIs, which includes fluvoxamine, paroxetine, fluoxetine, sertraline, citalopram and

venlafaxine. We have also been able to obtain data on actual SSRI sales for these countries for

each year back to 1990. The fact that we do not have SSRI sales data before 1990 could in

principle complicate our analysis, although it is important to note that most countries began to

sell SSRIs starting only in the late 1980s and in almost all countries SSRI sales growth was a

phenomenon of the 1990s (see Table 1). For countries that approved SSRIs before 1990 we do

know what sales were in the years before approval – zero. We use linear interpolation to impute

sales in years between the date of SSRI approval and 1990. 14 More complicated imputation

procedures are possible, but we show below that our results are not sensitive to how we address

this problem since we obtain nearly identical results when we set to missing those country-year

observations in the 1980s that come after SSRIs had been approved in a country.

         To implement our preferred IV strategy below, we also obtained similar information from

IMS Health about drug introduction dates and sales data for four drug classes other than SSRIs.

We selected drugs that satisfied three criteria: (1) Like SSRIs, they must have been introduced

in the 1980s so that the set of institutions that generally affect the drug adoption process are

similar across drug types; (2) Like SSRIs, they must have been among the top-ten selling drug

classes at the end of our study period (1998-2000), in the event that there is some general “major

drug” effect on regulatory approval or sales trends; and (3) Unlike SSRIs, these drugs should not



high in East versus West Germany (25.8 versus 16.5). Using data just on West Germany over our study period is
problematic in part because of increased migration of East Germans into the West following reunification.
14
   Specifically for each country we know sales in the year before approval (zero) and from our data sales levels in
1990, and then just linearly interpolate SSRI sales data in the intervening years.


                                                         15
be used in the treatment of psychiatric illnesses, to avoid the potential endogeneity problems

described above. The drug classes that satisfy these criteria are summarized in Table 2: Statins, a

class of drugs designed to lower LDL (“bad”) cholesterol; proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), which

are used to treat stomach and duodenal ulcers; and two drug classes used to treat hypertension,

calcium channel blockers (CCBs) and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors. 15

Below we describe how we use information on the introduction and rates of sales growth for

these drugs to construct our instruments.

         In our analyses we also controlled for a number of socio-demographic factors thought to

affect suicide rates. For example there is a powerful age structure to suicide mortality (Table 1),

and so we control for the annual distribution of each country’s population across different age

groups. We also have data on unemployment rates from the OECD, and data on real per capita

gross domestic product adjusted for changes over time in exchange rates [World Bank, 2006].

                                                 IV. FINDINGS

         Our preferred estimates, which use just the variation in SSRI sales across countries over

time that can be explained by variation in the rate of growth in sales of other drugs, suggest that

an increase in SSRI sales of 1 pill per capita reduces suicide mortality by around 5 percent. This

negative relationship is larger in absolute value among relatively younger people, although our

estimates for age-specific impacts of SSRI sales are limited by the fact that we have data on

suicide mortality but not SSRI sales broken out separately by age groups.

A. OLS Results

         Before we present our preferred IV research design and findings, it is useful to have some

basic understanding of our data and the nature of the variation in both SSRI sales and suicide

15
   We were only able to obtain sales data for these drugs back to 1994, and so linearly interpolate annual sales
figures for countries for the years between when the country first approved the drug for sale and 1994 (in cases
where countries approved the drugs before 1994).


                                                         16
mortality across countries over time. As a point of departure, consider the time series of log

suicide rates and SSRI sales per capita for the OECD countries in our sample from 1980 to 2000

(Figure 1). Consistent with the hypothesis that SSRIs may reduce suicide we find a decline in

suicide mortality in this sample of countries starting in the mid-1990s, about when SSRI sales

increase dramatically. However this is something less than definitive proof given the data also

show some changes in suicide mortality early in the period before SSRIs were on the market. 16

         Some additional insight into what is going on in the data comes from estimating equation

(1), where Yit equal to the natural log of country i’s suicide rate per 100,000 people in year t, and

SSRIit is the number of SSRI pills sold per capita in country i in year t. We control for the share

of the population in different age groups (15-24, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54, 55-64 and 65 and up), an

indicator for whether the country records deaths in that year using the ICD-10 versus -9 system,

and country and year fixed effects di and dt and country-specific linear time trends, Timet×di. 17

(1) Yit = a0 + a1 SSRIit + a2 Xit + di + dt + (Timet×di) + v1it

         Equation (1) is estimated using population-weighted least squares. 18 Estimation without

population weights generates very similar point estimates but, as we would expect, slightly larger




16
   The specific increase in the early 1980s observed in Figure 1 is probably driven by changes in suicide in several
countries during a period of economic recession. Another contributing factor is the increase in suicide rates in
Mexico from extremely low initial levels up closer to international norms, which presumably reflects some declining
stigma of suicide in that predominantly Catholic country.
17
   The raw data suggested that these country-specific linear terms may be important given differences in trends even
before SSRI use became widespread. For example, in Austria the suicide rate declined from 25.4 per 100,000 in
1980 to 23.3 by 1990 and 18.1 by 2001. In contrast, the suicide rate in Mexico increased steadily from 1.4 per
100,000 in 1980 to 3.8 by 2001. The rise in suicide rates over the panel for Mexico may reflect a change in
reporting, rather than real patterns of mortality, due to a declining stigma associated with suicide. Other
predominantly Catholic countries (Ireland, Spain, Italy) saw similar patterns.
18
   The signal-to-noise ratio of country-level suicide rates seems to be higher for larger countries. For example the
suicide rate per 100,000 in the U.S. changes modestly year to year (from 1980 to 1985 the annual rate 11.9, 12.0,
12.2, 12.1, 12.4, 12.4). The year-to-year variability is much larger in Luxembourg (12.8, 16.7, 21.3, 21.9, 18.6, and
14.8). Another way to see this comes from dividing countries in our sample up those with populations above versus
below the median, then calculating residualized log suicide rates where we take out country-specific linear trends for
1980-2000. The variance of the residuals for large vs. small countries is .06 vs. .12.


                                                         17
standard errors. To account for serial correlation we calculate standard errors that are clustered

at the country level [Bertrand et al., 2004]. 19

         Most of the variation in suicide mortality rates is across countries rather than over time.

Country fixed effects account for around four-fifths of the total variation in log suicide rates in

our panel. These persistent differences in suicide rates across countries are thought to be due to

in part to climate, culture, urbanicity, and perhaps differences in data recording practices [Smith

et al., 1995; Goldsmith et al., 2002, Chapter 6]. Country and year fixed effects plus country-

specific linear trends account for 90 percent of the variation in log suicide rates in our panel.

         Table 3 shows countries that experienced relatively larger increases in SSRI sales over

our study period also experienced relatively larger declines in suicide. When we regress log

suicide rates against SSRI sales and country and year fixed effects (column 1), an increase in

sales of 1 pill per capita (about 12 percent of the mean 2000 sales levels in our sample) is

associated with a reduction in suicide of around 3.5 percent. Figure 2 provides some additional

intuition about this estimate by plotting for each country the change in log suicide rates from

1980-95 against the change in SSRI sales. 20 We can also see the substantial variation in the

growth of SSRI sales across countries. For example SSRI sales increased about twice as much in

the US as in the UK, while by 1995 Japan had not even introduced SSRIs for sale yet. Of course

countries may experience different trajectories in suicide rates for a variety of reasons other than

SSRI sales. The second column of Table 3 shows that controlling for population age structure




19
   Hansen [2006] shows that standard errors calculated in this way may be overly conservative compared to more
efficient generalized least squares estimates. Since our main IV estimates below are statistically significant with the
more conservative approach, we present clustered standard errors throughout the paper for simplicity.
20
   Even though we have suicide and SSRI sales data through at least 1999 for all of the countries in our sample, with
our IV design described below we lose some country-years’ of data after 1995, and so for consistency in these
figures we focus here on the 1980-95 period. Re-doing Figure 2 using data through 1999 yields a similar picture.


                                                          18
reduces the magnitude of the point estimate by around one-third. Adding country-specific linear

trends (column 3) has only a modest impact on the magnitude of our point estimate.

         The larger concern with these OLS estimates is that SSRI sales may be endogenous to the

conditions that influence suicide. For example, increases in major depressive disorder could

drive up SSRI sales. Since reliable longitudinal, population-level estimates for the prevalence of

severe depressive disorder are not available for our sample of countries, OLS estimates may

understate in absolute value any beneficial effect of SSRIs on suicide. On the other hand,

countries might expedite approval of SSRIs or implement policies designed to improve access to

SSRIs as part of a larger portfolio of efforts designed to improve mental health, in which case

OLS would overstate the protective effects of SSRI on suicide mortality.

         Some indication that these concerns may be empirically relevant comes from the fact that

there is much more variation across countries in how quickly they approve SSRIs for public sale

compared to how quickly these countries approve other drugs. The vertical axis in Figure 3

shows the number of years that each country actually had SSRIs for sale as of 1995 (note SSRIs

were first approved for sale anywhere in the world market in 1984). 21 The horizontal axis shows

how many years SSRIs would have been on the market as of 1995 if each country had approved

SSRIs as quickly as they approved the other major new drugs introduced in the 1980s (from

Table 2, Statins, PPIs, CCBs, and ACEs). That is, for each country we calculate the average

adoption lag for Statins, PPIs, CCBs and ACES (most countries in our sample approved these

drugs within a year or two of when they were introduced to the world market), and then calculate

each country’s predicted approval date for SSRIs as the year SSRIs first came on the world



21
  SSRIs were first sold anywhere in the world in West Germany in 1984, which is dropped from our sample as
described in Section III because of the effects of reunification on suicide in Germany plus the difficulty of obtaining
reliable data on suicides for East Germany prior to this period.


                                                          19
market (1984) plus the country’s average adoption lag for these four other drugs. 22 Most

countries in our sample approved these drugs within a year or two of when they were introduced

to the world market. The extra variability in the timing of SSRI approval compared to other

drugs suggests regulators may have had special concerns about these anti-depressant drugs or

about the underlying health problems they are designed to address.

         In fact we find some evidence suggesting that countries with increasing suicide rates may

have been quicker to approve SSRIs for public use, as shown in the fourth column of Table 3.

We re-estimate our basic panel-data setup as in equation (1) but now add a set of indicator

variables for each of the five years before SSRIs were first sold in each country. We find that

these pre-SSRI year indicators are jointly significant (p<.01) and become less negative (smaller

in absolute value) as we get closer to the time SSRIs were approved.

         One possible concern with this specification check is suggested by Wolfer’s [2006]

observation that in some applications jurisdiction-specific linear trends could pick up un-

modeled dynamic policy responses in addition to picking up differences across areas in pre-

existing trends, which could bias our coefficient estimates for the indicators for pre-SSRI years.

Some protection against this concern comes from the fact that our key explanatory variable of

interest in these OLS models is actual SSRI sales, rather than a simple indicator for SSRIs being

on the market. In any case we obtain similar results when we re-run our specification test



22
    There are many cultural and institutional reasons why drug approval times might vary across countries. To take
just one example, the U.S. Prescription Drug User Fee Acts (PDUFA) was intended to provide additional resources
to FDA to speed up drug approvals by charging drug companies user fees. User fees from drug companies vary
considerably – for example the United Kingdom’s Medicine and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency receives
100% of funding from user fees, while Japan’s Koseisho regulatory agency does not charge any user fees [Berndt et
al., 2005]. Sociological factors may also influence patterns of technology adoption. For example, Skinner and
Staiger [2005] found that some states in the US consistently adopted effective new technologies, whether hybrid
corn, tractors, or heart attack treatments, earlier than other states. They also found that early adoption was closely
associated with social capital and state-level 1928 high school graduation rates, but not per capita income, density,
or (in the case of Beta Blockers) expenditures on heart attack patients.


                                                         20
without country-specific linear trends, or replace the SSRI variable with a series of indicator

variables for the number of years SSRIs were on the market.

       It is more difficult to generate a similarly transparent test for the endogeneity of SSRI

sales growth once these drugs are on the market, though there is ample reason to be worried

about simultaneity with trends in SSRI sales and mental health conditions. These conceptual

concerns together with the empirical findings above motivate the IV analysis that follows.

B. Main Findings

       Our preferred research design seeks to identify the effect of SSRIs on overall suicide

mortality using just the variation in SSRI sales across countries over time that can be explained

by differences across countries in the timing of when new drugs are approved more generally,

and the general rate at which sales of new drugs increase once they are on the market. The

variation in SSRI sales that can be explained by variation in sales for other drugs is plausibly

orthogonal to pre-existing trends in mental health conditions or mental health treatment

environments across countries. The preferred model is given by the system:

(2)     Yit = b0 + b1SSRIit + b2 X it + d i + d t + Timet * d i + v2it

(3)     SSRI it = c0 + ∑ δ k PSALES (k ) it + c2 X it + d i + d t + Timet * d i + v3it
                         k
       As in OLS equation (1) Yit represents the log suicide mortality rate per 100,000 in country

i in year t, and SSRIit is the actual SSRI sales (pills per capita) observed in each country each

year. Our instruments, PSALES(k)it, equal the predicted level of sales of SSRIs in country i in

year t in the kth year we predict SSRIs to have been in the market if the country had approved

SSRIs as quickly as the country approved the four other major new drugs introduced in the 1980s

that are not used to treat mental health conditions (Statins, PPIs, CCBs, and ACEs), and then

assuming that the SSRI sales grow each year they are on the market at the same rate as these



                                                        21
other drugs. Put differently, our instruments represent the counterfactual SSRI sales pattern we

would have expected in these countries if SSRI sales followed the same introduction and sales

patterns observed for other drugs.

       Mechanically, our instruments are constructed as follows. We begin by calculating the

predicted SSRI adoption lag for each country (P_Lagi), defined as the average adoption lag for

each country for the four instrument drugs (Statins, PPIs, CCBs, ACEs) which are indexed by d.

In equation (4) launchd equals the year in which drug d was first sold (or “launched”) anywhere

in the world, and launchdi is the year in which drug d was launched in country i specifically.

                         launchdi − launchd
(4) P_Lag i = int(   ∑
                     d
                                  4
                                            )


       Then for each country and calendar year we calculate the number of years we predict

SSRIs would have been on the market if the SSRI adoption lag for that country was the same as

the average adoption lag observed for the four instrument drugs. That is, Predicted_Yearit equals

the year in which SSRIs were first sold anywhere in the world (launchSSRI) plus the country’s

average adoption lag for the four instrument drugs (P_Lagi). For example, the U.S. approved

Statins, PPIs, CCBs and ACEs on average one year after they were introduced anywhere on the

world market. Since SSRIs were first launched on the world market in 1984, for the U.S.

Predicted_Yearit =1 in 1985, Predicted_Yearit =2 in 1986, and so on for each of the k years

SSRIs would have been for sale in each country. This is a bit earlier than the first year SSRIs

were actually sold on the American market, 1988.

(5) Predicted _ Yearit = max{0,1 + t − (launchSSRI + P _ Lagi )}

       Then for the kth year we predict SSRIs to have been on the market in a given country, our

instruments, PSALES(k)it, equal the average sales of Statins, PPIs, CCBs, and ACEs in the kth




                                                22
year that these drugs were on the market in country i. So for example for the U.S. when

Predicted_Yearit =1 in 1985, PSALES(1)it equals the average sales of Statins, PPIs, CCBs and

ACEs in their first years on the American market, and is equal to zero in all other years. In 1986

when Predicted_Yearit =2 the value of PSALES(2)it is the average sales of our four instrument

drugs the second year they were on the American market, and so on.

                        1
(6) PSALES (k )it = [
                        4   ∑ Sales
                            d
                                      dk   ] × 1( Predicted_Yearit = k )


        In principle we could calculate a single instrumental variable equal to the predicted

profile of SSRI sales had they been adopted at the same rate and then had sales growth similar to

our other instrument drugs. However that would assume the relationship between sales of other

drugs and sales of SSRIs would be constant (that is, from equation 3 above, δk=δ for all values of

k>0). However, from Table 1 it is clear that SSRI sales growth was initially quite slow, which

was not typical of the instrument drugs. Countries with more rapid growth in our instrument

drugs will be predicted to have faster growth in SSRIs, but this more flexible setup allows for the

fact that the sales trajectory of SSRIs may be different from that of our other drugs by allowing

the instruments for each year we predict SSRIS to be on the market to have a separate coefficient

in the first-stage regression against actual SSRI sales. In any case as shown below, when we

instead use just a single instrument for predicted drug sales we lose some first-stage explanatory

power relative to our preferred model, but the second-stage point estimate is similar to that from

our preferred model and still statistically significant.

        Figure 4 provides some intuition by plotting actual SSRI sales each year from 1980 to

1999 (given by the shaded bars), our instruments (light bars), and the predicted value of SSRI

sales each year (triangles) for the U.S. and Japan. As noted above if the U.S. had approved

SSRIs at the same rate as for our instrument drugs, the first year SSRIs would have been on the


                                                          23
market in America would have been 1985, instead of the actual year of 1988. The height of the

light bar for the U.S. in 1985 represents the value of PSALES(1)it for the U.S. in 1985 (i.e. the

average sales level of our four instrument drugs the first year they were on the American

market), while the height of the light bar for 1986 is the value of PSALES(2)it for that year. The

top panel of Figure 4 shows that the sales trajectory for the four instrument drugs in America was

steeper in the early years after they were on the market compared to the sales trajectory for

SSRIs, which is reflected in the predicted SSRI sales value that we calculate from our first stage.

        The bottom panel of Figure 4 shows that Japan is generally a bit slower than the U.S. in

approving new drugs [Currie, 1993] but still approved our four instrument drugs on average

within two years of their introduction anywhere in the world market. However Japan was much

slower in approving SSRIs for sale, and in fact did not approve SSRIs for sale until 1999 – fully

15 years after they first came on the world market. 23 Comparing the top and bottom panels of

Figure 4 also highlights the fact that most of the variation with our instruments will come from

differences across countries in the rate of drug sales growth once new drugs are on the market,

rather than differences in the timing of when new drugs are generally are first introduced for sale

in our countries. This also follows logically from the evidence in Figure 3 showing that most

countries in our panel are relatively rapid adopters of new drugs, and so there is relatively little

variation across our sample in the predicted date of SSRI adoption.

        The first column of Table 4 shows our first-stage coefficients, which are positive as

expected – countries with higher rates of growth in new drugs in general have higher rates of

growth in SSRI sales as well. The first-stage F-test on our excluded instruments is equal to 29.2


23
  Why approval of SSRIs was so delayed in Japan is not clear, but the stigma associated with depression is
especially severe in Japan [Desapriya and Nobutada, 2002]. The eventual approval of SSRIs in 1999 may have been
hastened by industry pressure [Kubota, 1997], or by an exceptional 50% increase in suicide rates during the 1990s,
a period when virtually all the developed world saw suicide rates fall [Koo and Cox, 2006].


                                                       24
(p<.01). Given that we have a relatively large number of instruments (15), Hansen, Hausman

and Newey [2005] suggest that the concentration parameter may be a better indicator for first-

stage explanatory power, which in our case is equal to 15×(F-1)=422.9. Hahn and Hausman

[2002] suggest an alternative test for weak instruments that is essentially based on a comparison

of IV estimates run “forward” versus “backward” (i.e. switching the dependent variable and

endogenous explanatory variable, then rescaling the latter appropriately). If the two sets of

estimates are significantly different then 2SLS may be inappropriate, although in our application

we do not reject this null hypothesis at the usual 5 percent cutoff.

         The second column of Table 4 shows that the IV estimates from our second-stage

equation suggest that an increase of 1 SSRI pill per capita reduces suicide rates by around 5

percent, which is statistically significant at the usual cutoff. That our preferred IV estimate is

somewhat larger in absolute value compared to the naïve panel-data estimates shown in Table 3

is consistent with the idea that variation in actual SSRI sales may be driven in part by worrisome

trends within these countries with respect to suicide mortality or negative mental health

conditions generally, although a standard Hausman test [1978] shown in the last row of the table

does not allow us to quite reject the null hypothesis that our OLS and IV estimates are equal

(p=.11). For purposes of interpretation, a one pill per capita increase in SSRI sales represents

about a 12 percent increase over the average 2000 sales level across our sample of countries. An

increase of one pill per capita also represents a 41 percent increase over average sales over our

entire sample period, so that the estimated elasticity of suicide with respect to SSRI sales implied

by the results in Table 4 is equal to around -.12. 24



24
  When we replicate our IV estimates and include indicator variables for each of the five years before we predict
SSRIs to first be sold in each country, we find these indicators are not statistically significant. However this is not a
very powerful test because there is so little variation across our countries in the predicted timing of when SSRIs


                                                           25
C. Sensitivity Analyses

         In general our results seem fairly robust to alternative model specifications and changes

in our analytic sample. For example our findings are not driven by the experiences of just a few

outlier countries. This is easiest to see from a visual inspection of the difference-in-difference

analog to our preferred IV estimates (Figure 5). The horizontal axis shows the change in the

predicted value of SSRI sales from 1980 to 1995 for each country from equation (4) above,

while the vertical axis shows the simple change in log suicide rates over the same period. The

simple bi-variate relationship between change in log suicide rates and change in predicted SSRI

sales is negative, consistent with the results of our preferred IV analysis, and does not visually

appear to be driven by the experiences of outlier countries. More formally in Table 5 we re-

estimate our preferred IV model excluding different countries that Figure 5 suggests might exert

special leverage over the regression line (namely the U.S., Mexico, and Japan) and obtain similar

results. The second column of Table 5 shows that qualitatively similar results hold when we

restrict the analytic sample just to member nations of the OECD in our sample.

         The remainder of Table 5 shows the results are qualitatively similar to a variety of other

changes in our estimation approach, including dropping country-year observations in the late

1980s when SSRI sales were imputed, excluding our controls for population age structure and

ICD-10 coding, or adding in controls for each country’s unemployment rate and/or real GDP per

capita. Our panel is a bit unbalanced because the amount of data available on our instrument

drugs varies a bit across years, 25 but replicating our analysis on a balanced panel using data just



would first be sold if each country’s adoption lag for SSRIs was similar to the average adoption lag for Statins, PPIs,
CCBs and ACEs.
25
   We have sales data through at least 1999 for all countries, and for a few additional years for a sub-set of our
sample. In addition because there is a bit of variation across countries in when they approved our four instrument
drugs for sale the number of years-on-the-market for which we can calculate our instruments will vary slightly
across countries. As a result our standard IV estimates drop some country-year observations in the late 1990s.


                                                          26
through 1997 yields similar results. While our main estimates weight by country population, the

un-weighted point estimate is similar although somewhat less precisely estimated. Re-

calculating the estimates using actual rather than logged suicide rates yields a point estimate of -

.24, which given an average suicide rate of 10.2 in our panel (Table 1) implies that an increase in

SSRI sales of 1 pill per capita reduces suicide by around -2.5%, about half the size of the log

specification and now no longer statistically significant. However given the substantial

differences in suicide levels across countries described above a log-linear model that estimates

SSRI impacts in proportional rather than absolute terms seems preferable.

         Our preferred model uses separate instruments for each of the (k) years drugs are on the

market to allow the shapes of the trajectories of sales growth for our instrument drugs to differ

from the trajectory of SSRI sales (consistent with inspection of Figure 4). When we restrict the

first-stage coefficient of other drug sales on SSRI sales to be the same regardless of how long

drugs have been on the market (i.e., we replace our series of variables for other drug sales in the

kth year they are on the market with a single linear term for other drug sales), the first-stage

explanatory power of our instrument set declines (F=21.2, versus 29.2 in our preferred model).

One result is that as shown in Table 5 the standard error around our second-stage estimate is

almost twice as large as with our preferred model. In any case the point estimate is still

statistically significant, and slightly larger compared to the preferred model (-.085 versus -.05). 26

         Implicit in our IV design is the notion that there is some “usual” way that new drugs are

approved and sold within a country. Consistent with this assumption we find that the adoption

lags across the OECD countries in our sample for our four instrument drugs are all highly

26
   With the simpler linear instrument the second-stage estimates are also sometimes more sensitive to changes in the
sample or model specification. For instance if we drop controls for population age structure from the model with the
linear instrument setup the size of the second-stage point estimate for SSRI sales is hardly affected (-.076 versus -
.085), but the standard error increases substantially (from -.034 to -.056) and so the second-stage estimate is no
longer statistically significant.


                                                         27
correlated (between +.8 and +.9). If we regress actual sales values for our instrument drugs

against one another using our panel of country-level data the R-squared values are usually on the

order of .5 to .6. Another way to see this is by constructing new versions of our instruments that

use separately each of the four instrument drugs (Statins, CCBs, ACEs and PPIs). The first

column of Table 5 shows that in our full sample the estimates using Statins, ACEs, and PPIs

range from -.03 to -.045, close to our preferred IV estimate of -.05. The outlier comes from

using CCBs alone to construct our instruments, which seems to be driven in part by the fact that

CCBs were a smash success in Japan, with CCB sales levels that are much higher than in any

other country (and also much higher than those of our other drugs in Japan for that matter). CCB

sales will thus have more limited power to explain growth in SSRI sales because Japan has

unusually high CCB sales but unusually low SSRI sales (given its late adopter status). When we

restrict our sample to just OECD countries (column 2 of Table 5), the Japan effect in distorting

the first stage with the CCB instruments is even more pronounced.

D. Additional Specification Tests

       Perhaps the main concern with our IV estimates is the possibility that countries where

new drug sales generally increase more rapidly also experience more pronounced improvements

in other health services or health characteristics compared to slow-drug-sales countries. One

way we try to address this concern is to include in our baseline specification both country fixed

effects and country-specific linear trends, but this may be an imperfect fix.

       One way to address this general concern is to examine whether our IV design suggests a

relationship between predicted SSRI sales and other causes of death that should not be causally

affected by SSRI treatment. This sort of falsification test might be more informative still if we

focus on causes of death that should also not be substantially affected by drug treatments of any




                                                 28
type, since our basic IV design comes from comparing countries with relatively high and low

rates of growth in new drugs more generally. One natural candidate is accidents, which are

substantially affected by changes in individual behavior and non-medical technologies

(automotive and transport safety, workplace safety) rather than changes in drug treatments. The

estimated coefficient for the “effect” of SSRI sales on the log of accident mortality rates is equal

to -.0108 (se=.0269), which is not statistically significant and much smaller in absolute value

than our estimate for the effect of SSRIs on suicide.

         Another falsification check for the validity of our IV design is to examine whether

countries that are predicted to have high- versus low rates of growth in SSRI sales experience

different suicide trends before SSRI use became widespread in the 1990s. The top panel of

Figure 6 shows there is almost no relationship between the predicted growth in SSRI sales for

our countries during the period 1990-95 when SSRI use became common with the rate of change

in log suicide rates during the previous period from 1980-90 (the slope of the regression line is

equal to -.005). In contrast there is a pronounced negative relationship between the change in log

suicide rates from 1990-95 with the predicted change in SSRI sales over this period (the slope is

-.04, quite close to our formal IV estimate, and significant at the usual cutoff). 27

         While these two falsification checks provide at least some reassurance that our IV

estimates are not being driven by differences across countries in general improvements to their

health systems, a more subtle concern arises from the possibility of confounding with trends in

sales of other anti-depressant drugs besides SSRIs. Specifically TCA anti-depressant drugs were

on the market in most countries for decades before the introduction of SSRIs. In addition in the

mid to late 1990s another class of anti-depressants was introduced, the serotonin-norepinephrine


27
  If we regress change in log suicide rates 1980-85 against change predicted SSRI sales 1990-95 the coefficient is
equal to -.012, while using as the dependent variable the 1985-90 change in log suicide rates the coefficient is +.009.


                                                          29
reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), which as their name suggests act on two neurotransmitters

(serotonin and norepinephrine) rather than just one as with SSRIs.

        There are several reasons to believe that our IV estimates are not confounding the effects

of SSRI sales with those of either TCAs or SNRIs. First, Figure 7 shows that SSRI sales account

for most of the global increase in anti-depressant sales over the period from 1995 (the first year

for which we could obtain global antidepressant sales figures) to 2004. Ludwig and Marcotte

[2005] show that TCA sales were relatively flat in the U.S., and the same appears to be true

worldwide given little trend in non-SSRI anti-depressant sales in Figure 7 until the late 1990s

when SNRI sales began to increase. Changes in SNRI sales are unlikely to be driving our IV

estimates for the effects of SSRIs in part because they do not represent a major technological

change in the treatment of depression compared to SSRIs. But more importantly Figure 7 shows

that SNRI sales did not begin to substantially increase until the late 1990s, while Table 5 shows

that our IV estimates for the effects of SSRIs on suicide are not much affected by using data only

through 1997. Another way to see this comes from re-estimating our model dropping country-

year observations in which SSRIs accounted for less than 90 percent of total anti-depressant

sales. 28 The point estimate and standard error (-.0514, 0.190) are similar to our baseline model.

E. Extensions

        Much of the concern about SSRI use by government regulators has focused on age

heterogeneity in drug impacts, since the initial UK and US warnings focused on pediatric use of

these drugs. Unfortunately we cannot obtain country-level data on SSRI sales for demographic

subgroups defined by either gender or age. However we can at least measure suicide rates

separately for these subgroups. Regressing country-level SSRI sales against age-specific suicide

28
  On average for the countries in our sample SSRIs accounted for 96.5 percent of antidepressant sales even after
2000. A small number of countries saw the market share of SSRIs fall below 90 percent, to 86 percent by 2001 (the
U.S., the U.K., Norway, Spain, Mexico, Japan, and Australia).


                                                       30
mortality rates will identify the age-specific impacts under the perhaps strong assumption that

the relative trends across countries in SSRI sales are similar for all age groups and by gender.

This assumption may not hold in practice, so our sub-group estimates should be taken as only

suggestive. Nevertheless given the limitations of RCTs in their ability to identify SSRI impacts

on suicide mortality we think even these exploratory results might be of some policy value.

       With these important caveats in mind, Table 6 shows that the IV point estimates are

larger in proportional terms for females than males, although since the baseline suicide mortality

rate in our data is about three times as high for males as for females (Table 1) the estimated

association between SSRIs and suicide in absolute terms (deaths per 100,000) will be somewhat

larger for males than females. When we disaggregate the suicide data by age, we find the

estimated relationship between SSRI sales and suicide mortality is largest in both proportional

and absolute terms for people ages 15-24, consistent with evidence that the largest increase in

antidepressant prescriptions at least in the U.S. has been among adolescents and young people

[Zito et al., 2003; American Academy of Adolescent and Child Psychiatry, 2001].

                                      VI. CONCLUSIONS

       Understanding the effects of SSRI antidepressants on suicide is important for government

regulators as well as for doctors, patients, and the family and friends of those suffering from

severe depression. It is unlikely that randomized clinical trials (RCTs) will ever be able to

identify the effects of SSRIs on suicide mortality, both because of small samples and because

these samples exclude those at highest risk for suicide. Previous clinical trials instead focus on

measures of non-lethal “suicidal behavior,” but the association between these indicators and

actual suicide mortality remains unclear. Moreover the conditions under which subjects in RCTs




                                                31
use SSRI drugs (for example level of physician monitoring) may differ from the usual

community standard of care.

       In light of these practical and ethical constraints, we must turn to population-based

observational studies to adequately identify the effects of SSRIs on suicide completion rates. We

believe our study represents a substantial improvement over previous research by using

population-level data together with a plausibly exogenous source of identifying variation in SSRI

use. Specifically we use just the variation in SSRI sales across countries over time that can be

explained by how quickly these countries adopt new drugs in general, and the rate at which sales

increase for these new drugs once they are on the market.

       Our results are consistent with the hypothesis that the net effect of the introduction and

subsequent sales of SSRIs is to reduce death by suicide. We find that increase in SSRI sales of 1

pill per capita per year (about a 12% increase over 2000 sales levels) is associated with a decline

in suicide mortality of around 5%. This IV estimate is about twice as large in absolute value as

OLS estimates, consistent with our general concern that both the timing of SSRI approval and

the rate at which SSRI sales increase over time may be endogenous to what is happening with

mental health and suicide within countries. We also demonstrate that that we estimate no

relationship between SSRI sales and accident deaths, which should not be affected by SSRI use,

and that there is little relationship between trends across countries in log suicide rates over the

course of the 1980s and predicted SSRI sales growth in the 1990s.

       Note that the impact we estimate here is the average effect from expanding SSRI sales in

our sample of countries during the years after these drugs were first introduced to the public. If

SSRI treatment went first to those who would benefit the most, or if markets are now becoming

saturated, additional expansions of SSRI sales may have somewhat smaller impacts on suicide




                                                 32
mortality than our IV estimates would suggest. However it is possible the difference between the

average effect implied by our estimates and the effects arising from further expansions in SSRI

use might be modest, given the relatively low rates of current mental health treatment even in

very wealthy countries like the U.S.

         Our estimates suggest that on balance SSRIs may be a very cost-effective means for

saving lives, which is important in part because data from the National Comorbidity Survey from

2001-3 suggest that only around 40 percent of people with severe mental health disorders were

receiving any treatment [Kessler, Demler et al., 2005]. Commonly used SSRIs can currently be

obtained in the United States for around $0.10 per pill. Our estimates thus imply that each

additional $20,000 spent on SSRIs will avert one suicide completion, far below the cost per life

saved from most other public health, regulatory, or other forms of government intervention. But

using this estimate in a more formal benefit-cost analysis raises difficult conceptual and

normative questions about the appropriate way to value the life of someone who subjectively

prefers death (at least at the time of the intervention). If SSRIs reduce the risk of suicide by

reducing access to a method of self harm, then the suicidal person may or may not experience a

switch to SSRIs as a net benefit, depending on the transience or permanence of their state of

pain. On the other hand if SSRIs reduce the risk of suicide by improving the subjective utility of

life, then persons at risk for suicide and their loved ones may have a considerable willingness to

pay for such an intervention. 29 Of course SSRIs also generate other benefits beyond their net

effects on mortality that should be counted in this calculus, including improvements in mood,

health status, functioning, and productivity.



29
   Another complication arises from the possibility that those effectively treated this year may attempt suicide at
some point in the future. While the data here are not as strong as we would like there is some suggestion in the
literature that many persons treated for an episode of major depression do not have recurring episodes.


                                                          33
       One important limitation of our study is that we are estimating the average effect of

expansions in SSRI use on overall suicide mortality rates. Previous medical studies have raised

special concerns about drug impacts on certain patient sub-groups. We provide suggestive

evidence that the effects of SSRI use on suicide mortality might have, if anything, even more

beneficial impacts for younger people (15-24), the age group that has been a particular focus of

recent government warnings in the U.S. and U.K. However this finding should be qualified by

the observation that we can measure suicide mortality separately for specific age groups but we

cannot disaggregate by age country-level sales of SSRIs. Moreover our data are not at all

informative about sub-group effects on patients by pre-existing mental health status, which is

important in light of the view by some researchers that any effect of SSRIs to worsen mood

might be particularly pronounced among some patients – for example, those with undiagnosed

bipolar disorder. Understanding more about heterogeneity in SSRI effects on different types of

patients remains arguably the top priority for future research in this area.




                                                 34
                                        REFERENCES

Akerlof, George A., William T. Dickens, and George L. Perry. 2000. “Near-rational wage and
        price setting and the long-run Phillips curve.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
        1: 1-60.
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 2001. Practice parameter for the
        assessment and treatment of children and adolescents with suicidal behavior, Journal of
        the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 40(suppl7):24S-51S.
Anderson, RN, AM Minino, DL Hoyert, HM Rosenberg. 2001. Comparability of Cause of
        Death Between ICD-9 and ICD-10: Preliminary Estimates. National Vital Statistics
        Reports, 49(2), May 18, 2001. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human
        Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Baldessarini, Ross J. 2005. Drug therapy of depression and anxiety disorders. In
        Goodman and Gilman’s The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, 111th Ed.. Edited
        by LL Brunton, JSLazo, and KL Parker. NY: McGraw-Hill. Pp. 429-459.
Baldessarini, Ross J., Maurizio Pompili, and Leonardo Tondo. 2006a. Suicidal Risk in
        Antidepressant Drug Trials. Archives of General Psychiatry. 63: 246-8.
Baldessarini Ross J, Maurizio Pompili, and Leonardo Tondo .2006b. Suicide in bipolar disorder:
        Risks and Management. CNS Spectr. 11(6): 465-71.
Barbui C, Campomori A, D’Avanzo B, Negri E, Garattini S. 1999. Antidepressant drug use in
        Italy since the introduction of SSRIs: national trends, regional differences and impact on
        suicide rates. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol. 34: 152-156.
Beasley CM, Dornseif BE, Bosomworth JC, Sayler ME, Rampey AH, Heiligenstein JH,
        Thompson VL, Murphy DJ, Masica DN. 1991. Fluoxetine and suicide: a meta-analysis of
        controlled trials of treatment for depression. British Medical Journal. 303: 685-692.
Berndt, Ernst R., Adrian H.B. Gottschalk, Tomas J. Philipson, and Matthew W. Strobeck. 2005.
        Industry Funding of the FDA: Effects of PDUFA on Approval Times and Withdrawal
        Rates. Nature Reviews, Drug Discovery. 4: 545-554.
Bertand, M, E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan. 2004. How Much Should We Trust Differences-in-
        Differences Estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics. 119(1): 249-275.
Carey, Benedict. 2006. “Panel to debate antidepressant warning. New York Times. December 13.
        p. A26.
Carpenter, Daniel P. 2002. “Groups, the Media, Agency Waiting Costs, and FDA Drug
        Approval.” American Journal of Political Science. 46(3): 490-505.
Cook, Philip J. and Jens Ludwig. 1996. Guns in America: Results of a Comprehensive National
        Survey on Firearm Ownership and Use. Washington, DC: Police Foundation.
Cook, Philip J. and Jens Ludwig, 2000. Gun Violence: The Real Costs. NY: Oxford University
        Press.
Currie, J. and M. Stabile, 2004. Child Mental Health and Human Capital Accumulation: The
        Case of ADHD. NBER Working Paper 10435.
Currie, J. and M. Neidell. 2005. Air pollution and infant health: what can we learn from
        California’s recent experience? Quarterly Journal of Economics. 120(3), pp. 1003-1030.
Currie, W.J. 1993. Drug development and registration in Japan: Threshold of transition. Journal
        of Clinical Pharmacology. 33(2), pp. 100-108.




                                               35
Cutler, David, Edward L. Glaeser, and Karen Norberg. 2001. Explaining the rise in youth
        suicide, in J. Gruber, ed., Risky Behavior Among Youths: An Economic Analysis,
        Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 219-269.
Dahlberg, M., and K. Lundin. 2005. Antidepressants and the suicide rate: Is there really a
        connection? Upsulla University (Sweden) Economics Department, Working Paper
        2005:4.
Desapriya, E.B.R., and I. Nobutada. 2002. Stigma of mental illness in Japan. The Lancet.
        359(9320): 1866.
Deyo, Richard A. 2004. Gaps, Tensions, and Conflicts in the FDA Approval Process:
        Implications for Clinical Practice. JABFP. 17(2): 142-149.
Dranove, David and David Meltzer, 1994. Do Important Drugs Reach the Market Sooner?
        RAND Journal of Economics. 25(3): 402-423.
Duggan, Mark. 2003. Guns and suicide. In Evaluating Gun Policy, Ed. Jens Ludwig and Philip J.
        Cook. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press. pp. 41-73.
Fergusson, D., S Doucette, KC Glass, S Shapiro, D Healy, P Hebert, and B Hutton, 2005.
        Association between suicide attempts and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors:
        systematic review of randomized controlled trials. British Medical Journal. 330: 396-
        402.
Flechtner KM, Wolf T, and Priebe S. 1995. The feasibility of suicide rates as an evaluation
        criterion in community psychiatry: Methodological problems. J. Psychiatr. Res. 29(6):
        481-6.
Food and Drug Administration, 2003. FDA Statement Regarding the Anti-Depressant Paxil for
        Pediatric Population. FDA Talk Paper T03-43, June 19, 2003.
        www.fda.gov/bbs/topics/ANSWERS/2003/ANS01230.html
Food and Drug Administration, 2004. FDA Public Health Advisory: Worsening Depression and
        Suicidality in Patients Being Treated with Antidepressant.
        www.fda.gov/cder/drug/antidepressants/AntidepressanstPHA.htm
Food and Drug Administration, 2005. FDA Public Health Advisory: Suicidality in Adults Being
        Treated with Antidepressant Medications.
        http://www.fda.gov/cder/drug/advisory/SSRI200507.htm
Food and Drug Administration, 2006. Memorandum for December 13 Meeting of
        Psychopharmacologic Drugs Advisory Committee.
        http://www.fda.gov/ohrms/dockets/ac/06/briefing/2006-4272b1-01-FDA.pdf
Frank, Richard G. and Thomas G. McGuire, 2000. Economics and Mental Health. Handbook of
        Health Economics. Joseph P. Newhouse and A. Cuyler, Eds. Amsterdam: North
        Holland.
Gibbons, RD, K Hur, DK Bhaumik, and JJ Mann. 2005. The relationship between antidepressant
        medication use and rate of suicide. Archives of General Psychiatry. 62 (Feb): 165-172.
Gibbons, RD, K Hur, DK Bhaumik, JJ Mann. 2006. The relationship between antidepressant
        prescription rates and rate of early adolescent suicide. American Journal of Psychiatry.
        163(11): 1-7.
Gleitman, Henry. 1996. Basic Psychology. Norton.
Goldsmith SK, Pellmar TC, Kleinman AM, Bunney WE. 2002. Reducing Suicide: A National
        Imperative. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Goode, E. 2003. British Warning on Antidepressant Use for Youth. The New York Times.
        December 11, 2003. p. A1.



                                              36
Green B. 2003. Focus on paroxetine. Curr Med Res Opin. 19(1): 13-21.
Guze BH. 1996. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors: Assessment for formulary inclusion.
        Pharmacoeconomics. 9: 430-442.
Hahn, Jinyong and Jerry Hausman. 2002. A new specification test for the validity of instrumental
        variables. Econometrica. 70(1): 163-189.
Hall, WD, Mant, A. Mitchell, PB, Rendle V.A., Hickie, IB, and McManus, P, 2003. Association
        Between Antidepressant Prescribing and Suicide in Australia, 1991-2000: Trend
        Analysis. British Medical Journal. 326: 1008-1013.
Hamermesh, D.S., and N.M. Soss. 1974. An Economic Theory of Suicide, Journal of Political
        Economy, pp. 83-98.
Hammad, Tarek A., Thomas Laughren, and Judith Racoosin, 2006. Suicidality in Pediatric
        Patients Treated with Antidepressant Drugs. Archives of General Psychiatry. 63: 332-9.
Hansen, Christian B. (2006) Generalized least squares inference in panel and multilevel models
        with serial correlation and fixed effects. Working Paper, University of Chicago Graduate
        School of Business.
Hansen, Christian B., Jerry Hausman, and Whitney Newey, 2005. Estimation with Many
        Instrumental Variables. Working Paper, University of Chicago Graduate School of
        Business.
Hansen V, Jacobsen BK, and Arnesen E. 2001. Cause-specific mortality in psychiatric patients
        after deinstitutionalization. British Journal of Psychiatry. 179: 438-43.
Hausman, J. 1978. Specification tests in econometrics. Econometrica. 46: 1251-71.
IMS Health, National Prescription AuditTM Plus, 1/2006 http://www.imshealth.com
Isacsson, G. 2000. Suicide prevention – a medical breakthrough? Acta Psychiatr Scand. 102:
        113-117.
Joyce PR, Mulder RT, Luty SE, McKenzie JM, Rae AM, 2003. A differential response to
        nortriptylkine and fluoxetine in melancholic depression: The importance of age and
        gender. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica. 108(1): 20-3.
Jureidini, JN, CJ Doecke, PR Mansfield, MM Haby, DB Menkes, and AL Tonkin, 2004.
        Efficacy and safety of antidepressants for children and adolescents. British Medical
        Journal, 328: 879-83.
Jurrlink, David N., Muhammad M. Mamdani, Alexander Kopp, Donald A. Redelmeier. 2006.
        The risk of suicide with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors in the elderly. American
        Journal of Psychiatry. 163(5): 813-821.
Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky. 1979. “Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under
        risk.” Econometrica. 47(2): 263-92.
Kaitin, KI, NR Phelan, D Raiford, and B Morris, 1991. Therapeutic Ratings and End-of-Phase II
        Conferences: Initiatives to Accelerate the Availability of Important New Drugs. Journal
        of Clinical Pharmacology. 31: 17-24.
Kessler, Ronald C., Patricia Berglund, Olga Demler, Robert Jin, Kathleen R. Merikangas, and
        Ellen E. Walters, 2005. Lifetime Prevalence and Age-of-Onset Distributions of DSM-IV
        Disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General
        Psychiatry. 62: 593-604.
Kessler, Ronald C., Olga Demler, Richard G. Frank, Mark Olfson, Harold Alan Pincus, Ellen E.
        Walters, Philip Wang, Kenneth B. Wells and Alan M. Zaslavsky, 2005. Prevalence and
        Treatment of Mental Disorders, 1990 to 2003. New England Journal of Medicine.
        352(24): 2515-23.



                                               37
Khan A, Khan SR, Leventhal RM, Brown WA. 2001. Symptom reduction and suicide risk in
        patients treated with placebo in antidepressant clinical trials: A replication analysis of the
        Food and Drug Administration database. International Journal of
        Neuropsychopharmocology. 4(2): 113-118.
Khan A, Warner HA, Brown WA. 2000. Symptom reduction and suicide risk in patients treated
        with placebo in antidepressant clinical trials: An analysis of the Food and Drug
        Administration database. Archives of General Psychiatry. 57(4): 311-317.
Klein DF 2000. Flawed meta-analysis comparing psychotherapy with pharmacotherapy.
        American Journal of Psychiatry. 157(8): 1204-11.
Koo, J, and W.M. Cox. 2006. An economic interpretation of suicide cycles in Japan. Federal
        Reserve Bank of Dallas, forthcoming in Contemporary Economic Policy.
Kreitman, N. 1976. The coal gas story. British Journal of Preventative Social Medicine. 30: 86-
        93.
Kubota, C. 1997. US presses Japan to “cure” ailing health care system. Journal of Commerce.
        Sept.22. p. 4A.
Kunreuther, Howard. 1978. Disaster insurance protection: Public policy lessons. Wiley.
Lawrenson RA, Tyrer F, Newson RB, Farmer RD. 2000. The treatment of depression in UK
        general practice: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and tricylic antidepressants
        compared. Journal of Affective Disorders. 59(2): 149-157.
Ludwig, J, Cook PJ. 2000. Homicide and Suicide Rates Associated with Implementation of the
        Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act. JAMA. 284(5): 585-591.
Ludwig, J. and D. Marcotte. 2005. Anti-depressants, Suicide and Drug Regulation. Journal of
        Policy Analysis and Management. 24: 249-72.
Mallick R, Chen J, Entsuah AR, Schatzberg AF. 2003. Depression-free days as a summary
        measure of the temporal pattern of response and remission in the treatment of major
        depression: a comparison of venlafaxine, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and
        placebo. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry. 64(3): 321-30.
March J, Silva S, Petrycki S, Curry J; Wells K, Fairbank J, Burns B, Domino M, McNulty S;
        Vitiello B, and Severe J. 2004. Fluoxetine, cognitive-behavioral therapy, and their
        combination for adolescents with depression: Treatment for Adolescents With
        Depression Study (TADS) randomized controlled trial. JAMA, 292: 807-20.
Marcotte, DE. 2003. The economics of suicide, revisited, Southern Economic Journal. 69(3):
        628-643.
Marcotte, DE, and V. Wilcox-Gök. 2001. The employment and earnings costs of mental illness:
        recent developments in the United States. Social Science and Medicine 53(1): 21-27.
Ohberg A, Vuori E, Klaukka T, Lonnqvsit J. 1998. Antidepressants and suicide mortality.
        Journal of Affective Disorders. 50: 225-233.
Pearson, JL., B. Stanley, C. King, and C. Fisher. 2001. Issues to consider in intervention
        research with persons at high risk for suicidality, National Institute for Mental Health.
        http://www.nimh.nih.gov/SuicideResearch/highrisksuicide.cfm (Accessed Dec 15,
        2005).
Peltzman, Sam. 1975. “The effects of automobile safety regulation.” Journal of Political
        Economy. 83(4): 677-726.
Rihmer, Z, Belso N, Kalmar S. 2001. Antidepressants and suicide prevention in Hungary. Acta
        Psychiatr Scand. 103: 238-239.




                                                 38
Robinson, WS. 1950. Ecological correlations and the behavior of individuals. American
       Sociological Review. 15(3): 351-357.
Rosenthal, Robert W. 1993. Suicide attempts and signaling games. Mathematical Social
       Sciences. 26(1): 25-33.
Ryan, ND. 2003. Medication treatment for depression in children and adolescents. CNS Spectr.
       8(4): 283-7.
Salzer MS, Kaplan K, Atay J. 2006. State psychiatric hospital census after the 1999 Olmstead
       decision: Evidence of decelerating deinstitutionalization. Psychiatric Services. 57(10):
       1501-4.
Skinner J. and Staiger, D. 2005. Technology Adoption from Hybrid Corn to Beta Blockers.
       NBER working paper #11251. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA
Smith, G.S., J.A. Langlois, and I.R.H. Rockett. 1995. International comparisons of injury
       mortality. Current Problems in Producing Comparable International Mortality and
       Morbidity Statistics. (Altanta, GA: U.S. CDC).
Thorpe K.E., C.S. Florence, and P. Joski (2004). “Which Medical Conditions Account
       For The Rise In Health Care Spending?” Health Affairs. DOI 10.1377/hlthaff.W4.437
Trindade E., Menon D., Topfer L., and Coloma C. 1998. Adverse effects associated with
       selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and tricyclic antidepressants: a meta-analysis.
       CMAJ. 159:1245-52
United Kingdom Department of Health. 2003. “Seroxat Must Not Be Used for the Treatment of
       Children with Depression.” Press Release 2003/0223, June 20th.
       www.info.doh.gov.uk/doh/intpress.nsf/page/2003-0223?OpenDocument accessed August
       13, 2003.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: National health expenditures aggregate
       amounts and average annual percent change, by type of expenditure: selected calendar
       years 1960-2002. Accessed March 20, 2006. Web Page. Available at:
       http://www.cms.hhs.gov/NationalHealthExpendData/
Vaswani M, Linda FK, Ramesh S, 2003. Role of selective reuptake inhibitors in psychiatric
       disorders: a comprehensive review. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 27(1):
       85-102.
Viscusi, W. Kip (1984) “The lulling effect: The impact of child-resistant packaging on aspirin
       and analgesic ingestions.” American Economic Review. 74(2): 324-327.
Viscusi, W. Kip (1985) “Consumer behavior and the safety effects of product safety regulation.”
       Journal of Law and Economics. 28(3): 527-553.
Webb, Charles P.M., Evelyn J. Bromet, Semyon Gluzman, Nathan L. Tintle, Joseph E. Schwartz,
       Stanislav Kostyuchenko, and Johan M. Havenaar, 2005. “Epidemiology of heavy alcohol
       use in Ukraine: Findings from the World Mental Health Survey.” Alcohol and
       Alcoholism. 40(4): 327-335.
Wolfers, Justin. 2006. Did unilateral divorce laws raise divorce rates? A reconciliation and new
       results. American Economic Review. 96(5): 1802-1820.
World Bank. 2006. World Development Indicators, 2006. Available online:
       http://devdata.worldbank.org/wdi2006/contents/cover.htm
Zimmerman M, Mattia JI, and Posternak MA, 2002. Are subjects in pharmacological treatment
       trials of depression representative of patient in routine clinical practice? Am J Psychiatry
       159(3): 469-4.




                                                39
Zito J. Safer D, dosReis S, et al. 2003. Psychotropic practice patterns for youth; a 10-year
        perspective. Archives Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine.157:17-25.




                                                40
Figure 1

                                      Suicide Rates and SSRI Sales per Capita
                                               OECD Countries: 1980-2000
                2.5




                                                                                             8
  2.25 2.3 2.35 2.4 2.45
    Suicide Rate Per 100,000




                                                                                             SSRI Sales per Capita
                                                                                             02       4        6
                               1980         1985             1990          1995       2000
                                                             Year

                                                   Suicide Rate          SSRI Sales




                                                                    41
                                   Figure 2: Changes in log suicide rates, 1980-95, vs. changes in SSRI sales
                 .8                     Mexico




                                                                                         Spain
                              .6




                                                                      Ire
ln suicide 95 - ln suicide 80




                                        Ecuador
                   .4




                                                                            New_Zeal
                                                          Chile
                                        Brazil
        .2




                                                                                    Lux

                                                      Italy
                                           Israel Greece                        Austrl
                                                                               Port
                                                                                                       France
                                       Nor                                                                           US
                 0




                                       Japan
                                       Neth                                                               Belg
                                                                                                 Can
                                                 Argent
                                                                            Aust
                                                                                    UK
                 -.2




                                   0                               2                      4                      6
                                                                  SSRI doses / capita 1995 - 1980




                                                                                          42
                                          Figure 3: Comparison of Actual Years SSRIs on Market as of 1995
                                         Vs. Years on Market as Predicted by Adoption Lags for Other Drugs
                  10
                                         Lux                                                     Belg     Aust
                                                                                                          Neth

                                                                                                 France           Port
ACTUAL yrs SSRIs on mkt as of 1995




                                                                                                          UK      Spain
                              8




                                                                                                 New_Zeal
                                                                                                       Italy      US

                                                                                                          Brazil Fin
                                                                                                          Argent
                                                                                                          Chile
                                                                                                          Mexico
                                                                                                          Israel
                                                                                                          Ire    Can
                    6




                                                                                                          ColumbiaAustrl
                                                                                                          Venez
                                                                                                          Greece

                                                                                       Ecuador
  2        4




                                               Nor                                                        Japan
                  0




                                     0                             5                                    10
                                                     PREDICTED yrs SSRIs on mkt as of 1995




                                                                         43
     Figure 4: Actual SSRI sales vs. Instruments and Predicted Sales, Selected Countries

            United States

                20
                18
                16
                14
                12                                                                                 Instruments
                10                                                                                 SSRI_sales
                 8                                                                                 Predicted_sales
                 6
                 4
                 2
                 0
                     80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99

            Japan

                20
                18
                16
                14
                12                                                                             Instruments
                10                                                                             SSRI_sales
                 8                                                                             Predicted_sales
                 6
                 4
                 2
                 0
                     80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99




NOTES: Y-axis presents drug sales (doses per capita), while x-axis shows year. White bars in each graph show
instruments from preferred IV model, gray bars show actual SSRI sales, and dark lines show predicted SSRI sales
values from a simplified version of our first-stage equation that regresses actual SSRI sales against the instruments
but without the country and year fixed effects, country-specific linear trends and other covariates that are included in
the actual 2SLS estimation that is used in calculating our preferred IV estimates below. We show predicted values
from this simplified first stage equation simply to help illustrate the intuition behind our research design.




                                                          44
               Figure 5: Predicted Change SSRI Sales from Preferred IV Model vs.
                               Change Log Suicide Rates, 1980-95

                                               Mexico

                 .8

                                                                                                Spain
                              .6


                                                                 Ire
ln suicide 95 - ln suicide 80




                                               Ecuador
                   .4




                                                                            New_Zeal
                                                                 Chile
                                                 Brazil
        .2




                                                                                          Lux

                                                Israel        Italy
                                                          Greece         Austrl          Port
                                                                                                              France
                                                                                  Nor                                  US
                 0




                                   Japan
                                                                                                        Can
                                                   Argent
                                                                                  Aust
                                                                                                 UK
                 -.2




                                           0               2                  4                                   6
                                                   PREDICTED chg SSRI sales 1995 - 1980




                                                                           45
                             Figure 6:
Falsification Check, Changes in Suicides Pre and Post SSRI Changes

 Panel A: Change suicides 1980-90 vs predicted change SSRIs 1990-95



                     .6
                                                                                                                Spain

                                                        Mexico
                                                       Ecuador
                                .4
     ln suicide 90 - ln suicide 80



                                                                               Ire

                                                                                      Lux

                                                                                              Nor
                                                                                            New_Zeal
                  .2




                                                                                                    Port            Austrl
                                                                          Chile

                                                             Israel
                                                                          Greece
                                                                          Italy                            France                        US
                                                             Brazil
      0




                                               Japan                      Argent
                                                                            Aust                UK
                                                                                                                             Can
                     -.2




                                                  0               1          2            3           4                                  5
                                                                 PREDICTED chg SSRI sales 1995 - 1990



 Panel B: Change suicides 1990-95 vs predicted change SSRIs 1990-95

                                                         Mexico
                             .3




                                                                 Brazil
                                          .2
              ln suicide 95 - ln suicide 90




                                                            Columbia
                                                                                Ire
                                                                           Chile
                                 .1




                                                       Ecuador                              New_Zeal

                                               Japan                                                           Spain
                                                                          Italy                                              Can
                                                                          Greece
                                                                                                           France
                       0




                                                             Israel

                                                                          Argent                                                         US
                                                                            Aust
                                                                                                 Port               Austrl
            -.1




                                                                                                UK
                                                                                                                                   Fin
                                                                                      Lux
                             -.2




                                                                                              Nor

                                                   0               1          2            3           4                                 5
                                                                  PREDICTED chg SSRI sales 1995 - 1990




                                                                                        46
                                                                         Figure 7:
                                               Global Anti-Depressant Sales: 1995-2004


                      12000



                      10000



                      8000
Doses (in millions)




                                                                                                       SSRIs
                      6000
                                                                                                       Others


                      4000



                      2000



                         0
                              1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001    2002     2003   2004
                                                             Year




                                                                               47
                Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for Full Sample of Country-Level Panel Dataset
Variable                             Mean                                  Standard Deviation
Full sample (1980-2000)
SSRI doses per capita                2.1290                                4.0924

Suicide rates per 100,000
Total                                10.1419                               5.9929
Male                                 15.4149                               8.5891
Female                                5.1935                               5.1935
Age 15-24                             8.2268                               4.0046
Age 25-34                            11.1920                               5.5708
Age 35-44                            12.2534                               6.8066
Age 45-54                            14.1380                               8.7442
Age 55-64                            14.5407                               8.9454
Age 65 and over                      18.5482                               11.9183

% population in age group:
15-24                                16.4555                               2.7964
25-34                                15.4560                               1.3395
35-44                                13.2939                               1.9874
45-54                                10.5985                               2.4970
55-64                                 8.4401                               2.5647
65 and over                          10.5681                               4.3550

Real GDP per capitaa                 16,747                                8,118
Unemployment rate                    7.1428                                3.8937

Suicide data coded using ICD10        .1993                                   .3999
1980
Suicides per 100,000                  9.3718                                  5.9366
SSRI doses capita                     0                                       0
1985
Suicides per 100,000                  10.3165                                 6.5327
SSRI doses per capita                 .0015                                   .0126
1990
Suicides per 100,000                  9.7190                                  5.7663
SSRI doses per capita                 .3675                                   .4292
1995
Suicides per 100,000                  9.9122                                  5.5527
SSRI doses per capita                 2.5327                                  2.6395
2000
Suicides per 100,000                  9.617                                   6.4063
SSRI doses per capita                 5.6454                                  5.4700
NOTES: Authors’ calculations from WHO mortality and SSRI sales data for sample countries (see text). Calculations are weighted
by country population. a = GDP per capita adjusted for changes over time across countries in currency exchange rates.




                                                             48
                 Table 2: Information on SSRIs and other Top Selling Pharmaceutical Classes
Drug class                                Drug purpose           Year first sold   Country first sold
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors   Anti-depressant        1984              Germany
Statins                                   Cholesterol            1987              US
                                          regulation
Proton pump inhibitors                    Ulcers                 1988              Netherlands
Calcium channel blockers                  Hypertension           1982              US, Spain, Italy,
                                                                                   Finland, Australia,
                                                                                   Canada and Ireland
ACE inhibitors                            Hypertension           1982              Canada, Portugal,
                                                                                   Australia and France




                                                            49
                                                                Table 3
                                  OLS Regression Estimates with Country-Level Panel Data 1980 to 2000
                                                 Outcome measure =        Outcome measure =         Outcome measure =        Outcome measure =
                                                 log(suicides/100,000)    log(suicides/100,000)     log(suicides/100,000)    log(suicides/100,000)
            SSRI doses sold per capita              -.0350 (.0074)**         -.0258 (.0011)**          -.0198 (.0102)*          -.0204 (.0094)**
            Population age distribution
            % pop 15-24                                                   .0305 (.0254)             .0007 (.0221)            .0006 (.0203)
            % pop 25-34                                                   .0297 (.0187)             .0275 (.0224)            .0218 (.0201)
            % pop 35-44                                                   .0287 (.0143)**           .0087 (.0212)            -.0061 (.0184)
            % pop 45-54                                                   .0025 (.0291)             -.0298 (.0251)           -.0159 (.0218)
            % pop 55-64                                                   .0072 (.0231)             .0535 (.0242)**           .0556 (.0217)**
            % pop 65 and over                                             .0059 (.0214)             .0130 (.0259)            .0268 (.0254)
            ICD-10 system used to classify                                -.0079 (.0422)            -.0417 (.0252)           -.0279 (.0238)
            mortality codes
            Indicators for Years Before SSRIs
            on the market:
            1 year before                                                                                                    -.0309 (.0194)
            2 years before                                                                                                   -.0625 (.0416)
            3 years before                                                                                                   -.0846 (.0443)*
            4 years before                                                                                                   -.0994 (.0410)**
            5 years before                                                                                                   -.0867 (.0353)**
            Model specification
            Year indicators?                     Yes                      Yes                       Yes                      Yes
            Country indicators?                  Yes                      Yes                       Yes                      Yes
            Country-specific linear trends?      No                       No                        Yes                      Yes
                                                 541                      531                       531                      531
            N
            R-squared                            .977                     .981                      .991                     .992
NOTES: Table reports least squares regression coefficients. Standard errors in parentheses. Regression models also include a constant intercept term and in the
last three columns binary indicators for whether GDP, divorce and unemployment rate variables are missing and set equal to zero. Country populations used as
weights. For more details on estimation approach see text. * = p<.10 ** = p<.05




                                                                                50
                                                    Table 4
                            First and Second Stage Instrumental Variables Estimates

                                                           Outcome measure =         Outcome measure =
                                                           SSRI sales per capita     log (suicides/100,000)
                                                                                     -.0542 (.0190)**
                     SSRI doses sold per capita
                     Instruments: Predicted Drug Sales
                     Year 1                                .4815 (.15627)**
                     Year 2                                .3613 (.1283)**
                     Year 3                                .3566 (.1769)**
                     Year 4                                .3034 (.1534)*
                     Year 5                                .2866 (.1293)**
                     Year 6                                .2757 (.1278)**
                     Year 7                                .2523 (.1285)*
                     Year 8                                .2845 (.1246)**
                     Year 9                                .2765 (.1224)**
                     Year 10                               .3461 (.1094)**
                     Year 11                               .3942 (.1112)**
                     Year 12                               .4013 (.1062)**
                     Year 13                               .3799 (.0985)**
                     Year 14                               .3985 (.1131)**
                     Year 15                               .5312 (.1181)**
                     % Pop 15-24                            .1867 (.1233)            -.0010 (.0196)
                     % Pop 25-34                           -.5009 (.1693)**          -.0111 (.0280)
                     % Pop 35-44                           -.2821 (.2909)             .0199(.0347)
                     % Pop 45-54                            .4729 (.2487)*            .0264 (.0282)
                     % Pop 55-64                           -.1292 (.2786)             .0524 (.0361)
                     % Pop 65 +                            -.2096 (.3346)            -.0307 (.0391)
                     ICD-10 system to code mortality       -1.5687 (.7415)**         .0412 (.0549)
                     causes
                     Model specification
                     Year indicators?                      Yes                       Yes
                     Country indicators?                   Yes                       Yes
                     Country-specific linear trends?       Yes                       Yes
                     F test on joint significance of       29.19 (p<.0001)
                     instruments in first stage
                                                           421                       421
                     N
                     R-squared                             .988                      .996
                     Hausman test of endogeneity of        1.64 (p =0.11)
                     SSRI sales (t-statistic)

NOTES: Table reports least squares regression coefficients. Standard errors in parentheses. Regression models also include a
constant intercept term and binary indicators for whether GDP, divorce and unemployment rate variables are missing and set equal
to zero. Country populations used as weights. For more details on estimation approach see text. * = p<.10 ** = p<.05




                                                               51
                                        Table 5: Sensitivity Analyses
Model Specification                        Full sample                                 OECD countries only
Baseline specification                     -.0542 (.0190)**                            -.0499 (.0178)**
Drop US                                    -.0975 (.0383)**                            -.0665 (.0252)**
Drop Mexico                                -.0745 (.0238)**                            -.0770 (.0227)**
Drop US and Mexico                         -.1475 (.0473)**                            -.0917 (.0580)
Drop Japan and Mexico                      -.0601 (.0190)**                            .0191 (.0184)
Drop obs with imputed sales                -.0503 (.0168)**                            -.0496 (.0176)**
No time-varying covariates                 -.0408 (.0161)**                            -.0319 (.0112)**
Control for unemployment rate              -.0509 (.0191)**                            -.0521 (.0182)**
                                 a
Control for real per capita GDP            -.0513 (.0173)**                            -.0318 (.0171)**
Control for unemployment and real per      -.0515 (.0167)**                            -.0353 (.0177)**
capita GDPa
Restrict sample to ≤ 1997                  -.0464 (.0173)**                            -.0353 (.0210)*
Unweighted                                 -.0442 (.0269)                              -.0307 (.0273)
Not logged                                 -.2404 (.2070)                              -.2973 (.3001)
Use single linear version of drug sales    -.0854 (0.0341)**                           -.0672 (.0293)**
instrument (using 4-drug bundle)
Just use Statin sales data to construct    -.0454 (.0142)**                            -.0303 (.0197)
instrument
Just use CCB sales data to construct       .0100 (.0264)                               .0494 (.0273)*
instrument
Just use ACE sales data to construct       -.0300 (.0212)                              -.0078 (.0186)
instrument
Just use PPI sales data to construct       -.0337 (.0184)**                            -.0077 (.0268)
instrument

NOTES: a = Figures for real per capita GDP adjusted for exchange rate variation over time. Each cell includes the coefficient for
predicted SSRI sales values by applying the basic IV estimation approach as in Table 4 (from equations 4 and 5 in the text) to the
analytic sample described at the top of the column, with deviations from the basic model setup described at left for each row.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses, clustered at the country level to account for serial correlation. * = p<.1, ** = p<.05




                                                                52
                              Table 6: IV Results for the Estimated Effect of SSRI Sales
                                  on Suicide Mortality for Population Sub-Groups
Dependent variable                    Full sample                    OECD countries only
Log suicide, females                  -.0775 (.0174)**               -.0937 (.0184)**
Log suicide, males                    -.0539 (.0215)**               -.0483 (.0214)*
Log suicide, age 15-24                -.0978 (.0275)**               -.0849 (.0556)
Log suicide, age 25-34                -.0525 (.0226)**               -.0326 (.0341)
Log suicide, age 35-44                 .0000 (.0303)                  .0223 (.0306)
Log suicide, age 45-54                -.0171 (.0305)                 -.0249 (.0251)
Log suicide, age 55-64                -.0398 (.0318)                 -.0228 (.0317)
Log suicide, age 65 +                 -.0253 (.0394)                 -.0145 (.0335)

NOTES: Each cell includes the coefficient for predicted SSRI sales values by applying the basic IV estimation approach as in Table
4 (from equations 4 and 5 in the text) to the analytic sample described at the top of the column, with the dependent variable of
interest described at left for each row. Robust standard errors are in parentheses, clustered at the country level to account for serial
correlation. * = p<.1, ** = p<.05




                                                                  53
