NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE RETURNS TO CURRENCY SPECULATION IN EMERGING MARKETS
Craig Burnside
Martin Eichenbaum
Sergio Rebelo
Working Paper 12916
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12916

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2007

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Craig Burnside, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Returns to Currency Speculation in Emerging Markets
Craig Burnside, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo
NBER Working Paper No. 12916
February 2007
JEL No. F3,F41
ABSTRACT
The carry trade strategy involves selling forward currencies that are at a forward premium and buying
forward currencies that are at a forward discount. We compare the payoffs to the carry trade applied
to two different portfolios. The first portfolio consists exclusively of developed country currencies.
The second portfolio includes the currencies of both developed countries and emerging markets. Our
main empirical findings are as follows. First, including emerging market currencies in our portfolio
substantially increases the Sharpe ratio associated with the carry trade. Second, bid-ask spreads are
two to four times larger in emerging markets than in developed countries. Third and most dramatically,
the payoffs to the carry trade for both portfolios are uncorrelated with returns to the U.S. stock market.
Craig Burnside
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Sciences Building
Durham, NC 27708-0097
and NBER
burnside@econ.duke.edu
Martin Eichenbaum
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
eich@northwestern.edu

Sergio Rebelo
Kellogg Graduate School of Management
Northwestern University
Leverone Hall
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
s-rebelo@northwestern.edu

Currencies that are at forward premium tend to depreciate. This empirical regularity underlies the carry trade, a currency speculation strategy that is widely used by practitioners.
This strategy involves selling forward currencies that are at a forward premium and buying
forward currencies that are at a forward discount. In this paper we compare the payo¤s to
the carry trade applied to two di¤erent portfolios. The …rst portfolio consists exclusively of
developed country currencies. The second portfolio includes the currencies of both developed
countries and emerging markets. Our main empirical …ndings are as follows. First, including
emerging market currencies in our portfolio substantially increases the Sharpe ratio associated with the carry trade. Second, bid-ask spreads are two to four times larger in emerging
markets than in developed countries. Carry trade strategies that ignore bid-ask spreads yield
negative Sharpe ratios. Large positive Sharpe ratios emerge only when the trading strategy
takes bid-ask spreads into account. Third, over our sample period the payo¤s to the carry
trade are essentially uncorrelated with returns to U.S. stock market. This result is consistent
with Craig Burnside, Martin Eichenbaum, Isaac Kleshchelski, and Sergio Rebelo (2006) who
argue that it is di¢ cult to rationalize the payo¤s to the carry trade as compensating agents
for bearing risk. Burnside et al. (2006) propose a market microstructure explanation of
the large Sharpe ratios associated with the carry trade. We suspect that these explanations
apply with even greater force to emerging market currencies.
Our data, which is from Datastream, covers the period from October 1997 to November
2006. Not all countries are included throughout the sample. Rather, countries are included
as data on them becomes available. The original data are daily and represent quotes at 4
p.m. taken from the Reuters system. The rates are based on actual traded rates on the
Reuters Dealing 2000-2 network along with other quoted rates contributed to Reuters by
leading market participants (see Reuters, 2003). Each exchange rate is quoted as foreign
currency units per U.S. dollar. We convert the daily data into weekly data by sampling the
daily data on every Wednesday. We also construct a monthly data set by sampling the daily
data on the 2nd day of each month. Our data includes both bid and ask exchange rates.
The ask (bid) exchange rate is the rate at which a participant in the interdealer market can
buy (sell) U.S. dollars from a currency dealer.
We have reliable data on both spot and forward rates quoted against the U.S. dollar
for 63 countries. These are the countries included in the ‘large portfolio’ that we discuss
below. We also consider a ‘small portfolio’that includes ten developed country currencies

1

as in Burnside et al. (2006).1
We obtained data on the weekly stock market premium (Mkt-RF ) and the weekly Treasury Bill rate from Kenneth French’s data library.2
The bid-ask spreads for both the spot and forward market are much larger for emerging
markets than for developed economies. For developed countries, the median bid-ask spread
in the spot market was between 0:039 and 0:051 percent depending on the sample period
chosen, while the median spreads for 1-week and 1-month forwards were in the ranges 0:042–
0:053 percent and 0:045–0:057 percent, respectively. We found the spreads to be between two
and four times larger for emerging market currencies than for developed country currencies.
Let Sta and Stb denote the ask and bid spot exchange rates, respectively. Let Fta and Ftb
denote the ask and bid forward exchange rate, respectively, for forward contracts maturing
at time t + 1. The variable St denotes the average of Sta and Stb . Also, Ft denotes the average
of Fta and Ftb . All exchange rates are expressed as foreign currency units per U.S. dollar.
We consider two versions of the carry trade distinguished by how bid-ask spreads are
treated. In both versions we normalize the size of the bet to one U.S. dollar. In the …rst
version we sell xt dollars forward according to the rule:
xt =

+1 if Ft St ,
1 if Ft < St ,

(1)

We refer to this strategy as the ‘naive carry trade’. This strategy is optimal if agents are
risk neutral with respect to nominal payo¤s, agents believe that 1=St+1 is a martingale
(Et (1=St+1 ) = 1=St ), and agents can trade at the average of bid and ask exchange rates.
In the second version we sell xt dollars forward according to the rule:
8
< +1 if Ftb =Sta > 1,
1 if Fta =Stb < 1,
xt =
:
0
otherwise.

(2)

We refer to this strategy as the ‘transaction-cost-based carry trade’. This strategy is optimal
a
if agents are risk neutral with respect to nominal payo¤s and agents believe that 1=St+1
and
b
1=St+1
are martingales.
1

The currencies included in our large portfolio are as follows, with those also included in the small
portfolio being indicated by (S): Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium (S), Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada (S),
Chile, Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, Estonia, Euro (S), Finland, France
(S), Germany (S), Greece, Hong Kong, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy (S), Japan
(S), Kazakhstan, Kenya, Korea, Kuwait, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Mexico, Morocco, Netherlands (S), New
Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland (S), Taiwan, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, United
Arab Emirates, UK (S), and Ukraine.
2
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html

2

In both versions of the carry trade the realized payo¤s are given by:
8
a
1 if xt > 0,
< xt Ftb =St+1
a
b
xt Ft =St+1 1 if xt < 0,
zt+1 =
:
0
if xt = 0.

(3)

Recall that the sample period over which we have data varies by country. In the naive
carry trade xt is always di¤erent from zero. We consider two portfolios of naive carry-trade
strategies. The …rst or ‘large’portfolio gives equal weight at each point in time to all the
currencies for which we have data. The second or ‘small’portfolio is constructed in the same
way but includes only the ten developed country currencies considered in Burnside et al.
(2006).
We also consider two portfolios of the ‘transaction-cost-based carry trade’. For this
strategy xt can be equal to zero [see (2)], so the trader does not necessarily take positions
in all available currencies. The …rst portfolio gives equal weight at each point in time
to all the currencies for which we have data and for which xt is di¤erent from zero. he
second portfolio is constructed in the same way but includes only the ten developed country
currencies considered in Burnside et al. (2006).
Table 1 reports statistics for the average, standard deviation, and Sharpe ratio of payo¤s
to our di¤erent portfolios. We begin by considering the payo¤s to the naive carry trade
computed under the assumption that it is possible to trade at the average of bid and ask
rates, so that zt+1 = xt (Ft =St+1

1). The resulting Sharpe ratio is very large: 0:27 on

a weekly basis and 1:92 on an annualized basis. However, if we compute the payo¤s to
the carry trade according to (3), so that bid-ask spreads are taken into account, then the
Sharpe ratio is actually negative ( 0:05). We conclude that bid-ask spreads are very large
in the sense that ignoring them leads to grossly misleading inference about the pro…tability
of currency speculation strategies.
We now consider the payo¤s to the transaction-cost-based carry trade. Table 1 indicates
that the Sharpe ratio for this strategy is very high: 0:18 on a weekly basis and 1:32 on an
annualized basis. So our simple modi…cation of the naive carry trade is su¢ cient to transform
a negative Sharpe ratio into a Sharpe ratio that is higher than that of the U.S. stock market.3
This large Sharpe ratio re‡ects, in part, that the trader takes transactions costs into account
when deciding whether to take an active position in a given currency. There are 12 currencies
3

The annualized monthly Sharpe ratio of the U.S. stock market is 0:23 for the period from October 1996
to August 2006 and 0:35 for the period from the beginning of Kenneth French’s data (January 1963) to
August 2006.

3

for which the trader never takes a position and an additional 12 currencies for which the
trader makes fewer than 10 trades over the whole sample. Moreover, the top ten (20)
countries account for 60 (80) percent of all trades. We conclude that it is critical to take
transactions costs into account in forming and evaluating currency speculation strategies.
Clearly a speculation strategy that involves fewer trades would mitigate the impact of
transactions costs. The strategies discussed above involve settling existing positions and
taking new positions on a weekly basis. To reduce transactions costs we could use forward
contracts with longer maturities. To investigate the pro…tability of longer-horizon strategies
we re-did the calculations underlying Table 1 using monthly forward contracts. We …nd
that the Sharpe ratios for the weekly and monthly trading horizons are very similar. In
principle it might be possible to reduce transactions costs and generate higher Sharpe ratios
by extending the maturity of the forward contracts beyond one month. But, in practice, most
forward contracts are available only for short horizons, typically less than a year. Because of
data limitations we cannot investigate the pro…tability of carry-trade strategies with trading
horizons exceeding one month.
One way to trade at horizons beyond those for which forward contracts are available is to
borrow low-interest-rate currencies and lend high-interest-rate currencies. But this strategy
can involve high transactions costs. Moreover, this strategy exposes the trader to default
risk on both interest and principal invested in the high interest rate currency. In contrast,
with the forward strategy the trader is exposed to default risk solely with respect to the
forward contract payo¤.
We now analyze the source of the high Sharpe ratio associated with the carry-trade
strategy. The diversi…cation e¤ect that results from combining individual currencies into
portfolios is the main reason why the Sharpe ratio is higher for the large portfolio than for
the small portfolio. According to Table 1 the average payo¤ to the small and large portfolios
are identical (0:0010). However, the standard deviation of the large portfolio payo¤ is roughly
half the standard deviation of the small portfolio payo¤ (0:0100 versus 0:0054).
An important shortcoming of our results is that our data set happens to exclude major
currency crises.4 To assess the potential e¤ect of currency-crisis episodes on our results we
proceed as follows. Suppose that a country incurs a currency crisis at time t + 1. We assume
that 1=(N + 1) of the portfolio is invested at time t in the currency crisis country, where
4

Recall that our sample period is October 1997 to August 2006, so it excludes the Asian currency crises
that occurred in June and July 1997. The data set also excludes the Korean currency crisis of October 1997.

4

N is the number of countries in the previously de…ned ‘large portfolio’. We reweight the
other currencies accordingly. In addition, we assume that the time t + 1 payo¤ to that
portion of the portfolio is St =St+1

1. This modi…cation of the portfolio is conservative

in the sense that it penalizes the portfolio by the full extent of the currency depreciation
between t and t + 1, but ignores the interest di¤erential earned during and before the crisis
period. We also assume that the trader does not take any position on the currency until that
point in time where our data set includes the currency in question. Using this procedure
we incorporate …ve crises into our portfolio: Argentina (1/7/02), Brazil (1/19/99), Korea
(12/10/97), Russia (9/7/98) and Turkey (2/23/01). In the case of Argentina we measure
the devaluation in the week in which the …xed exchange rate regime was abandoned. For all
other countries we use the largest weekly devaluation that occurred during the crisis period.
Our procedure translates in to a one time weekly loss of
percent,

56 percent, and

29 percent,

23 percent,

32

29 percent for Argentina, Brazil, Korea, Russia, and Turkey,

respectively. While these losses are very large, the diversi…ed nature of the trader’s portfolio
mitigates the impact of the crisis on the overall portfolio payo¤.
According to Table 1, the currency crisis modi…cation reduces the weekly Sharpe ratio,
which falls from 0:183 to 0:097. However, this reduced Sharpe ratio is still roughly the same
as that of the small portfolio. So, even under our conservative assumptions, an investor
would do just as well with the crisis-modi…ed portfolio as with the small portfolio.
To make concrete the properties of the di¤erent portfolio payo¤s discussed above we
proceed as follows. We use the realized payo¤s to compute the cumulative realized return
to committing one dollar in the beginning of the sample to a particular carry-trade portfolio
and reinvesting the proceeds at each point in time. The agent starts with one U.S. dollar
in his bank account and bets that dollar in the currency strategy. From that point forward
the agent bets the balance of his bank account on the carry trade. The resulting payo¤s
are deposited or withdrawn from the agent’s account. Since the currency strategy is a zerocost investment, the agent’s net balances stay in the bank and accumulate interest at the
Treasury Bill rate. It turns out that the bank account balance never becomes negative in
our sample.
The upper-left-hand panel of Figure 1 displays the cumulative realized returns to the
large carry-trade portfolio. For comparison the upper-right-hand panel of Figure 1 displays
these returns as well as the cumulative realized return associated with the U.S. stock market

5

and the Treasury-bill rate. Not surprisingly, the carry trade dominates a strategy of investing
in Treasury bills. More interestingly, the total realized cumulative return to the carry-trade
strategy is higher than that of the cumulative returns associated with the U.S. stock market.
Moreover, the volatility of the large portfolio payo¤s is much smaller than that of the U.S.
stock market returns (0:0056 versus 0:0246). These observations explain why the Sharpe
ratio associated with the large portfolio is so much larger than that of the stock market
(0:183 versus 0:032 on a weekly basis).
The bottom left-hand panel displays the cumulative payo¤ to the large and small portfolios. The cumulative payo¤ of these two portfolios is similar but the small portfolio payo¤s
exhibit lower volatility. Finally, the bottom right-hand panel of Figure 1 displays the cumulative payo¤ to the large portfolio and the crises-adjusted portfolio discussed above. The
main impact of the currency crisis correction is to reduce the payo¤ to the portfolio. Still,
comparing the top and bottom right-hand panels of Figure 1 we see that the cumulative
returns to the crisis-adjusted portfolio are higher than those of the U.S. stock market.
Why is the Sharpe ratio associated with the carry trade so high? Burnside et al. (2006)
argue that it is di¢ cult to interpret these payo¤s as compensation for agents bearing risk,
as measured by traditional risk factors such as real consumption growth. Because of data
availability issues, the only conventional risk factor that we have available at the weekly
frequency is the return to the U.S. stock market. We regress the payo¤s to our portfolios
on this variable and a constant. For the large portfolio the slope coe¢ cient is 0:0194 with
a standard error of 0:0087. For the small portfolio the slope coe¢ cient is

0:0041 with

a standard error of 0:0235. Finally, for the crisis-modi…ed portfolio the slope coe¢ cient
is 0:0243 with a standard error of 0:0103. In all cases the slope coe¢ cient estimates are
small and, at best, marginally signi…cant. Overall, these results are consistent with the key
conclusion in Burnside et al. (2006): large Sharpe ratios are not a compensation for risk as
traditionally measured.
So far we have emphasized the mean and variance of the payo¤s to currency speculation.
These statistics are su¢ cient to characterize the distribution of payo¤s only under the assumption of normality. As Table 1 indicates, there is little evidence of skewness in either the
small and large portfolio payo¤s or in the U.S. stock market returns. While there is some
evidence of kurtosis in the large portfolio, those payo¤s do not appear to be more kurtotic
than those associated with the U.S. stock market. We can easily reject the hypothesis that

6

the distribution is normal for the both the small and large portfolios of carry trade and the
U.S. stock market. Not surprisingly there is more evidence of skewness and kurtosis in the
crisis-modi…ed carry-trade portfolio.
To assess the economic signi…cance of these deviations from normality we confront a
hypothetical trader with the possibility of investing in the U.S. stock market and wagering
bets on the carry-trade. The trader’s problem is given by,
maxc
s

fCt ;Xt+1 ;Xt+1 g1
t=0

U = E0

1
X
t=0

t

Ct1
1

1

s.t. Ct = Yt + Xts (1 + rts ) + Xtc rtc

(4)
s
Xt+1
,

Here Ct denotes consumption, Yt is an exogenous income endowment normalized to one at
time zero and assumed to grow at an annual rate of 1:9 percent (the growth rate of U.S.
per capita GDP in our sample period), Xts and Xtc are the end-of-period t

1 investments

in the U.S. stock market and the carry trade, respectively. The variables rts and rtc are the
time-t realized real return to the U.S. stock market, and the real payo¤ to the carry trade,
respectively. We assume that rtc and rts are generated by the joint empirical distribution of
returns to the U.S. stock market and to the carry trade. We consider the large and small
portfolio as well as the crisis-modi…ed carry-trade portfolio.
It is useful to de…ne the ratios xst = Xts =Yt and xct = Xtc =Yt . We assume that the trader
C
chooses constant values xSt = xS and xC
t = x for all t. We choose a value of

equal to

…ve. For the large portfolio we …nd that xS = 0:26, xC = 6:24. For the small portfolio we
…nd that xS = 0:37, xC = 1:92. For the crisis-adjusted portfolio we …nd that xS = 0:31,
xC = 2:54. So, even though the distribution of payo¤s to the crisis-adjusted portfolio has
signi…cantly fatter tails than those of a comparable normal distribution, the agent still wants
to place very large bets on the carry trade.
It is always possible to rationalize the Sharpe ratios that we document by appealing to
a peso problem, i.e. agents place positive weight on very large tail events that have not
materialized in the sample. The problem with this explanation is that, by construction,
there is no evidence to support it.
In summary, we show that there are large Sharpe ratios associated with the carry trade.
The payo¤s to the carry trade are uncorrelated with U.S. stock market returns. Our results
raise an obvious question: if the large Sharpe ratios associated with the carry trade cannot
be interpreted as compensating agents for risk, how can they persist as an equilibrium
7

phenomenon? Burnside et al. (2006) argue that transactions and microstructure frictions
drive a wedge between average and marginal Sharpe ratios. By the latter we mean the
Sharpe ratio associated with the last dollar bet on currency speculation strategies. Burnside
et al. (2006) argue that for developed countries these frictions can explain large average
Sharpe ratios and marginal Sharpe ratios that are close to zero. It remains an open question
whether these frictions can explain the large Sharpe ratios associated with portfolios that
include emerging market currencies.

REFERENCES

Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, Isaac Kleshchelski, and Sergio Rebelo. 2006. “The
Returns to Currency Speculation,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper 12489.
Reuters. 2003. “WM/Reuters Spot and Forward Rates: A Fixed Reference in a Changing
World.”

8

TABLE 1—PAYOFFS TO PORTFOLIOS, 97:10—06:11

Large carry-trade
portfolio

Mean
0.0010

Std.
Dev.
0.0056

Sharpe
Ratio
0.1832

(0.0003)

(0.0003)

(0.0527)

Small carry-trade
portfolio

0.0010

0.0100

0.1001

(0.0005)

(0.0005)

(0.0505)

Crisis-modified
carry-trade

0.0006

0.0066

0.0971

(0.0003)

(0.0005)

(0.0544)

Value-weighted
US stock market

0.0008

0.0246

0.0320

(0.0011)

(0.0016)

(0.0444)

Large carry-trade
portfolio

Skewness Kurtosis
-0.27
1.63

JarqueBera
58

(0.21)

(0.36)

(0.00)

Small carry-trade
portfolio

-0.55

2.11

111

(0.30)

(1.20)

(0.00)

Crisis-modified
carry-trade

-1.71

9.54

2018

(0.56)

(3.16)

(0.00)

Value-weighted
US stock market

-0.54

3.40

250

(0.34)

(1.40)

(0.00)

Notes: Portfolios are described in the main text. Payoffs
are in dollars, per dollar traded. Standard errors in
parentheses, p-values reported for the Jarque-Bera test.

FIGURE 1— The Cumulative Return to Investing in the Portfolios
2.4
Carry-Trade
Large Port folio

2.2
2.0

Value Weighted
US Stock M arket

1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2

T-bills

1.0
0.8
97

99

01

03

05

2.4
Carry-Trade
Large Port folio

2.2
2.0
1.8

Carry-Trade
Small Port folio

1.6
1.4
1.2

Crisis-Adjusted
Port folio

1.0
0.8
97

99

01

03

05

Note: The y-axis in each …gure indicates the accumulated value (in U.S. dollars) of
beginning with a balance of 1 U.S. dollar on 10/29/97 and rolling over the accumulated
value of the investment weekly through 11/8/06. The portfolios are de…ned in the text.

10

