                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       OVERRULING AND THE INSTABILITY OF LAW

                                           Nicola Gennaioli
                                           Andrei Shleifer

                                        Working Paper 12913
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12913


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2007




We are grateful to Olivier Blanchard, Filipe Campante, Edward Glaeser, Claudia Goldin, Oliver Hart,
Elhanan Helpman, Anup Malani, Fausto Panunzi, Torsten Persson, Richard Posner, Ilia Rainer, Alan
Schwartz, Kathryn Spier, Pablo Spiller, Mathew Stephenson, David Stromberg, and especially Louis
Kaplow for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Nicola Gennaioli and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Overruling and the Instability of Law
Nicola Gennaioli and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 12913
February 2007
JEL No. K13,K4

                                              ABSTRACT

We investigate the evolution of common law under overruling, a system of precedent change in which
appellate courts replace existing legal rules with new ones. We use a legal realist model, in which
judges change the law to reflect their own preferences or attitudes, but changing the law is costly to
them. The model's predictions are consistent with the empirical evidence on the overruling behavior
of the U.S. Supreme Court and appellate courts. We find that overruling leads to unstable legal rules
that rarely converge to efficiency. The selection of disputes for litigation does not change this conclusion.
Our findings provide a rationale for the value of precedent, as well as for the general preference of
appellate courts for distinguishing rather than overruling as a law-making strategy.

Nicola Gennaioli
Stockholm University
Institute for International Economic Studies
SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden
Nicola.Gennaioli@iies.su.se

Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M-9
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu
Introduction



       In the common law tradition, the law evolves through the creation and revision of precedents by

appellate courts (Stone, 1985). There are two principal forms of such revision in common law. The

first, and more typical, is distinguishing, whereby an appellate court accepts the previous precedent, but

limits the scope of its applicability and establishes a new rule for the circumstances in which the

previous precedent no longer applies.       The second, and less typical, form is overruling, whereby an

appellate court simply replaces the precedent with a new rule.          Overruling deserves some attention

both because it is the form of precedent revision typically studied in law and economics (Rubin, 1977,

Priest, 1977, Posner, 2003) and because it is sometimes used by the U.S. Supreme Court.

       Political scientists find that, although there is some role of precedent in binding the U.S.

Supreme Court’s decisions, the Court overrules precedents incompatible with its political orientation

(Brenner and Spaeth, 1995, Segal and Spaeth, 2002). Furthermore, Supreme Court judges vote based

on their ideological preferences (George and Epstein, 1992, Brenner and Spaeth, 1995, Songer and

Lindquist, 1996), follow only those prior Court decisions that are compatible with their own ideologies

(MacKuen and McGuire, 2005), and do not revise their past votes after the Court they sit on has

established a new legal rule they had voted against (Segal and Spaeth, 1996, 2002). Klein (2002)

obtains similar results in a study of appellate and not just Supreme Court decisions.

       This evidence indicates that judges’ policy preferences play a key role in shaping appellate

courts’ overruling behavior. What do these findings imply for the evolution of common law? Does

overruling lead the law to converge in the long run? If so, does the law converge to efficiency? What

is the role of the selection of disputes for litigation for the quality of law?

       This paper presents a model of overruling by appellate courts. The model answers the above

questions and allows us to compare the evolution of common law under overruling with that under


                                                       3
distinguishing, not considered in this paper but investigated by Gennaioli and Shleifer (2007). One

important question we do not address is the court’s choice of overruling versus distinguishing when

both options are open.

        Like Gennaioli and Shleifer (2007), our model relies on two assumptions. First, consistent with

the findings of political science, we assume that judges hold biases favoring different types of

disputants, and that these biases vary across the population of judges.2 This assumption has its

intellectual foundation in legal realism, the theory that sees judicial decisions as based largely on

judges’ preferences and beliefs (Holmes, 1897, Radin, 1925, Frank, 1930, Stone, 1985, Posner, 2005).

        Second, following Radin (1925) and Posner (2003, 2005), we assume that changing precedent is

personally costly to judges: it requires extra investigation of facts, extra writing, extra work of

persuading colleagues when judges sit in panels, extra risk of being criticized, and so on. “Judges are

people and the economizing of mental effort is a characteristic of people, even if censorious persons

call it by a less fine name” (Radin, 1925, p. 362). The assumption that, other things equal, judges

would rather not change the law implies that only the judges who disagree with the current legal rule

strongly enough actually change it. Posner (2003, p. 544) sees what he calls “judicial preference for

leisure” as a source of stability in the law; we revisit this issue.

        Using a model relying on these two assumptions, we examine the evolution of legal rules under

overruling in the case of a simple tort: a dog bites a man (e.g., Landes and Posner, 1987).                         We ask

when and how precedents evolve through overruling, what factors render such evolution more efficient,

and whether legal rules converge to efficient ones. We also examine how the selection of disputes for

litigation influences efficiency3.




2
  Legal scholars increasingly accept the importance of judicial ideologies for rulings on politically sensitive issues (e.g.,
Pinello 1999, Rowland and Carp 1996, Revesz 1997, Sunstein, Schkade, and Ellman 2004).
3
  The hypothesis that common law tends toward efficiency was introduced by Posner (2003, 1st edition 1973). Key studies
include Rubin (1977), Priest (1977), Cooter, Kornhauser, and Lane (1979), and Cooter and Kornhauser (1979).

                                                              4
       In line with the evidence on Supreme Court and appellate decisions, we find that the probability

of an appellate court’s overruling a precedent increases in the distance between the precedent and the

appellate court’s own bias. This result implies that the conditions for judge-made law to converge to

efficient legal rules are implausibly strict. When judges overrule precedents, not only does the law fail

to be efficient, but it may not converge at all, as legal rules fluctuate between extremes. This outcome

is especially likely when judicial preferences are polarized; in this case, judges are more likely to

strongly disagree with the current precedent, and so more eager to change the law. Overruling only

leads to efficiency when efficiency-oriented judges are more activist than the biased ones, provided

judicial preferences are not too polarized. Legal volatility has important implications for the areas of

law with significant judicial disagreement as measured, for example, by their political sensitivity. It is

precisely in these areas of law, as opposed to the more apolitical ones, that overruling raises the

volatility of legal rules and thus leads to efficiency losses.

       This pessimistic assessment of common law evolution under overruling still holds when several

moderating factors are at work, including the strategic behavior of forward looking judges. More

interestingly, the selection of disputes for litigation does not necessarily encourage the evolution of

legal rules toward efficiency. Indeed, when judicial biases are known to the potential litigants, a

driving force behind litigation is the potential sympathy of the court. An efficient rule may well be

appealed when a litigant has reason to believe that a sympathetic court will overturn it. This result

stands in contrast to the mechanisms discussed by Rubin (1977) and Priest (1977).

       This highly pessimistic assessment of the quality of legal evolution under overruling may

explain why appellate courts in common law countries generally prefer distinguishing. As shown by

Gennaioli and Shleifer (2007), while distinguishing does not guarantee convergence to efficient legal

rules, it refines and improves the law on average because it responds to factual circumstances. Such a

tendency is not present under overruling, which keeps the law as a blunt but changing instrument.


                                                      5
Although we do not explicitly model the choice between overruling and distinguishing, our results

suggest why an efficient legal system should rely on distinguishing as the main form of legal change.

       The next section presents our model of precedent formation. Section 3 describes the efficient

legal rules. Section 4 studies the evolution of law under overruling. Section 5 presents several

extensions, including a model of selection of disputes for litigation. Section 6 concludes the paper.

The proofs of Propositions are contained in Section 7.



2. A Model of Overruling

       There are two parties, the owner O and the victim V, as well as a dog. The dog bit victim V,

who seeks to recover damages from O, the dog’s owner. The dog was not on a leash, so to assess O’s

liability one should determine whether O was negligent (and so is liable) or not (and so is not). The

model is a one-dimensional version of the two dimensional model in Gennaioli and Shleifer (2007).

       Let PNP be the probability that a dog bites victim V if the dog’s owner O does not take

precautions (he does not put the dog on a leash) and PP the probability that the dog bites V if

precautions are taken. Let C be O’s cost of precautions (e.g., the costs of putting the dog on a leash).

First best efficiency requires that the dog owner takes precautions if and only if their cost C is lower

than the reduction in the probability of a bite (weighted by V’s harm, which we normalize to 1). As

indicated by the Hand formula, the first best is implemented by holding O negligent and thus liable if

PNP − PP ≥ C , and not liable if PNP − PP < C . We assume that damages are high enough (e.g., punitive

damages) that O takes precautions whenever found liable. In this context, the question for the law is

how to determine negligence from the facts of a case.

       We assume that judges determine O’s liability by using only one empirical dimension, the dog’s

aggressiveness a ∈ [0,1] . A dog with a = 0 is very peaceful (a golden retriever) and less likely to bite

V than a dog with a = 1 (a pit bull). Although legal rules are based solely on a, in a specific dispute
                                                   6
liability may depend on a variety of idiosyncratic and unverifiable factors in addition to aggressiveness.

We call these latter factors u and assume that both a and u are independently and uniformly distributed

over the population of interactions between O and V. We further assume that:

                                            ⎧⎪ΔP      for a + u ≥ 1
                                 PNP − PP = ⎨                       ,                                   (1)
                                             ⎪⎩ΔP     for a + u < 1

where ΔP > C > ΔP . O is optimally held liable if and only if the dog is sufficiently aggressive, i.e. if

a ≥ a(u ) = 1 − u . We could allow for more general functions ΔP(a + u ) linking a + u to the benefit of

the leash, but the assumption that ΔP(a + u ) “jumps” at a+u=1 allows us to separate the probabilities

of the different errors induced by a legal rule from their welfare cost.

       A legal rule in this environment attaches a legal consequence (O liable, O not liable) to every

level of the dog’s aggressiveness, a . How do appellate judges make legal rules? We assume that,

when no legal rule deals with dog bites at the beginning, the appellate judge who reviews the case sets

the rule by choosing a threshold on a, which we call A1 . Owners of dogs more aggressive than A1 are

held liable; owners of dogs less aggressive than A1 are not. Once A1 is set, if a later judge dealing

with a dog bite overrules the initial precedent he discards A1 and replace it with a new rule A2 . Stare

decisis only binds in so far as it is costly for the judge to change the precedent. In particular, we

assume that each judge changing the legal rule (after the first) incurs a personal effort cost k, regardless

of what change he makes. We take k to be a fixed cost, independent of the magnitude of precedent

change. In Section 5, we allow more radical precedent changes to entail higher personal costs.

       The model’s timing is as follows. At t = 0, the first judge establishes the aggressiveness

threshold A1 . This precedent guides adjudication until another judge (if any) overrules at some t ' . The

judge changing A1 sets a new rule A2 , possibly giving rise to a new round of precedent change.




                                                     7
3. Optimal Legal Rules

       We now investigate the efficient – welfare maximizing – rules that provide the normative

benchmark for our analysis of legal change and judge made law in Sections 4-5.

       The owner of a dog with aggressiveness a facing unverifiable factors u decides whether to put

the dog on a leash by considering the risk of liability under the prevailing legal rule. Under first best

precautions (i.e., O puts the dog on a leash whenever a + u ≥ 1 ), social welfare is equal to:

                                          W F . B. = −(1 / 2)ΔP − (1 / 2)C ,                            (2)

where the probability of a bite when precautions are taken is normalized to 0. In half the cases,

precautions are not efficient and the parties bear the extra risk ΔP of the dog biting the man; in the

other half, precautions are efficient and cost C to society.

       Legal rules in this model cannot attain the first best because they can only condition O’s

liability on a and not on the unverifiable factors u. As a result, legal rules are necessarily imperfect,

inducing either over-precautions by mistakenly holding O liable, or under-precautions by mistakenly

holding O not liable, or both. What is the socially optimal legal rule in this context?      Suppose    that

the law holds O liable if and only if a ≥ A . Then, O is mistakenly liable if a ≥ A and a < 1 − u , which

                                             1
happens with probability Pr( L NL) = ∫ (1 − a)da = (1 / 2)(1 − A) 2 .          In this case, O takes over-
                                             A



precautions, whose (constant) marginal social cost is Λover = C − ΔP . In contrast, O is mistakenly not

                                                                                A
liable if a < A and a ≥ 1 − u , which occurs with probability Pr( NL L) = ∫ ada = (1 / 2) A2 . In this case,
                                                                                0



O takes under-precautions, whose (constant) marginal social cost is Λunder = ΔP − C . Then, the loss of

social welfare (relative to the first best) under A is:

                                                      [                 ]
                                Λ ( A) = (1 / 2)Λunder A 2 + λ (1 − A) 2 ,                              (3)



                                                          8
where λ = Λover / Λunder is the relative social cost of over-precautions. With the threshold A, social

losses are Λ( A) – the average of over- and under-precaution costs under the error probabilities that A

introduces. The higher is A (the more the initial rule favors O), the larger is the loss from under-

precautions but the smaller is the loss from over-precautions. By minimizing (3) with respect to A , we

find the optimal legal rule, which is the normative benchmark for our analysis.


Proposition 1: The optimal legal rule is given by AL = λ /(1 + λ ) .


        The optimal legal rule trades off the social cost of under- and over-precautions. The higher is

the relative cost of over-precautions λ , the more lenient is the optimal rule (the higher is AL ). In

particular, the optimal legal rule induces Pr( NL L) / Pr( L NL) = λ2 , namely the relative likelihood of

under-precautions increases in the relative social cost of over-precautions.

        With these results in mind, we can move on to study judicial lawmaking. We ask when and

how judge made law evolves over time through overruling, and evaluate the efficiency of legal

evolution. By efficiency we mean ex ante efficiency, before judge types are revealed.



4. Overruling and Legal Evolution

        When a case comes before an appellate judge, he either retains the existing rule A, or overrules

A and sets a new threshold.4 Like social welfare, the utility of an appellate judge ruling on a dispute

between O and V depends on the social costs induced by the rule. However, we assume that a judge’s

objective diverges from social welfare (i.e. expression (3)) because of his bias, which reflects his

preference for V or O and induces him to rule in favor of his preferred party. Specifically, the utility of

judge j is given by:

4
  Judicial decision making in panels could moderate polarization of their views and lead to better law, but also lead to
strategic behavior (Kornhauser 1992, Schwartz 1992). As shown by Revesz (1997) and Sunstein et al. (2004), panels
sometimes lead to the convergence of member views to the bias of the majority, rather than to a moderate compromise.

                                                           9
                                     U j = − β V , j Pr( NL L) − β O , j Pr( L NL)                                         (4)

Judges dislike making mistakes, but they do not dislike the two types of mistakes equally. β O, j and

β V , j ( β V , j , β O , j ≥ 0 ) capture the preference of judge j for O and V, respectively: the larger is β O, j , the

more he is eager to hold O not liable, the larger is β V , j , the more he is willing to hold O liable. In

setting the threshold A, different judges trade off the social cost of under and over-precautions in

different ways.

         In our specification of judicial preferences, a judge’s utility depends on the expected outcome

arising from the application of a given rule, not from the resolution of a particular case. Such a judge

would consider replacing a legal rule he dislikes even if the outcome of the specific case before him is

the same under the new rule. A judge cares about having a rule in place that meets his idea of justice,

rather than about delivering a desired outcome in a specific dispute before him.                       This assumption is

particularly appropriate for appellate judges, who establish legal rules rather than resolve specific

disputes5.

         There is a measure 1 of judges, who can be of three types: share γ of judges are unbiased, with

bias β O , j / β V , j = λ reflecting social welfare; the rest are equally divided among pro-O judges, with

bias β O , j / β V , j = λπ and pro-V judges, with bias β O , j / β V , j = λ / π . Parameter π ( π ≥ 1 ), measures

the polarization of judges’ preferences: with a higher π , the preferences of pro-O and pro-V judges are

more extreme (there is more disagreement among them). We assume that all judges have the same

preference intensity and normalize it to 1 ( β V , j + β O , j = 1 , ∀j ).




5
  For now, the judge is assumed to ignore the possibility that the rule he establishes will be changed in the future. We relax
this assumption in Section 5.

                                                              10
4.1. The Decision to Overrule a Precedent

        The first judge adjudicating a dispute between O and V establishes the initial precedent.

Suppose that the dispute comes up before judge i, with preferences β V ,i and β O,i . The judge then

selects a threshold A to maximize:

                                U i ( A) = −(1 / 2) β V ,i A 2 − (1 / 2) β O ,i (1 − A) 2                   (5)

Define β i = β O ,i / β V ,i as the pro-O bias of this judge. Then judge i sets:

                                                     βi
                                          A1,i =                                                            (6)
                                                   1 + βi

The subscript indicates that A1,i is the initial precedent set by judge i. The result is intuitive: the more

Pro-O is the judge, the more lenient he is (the higher is A1 ). A1 coincides with the efficient legal rule

AL only if β i = λ = Λover / Λunder , i.e., if the judge is unbiased.

        Under A1,i , social losses are given by Λ ( A1,i ) . Given the variety of judicial preferences, there is

no reason to presume that A1,i is set efficiently, i.e. to minimize Λ ( A) . If the case ends up before a

pro-O judge ( β i > λ ), too many aggressive dogs roam and bite with impunity; if the case ends up

before a pro-V judge ( β i < λ ), too many peaceful dogs are put on a leash.

        Does overruling of this initial precedent correct the inefficiency of the law?          To answer this

question, we must first ask when judges find it worthwhile to overrule A1,i . To this end, suppose that

precedent A1,i is in place, and judge j takes the initiative to change the law.             He then sets a new

threshold A2, j , equal to

                                                               βj
                                                    A2, j =          ,                                      (7)
                                                              1+ β j




                                                              11
where β j = β O , j / β V , j is the pro-O bias of judge j. To check if judge j in fact overrules A1,i , we must

consider his personal incentive to do so. Judge j overrules only if the benefit of doing so is larger than

the effort and other costs of overruling. Using the judge’s utility function, we find that judge j

overrules the precedent when:

                                        (A1,i   − A2, j ) ≥ 2k
                                                       2
                                                                                                            (8)

       Since a judge overrules to set a rule reflecting his preferences, there is no need for him to

repudiate a rule established by someone with the same views. Notice also that judicial behavior is

symmetric: if judge j overrules A1,i , then judge i overrules A1, j . The smaller is the cost k, the higher

the chance that a judge changes the law. When there are no costs of overruling, the judge always sets a

new rule reflecting his own bias. But how do judges with a positive k react to precedent? Since judges

regain discretion through overruling, they are more activist when the prevailing legal rule is further

away from their preferred one (see equation (8)). This is more likely to be the case if judges’

preferences are more polarized ( π is higher). In this way, the extent of disagreement among judges

determines the long run configuration of law. The case of λ = 1 illustrates this idea.


Proposition 2: If λ = 1 , there exist two polarization levels π 1 and π 2 ( π 1 ≤ π 2 ) such that: i) If

π ≤ π 1 the initial precedent sticks forever; ii) If π ∈ (π 1 , π 2 ] , precedent fluctuates between pro-O and

pro-V legal rules unless the initial rule was unbiased; iii) If π > π 2 , precedent fluctuates between pro-

O, pro-V and unbiased legal rules.


       Polarization of judicial preferences determines whether judges overrule the initial precedent and

thus the ultimate configuration of judge-made law. For low polarization, precedent remains at its initial

configuration regardless of whether A1 is set by a biased or an unbiased judge. At intermediate levels

of polarization, pro-O and pro-V judges overrule each other. As a result, precedent oscillates between


                                                           12
pro-O and pro-V rules unless an unbiased judge sets the initial rule, which then becomes permanent.

Unbiased judges stop being passive when π ≥ π 2 as they begin to overrule extremists. At high levels

of polarization, every judge pursues legal change. Overruling is highly problematic for convergence.

       This proposition yields a key empirical prediction of our model, namely that, under overruling,

legal rules are the more volatile, the higher is the dispersion of judicial preferences. In particular,

looking across various areas of law, those areas with greater dispersion of judicial preferences (perhaps

because they are more political) would see greater volatility of legal rules.

       Little changes for λ < 1 . Since now pro-O judges disagree with unbiased ones more than the

pro-V ones do, there is a π 3 such that for π ∈ [π 2 , π 3 ) pro-O judges overrule unbiased judges even if

pro-V ones stay passive. Still, the main thrust of Proposition 2 is maintained: the volatility of the law

increases in the polarization of judicial preferences.



4.2. The Efficiency of Legal Evolution Under Overruling

       What about the ex ante efficiency of long run law? Does overruling of precedents lead to

optimal legal rules? The benchmark here is AL , the optimal one-dimensional rule we found in section

3. The following proposition explains when overruling leads to optimality:


Proposition 3:     Under overruling, the law converges to efficiency if and only if all judges are

unbiased. Moreover, social welfare falls as the level of judicial polarization rises.


       In expectation, the law converges to the efficient rule AL only if there is full agreement among

judges and their views are aligned with efficiency. When some judges are biased, there is a chance that

the initial precedent is set by either a pro-O or by a pro-V judge. In either case, the law does not

converge to an efficient rule. The contribution of efficiency-seeking judges to the efficiency of judge-




                                                     13
made law is recognized by Posner (2003), but under overruling the conditions for full efficiency seem

implausibly stringent.

         Our model also implies that, under overruling, social welfare decreases in the polarization of

judicial views. Not only does judicial polarization increase the volatility of the law but it also reduces

its efficiency. Too see this clearly, note that when people take precautions based on the law of the

moment6, expected losses are given by E [Λ( A)] , where the expectation is taken across all the legal rules

that may obtain in the long run. Because Λ ( A) is quadratic in A, expected losses are proportional to:

                                    V ( A) + E ( A)[E ( A) − 2 AL ] + AL .                                                   (9)

The optimal legal rule should be unbiased, i.e., E ( A) = AL , and have zero variance V ( A) . Unless all

judges are unbiased, judge made law cannot achieve this outcome. Importantly, expression (9) shows

that polarization mainly affects social welfare by raising the variance of equilibrium legal rules. As π

rises, V ( A) rises as well, and so do social losses under judge made law.

         Proposition 3 underscores the cost of polarization, but it does not in itself prevent overruling

from being beneficial in an evolutionary sense. The question then arises, is there a tendency for the law

to improve over-time? The next result addresses this question.


Corollary 1: Under overruling, expected social losses are (weakly) minimized for k = +∞ .


         Overruling of precedents does not improve the law on average.                              For a given level of

polarization, welfare is independent of k. The reason is the model’s symmetry: if an efficiency oriented

judge overrules a biased precedent, then the biased judge overrules the efficient precedent, creating no

overall tendency toward efficiency. Efficiency is the same for k = 0 as for k = +∞ . Indeed, when

k = ∞ , there is no legal change, but uncertainty over the bias of the initial judge leads to social losses



6
  Precautions optimally follow this rule if in every period the same appellate court adjudicates all the disputes. In this case,
the law can only change next period if the new appellate court has a different bias from the current one.

                                                               14
     [        ]
of E Λ( A j ) (where the average is taken across all judge types). The same social losses obtain

under k = 0 , when the law fluctuates between pro-V, unbiased and pro-O rules.               Despite such

irrelevance, there might be some reasons why, under overruling, k = +∞ is preferred. Such values as

the predictability of the law or equal treatment may render a bad but stable law preferable to an equally

efficient on average but unpredictable law.

         The dismal performance of overruling is due to the symmetry of judges’ behavior: by mutually

overruling each other, active judges neutralize their respective impacts on the law. For legal change to

be desirable, the odds of moving from a bad to a good rule should be greater than those of moving in

reverse (Cooter and Kornhauser, 1979). When would that be the case? Efficient precedents are less

likely to be overruled when unbiased judges are more activist than the extremists, i.e., have a lower

overruling cost kU (Posner, 2003). This might be the case when judicial ability is positively correlated

with both unbiasedness and peer respect, which reduces the private cost of legal change:


Proposition 4: If kU < k , there exists a πˆ ≤ π 2 such that, for π ∈ [πˆ , π 2 ] , the law converges to

efficiency.


         When the unbiased judges are more interventionist than the biased ones ( kU < k ), then not

only is there a possibility for overruling to improve the law, but Posner’s efficiency conjecture also

holds. However, the activism of the unbiased judges is not sufficient for the law to converge to full

efficiency and a further condition must be met: polarization should not be too extreme. Figure 1 below

plots, for kU < k , the set of π for which overruling does or does not lead to full efficiency.




                                                    15
                         π
                                                 Inefficiency

                         π2
                                                                                     πˆ (kU / k )

                                           Efficiency

                          1
                                                               Inefficiency


                                   0                                          1
                                                   Figure 1.                         kU / k


       The vertical axis of the diagram measures preference polarization π , the horizontal axis

measures kU / k ∈ [0,1] , the strength of unbiased judges’ comparative advantage in legal change,

maximal at kU = 0 and minimal at kU = k . The function πˆ (kU / k ) shows, for every kU , the level of

polarization above which Unbiased judges overrule inefficient precedents. The dashed area and the

bold lines delimit the set of parameters for which judge-made law converges to efficiency.

       As in Proposition 3, Posner’s conjecture holds – regardless of kU – when all judges are

benevolent ( π = 1 ). An intriguing feature of Figure 1 is that, in the shaded region above πˆ (kU / k ) , the

law converges to full efficiency even if only a few judges are unbiased. Indeed, when π ≥ πˆ , unbiased

judges correct inefficient precedents, and when it is also the case that π ≤ π 2 , extremists stay passive

and do not reverse the efficiency promoting decisions of the unbiased judges.

       To summarize, our model suggests that if the behavior of different judges is symmetric, there is

no tendency for overruling of precedents to be beneficial and – if judges’ preferences are very


                                                     16
polarized – convergence itself is unlikely. Moreover, the volatility of law increases with polarization

of judicial opinions. These results are broadly consistent with the main finding of the political science

literature, namely that the Supreme Court overrules precedents incompatible with its political

orientation (e.g., Brenner and Spaeth, 1995, Segal and Spaeth, 2002). That literature indeed supports

the key mechanism of our model, namely that the extreme judges are more likely to vote against the

precedent than the centrist ones (Brenner and Stier, 1996)7.

        At the same time, the results point to one force that leads to virtuous evolution of the law when

judicial preferences are not too polarized, namely the greater activism of the Unbiased judges.

Unfortunately, extreme polarization undermines this mechanism. Moreover, it is at least possible that

the extreme rather than the unbiased judges face a lower personal cost of changing the law and hence

are more activist, in which case we get even greater legal volatility than in the base model.

        Our model suggests that especially in political areas of law where judicial preferences are very

polarized, overruling of precedents is a source of volatility and unpredictability of legal rules. It does

not create a tendency for the law to become more efficient.



5. Factors Inducing Judicial Moderation

        The model studied so far abstracts from some factors that may foster judicial moderation,

thereby reducing the extent of biased adjudication and the inefficiency of overruling. We now evaluate

one at the time three leading factors that might induce judicial moderation: variable overruling cost,

forward looking judges, and the selection of disputes for litigation. We show that the mere presence of

these factors is not sufficient to guarantee the law’s convergence to efficiency. In many circumstances,

even when those moderating factors are at work, under overruling judicial bias is a source of volatility


7
 These skeptical conclusions about overruling contrast with the more benign assessment of distinguishing as a strategy of
precedent change in Gennaioli and Shleifer (2007). In our models, distinguishing dominates overruling, and it seems
unlikely that, in a model where both strategies are open to judges, overruling would improve the efficiency of legal change.

                                                             17
of legal rules and efficiency losses. Section 5.4 then discusses some circumstances under which these

factors are sufficiently strong to ensure convergence to efficiency.



5.1. Variable Overruling Cost

        Suppose that a judge j inheriting precedent At −1 and setting a new one At ≠ At −1 at time t, must

incur a variable overruling cost C ( At , At −1 ) = c( At − At −1 ) 2 / 2 , with c > 0 , in addition to the fixed cost

k. The variable overruling cost increases in the magnitude At − At −1 of the legal revision. This cost is

a potential source for moderation because it discourages extremist judges to fully cater to their

preferences. When a judge decides to replace At −1 by At , he solves:


                                 max − ( At − A*j ) 2 − c( At − At −1 ) 2                                       (10)
                                   At



Judge j minimizes the sum of two costs. The first one is the loss he bears when At differs from his

preferred legal rule A*j . The second is the cost of setting At far from At −1 . Judge j then sets:

                                                  c            1
                                          At =        At −1 +      A*j                                          (11)
                                                 1+ c         1+ c

        Suppose that k=0. Then judges always engage in some overruling and equation (11) says that

judge-made law follows an auto-regressive stochastic process converging to a distribution with mean

E ( A*j ) and variance V ( A*j ) /(1 + 2c) . This suggests:


Proposition 5. If k=0 and c > 0 , the law converges to efficiency if and only if all judges are unbiased.

A higher V ( A*j ) increases the volatility of legal rules and reduces long run efficiency.



        Even without a fixed cost of legal change, the variable overruling cost does not alter the

message of Propositions 2 and 3. The variable overruling cost does not ensure legal convergence; it

                                                          18
only reduces the magnitude of legal change and thus the volatility of legal rules from V ( A*j ) to

V ( A*j ) /(1 + 2c) . However, the polarization of judicial views V ( A*j ) still increases the volatility of the

law and reduces its quality.

       For a positive k, it is even less likely that efficiency is attained under a variable overruling cost.

The variable cost reduces the benefit judges obtain from overruling. Although this effect may reduce

the volatility of the law, it increases hysteresis, making more likely the scenario (associated with

k = +∞ ) in which the initial precedent sticks forever.



5.2. Forward Looking Judges

       Another source of judicial moderation is forward looking judges: to reduce the possibility of

future overruling, extremist judges may choose to set a less biased precedent today. We show that such

strategic behavior may fail to induce convergence of judicial decisions to efficiency in a two period

model where judges discount the future by a factor δ ≤ 1 .

       We solve the model by backward induction, starting from the final period two. If the initial

precedent is Ai , then judge j overrules it and replaces it with his desired legal rule A*j when:

                                                           ( Ai − A*j ) 2 > 2k                                                      (12)

                                                   [                           ]
Judge j leaves Ai in place when Ai ∈ A*j − d , A*j + d , d ≡ (2k )1 / 2 . If desired legal rules Ai* are

distributed on [0,1] according to the c.d.f. F ( A) , then in period one judge i sets Ai so as to:



                min ( Ai − Ai* ) 2 + δ
                 Ai
                                         {∫
                                          [0, Ai − d ]∪[ Ai + d ,1]
                                                                      ( A − Ai* ) 2 dF ( A) + ( Ai − Ai* ) 2 ∫
                                                                                                                 Ai + d

                                                                                                             Ai − d
                                                                                                                                }
                                                                                                                          dF ( A)   (13)



Judge i sets Ai by trading off the cost of deviating from Ai* against the benefit of minimizing future

overruling. The first term of expression (13) captures the judge’s static gain from following his own


                                                                         19
bias. The term in curly brackets captures the strategic effect of Ai . The first integral is the judge’s loss

when Ai is overruled, the second one is his loss when Ai stays in place.

       When d = 0 or d ≥ 1 , judges set Ai = Ai* . When d = 0 , Ai is always overruled and has no

strategic value. When d ≥ 1 , Ai is never overruled, so it does not have strategic value either. Thus,

when k = 0 and k ≥ 1 / 2 , judge-made law is unaffected by forward looking behavior.

                                                                        Ai + d
       Roughly speaking, strategic effects call for maximizing ∫                 dF ( A) , the probability that Ai
                                                                        Ai − d



stays in place. The cost of setting Ai above Ai* is that more judges to its left (i.e. more pro-V ones)

overrule it, while the cost of setting Ai below Ai* is that more judges to its right (i.e. more pro-O ones)

overrule it. The strategic motive, then, does not necessarily lead judges toward efficiency.                     For

instance, when Ai* is uniformly distributed in [0,1] , we have:


                                                 ~                             ~     ~
                                                                                       [       ]
Proposition 6. For every d ≤ 1 , there exists an A ∈ [0,1] such that, if Ai* ∈ A,1 − A , then Ai = Ai* ; if

      ~
                     (    ~
                             )             ~
                                                          (  ~
                                                                   )
Ai* ≤ A , then Ai ∈ Ai* , A ; if Ai* > 1 − A , then Ai ∈ 1 − A, Ai* .


       When Ai* is uniformly distributed, a moderate judge is almost as likely to be overruled by a

more pro-V as by a more pro-O judge. These two effects just cancel out for judges in the middle of the

                 [ ~
                         ]
                         ~
range (i.e., Ai* ∈ A,1 − A ), so that strategic motives do not affect their behavior. The two effects do not

cancel out for extremists, who cater to more moderate judges to avoid being overruled too often. As a

consequence, in the uniform case, strategic effects introduce some, but not full, moderation. Most
                                                                                         ~     ~
                                                                                                    [
important, moderation is unrelated to efficiency. When the efficient law lies outside of A,1 − A , the       ]
strategic motive also distorts the behavior of unbiased judges, making the law less efficient! Once




                                                     20
again, when judges act strategically, greater polarization reduces welfare by increasing the volatility of
                                         ~
                                          [    ~
                                                   ]
the law, since the “non-strategic” range A,1 − A widens.

       In this model, judges’ strategic motive can generate some tendency toward efficiency only if the

proportion of unbiased judges is large enough that shading Ai toward their tastes maximizes the

probability of the rule’s survival. To see this, let us go back to our example with three types of judges,

where a fraction γ of them is unbiased. Suppose for simplicity that the efficient legal rule is AU* = 1 / 2

and that pro-O and pro-V judges are infinitely biased, so that AV* = 0 and AO* = 0 . Moreover, suppose

that d < 1 / 2 , so that the unbiased judges overrule a biased initial precedent. Then, we obtain:


Proposition 7. For every d < 1 / 2 , there exists a γ~ ∈ [0,1] such that, for γ ≥ γ~ pro-V judges

set Ai = 1 / 2 − d , pro-O judges set Ai = 1 / 2 + d and unbiased judges set Ai = 1 / 2 .


       The strategic motive introduces a tendency toward efficiency only when there are enough

unbiased judges, but the law is fully efficient only if all judges are unbiased.            The extent of

convergence depends on the overruling cost. When k is large, convergence is weak or non-existent, as

unbiased judges never overrule the biased ones. When k is small, convergence may require the

presence of many unbiased judges, as biased ones are unwilling to set the quasi-efficient precedents

that are not overruled. Not only do strategic motives fail to eliminate the impact of bias on the law;

they also reconfirm the role of unbiased judges in ensuring convergence to efficiency.



5.3. Selection of Disputes for Litigation

       The selection of disputes for litigation may mitigate the costs of overruling. Rubin (1977) and

Priest (1977) suggest that disputes involving inefficient legal rules are more likely to be taken to court

rather than settled, leading to the replacement of such rules by better ones over time. This section


                                                       21
shows that, when inefficient rules are a product of deliberate decisions by biased judges, this

conclusion is unlikely to hold so long as the litigants do not put too much weight on the distant future.

After having lost at trial, the party losing from the prevailing precedent would appeal even if the

existing legal rule is efficient, especially if the current appellate court is biased in its favor. When the

bias of the appellate court is incompatible with the precedent, efficient and inefficient rules are equally

likely to be challenged. In this world, litigation and overruling of precedents reflect the evolution in

the biases of appellate courts rather than the law’s convergence to efficiency.

        To see this argument, consider the following model of litigation. After a dog bite has occurred,

and in light of the existing precedent, the dog owner and the victim decide whether to settle or litigate.

Litigation here corresponds to the litigants’ decision to appeal the trial court’s ruling. The cost of

going to trial is sufficiently low that the parties’ decision to litigate in the first place is entirely driven

by their later decision as to whether to appeal the trial court’s ruling. The parties are assumed to know

the preferences of the appeals court, which is especially realistic for litigation in front of the Supreme

Court. Even if the court’s bias is known, the parties may still fail to settle due to uncertainty about the

court’s overruling cost k. For example, the court’s overruling cost is likely to depend on the quality of

the parties’ legal arguments. If the argument in favor of legal change is relatively weak then, even if

the appellate judge disagrees with the existing precedent, he may prefer to leave it in place: it might be

simply too costly to justify an overruling decision. The parties’ uncertainty about their abilities to

present to the appeals court a stronger argument may generate settlement failures and be a source of

litigation.

        For concreteness, assume that, by presenting their arguments in court, the parties render the

appellate judge’s overruling cost k stochastic. With probability p the party favoring legal change

presents a stronger argument and k becomes sufficiently low that the judge overrules the existing

precedent. With probability 1 − p the party against legal change presents a stronger argument and the

                                                      22
judge keeps the existing precedent in place.              Furthermore, the parties are allowed to have

heterogeneous beliefs about p : the party in favor of overruling believes that it will present a stronger

argument with probability pO ≥ p , whereas the party in favor of the existing precedent believes that its

argument will be weaker with probability p P ≤ p . pO − p P ≥ 0 measures the divergence in litigants’

beliefs: when pO − p P is higher, there is more disagreement between the parties about their abilities to

present a stronger argument. For simplicity, we assume that pO − p P is unrelated to the extent of the

judges’ disagreement with the current precedent.

       Suppose that the prevailing precedent is pro-V and is equal to AV* . In this situation, dog bites

where a < AV* or a > AO* are not litigated because disputes involving extremely peaceful and extremely

aggressive dogs are adjudicated efficiently by all judges.            Things become interesting when

AV* ≤ a ≤ AO* . Even in this range, if the current appeals court is pro-V, the case is not litigated because

the dog owner is unable to obtain a more favorable ruling. However, if the current court is unbiased or

pro-O, then the dog owner may appeal a trial court ruling against him, hoping to be released from

liability through overruling.     Indeed, if AV* ≤ a ≤ AU* both unbiased and pro-O courts consider

overruling AV* , while if AU* < a ≤ AO* , only pro-V courts do.

       As long as the current judge is willing to consider overruling, the expected utility of the dog

owner from litigating is − pO D − X – where D are the damages awarded in the lawsuit, pO is the

probability that O attaches to losing and X is O’s litigation cost – whereas the victim’s expected utility

from litigating is p P D − X . Litigation then occurs whenever:

                                              ( pO − p P ) D > 2 X                                     (14)

       When condition (12) holds, the dog owner appeals the case and the current precedent is

overruled in his favor with probability p . If the current appellate court is unbiased, the precedent

                                                     23
becomes efficient with probability 1 because at least one among the multitude of dog owners involved

in accidents eventually manages to win the dispute. By the same token, if the current appellate court is

pro-O, then precedent becomes pro-O with probability 1. For these reasons, the selection of disputes

for litigation does not systematically render precedent more efficient. True, if the current court is

unbiased, then the litigation incentives of dog owners are aligned with efficiency, but the same cannot

be said if the current court is pro-O.

       A fuller evaluation of the performance of judge made law under the selection of disputes for

litigation calls for an evaluation of litigants’ incentives under any existing precedent. The symmetry of

our setup implies that the very same condition (12) predicts whether litigation occurs irrespective of

whether the victim or the dog owner is bringing the appeal. We obtain:

Proposition 8. If ( pO − p P ) D ≤ 2 X , the initial precedent sticks forever. If ( pO − p P ) D > 2 X , the

long run distribution of the law is described by Proposition 2 for k = 0.

       Selection of disputes for litigation does not necessarily promote efficiency in the long run. In

our model, inefficient rules are appealed in front of both biased and unbiased judges, creating no

tendency for the law to improve over time. Indeed, in the current example, selection of disputes for

litigation yields the maximal long-run volatility in the law, namely the one prevailing in the basic

model when the overruling cost is zero.

       It is useful to compare our dismal result with those, more optimistic, findings of Priest (1977)

and Rubin (1977). Priest (1977) argues that inefficient laws create larger stakes and are thus litigated

more often than efficient ones, which improves the law over time. In our model, the stakes of the case

are fixed and equal to D. However, if in our model appellate judges are allowed to also set new

damages, the pro-V judges would presumably set extremely high damages and pro-O judges extremely

low ones. For any given rule, this would increase the stakes of litigating in front of a biased judge,


                                                      24
effectively facilitating litigation when the current court is very biased. Strategic litigation in front of

biased judges weakens the effect Priest (1977) had in mind.

       Rubin (1977) argues that inefficient precedents are more likely to be litigated than the efficient

ones if parties are concerned about the future. This effect is due to asymmetric stakes: the gain to the

efficiency oriented party in moving from an inefficient to an efficient rule is greater than the loss to the

inefficiency oriented party. In our model, this effect is unlikely to obtain. As Proposition 8 shows,

conditional on litigation taking place, the law exhibits a lot of volatility. As a result, if – due to judicial

bias – efficient precedents are not more likely to stick in the future than inefficient ones, the litigants’

decision is unlikely to put a lot of weight in the future. This feedback from expected future litigation to

present litigation paves the way for equilibria where high future inefficient litigation leads to a present-

day bias in litigants’ decisions, thereby inducing a lot of inefficient litigation today. This mechanism

weakens the effect Rubin (1977) had in mind.



5.4 Strong Forces Leading to Moderation and Efficiency

       The previous subsections showed that the mere presence of certain moderating factors such as

forward looking judges and the selection of disputes for litigation does not guarantee the law’s

convergence to efficiency. These factors do not prevent overruling from being driven by the bias of the

judge (in conjunction with the bias of litigants), in line with empirical evidence.         These robustness

checks confirm the model’s basic message that overruling increases the volatility of the law without

inducing a tendency toward efficiency.

       Of course, the moderating factors may be sufficiently strong to ensure the law’s convergence to

efficiency or at least to avoid long run volatility in legal rules. This subsection discusses, without

providing formal proofs, some assumptions needed to obtain long run stability.




                                                      25
       Begin with forward looking judges. In this case, even if the cost k of changing the law is low,

convergence to an efficient (or a fixed) legal rule may occur when judges are infinitely lived and

repeatedly interact over their lifetimes. When judges are sufficiently patient, an efficient outcome can

be sustained in equilibrium by a trigger strategy in which judges collectively respond to inefficient

legal change by reverting to the myopic equilibrium, where the precedent is replaced with the current

judge’s preferred legal rule. In equilibrium, a biased judge is discouraged from overruling the initial

efficient precedent: such a deviation would only pay off in the first period, when the biased judge’s

puts his preferred legal rule in place. However, such a deviation imposes two costs on the judge in the

future. First, the judge loses insofar as the average legal rule E(A) prevailing in the long run after a

deviation is worse from the deviant judge’s perspective than the efficient legal rule prevailing in

equilibrium. Second, a risk averse deviant judge loses from the long run equilibrium variance V(A) in

legal rules prevailing after a deviation.

       While these folk-theorem-type results are a theoretical possibility in models with infinitely lived

and patient judges, in reality they are hard to obtain and do not square with the empirical evidence.

The reason is that such results rely on very demanding assumptions concerning the ability of judges to:

1) coordinate on one specific equilibrium strategy among the many possible (and inefficient) ones, and

2) to condition their strategy on the entire history of the game.

       A similar, but perhaps more realistic, accountability mechanism that might induce convergence

toward efficiency hinges on judges’ career concerns. Suppose, for example, that the legislature can

intervene and punish judges who take deviant decisions (Spiller and Tiller, 1997). Then, as long as the

legislature is efficiency oriented, such oversight induces judges to optimally leave an efficient

precedent in place. Strictly speaking, such a model describes better the interaction between legal and

legislative bodies than the autonomous evolution of a common law system of judicial law-making

(unless the body overseeing judicial decision-making is itself a court, e.g., the Supreme Court). More


                                                    26
important, this moderation mechanism is clearly vulnerable to the risk of biased oversight. When the

legislature or the Supreme Court is itself subject to biases, its oversight would induce judges to

adjudicate in a biased, not in an efficient, manner. The results would then be similar to our analysis of

section 4, except that the bias of judicial decisions would reflect the bias of the overseeing body rather

than the bias of the law-making court.

       Finally, having forward looking litigants improves the selection of disputes for litigation. If

litigants consider their future costs and benefits under different legal rules, then – as discussed by Priest

(1977) – inefficient laws tend to generate a larger loss to the efficiency-oriented litigant than a benefit

to the inefficiency-oriented litigant. Such asymmetric stakes imply that inefficient laws are more easily

litigated and thus more likely to be replaced, improving the law’s efficiency over time. Unfortunately,

although this effect can reduce the long run volatility of the law, it cannot ensure convergence to

efficiency: given the incentive to litigate in front of a biased judge described in Section 5.3, efficient

laws will always be litigated and replaced in the long run.



6. Conclusion

       We have considered the evolution of common law under overruling of precedents by appellate

courts, and compared the results to the case of distinguishing. As with distinguishing, we found that

the conditions for ultimate efficiency of judge-made law are implausibly stringent. Strategic behavior

by judges, costliness of radical legal change, and selection of disputes for litigation may mitigate but do

not reverse these pessimistic conclusions. One case of convergence to full efficiency under overruling

occurs when efficiency-oriented judges are more activist than the biased ones, and the preferences of

the biased judges are not too polarized. In some areas of law, however, it is more plausible to expect

that the most biased rather than the most efficiency oriented judges are the most activist.




                                                     27
        We also found that, for our case of overruling, disagreement among judges is likely to

undermine the quality of legal change.               This result implies that, in the areas of law with higher

polarization of judicial views, we expect to see greater volatility of legal rules, as legal rules need not

even converge, and lower efficiency.               This finding contrasts with our results on distinguishing

(Gennaioli and Shleifer, 2007), where some judicial disagreement, and thus some volatility in the law,

is desirable as it allows legal evolution and improves the precision of the law.

        These results point to some strategies for reducing the costs of judicial polarization under

overruling. From an ex-ante perspective, the design and implementation of optimal appointment rules

or training programs may help reduce the share of biased judges in the population and thus to improve

the performance of judge-made law under overruling. From an ex-post perspective, suitably designed

incentives such as short judicial tenure or optimal promotion/demotion policies might also help

improve the performance of overruling. These policies, however, may also entail large costs of

undermining the socially valuable judicial independence (La Porta et al., 2004).

        At a broader level, our pessimistic assessment of the quality of law under overruling simply

points to the value of precedents. The volatility of law under overruling is the flip side of the weakness

of precedent, and the ease of changing it.             With overruling, the evolution of law simply reflects the

volatility of judicial bias.        With distinguishing, because prior legal rules must be respected, the

evolution of law instead reflects its refinement over time, even when judges are biased, and as a

consequence has social benefits. This consideration implies that the preference for distinguishing

relative to overruling by common law appellate courts, especially those in the UK, may be an efficient

resolution of the tension between stability and change characteristic of any system of precedent.8



8
  Although we do not model courts’ choice between distinguishing and overruling, the distinguishing model of Gennaioli
and Shleifer (2007) allows for some speculation. Just like overruling, distinguishing allows judges to rule according to their
biases. However, relative to overruling, distinguishing also allows judges to benefit from the greater precision due to the
introduction of new material dimensions into legal rules. We would then expect judges to prefer distinguishing to
overruling as long as the informational benefit of the former is sufficiently large and overruling is not much cheaper.

                                                             28
Unlike overruling, which encourages appellate courts to adjust the law to their own changing political

or social whims, distinguishing encourages appellate courts to adjust the law to the changing factual

circumstances, thereby fostering efficiency.



7. Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1. The optimal one-dimensional threshold rule AL is defined as

                          AL = arg min (1 / 2) A 2 Λunder + (1 / 2)(1 − A) 2 Λover
                                   A∈[0 ,1]


                                                                                              [                   ]
If Λover , Λunder > 0 , the objective function is convex and AL = (Λover / Λunder ) / 1 + (Λover / Λunder ) is found

by solving the f.o.c. ( AL Λunder − (1 − AL )Λover = 0 ).♠


Proof of Proposition 2. Judge j overrules Ai when:


                                    f j ,i ≡
                                                    (β i − β j )2          ≥ 2k
                                               (1 + β i ) 2 (1 + β j ) 2

Judges’ symmetric behavior considerably restricts the number of cases that we need to look at.
                                                                                  λ2 (π 2 − 1) 2
a) Pro-O ( β i = πλ ); Pro-V ( β i = λ / π ). Now f O ,V (π ) = f V ,O (π ) =                        .
                                                                              (1 + πλ ) 2 (π + λ ) 2

                                                                                         λ2 (π − 1) 2
b) Pro-O ( β i = πλ ); Unbiased ( β i = λ ). Now f O ,U (π ) = f U ,O (π ) =                                .
                                                                                     (1 + πλ ) 2 (1 + λ ) 2

                                                                                         λ2 (π − 1) 2
c) Pro-V ( β i = λ / π ); Unbiased ( β i = λ ). Now f V ,U (π ) = f U ,V (π ) =                             .
                                                                                      (π + λ ) 2 (1 + λ ) 2

f j ,i (π ) increases in π . f i , j (1) = 0 , f O ,V (∞) = 1 , f O ,U (∞) = 1 /(1 + λ ) 2 , f V ,U (∞) = λ2 /(1 + λ ) 2 . Call

π j ,i ∈ [1,+∞ ) ∪ {+ ∞} the level of π above which j overrules i (and vice-versa). Set π i, j = +∞ when i

and j never overrule each other (e.g. π U ,O = +∞ if k > 1 /(1 + λ ) 2 ).                         Notice that for λ ≤ 1 ,

π O ,V ≤ π O ,U ≤ π V ,U . If k > 1 / 2 , precedent does not change; otherwise the law changes if π is large

enough. At λ = 1 , π O ,V = π 1 π O ,U = π V ,U = π 2 and judge made law behaves as in Proposition 2.♠




                                                                    29
Proof of Proposition 3 (and of Corollary 1).                                For every k, expected social losses are
Ei [Λ( Ai )] ≡ α V Λ ( AV ) + α B Λ( AB ) + α O Λ ( AO ) , where AV , AB , AO are the preferred rules of Pro-V,

Benevolent and Pro-O judges, respectively. At k = 0 , it is so because judges always overrule
precedents. At k → +∞ , the initial precedent sticks forever, but uncertainty over the first judge leads to
the same expression. This is also the case for intermediate k’s, because of the symmetry in judicial
behavior: the effect of judge j on law Ai is exactly neutralized by the effect of judge i on A j . Thus,

unless γ = 1 the law does not converge to full efficiency. In line with expression (12), to study the
impact of π on social losses, consider its effect on E ( A j ) and on V ( A j ) . After a little algebra, one

finds that when λ ≤ 1 , E ( A j ) ≤ AL and dE ( A j ) / dπ ≤ 0 . Thus, a higher π distorts E ( A j ) further

away from efficiency. Moreover, it is also the case that dV ( A j ) / dπ ≥ 0 . Hence, polarization increases

social losses.♠


Proof of Proposition 4. Efficiency is attained if Unbiased judges set AL without being overruled by
extremists. This happens if π < π O,U , which is necessary for AL to stay in place. The law can

converge to AL either if Unbiased judges overrule all extremists, i.e. when π ≥ π V ,U where

f V ,U (π V ,U ) = kU , or if Unbiased judges overrule only Pro-O ones, but at the same time Pro-O overrule

Pro-V. This event happens when π ≥ π O ≡ max[π O ,V , π O ,U ] ( f U ,O (π O ,U ) = kU ). Call πˆ = min[π O , π V ,U ].

Then, if π ∈ [πˆ , π O,U ) , the law converges to AL . Clearly, it is always the case that πˆ ≤ π O,U . In order

to draw figure 1, suppose that 0 < k < 1 / 2(1 + λ ) 2 , k fixed. Define now the variable kU / k ∈ [0,1] .

πˆ (kU / k ) starts at πˆ (0) = 1 , ends at πˆ (1) = π O ,U > 1 and it increases continuously in kU / k .♠


Proof of Proposition 5. By inspection.


Proof of Proposition 6. Consider first the case where d ∈ [0,1 / 2] . Suppose A1 ∈ [d ,1 − d ] . Then,

since A*j → U [0,1] , the judge solves:

                              min
                            A1∈[d ,1− d ]
                                                              {[                      ]              }
                                            ( A1 − A*j ) 2 + δ ( A*j ) 3 + (1 − A*j ) 3 / 3 − 2d 3 / 3

thus, he sets A1 = A*j iff A*j ∈ [d ,1 − d ] Suppose instead that judge j sets A1 ≤ d . Then, he solves:



                                                                   30
                     min
                      A ≤d
                      1
                                                   {                                                            }
                         ( A1 − A*j ) 2 + δ (1 − A*j ) 3 / 3 − ( A1 + d − A*j ) 3 / 3 + ( A1 − A*j ) 2 ( A1 + d )

The first derivative of the objective is 2δy 2 + 2 y (δA*j + 1) − δd 2 . y = A1 − A*j is the correction judge j

makes with respect to A*j .                     The candidates for the solution are A1 = 0 or A1 = A*j + Δ + where

Δ + ≡ min   {[ (δA + 1)*
                       j
                                2
                                                           ]             }                      ]
                                    + 2δ 2 d 2 − (δA*j + 1) / 2δ , d − A*j . Thus, A1 ∈ (A*j , d . Notice that Δ + decreases

in A*j . A1 = 0 is never optimal, as the judge prefers A1 = A*j to it. Hence, if A*j ≤ d , A1 = A*j + Δ + .

Suppose that judge j sets A1 ≥ 1 − d . Then, he solves:
                                                   {
                     min ( A1 − A*j ) 2 + δ ( A*j ) 3 / 3 + ( A1 − d − A*j ) 3 / 3 + ( A1 − A*j ) 2 (1 − A1 + d )
                     A1 ≥1− d
                                                                                                                    }
                                                                 [                   ]
The first derivative of the objective is − 2δy 2 + 2 y 1 + δ (1 − A*j ) + δd 2 . Again, at the optimum

                                 ⎧
                                                                     [ 2
                                                                                         ]              ⎫
A1 = A*j + Δ − , where Δ − ≡ max ⎨⎡⎢1 + δ (1 − A*j ) − 1 + δ (1 − A*j ) + 2δ 2 d 2 ⎤⎥ / 2δ ,1 − d − A*j ⎬ .               Thus,
                                 ⎩⎣                                                 ⎦                   ⎭
A1 ∈ (1 − d , A*j ) . Notice that Δ − decreases in A*j . Hence, if A*j ≥ 1 − d , A1 = A*j + Δ − .

         Consider now d ∈ [1 / 2,1] . If A1 ∈ [1 − d , d ] the judge is never overruled. Thus, A1 = A*j iff

A*j ∈ [1 − d , d ] . If judge j sets A1 ≤ 1 − d . Then, by using the same logic of before, one can define
~
Δ + ≡ min   {[ (δA + 1)*
                       j
                                2
                                                           ]                     }
                                    + 2δ 2 d 2 − (δA*j + 1) / 2δ ,1 − d − A*j . Δ + decreases in A*j . Hence, if A*j ≤ d ,
           ~
                                                       ]
A1 = A*j + Δ + , so that A1 ∈ (A*j ,1 − d . Suppose that judge j sets A1 ≥ d .                         Then, one can define

~         ⎧
                                            [   2
                                                           ]                  ⎫
Δ − ≡ max ⎨⎡⎢1 + δ (1 − A*j ) − 1 + δ (1 − A*j ) + 2δ 2 d 2 ⎤⎥ / 2δ , d − A*j ⎬ , where              Δ−    decreases in    A*j .
          ⎩⎣                                                 ⎦                ⎭
                                ~
Hence, if A*j ≥ d , A1 = A*j + Δ − , so that A1 ∈ (d , A*j ) .


Proof of Proposition 7. If d < 1 / 2 , a Pro-V judge sets A1 in {0,1 / 2 − d ,1 − d } . AV* = 0 ; with 1 / 2 − d

and 1 − d the Unbiased and Pro-O judges do not overrule, respectively. A Pro-O judge sets A1 in
{1,1 / 2 + d, d }.     AO* = 1 ; with 1 / 2 + d and d the Unbiased and Pro-V judges do not overrule,

respectively. An Unbiased judge sets A1 in {1 / 2, d ,1 − d } . AU* = 1 / 2 ; with 1 − d and d
the Pro-O and Pro-V judges do not overrule, respectively. There are two cases to consider.
                                                                                               [
a. d < 1 / 4 . A Pro-V judge gets (δ / 4)[2 − γ ] if A1 = 0 ; (1 / 2 − d ) 2 + δ (1 / 2)(1 − γ ) + γ (1 / 2 − d ) 2 if      ]
                                        [                                    ]
A1 = 1 / 2 − d , (1 − d ) 2 + δ (1 / 2)(1 − γ )(1 − d ) 2 + γ (1 / 4) if A1 = 1 − d . The judge prefers 0 to 1 − d .

                                                                  31
He thus sets 1 / 2 − d iff γ ≥ γ B ,1 = (1 / 2 − d ) 2 / δd (1 − d ) . Judges’ behavior is symmetric, hence in the

same case a Pro-O sets A1 = 1 / 2 − d . What does an Unbiased judge do?. He gets δ (1 − γ )(1 / 4) if

                                                [                          ]
A1 = 1 / 2 , (1 / 2 − d ) 2 + (δ (1 − γ ) / 2) (1 / 2 − d ) 2 + 1 / 4 if A1 = d or if A1 = 1 − d . He thus sets 1/2 iff

γ ≥ γ U ,1 = 1 − (1 / 2 − d ) 2 /(δ / 2)d (1 − d ) . Thus, for γ ≥ γ 1 = max(γ U ,1 , γ B ,1 ) , Pro-V , Unbiased and

Pro-O judges set A1 = 1 / 2 − d ,1 / 2 + d and 1/2 respectively.

                                                                  [                                            ]
b. d ≥ 1 / 4 . A Pro-V judge gets (1 / 2 − d ) 2 + δ (1 / 2)(1 − γ ) + (1 / 2)(1 + γ )(1 / 2 − d ) 2 if A1 = 1 / 2 − d ,

(1 − d ) 2 + δ (1 / 2)(1 + γ )(1 − d ) 2 if A1 = 1 − d . The judge prefers chooses 1 / 2 − d over 1 − d whenever
γ ≥ γ OV = [d + (δ / 2)(1 / 4 + d ) − 3 / 4] /(δ / 2)(14 / 8 − d )              and         1/ 2 − d         over        0    iff

γ ≥ γ VU = (1 / 2 − d ) 2 (1 + δ / 2) /(1 / 4 − d 2 ) . He thus sets A1 = 1 / 2 − d iff γ ≥ γ B , 2 = max(γ OV , γ VU ) .

In the same case a Pro-O judge sets A1 = 1 / 2 + d . An Unbiased judge gets δ (1 − γ )(1 / 4) if A1 = 1 / 2 ,

                  [                                           ]
(1 / 2 − d ) 2 + δ (1 / 2)(1 + γ )(1 / 2 − d ) 2 + (1 − γ ) / 8 if A1 = d or if A1 = 1 − d . He sets A1 = 1 / 2 iff

γ ≥ γ U , 2 = [(δ / 2)d (1 − d ) − (1 / 2 − d ) 2 ]/( d 2 − d + 1 / 2) .       For γ ≥ γ 2 = max(γ U , 2 , γ B , 2 ) ,   Pro-V ,

Unbiased and Pro-O judges set A1 = 1 / 2 − d ,1 / 2 + d and 1/2 respectively. To conclude the proof, set
γ~ equal to γ 1 if d < 1 / 4 and equal to γ 2 if d ∈ [1 / 4,1 / 2 ) .




                                                                      32
                                             Bibliography
Brenner, Saul, Spaeth, Harold, J., 1995. Stare Indecisis: The Alteration of Precedent on the U.S.

       Supreme Court, 1946-1992. Cambridge University Press, New York, NY.

Brenner, Saul, Stier, Marc, 1996. Retesting Segal and Spaeth’s Stare Decisis Model. American

       Journal of Political Science 40, 1036-1048.

Cooter, Robert, D., Kornhauser, Lewis, A., 1979. Can Litigation Improve the Law without the Help of

       Judges. Journal of Legal Studies 9, 139-163.

Cooter, Robert, D., Kornhauser, Lewis, A., Lane, David, 1979. Liability Rules, Limited Information,

       and the Role of Precedent. Bell Journal of Economics 10, 366-373.

Frank, Jerome, N., 1930. Law and the Modern Mind. Brentano’s, New York, NY.

Gennaioli, Nicola, 2004. Contracting in the Shadow of the Law. Mimeo. Harvard University.

Gennaioli, Nicola, Shleifer, Andrei, 2007. The Evolution of Common Law. Journal of Political

       Economy, forthcoming.

George, Tracey, E., Epstein, Lee, 1992. On the Nature of Supreme Court Decision Making.

       American Political Science Review 86, 323-337.

Hansford, Thomas, G., Spriggs II, James, F., 2006. The Politics of Precedent in the U.S. Supreme

        Court. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.

Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 1897. The Path of the Law. Harvard Law Review 10, 457-478.

Klein, David, E., 2002. Making Law in the United States Courts of Appeals. Cambridge University

       Press, Cambridge, U.K.

Kornhauser, Lewis, A., 1992. Modeling Collegial Courts, II. Legal Doctrine. Journal of Law,

       Economics, and Organization 8, 441-470.

Landes, William, M., Posner, Richard, A., 1987. The Economic Structure of Tort Law. Harvard

       University Press, Cambridge, MA.


                                                   33
La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, Pop-Eleches, Cristian, Shleifer, Andrei, 2004.

       Judicial Checks and Balances. Journal of Political Economy 112, 445-470.

MacKuen, Michael, B., McGuire, Kevin, T., 2005. Precedent and Preferences on the U.S. Supreme

       Court. Mimeo. University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.

Pinello, Daniel, R., 1999. Linking Party to Judicial Ideology in American Courts: A Meta-analysis. The

        Justice System Journal 3, 219-254.

Posner, Richard, A., 2003 (1st ed. 1973). The Economic Analysis of Law, 6th ed. Little Brown, Boston,

       MA.

Posner, Richard, A., 2005. Judicial Behavior and Performance: an Economic Approach. Florida State

       University Law Review 32, 1259-1279.

Priest, George, L., 1977. The Common Law Process and the Selection of Efficient Rules. Journal of

        Legal Studies 6, 65-82.

Radin, Max, 1925. The Theory of Judicial Decision: or How Judges Think. American Bar

       Association Journal xx, 357-362.

Revesz, Richard, L., 1997. Environmental Regulation, Ideology, and the D.C. Circuit. Virginia Law

        Review 83, 1717-1772.

Rowland, Charles, K., Carp, Robert, A., 1996. Politics and Judgment in Federal District Courts. The

       University Press of Kansas, Lawrence, KS.

Rubin, Paul, H., 1977. Why is the Common Law Efficient?. Journal of Legal Studies 6, 51-63.

Schwartz, Edward, P., 1992. Policy, Precedent, and Power: A Positive Theory of Supreme-Court

       Decision Making. Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 8, 219-252.

Segal, Jeffrey, A., Spaeth, Harold, J., 1996. The Influence of Stare Decisis on the Votes of the

       United States Supreme Court Justices. American Journal of Political Science 40, 971-1003.

Segal, Jeffrey, A., Spaeth, Harold, J., 2002. The Supreme Court and the Attitudinal Model Revisited.


                                                   34
       Cambridge University Press, New York, NY.

Songer, Donald, R., Lindquist, Stefanie, A., 1996. Not the Whole Story: The Impact of Justices’

       Values on Supreme Court Decision Making. American Journal of Political Science 40,

       1049-1063.

Spiller, Pablo, T., Tiller, Emerson, H., 1997. Decision Costs and the Strategic Design of Administrative

       Process and Judicial Review. Journal of Legal Studies 26, 347-370.

Stone, Julius, 1985. Precedent and the Law: Dynamics of Common Law Growth. Butterworths,

       Sydney, Australia.

Sunstein, Cass, R., Schkade, David, A., Ellman, Lisa Michelle, 2004. Ideological Voting on Federal

       Courts of Appeals: a Preliminary Investigation. Stanford Law Review 90, 301-354.




                                                  35
