                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            ACTIVITY-BASED VALUATION OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES

                                        Charles W. Calomiris
                                           Doron Nissim

                                        Working Paper 12918
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12918


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2007




The authors gratefully acknowledge the helpful comments and suggestions made by seminar participants
at Columbia University and Yale University. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Charles W. Calomiris and Doron Nissim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Activity-Based Valuation of Bank Holding Companies
Charles W. Calomiris and Doron Nissim
NBER Working Paper No. 12918
February 2007
JEL No. G12,G21,G3

                                              ABSTRACT

Standard valuation methods do not lend themselves to bank holding companies. Banks create value
through the types of assets and liabilities they create (e.g., lending and deposit taking relationships).
Bank income streams reflect heterogeneous sources of income which differ in their margins of profitability
and persistence. Our approach to valuation permits potential differences in the composition of assets,
liabilities, income and expenses, and in the profitability and persistence of different sources of income,
to reflect themselves in estimated relationships that relate the composition of the balance sheet and
income statement to bank value. Our approach explains substantial cross-sectional variation in observed
market-to-book values, and residuals from cross-sectional regressions of market-to-book values are
useful for predicting future stock returns. Predictable future variation in returns does not reflect priced
risk factors, but is related to trading costs.

Charles W. Calomiris
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu

Doron Nissim
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
dn75@columbia.edu
1. INTRODUCTION

       Roughly 20% of the S&P 500 and Russell 3000 consist of financial services companies,

with banking constituting the largest industry in this sector. Despite their importance in the stock

market, there is no existing satisfactory valuation approach for banks comparable to the

discounted cash flow approach used for nonfinancial firms. This study develops and tests a

valuation model for Bank Holding Companies (BHCs), which is based on the cross-sectional

relationship between the market-to-book ratio and proxies for the value generated by various

bank activities and bank attributes. The explanatory variables are constructed using data

extracted from regulatory FR Y-9C reports, which contain detailed and uniform information on

the assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses of BHCs. We find that the model performs well in

explaining cross-sectional differences in the market-to-book ratio, especially for large BHCs. We

also find that the model’s residual is strongly related to subsequent stock returns. That is, the

model’s inability to fully explain cross-sectional variation in the market-to-book ratio is due in

part to market inefficiency rather than to model error. While the magnitude of short-term market

mispricing decreases with larger bank size and greater stock liquidity, the model consistently

predicts excess portfolio returns for both large and small banks. For example, of the 18 quarters

examined, excess returns are positive in all 18 quarters for a portfolio of small bank stocks

selected on the basis of large estimated residuals for the market-to-book ratio, and excess returns

are positive in 17 of 18 quarters for a similarly constructed portfolio of large banks’ stocks.

       The estimated coefficients of the valuation model are generally consistent with

expectations. For example, we find that persistent streams of noninterest income have larger

valuation coefficients than less persistent ones. Further, the model generates reasonable estimates

of the contributions of different bank activities to value. For example, the valuation coefficients




                                                  1
of loans average about 1.08, suggesting that investors price existing loans and related intangibles

8% above their gross book value. Similarly, the average valuation coefficient of noninterest-

bearing deposits is -0.89 and that of interest-bearing core deposits is -0.92. While these

coefficients likely do not capture all valuation implications of the related instruments (e.g.,

lending and deposit-taking activities also affect noninterest income and noninterest expense,

which we account for separately), the relative magnitudes are consistent with expectations.

Moreover, the estimated effects on bank value of activity-specific attributes generally have the

expected signs and are significant. For example, the valuation coefficient of loans increases with

average loan yield and decreases with the relative magnitudes of nonperforming loans and credit

losses. Similarly, the valuation coefficient of deposits decreases (i.e., becomes more negative)

with the average interest rate on deposits and increases with the relative magnitudes of

transactions and savings accounts, which typically have greater “relationship” value than

certificates of deposit.

        Although our model is not structural in the sense that it is not based on explicit cash flow

forecasting, it nevertheless allows us to compare the value contributions of different banking

activities and analyze their correlations. This analysis yields many interesting insights. For

example, we find that the gross value contribution of noninterest income (i.e., the present value

of expected future noninterest income) is at least as large as that of loans or deposits, particularly

for large firms. However, its correlation with the value impact of noninterest expense is

significantly more negative than those of lending and deposit-taking activities. Thus, the net

value contribution of noninterest income may be smaller than that of loans or deposits. Another

interesting result is the strong positive correlation between the values created by loans and




                                                  2
deposits, which highlights the difficulty in decomposing the value of multi-dimensional customer

relationships into lending and deposit-taking intangibles.

       The paper proceeds as follows. The valuation model is developed in Section 2. Section 3

discusses the data, and Section 4 presents empirical results. Section 5 concludes.



2. DEVELOPMENT OF THE VALUATION MODEL

2.1 Background

       When valuing non-financial service firms, most analysts first estimate the value of

operations and then subtract the value of debt, typically estimated using its book value. The

value of operations is calculated by discounting flow measures such as free cash flow or

EBITDA, and little attention is paid to book values. In contrast, when valuing BHCs, analysts

value the equity directly and often focus initially on book values. This different approach reflects

the notion that banks are financial intermediaries who create value by acquiring loans and

deposits on favorable terms, which increase asset returns relative to the cost of funds. For

example, one approach for valuing BHCs is to start with the book value of equity and adjust it

for differences between the fair and book values of selected assets and liabilities. The resulting

adjusted book value is then marked up based on the perceived value of intangibles using market-

to-book prices of comparable firms.

       Such a valuation method is not very satisfying since it does not take into account in any

systematic way the particular attributes of the subject firm’s operations, and since it uses market

prices of comparables to perform the valuation (making valuation extremely dependent on

market prices for other firms, which may not be correct). While it may be necessary and

desirable to use market values of assets in the valuation of financial institutions, such an




                                                 3
approach should utilize all available information about the subject firm, and should combine the

information in a systematic way. Current valuation practice often falls short.

       A proper approach to valuing BHCs should take into account the unique combination of

features that affect the values of bank assets, liabilities, and customer relationships, and

recognize the ways in which the accounting concepts used for valuing nonfinancial firms differ

from those that are relevant for financial firms:

•   For BHCs, operating and financing activities are intertwined, and financing activities are

    essential for value creation. Thus, a valuation approach that focuses on operating activities

    would omit a major part of value creation for banks.

•   The fair values of many financial assets and liabilities of BHCs are relatively close to book

    values. Accordingly, balance sheet amounts can be used to value many assets and liabilities,

    or at least serve as a reasonable starting point for valuation.

•   Reported earnings of BHCs include relatively small amounts of depreciation and other

    expired costs, which often have weak relation to value. Therefore, there is no need to “undo”

    such items from the earnings of BHCs (as is done, for example, in free cash flow or EBITDA

    calculations).

•   BHCs are required by regulators to maintain minimum equity capital at levels proportional to

    their assets. This makes book equity a relatively useful measure of the scale of bank

    operations. Also, deviations of book capital from minimum regulatory capital reflect, inter

    alia, bank management of regulatory risk, which in turn reflects information about particular

    bank circumstances and risk management practices. Thus, the regulation of bank equity ratios

    enhances the statistical information contained in the levels of equity book value chosen by

    banks.



                                                    4
•   BHCs’ accounts provide uniquely detailed and consistent information about their assets,

    liabilities, revenues and expenses, which makes conditional cross-sectional analyses (such as

    regression analysis) more informative.

       In contrast, non-financial service firms generate value primarily in operations, and the

fair values of most of their assets and liabilities are substantially different from book values. In

addition, for many non-financial service firms, depreciation, amortization and other expenses

which measure expired costs based on rather arbitrary assumptions are relatively large,

prompting analysts to use performance measures which exclude these charges (e.g., EBITDA,

cash from operations). Further, the book value of equity for many non-financial service firms is

small or even negative and is hardly related to market value, often rendering the market-to-book

ratio a useless valuation metric. Non-financial service firms are also less regulated than BHCs

and consequently their financial disclosures are less detailed and uniform than those of BHCs.

       In recent years, however, some of the differences between BHCs and non-financial

service firms have diminished. In particular, due to deregulation, asset securitization,

technological innovations in information processing and telecommunication, development of

new financial products such as credit derivatives, and other changes in the financial markets,

BHCs now derive substantial portions of their income from fees and other sources of noninterest

income such as investment banking, asset management and securitizations. Moreover, unlike the

traditional fees that banks generate on servicing deposits and loans, which are related to

investments in tangible assets, new sources of noninterest income are generated primarily by

investing in human capital, technology and other intangible assets with little or no book value at




                                                 5
all.1 Accordingly, a pure balance sheet approach for valuing BHCs is less appropriate today than

it was in the past.

         In this paper, we develop a valuation model that takes these unique aspects of

contemporary BHCs into account by combining information from the balance sheet and the

income statement. Our model, developed in the next sections, estimates the cross-sectional

relationship between the market-to-book ratio and proxies for the value generated by various

bank activities and bank attributes, where these proxies are constructed using a flexible approach

that combines information from bank balance sheets and income statements.



2.2 Valuation Approach

         BHCs engage in different types of activities, including generating, acquiring and

servicing loans; investing in securities; trading a wide range of financial instruments on

securities and futures exchanges, as well as the over-the-counter (OTC) markets; obtaining and

maintaining deposits; borrowing; providing fee-based financial services (e.g., fiduciary,

advisory, underwriting, brokerage, and acting as counterparties for clients in swaps and other

hedges); and selling and securitizing financial assets. To a first-order approximation, the value of

a BHC (VALUE) is the sum of the values generated in the various activities. Conceptually, the

value created in activity j can be expressed as the product of the amount invested in the activity

(INVESTj) and the average value per dollar of investment in the activity (vj). INVESTj and vj

typically are not directly observable. For some subset of bank activities, it is possible to use the

book value of net assets engaged in the activity as a reasonable proxy for invested capital


1
 Under current U.S. GAAP, “costs of internally developing, maintaining, or restoring intangible assets (including
goodwill) that are not specifically identifiable, that have indeterminate lives, or that are inherent in a continuing
business and related to an entity as a whole, shall be recognized as an expense when incurred.” (Statement of
Financial Accounting Standard (SFAS) No. 142, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, para. 10).


                                                           6
(INVESTj), and use the profitability, risk and other characteristics of the activities as proxies for

the average value per dollar invested in the activity (that is, as proxies for vj).

        In contrast, for activities that involve primarily intangible assets, it is difficult to develop

measures of invested capital. We thus model the value of intangible-intensive activities based

solely on their earnings stream rather than the amount and profitability of invested capital.

        Our valuation model can be presented as follows:

                             VALUE = ∑ INVEST j × v j + ∑ γ i × EARi                                 (1)
                                          j                   i



where the first summation is over all bank activities that involve primarily tangible assets and

liabilities where book values serve as reasonable proxies for invested capital, while the second

summation is over activities that involve primarily intangible assets. Earnings in the second

summation are captured by EARi, where i = 1, 2, …, indexes the set of income and expense

variables that are included in the model to capture the value of intangible-intensive activities, and

γi, i = 1, 2, …, are the corresponding valuation coefficients (i.e., earnings capitalization

coefficients). Dividing both sides of the equation by the book value of tangible common equity

(BOOK), we arrive at the following expression:

                                  VALUE                                                              (2)
                                        = ∑ w j × v j + ∑ γ i × pi
                                  BOOK    j             i



where wj = INVESTj / BOOK and pi = EARi / BOOK.

        While bank value reflects the sum of the values generated in the various activities, it is

also affected in other ways by bank attributes such as size (e.g., a “too big to fail” implicit

subsidy may exist for some large banks) and by managerial factors, such as the extent of success

in asset-liability management and diversification which affect bank risk and the costs of

regulatory intervention. We accordingly add a third group of variables:



                                                   7
                                VALUE                                                                              (3)
                                      = ∑ w j × v j + ∑ γ i × p i + ∑ λl × a l
                                BOOK    j             i             l



where al, l = 1, 2, …, represent other bank-level attributes (not captured by v j or pi

characteristics) that may affect equity value, and λl are the corresponding valuation coefficients.

         Our approach for modeling the value of tangible-related activities (i.e., ∑ w j × v j )
                                                                                                         j



requires that we estimate vj—the average value per dollar investment in activity j—for each such

activity. This is straightforward for activities that generate assets or liabilities with available fair

values and small associated intangibles, such as investments in available-for-sale or held-to-

maturity securities. For these activities we measure vj as the ratio of reported fair value to the

activity’s book value. Accordingly, wj × vj for these activities is equal to the ratio of reported fair

value to the book value of tangible common equity (the activity’s book value cancels out). For

other tangible-related activities, we measure wj as the ratio of the activity’s book value to the

book value of tangible common equity, and we specify vj as a linear combination of a constant

and proxies for the profitability, growth and risk of the activity.2

         The next section (Section 2.3) discusses the specific constructs we use to model the

values of the various activities and the motivation for these variables. While this discussion is

important for understanding how we capture the value of each activity, readers interested in

skipping ahead to our empirical findings should be able to follow the presentation of our findings

in Section 4 without reading Section 2.3 in advance. Section 2.4 provides a summary of the

model and variables, and Appendix A details the FR Y-9C data items used in calculating each

variable.



2
 An important consideration in specifying the model is to restrict the number of free parameters. Therefore, for
some activities we specify vj as a linear combination of a small number of variables or even just a constant.


                                                         8
2.3 The Variables

         All variables are measured using information from FR Y-9C reports, which are prepared

by BHCs for each calendar quarter, and include calendar year-to-date income statement, end-of-

quarter balance sheet, and supplementary information.3

Loans and Leases

         Consistent with much of the theoretical literature on value creation by banks (e.g.,

Diamond 1984), for many BHCs, loans and leases are the primary driver of value on the asset

side. Banks’ ability to generate value by investing in securities (the main alternative to loans) is

limited as most securities are traded in competitive markets. In contrast, banks are often able to

generate value in lending activities due to their special access to customer relationships and

potential market power. Thus, the economic value of existing loans is typically larger than their

book value, and this difference possibly could explain a large portion of the difference between

the market and book values of equity. The value premium of existing loans reflects the effect of

access to customer relationships and the ability to monitor borrowers and control their activities,

which result in current and future (expected) earnings that more than compensate for the

economic (risk-adjusted) cost of funding the loans. Moreover, since the value premium of

existing loans increases with the strength of customer relationships, it may also proxy for

expected value creation in future lending.

         We model the value created in lending activities as the ratio of loans and leases to

tangible common equity (wLOANS) times the average value associated with a dollar investment in



3
 FR Y-9C reports are available at http://chicagofed.org/economic_research_and_data/bhc_data.cfm. These data
become available about two to three months after the end of each quarter (e.g., data for the third quarter of 2004
became available at the beginning of December 2004).


                                                          9
loans (vLOANS), which in turn is specified as a linear combination of an intercept and the

following seven variables:

           The average yield on loans and leases (YIELDLOANS). All else equal, the value of

existing loans and leases and the value of lending relationships increase with the loans’ average

yield.

           The ratio of the allowance for loan and lease losses to the gross book value of loans and

leases other than those held for sale (ALLOW). All else equal, the value of existing loans and

leases and the value of lending relationships decrease with the loans’ credit risk. On the other

hand, there is a possibly offsetting effect related to the value of relationships. Firms develop

relationships with bank lenders to mitigate the costs of screening and monitoring attendant to

borrowing, which are higher for high-risk firms or firms with less transparent credit risks. So

high risk loans may indicate more valuable lending relationships. Thus, ALLOW captures the net

effect of loan risk related to allowances, less the value of relationships correlated with risk that

are not captured elsewhere in the model. The allowance for loan and lease losses represents

management’s estimate of the amount of loans and leases held for investment that the bank will

be unable to collect, based on current information and events as of the date of the financial

statements.4 Thus, the allowance-to-loans ratio should reflect the extent to which the bank’s

loans are at risk of not being repaid.5

           The ratio of nonperforming loans and leases to the gross book value of loans and leases

(NPL). Prior research has demonstrated that banks often manipulate the allowance for loan and

lease losses, hence reducing its ability to proxy for credit risk (e.g., Beaver et al., 1989; Elliott et


4
    Loans and leases held for sale are reported at the lower of cost or fair value and therefore require no allowance.
5
 As discussed below, we include more than one measure of loan risk, which complicates the interpretation of the
measured effect of the allowance-to-loans ratio.


                                                            10
al., 1991; Griffin and Wallach, 1991). The NPL-to-loans ratio may therefore contain incremental

information about credit risk. Of course, NPLs may not be a perfect measure of portfolio risk,

since banks have some discretion in measuring nonperformance (e.g., loan terms can be recast to

avoid delinquency, a practice sometimes referred to as “evergreening”). To increase the

comparability of NPL in the cross-section, we include in the NPL measure all loans and leases

past due 90 days or more that are still accruing interest. This adjustment is important since banks

differ in the delinquency periods which trigger non-accrual classification.

         Average rate of credit losses on loans and leases (CHARGE). ALLOW and NPL reflect

information about the credit risk of existing loans, but both of these measures depend somewhat

on discretionary management practices for measuring loan quality and gross charge-offs. For this

reason, ALLOW and NPL may not fully capture the credit risk inherent in the bank’s lending

activities. For example, firms that employ relatively optimistic quality measurement policies for

reported loans will have low levels of ALLOW and NPL, even if their loans’ credit risk is

relatively large. Also, firms that use conservative charge-off policies will have low levels of

ALLOW and NPL, since they remove large portions of problem loans from their books (the

allowance and NPL relate to reported loans only). We therefore include CHARGE, the

annualized ratio of net loan charge offs to average loans and leases during the quarter, as an

additional proxy for credit risk.6

         The ratio of consumer loans to the gross book value of loans and leases (CONSUMER).

The rate of credit losses is typically highest for consumer loans. We therefore include

CONSUMER to further capture the expected rate of credit losses on the loan portfolio.



6
 Note that while gross charge-offs is affected by management discretion regarding the events that trigger charge-off,
net charge-offs is less sensitive to variation in charge-off policies since firms that use conservative charge-off
policies have large recoveries which offset the inflated charge-offs.


                                                         11
         The ratio of commercial loans to the gross book value of loans and leases (COMMER).

For most banks, the rate of credit losses on commercial and industrial loans is substantially larger

than that of real estate loans. Moreover, credit losses on commercial and industrial loans are less

predictable than those of most other loans, which may further reduce their value (holding

constant yield and other relevant characteristics).7

         Annual growth in loans and leases (GROWTHLOANS). This variable is a proxy for the

growth of lending opportunities, which should be positively associated with bank value. We

measure the rate of growth in the gross book value of loans and leases from a year ago through

the end of the current quarter.8 To reduce the potential for outliers to drive our results, we

measure all growth ratios using averages of beginning-of-period and end-of-period values in the

denominator (instead of beginning-of-period values).

         To sum up, we specify vLOANS as follows:

        vLOANS = α1 + α 2YIELDLOAN + α 3 ALLOW + α 4 NPL + α 5CHARGE
                  + α 6CONSUMER + α 7 COMMER + α 8GROWTH LOANS                                                      (4)

and, as discussed above, we model the value created in lending activities as the product of wLOANS

and vLOANS.

Core Deposits

         On the liability side, banks generate value primarily by obtaining and maintaining

deposits which carry low or zero interest. Deposits contribute to earnings and value by reducing

7
  Banks’ loan portfolios consist primarily of real estate loans (the largest group), commercial and industrial loans,
and consumer loans. Other loans include loans to depository institutions, loans to farmers, loans to foreign
governments and institutions, and lease financing receivables. Similar to real estate loans, these loans generally have
low credit risk. We therefore treat all loans other than consumer and commercial as one group, with their average
pricing being captured by the intercept of the loan value expression (equation (4) below).
8
 An alternative approach is to measure the growth in loans and leases during the current quarter. Quarter-to-quarter
growth, however, may be affected by seasonality. For example, short-term commercial loans that are used to fund
working capital are likely to vary over the fiscal year and across banks (so using cross-sectional regressions does not
solve this problem).


                                                          12
banks’ financing costs and creating “cross-selling” opportunities, which allow banks to generate

earnings from selling non-deposit services to depositors. In most cases, the book value of

deposits, which is generally equal to the amount payable on demand, overstates the economic

liability attached to deposits. The contribution of deposits to bank value increases with the spread

between market borrowing rates and the average interest rate on deposits, since this spread

reflects the impact of deposits on net interest income (compared to the alternative of funding

earning assets with capital market borrowings). The value contribution of deposits also increases

with service charges, cross selling opportunities for the particular customer niche, and the

stability of deposits, and it decreases with non-interest costs of servicing the deposit and the

forgone interest on required reserves. These and other characteristics (e.g., deposits growth) also

proxy for the future value expected to be created by deposits—the core deposit intangible—

which is typically omitted from the balance sheet.9 We accordingly model the value of the core

deposit intangible combined with the value of existing deposits.

         Because the average interest rate on core deposits is a primary determinant of their value

contribution, we model noninterest-bearing deposits (NONINTDEPO) and interest-bearing core

deposits (INTCOREDEPO) separately.10 In both cases, similar to our modeling of the value of

lending activities, we estimate the value associated with deposits and the related intangible as the

product of the deposits-to-equity ratio (wNONINTDEPO for noninterest-bearing deposits and


9
  The core deposit intangible is recognized on the balance sheet only when the branches giving rise to this asset were
purchased from other banks or in a business combination that is accounted for using the purchase method
(mandatory for acquisitions consummated after 2001, under SFAS 141). Organically developed core deposit
intangibles are never recognized. When recognized, the core deposit intangible is amortized to earnings over a
period selected by the bank.
10
  Note that the value created from a low deposit interest rate should be measured relative to some money market
benchmark interest rate. Because banks participate in the same market for such instruments, and because we control
for common factors that affect all banks at any moment in time, and which are allowed to vary over time, our
interest rates can be expressed in simple levels rather than as differentials with respect to a common market
benchmark.


                                                         13
wINTCOREDEPO for interest-bearing deposits) and the average value associated with a dollar of

deposits (vNONINTDEPO and vINTCOREDEPO respectively). If deposits do not contribute to bank value,

vNONINTDEPO and vINTCOREDEPO should equal -1; if deposits add value, vNONINTDEPO and vINTCOREDEPO

should be greater than -1 consistent with the economic liability attached to deposits being smaller

than their book value.

         Expected growth in core deposits is a primary determinant of the core deposit intangible.

We use the annual rate of growth in noninterest-bearing deposits through the end of the quarter

(GROWTHNONINTDEPO) as a proxy for future growth opportunities, and accordingly model the

average value associated with a dollar of noninterest-bearing deposits (vNONINTDEPO) as follows:

                                    v NONINTDEPO = β1 + β 2 GROWTH NONINTDEPO                                        (5)

To obtain the total value associated with noninterest-bearing deposits, we multiply vNONINTDEPO

by wNONINTDEPO.

         We model vINTCOREDEPO as a linear combination of an intercept and the following

variables:

         Average interest rate on interest-bearing core deposits (INTINTCOREDEPO). This variable

should be negatively related to vINTCOREDEPO for two reasons. First, all else equal, the economic

liability associated with existing time deposits increases with their average interest rate. Second,

the current interest rate on core deposits predicts future interest rates, which in turn affect the

value of the core deposits intangible.11




11
  The value of the core deposits intangible is equal to the present value of net interest savings in future periods due
to the use of core deposits instead of borrowed money to fund assets, plus the value added from cross-selling
services to depositors, and minus the present value of cash outflows required to obtain and maintain core deposits.
The latter benefits and costs are reflected primarily in noninterest income and expense, which we account for
separately.


                                                          14
       The ratio of interest-bearing transaction accounts to interest-bearing core deposits

(NOW), and the ratio of saving accounts to interest-bearing core deposits (SAVINGS). Interest-

bearing core deposits include NOW, ATS, and other interest-bearing transaction accounts,

money market deposits and other savings accounts, and time deposits of less than $100,000. The

average interest cost and stability of deposits, and therefore their value implications, are not

identical across the various categories of deposits. Although we include the average interest cost

of interest-bearing deposits as an explanatory variable, this variable is not likely to fully capture

the value implications of differences in interest cost across deposit categories. For example, a

bank that generated large amounts of time deposits during a period of particularly low interest

rates is not likely to be able to sustain the low interest cost of deposits. In contrast, a bank that

has primarily NOW accounts is likely to have persistently low interest cost. We therefore include

NOW and SAVINGS to capture the value implications of the composition of core deposits.

       Annual growth in interest-bearing core deposits (GROWTHINTCOREDEPO). Expected

growth in core deposits affects the value of the core deposit intangible. We use the rate of growth

in interest-bearing core deposits from their balance a year ago through the end of the quarter as a

proxy for future growth opportunities.

       To sum up, we specify vINTCOREDEPO as follows:

     vINTCOREDEPO = δ 1 + δ 2 INTINTCOREDEPO + δ 3 NOW + δ 4 SAVINGS + δ 5GROWTH INTCOREDEPO      (6)

To obtain the value associated with noninterest-bearing deposits, we multiply vINTCOREDEPO by

wINTCOREDEPO.

Securities

       Most securities are traded in relatively liquid and efficient capital markets, so banks’

ability to create value by investing in securities is limited. We measure the portion of the value-



                                                 15
to-book ratio (the dependent variable of equation (3)) attributable to investments in securities as

equal to the ratio of the fair value of investment securities to the book value of tangible common

equity (FVSEC). This formulation posits that the contribution of marketable securities to the value

of the bank is captured by the market value of those securities.

Cash and Cash-equivalent Instruments

       This item includes “cash and balances due from depository institutions” and “federal

funds sold and securities purchased under agreements to resell.” Similar to investment securities,

the ability of banks to generate value from these investments is rather limited since the market

for borrowing reserves among banks is highly competitive. We measure the portion of the value-

to-book ratio of equity due to cash instruments as equal to the ratio of cash and cash-equivalent

instruments to the book value of tangible common equity (FVCASH). The assumption of market

competition translates into assuming that short-term cash instruments are priced similarly across

banks at the face value of the instruments (no bank makes a significant premium relative to the

fed funds rate from lending fed funds).

       The effect on earnings from holding reserves at the Fed at below market interest is

captured elsewhere in our model, since it is directly related to the composition of deposits. Recall

that banks’ motive for holding reserves is largely the regulatory requirements related to deposits.

Holding cash against deposits induces a cost of foregone interest income on assets held as cash.

This cost of reserves is accounted for indirectly in the valuation of deposits by allowing the value

of deposits to vary according to the proportion of deposits that take the form of transaction

accounts (which require cash reserves).

Trading Assets and Liabilities

       We measure the portion of the BHC’s value-to-book ratio due to existing trading assets




                                                16
and liabilities as the difference between the fair values of trading assets and trading liabilities,

divided by the book value of tangible common equity (FVTRADING). Unlike cash and investment

securities, the fair value of existing trading assets and liabilities is not likely to fully capture the

value created in trading activities, since banks differ in their abilities to profit from trading. We

proxy for the ability of the BHC to generate value in future trading activities by using the amount

of trading revenue included in noninterest income, as discussed in detail below.

Debt Maturing or Repricing within the Next Year

       This category includes the following instruments: federal funds purchased and securities

sold under agreements to repurchase, domestic time deposits of $100,000 or more with a

remaining maturity of one year or less, commercial paper, subordinated notes and debentures and

other borrowed money with remaining maturity of one year or less, long-term debt that reprices

within one year, and interest-bearing foreign deposits. For these competitively-priced

instruments, book value provides a reasonable approximation of fair value. We accordingly

measure the impact of these instruments on the BHC’s value-to-book ratio as equal to their book

value divided by tangible common equity (FVSTD).

Fixed-rate Long-term Borrowing

       We measure fixed-rate long-term borrowing as the total of domestic time deposits of

$100,000 or more with a remaining maturity of more than one year, and long term debt that does

not reprice within the next year. Unlike short-term borrowing, the fair value of these instruments

may deviate significantly and systematically from their book value, due primarily to changes in

market interest rates. We therefore model the portion of the value-to-book ratio of equity due to

these instruments as equal to a cross-sectional coefficient (to be determined by the regression)

times the ratio of the instruments’ book value to the book value of tangible common equity




                                                  17
(wLTD). Our model allows these cross-sectional coefficients to vary in sign and magnitude over

time in response to movements in market interest rates (which affect the underlying value of

long-term debts).

Other Tangible Assets

       Other tangible assets are calculated as the sum of premises and fixed assets, other real

estate owned, investment in unconsolidated subsidiaries and associated companies, and “other

assets.” Unlike financial assets (e.g., cash, loans, securities), these assets are carried on the books

at amounts that may differ substantially from current market values. Moreover, these assets

typically do not generate identifiable streams of income, but rather serve to reduce cash outflows

or increase other sources of income. The value-creating implications of these assets will tend to

be captured by other variables in our model (e.g., greater brick and mortar branches tends to

attract more low-interest core deposits and high-interest loan customers, which will be captured

by the proxies for core deposits and lending relationships, noninterest income flows, etc.). Thus,

the valuation coefficient of other tangible assets may be substantially less than one.

       Rising levels of foreclosures, which increase real estate owned, imply a similar effect.

Higher real estate owned may provide a negative signal to the market about future performance,

which would also tend to reduce the valuation coefficient on other tangible assets.

       We specify the portion of the value-to-book ratio of equity due to other tangible assets as

equal to a cross-sectional coefficient times the ratio of the book value of these assets to the book

value of tangible common equity (wOTHERASSETS).

       BHCs’ balance sheets also include intangible assets, including goodwill, servicing rights,

favorable leasehold rights, etc. These assets are generally recognized only when acquired; under

GAAP, internally developed intangibles are not reported on the balance sheet. As a result, the




                                                  18
book value of intangible assets is likely to be a poor proxy for their economic value. Indeed,

including intangible assets in a valuation model would introduce non-comparability across

banks, related to their varying experiences in mergers and acquisitions. We therefore capture the

value of intangible assets (both recognized and unrecognized) using previously described

variables: the characteristics of loans and deposits (which proxy for the value of lending

relationships and core deposit intangibles), and measures of non-interest income and expense

(which proxy for the value of intangibles used in generating fee-based income).

Other Liabilities

        We measure other liabilities as the total of minority interest in consolidated subsidiaries,

perpetual preferred stock and related items, net liability for acceptances, and “other liabilities.”

Similar to other tangible assets, we measure the portion of the value-to-book ratio of equity due

to other liabilities as equal to a cross-sectional coefficient times the ratio of other liabilities to the

book value of tangible common equity (wOTHERLIAB).



        We now turn to the second set of variables (the second set of terms in equation (3))—

those with no available balance sheet-related proxies for the extent of bank activity, and for

which valuation consequences are derived from measures of noninterest income and expense.

Noninterest Income

        As discussed above, noninterest income has become increasingly important in explaining

value creation for many banks. To capture this source of value, we define three measures of

noninterest income, deflated by the book value of tangible common equity, which partition non-

interest income based on categories that we expect will reflect different degrees of income

persistence. The more persistent the income stream, the higher should be the valuation




                                                   19
coefficient on that income stream. By partitioning income streams according to persistence, we

expect to improve the accuracy of the valuation model.

       The first variable (NONINTINC1) includes traditional non-interest income sources:

service charges on deposit accounts in domestic offices, and income from fiduciary activities.

These fees tend to be highly persistent both because they are related to recurring services (e.g.,

monthly account fees) and because they are charged on accounts that tend to be stable (e.g.,

deposits). The second variable (NONINTINC2) includes less-traditional but generally recurring

revenues such as investment banking, advisory, brokerage, and underwriting fees and

commissions, insurance commissions and fees, and net income from servicing real estate

mortgages, credit cards and other financial assets held by others. We also include in this variable

unspecified sources of noninterest income (“other noninterest income”), because FR Y-9C

instructions suggest that the items included in this category relate primarily to recurring

activities. The third variable (NONINTINC3) includes gains and losses from activities in which

banks typically generate value but which tend to be less persistent than other sources of income.

These include trading revenue, venture capital revenue, net securitization income, and net gains

(losses) on sales of loans and leases.

       In addition to the above items, noninterest income shown in FR Y-9C reports includes net

gains (losses) on sales of other real estate owned, and net gains (losses) on sales of other assets

(excluding securities). These gains and losses are highly transitory so their value effect is

generally captured by existing assets (e.g., the cash that was received when the gain or loss was

recognized). We accordingly exclude these items from the analysis. For the same reason we also

exclude realized gains and losses on held-to-maturity and available-for-sale securities.12




                                                20
        While the level of noninterest income is relevant for valuing banks, considering changes

in noninterest income may provide further information. To the extent that growth in noninterest

income persists, past growth in noninterest income may proxy for growth opportunities in the

future. Conversely, if noninterest income exhibits mean-reversion, recent changes in noninterest

income may predict future reversals. We therefore include two measures of changes in

noninterest income: the change in noninterest income from the same quarter a year ago, divided

by the book value of tangible common equity (SAΔNONINTINC), and the change in noninterest

income compared to the previous quarter, divided by the book value of tangible common equity

(ΔNONINTINC).

Noninterest Expense

        Noninterest expenses are incurred in obtaining and servicing core deposits and loans, and

in generating noninterest income. Failure to account for cross-sectional variation in these

expenses, therefore, would result in overvaluation of core deposits, lending relationships and fee-

related intangibles. For example, if two banks had the same composition of deposits, but one

could achieve that composition with lower noninterest expenses related to deposit acquisition

(so-called “brick and mortar costs”), then that bank would be more valuable. We define

NONINTEXP as the total of salaries and employee benefits, expenses of premises and fixed

assets, and “other noninterest expense,” divided by the book value of tangible common equity.

We exclude amortization and impairment charges because we do not include the book value of

intangibles in our model, but rather focus on their earnings-generating ability. To the extent that




12
  These net gains may sometimes even be associated with negative firm performance. Many studies have
demonstrated that realized securities gains and losses are used for earnings, capital and tax management (e.g.,
Warfield and Linsmeier, 1992; Collins, Shackelford and Wahlen, 1995), so that firms are more likely to realize gains
when they have low earnings, low regulatory capital, or negative taxable income.


                                                        21
intangibles assets have been impaired, this will be captured in our model by the lower associated

earnings stream.

       Similar to our treatment of growth when measuring the effects of noninterest income

above, we also include two measures that capture changes in noninterest expense: the change in

noninterest expense from the same quarter a year ago, divided by the book value of tangible

common equity (SAΔNONINTEXP), and the change in noninterest expense compared to the

previous quarter, divided by the book value of tangible common equity (ΔNONINTEXP).



       We next discuss the third and final group of variables (the third set of terms in equation

(3))—attributes of the bank that may affect the bank’s value incremental to the value generated

by the individual activities.

Size

       Large banks may be perceived to be “too big to fail” (O’Hara and Shaw, 1990; Stern and

Feldman 2004). They may also have more market power (e.g., Berger, Demsetz, and Strahan,

1999), enjoy economies of scale (e.g., Sitroh, 2000; Hughes, Mester and Moon, 2001) or scope

(e.g., Demsetz and Strahan, 1997), or benefit from increased diversification (e.g., Penas and

Unal, 2004). Compared to small banks, large banks also may have greater financial flexibility as

they may be better able to obtain capital market funds when needed (e.g., Jayaratne and Morgan,

2000). Accordingly, we control for firm size, measured using the log of total assets (SIZE).

Since size also has implications for the value impact of the different bank activities, we estimate

the model for subsamples partitioned on size.

Repricing Gap

       The value of fixed-rate financial instruments is inversely related to interest rates.



                                                 22
Therefore, the sensitivity of the intrinsic value of equity to changes in interest rates is related to

the difference between fixed-rate earning assets and fixed-rate financial liabilities. We do not

have data that would permit a full analysis of the “duration gap” of each bank (that is, a measure

of interest rate risk exposure of equity that is based on the Macaulay duration of bank assets and

liabilities). Instead, as a proxy for the duration gap, we define ABSGAP as the absolute value of

the difference between fixed-rate earning assets and fixed-rate financial liabilities, divided by the

book value of tangible common equity. This variable essentially compares the magnitude of net

assets exposed to interest rate risk with total net assets (i.e., common equity).

       The sign of the asset-liability repricing gap may also be relevant. Many banks engage in

“Carry Trade”—a strategy whereby an investor borrows at a relatively low interest rate, and then

uses the proceeds to buy another asset with a higher yield, typically further out in the yield curve.

In doing so, banks earn higher returns from bearing interest rate risk. Banks take advantage of

this strategy by borrowing short and buying bonds, primarily mortgage-backed securities (MBS).

In our modeling approach, we essentially assume that investments in securities are zero NPV

activities. However, if the value impact of carry trade earnings is larger than the risk effect,

banks’ value-to-book ratios should increase with GAP—the signed difference between fixed-rate

earning assets and fixed-rate financial liabilities, divided by tangible common equity. We

accordingly include this variable in the model. GAP is also relevant as a proxy for the ex post

impact of interest rate exposure. For example, in periods of increasing interest rates, a positive

(negative) gap implies a declining (increasing) market value of equity, and vice versa in

declining interest rate environments.

Capital Adequacy

       The capital position of the bank may be value-relevant for several reasons. First, BHCs




                                                 23
with high capital ratios pay lower FDIC insurance premiums, incur lower regulatory costs and

risks, and have higher flexibility in operations and greater ability to grow.13 Second, related to

the previous point, high capital ratios may reflect accumulation of capital to facilitate value-

creating growth. Capital in excess of regulatory requirements creates option value for banks by

allowing them to forego having to raise external equity in the market (which would entail

physical costs of underwriting, as well as adverse-selection announcement effects on the value of

bank stock). Third, excess capital may proxy for market power or franchise value, since banks

with greater market power may perceive that they have more to lose from regulatory intervention

than other banks (e.g., Keeley, 1990), and consequently have a greater incentive to maintain

excess capital. These effects suggest that the market-to-book ratio should be positively related to

measures of capital adequacy. However, a possibly offsetting effect is related to the relationship

between bank capital and bank risk. A high level of bank capital may indicate relatively risky

operations or opaque assets (e.g., Calomiris and Wilson, 2004) which require more of a capital

cushion. This effect might lead to a negative empirical relationship between capital adequacy and

bank value. Moreover, higher capital could reflect the unavailability of positive net present value

investments or inefficient management which fails to maximize the net benefits from leverage,

which would also imply a negative relationship between capital adequacy and the market-to-

book ratio.14 Therefore, the empirical relationship between the market-to-book ratio and

measures of capital adequacy is an open question. Still, the above arguments suggest that capital


13
  For example, undercapitalized banks are required to submit capital restoration plans to regulators and are subject
to restrictions on operations, including prohibitions on branching, engaging in new activities, paying management
fees, making capital distributions such as dividends, and growing without regulatory approval. They may even be
required to dispose of assets. Some of these costs and restrictions also apply to banks that are classified as
adequately capitalized, especially restrictions on growth and new operations. In general, there is probably a
monotonic relationship between capital ratios and regulatory costs and restrictions.
14
  Benefits from leverage include the ability to increase the asset base (and consequently income), the tax-benefits of
debt and, specific to banks, the maximization of the deposit insurance put option.


                                                         24
ratios may explain cross-sectional variation in market-to-book ratios and should therefore be

included in our analysis.

         In evaluating capital adequacy, regulators use three capital ratios: The tier 1 leverage

ratio, the tier 1 risk-based capital ratio, and the total risk-based capital ratio.15 So-called well-

capitalized banks have total risk-based capital ratios, tier 1 risk-based capital ratios, and leverage

capital ratios of 10, 6 and 5 percent, respectively. Accordingly, we measure capital adequacy

based on what we term “deflated” ratios, that is, the ratios of each of the three capital measures

relative to their respective well-capitalized benchmarks. In essence, the deflated ratios reflect the

percentage deviation of the ratios from their well-capitalized benchmarks. We define CAP as the

log of the minimum of the three deflated capital ratios (to capture the definition of regulatory

capital that is most likely to bind on the margin), and we define CAP2 as the square of CAP. By

including both CAP and CAP2 in the model, we thus allow the relationship between the market-

to-book ratio and capital adequacy to be non-linear and even non-monotonic.

Dividends

         Firms are reluctant to cut dividends (e.g., Lintner, 1956). Hence high dividend payments

may indicate that management expects higher earnings or higher sustainability of earnings,

ceteris paribus, both implying a positive relationship between the value-to-book ratio and

dividend payments. We therefore include the ratio of cash dividends declared on common stock

to the book value of tangible common equity (DIV).



15
  The leverage ratio (tier 1 risk-based capital ratio) is calculated by dividing tier 1 capital by the quarterly average
of total assets (total risk-weighted assets). The total risk-based capital ratio is calculated as the ratio of total capital
to total risk-weighted assets. Tier 1 capital is measured as total equity minus some unrealized net gains,
nonqualifying preferred stock and most intangibles, and plus minority interests and qualifying trust preferred
securities. Total capital is equal to Tier 1 capital plus certain preferred stock and subordinated debt, a limited amount
of the allowance for loan losses, some unrealized gains, and adjustment for market risk. Risk-weighted assets are the
sum of balance sheet assets weighted by credit risk factors plus risk-weighted credit equivalent amounts of off-
balance sheet financial instruments, and adjustment for market risk.


                                                            25
2.4 The Model

         The dependent variable in equation (3) is the ratio of the intrinsic value of equity to its

book value. Since intrinsic values are unobservable, we use market values as substitutes. This is

legitimate if investors price bank stocks efficiently on average, in which case deviations of

prices from intrinsic values are unrelated to fundamentals (in that case, pricing errors are

captured and properly measured by the empirical model’s estimated residuals). However, if

stocks are systematically mispriced, the coefficient estimates will be biased.

         Even under the assumption of market efficiency, end of quarter stock prices are not likely

to fully reflect the value implications of FR Y-9C information because these reports are prepared

and disseminated after the end of the quarter. To adjust for this lag, we multiply the end of

quarter market value by one plus the cumulative stock return over the subsequent three months,

and measure the dependent variable, MTB, as the ratio of this adjusted market value to the book

value of tangible common equity.16

         Our valuation model is therefore:

MTB = wLOANS × (α1 + α 2YIELDLOANS + α 3 ALLOW + α 4 NPL + α 5CHARGE
             + α 6CONSUMER + α 7 COMMER + α 8GROWTH LOANS )

     Magnitude of loans                     Value per dollar of loans


        + wNONINTDEPO × ( β1 + β 2 GROWTH NONINTDEPO )


        Magnitude of                Value per dollar
         noninterest-                of noninterest-
       bearing deposits             bearing deposits
16
  If we measure market value after the publication of the quarterly report, we may introduce error since the bank
may pay dividends or issue or repurchase shares between the end of the quarter and the report publication date. Such
changes in market capitalization are not directly related to the quarterly information and may therefore bias the
results.


                                                        26
         + wINTCOREDEPO × (δ 1 + δ 2 INTINTCOREDEPO + δ 3 NOW + δ 4 SAVINGS + δ 5GROWTH INTCOREDEPO )

  Magnitude of interest-                        Value per dollar of interest-
  bearing core deposits                           bearing core deposits


    + FVSEC + FVCASH + FVTRADING − FVSTD + wLTD vLTD + wOTHERASSET vOTHERASSET + wOTHERLIAB vOTHERLIAB


                      Values of other non-intangible recognized assets and liabilities

+ γ 1 NONINTINC1 + γ 2 NONINTINC 2 + γ 3 NONINTINC3 + γ 4 SAΔNONINTINC + γ 5ΔNONINTINC
        + ρ1 NONINTEXP + ρ 2 SAΔNONINTEXP + ρ 3ΔNONINTEXP


                            Value of intangibles and the impact of operating costs


         + λ1LOGTA + λ2 ABSGAP + λ3GAP + λ4CAP + λ5CAP 2 + λ6 DIV + ε                             (7)


                          Value impact of bank attributes



The free parameters in this model are: α1 - α8, β1 - β2, δ1 - δ5, vLTD, vOTHERASSET, vOTHERLIAB, γ1 -

γ5, ρ1 - ρ3, and λ1 - λ6. The observable variables are:

MTB                       = Adjusted market value of common equity (see above) divided by the
                            book value of tangible common equity
wLOANS                    = The ratio of loans and leases to the book value of tangible common
                            equity
YIELDLOANS                = Annualized yield on loans and leases
ALLOW                     = The ratio of the allowance for loan and lease losses to the gross book
                            value of loans and leases other than held-for-sale loans
NPL                       = The ratio of adjusted nonperforming loans and leases (see Section
                            2.3) to the gross book value of loans and leases
CHARGE                    = Annualized rate of net charge-offs on loans and leases
CONSUMER                  = The ratio of consumer loans to the gross book value of loans and


                                                  27
                        leases
COMMER               = The ratio of commercial and industrial loans to the gross book value
                       of loans and leases
GROWTHLOANS          = Annual growth in loans and leases
wNONINTDEPO          = The ratio of noninterest-bearing deposits to the book value of tangible
                       common equity
GROWTHNONINTDEPO     = Annual growth in noninterest-bearing deposits
wINTCOREDEPO         = The ratio of interest-bearing core deposits to the book value of
                       tangible common equity
INTINTCOREDEPO       = Annualized average interest rate on interest-bearing core deposits
NOW                  = The ratio of NOW accounts to interest-bearing core deposits
SAVINGS              = The ratio of saving accounts to interest-bearing core deposits
GROWTHINTCOREDEPO = Annual growth in interest-bearing core deposits
FVSEC                = The ratio of the fair value of investment securities to the book value
                       of tangible common equity
FVCASH               = The total of “cash and balances due from depository institutions” and
                       “federal funds sold and securities purchased under agreements to
                       resell,” divided by the book value of tangible common equity
FVTRADING            = The difference between the fair values of trading assets and liabilities,
                       divided by the book value of tangible common equity
FVSTD                = The ratio of debt repricing or maturing within the next year to the
                       book value of tangible common equity
wLTD                 = The ratio of debt which does not reprice or mature within the next
                       year to the book value of tangible common equity
wOTHERASSET          = The ratio of other tangible assets to the book value of tangible
                       common equity
wOTHERLIAB           = The ratio of other liabilities to the book value of tangible common
                       equity
NONINTINC1           = The total of income from fiduciary activities and service charges on
                       deposit accounts in domestic offices, divided by the book value of
                       tangible common equity
NONINTINC2           = The total of (1) investment banking, advisory, brokerage, and
                       underwriting fees and commissions; (2) insurance commissions and
                       fees; (3) net income from servicing real estate mortgages, credit cards
                       and other financial assets held by others; and (4) “other noninterest
                       income,” divided by the book value of tangible common equity
NONINTINC3           = The total of trading revenue, venture capital revenue, net


                                            28
                             securitization income, and net gains (losses) on sales of loans and
                             leases, divided by the book value of tangible common equity
SAΔNONINTINC             = The change in noninterest income compared to the same quarter a
                           year ago, divided by the book value of tangible common equity
ΔNONINTINC               = The change in noninterest income compared to the previous quarter,
                           divided by the book value of tangible common equity
NONINTEXP                = the total of salaries and employee benefits, expenses of premises and
                           fixed assets and other noninterest expenses, divided by the book value
                           of tangible common equity
SAΔNONINTEXP             = The change in noninterest expense compared to the same quarter a
                           year ago, divided by the book value of tangible common equity
ΔNONINTEXP               = The change in noninterest expense compared to the previous quarter,
                           divided by the book value of tangible common equity
SIZE                     = Log of total assets
ABSGAP                   = Absolute value of GAP
GAP                      = Fixed-rate earning assets minus fixed-rate financial liabilities, divided
                           by the book value of tangible common equity
CAP                      = The log of the minimum of total risk-based capital ratio, tier 1 risk-
                           based capital ratio, and leverage capital ratio, divided by 10, 6 and 5
                           percent, respectively
CAP2                     = The square of CAP
DIV                      = The ratio of common cash dividends to the book value of tangible
                           common equity


3. DATA

       As discussed above, we extract all accounting data from regulatory consolidated financial

statements (FR Y-9C reports) that BHCs submitted to the Federal Reserve System during the period

Q1:2001-Q3:2005. Under the Bank Holding Company Act, BHCs with total consolidated assets of

$150 million or more, or that satisfy certain other conditions (e.g., have public debt), are required to

file these reports on a quarterly basis. FR Y-9C reports contain a uniform and detailed calendar

year-to-date income statement, an end-of-quarter balance sheet, and supplementary information.

Approximately two and a half months after the end of each calendar quarter, the Federal Reserve



                                                  29
Bank of Chicago creates a SAS data file with this information for all domestic BHCs and makes

it available on its web site. To create our sample, we download these files, merge them with the

quarterly COMPUSTAT files (to identify the CUSIP of each company) and with the CRSP files

(to obtain market and return data), and delete observations with unavailable market prices.17

           We start the sample period in 2001 primarily because many of the variables we use (e.g.,

components of noninterest income) were added to FR Y-9C reports in the first quarter of 2001.

Restricting the sample period to recent years is also important for accounting and economic

reasons. In 2001 the FASB discontinued the pooling method for new business combinations

which, given the prevalence of mergers in the banking industry, has significant implications for

reported accounting numbers. In addition, under recent regulation (in particular the Gramm,

Leach, Bliley Act of 1999), BHCs may engage freely in a wide range of financial activities. This

deregulation has substantially changed revenue mix for many BHCs.

           To reduce the effect of influential observations (outliers), we delete observations that lie

outside the 0.1% to 99.9% range of the distribution for any of the variables used in the valuation

model (Equation (7)).18 The resultant sample includes a total 7,443 observations (an average of

392 per quarter). Table 1 presents summary statistics for the variables for the full sample as well

as for two subsamples partitioned based on total assets (greater than or less than $1 billion). The

mean (median) value of total assets is $14,706 ($1,050) million, with approximately 52% of the

observations having total assets in access of $1 billion. Reflecting the very high financial

leverage in the banking industry, the ratio of tangible common equity to total assets is very low




17
  To identify CUSIPs, we match the COMPUSTAT and FR Y-9C data based on bank name and financial
characteristics and verify that all matches are valid and unique.
18
     We obtain results similar to those reported below when using alternative percentile cuts.


                                                            30
(mean 7.6%, median 7.4%), especially for large BHCs (mean/median 7.0%/6.8% compared to

8.3%/8.1% for small BHCs).

         During our sample period (2001-2005), BHCs traded at book multiples (MTB) in excess

of 2.41, on average. Large BHCs had especially large book multiples, with mean (median)

market-to-book ratio of 2.88 (2.67) compared to 1.93 (1.82) for small BHCs. The higher book

multiples of large BHCs coincide with substantially higher leverage and noninterest income.

Large BHCs’ higher leverage ratios allow them to generate more loans for each dollar of book

value (mean (wLOANS) = 9.74 for large BHCs compared to 8.82 for small BHCs). Large BHCs

also have larger investments in securities per dollar of book value (mean (FVSEC) = 3.76 for large

BHCs compared to 2.82 for small BHCs). These incremental investments in loans and securities

by large BHCs are funded primarily by short-term debt (mean (FVSTD) = 3.29 for large BHCs

compared to 1.98 for small BHCs). Large BHCs also have higher long term debt-to-equity ratios

(mean (wLTD) = 1.36 for large BHCs compared to 1.09 for small BHCs).19 In contrast, the

deposits-to-equity ratios (wNONINTDEPO and wINTCOREDEPO) of large BHCs are generally

comparable to those of small BHCs which, given the differences in equity-to-assets ratios,

implies that large BHCs have substantially smaller deposits-to-assets ratios.

         Examination of the distributions of the noninterest income variables reveals substantial

differences between large and small BHCs. Large BHCs generate mean noninterest income of

6.3% (= 2.5% + 2.9% + 0.9%) of common equity each quarter, which is much larger than that of

small BHCs (3.7% = 1.4% + 1.6% + 0.7%). This difference in noninterest income is only

partially offset by noninterest expense (a mean of 11.7% for large BHCs compared to 10.5% for


19
   A comparison of wLTD with FVSTD reveals that banks have substantially less fixed-rate long-term debt than short-
term (or variable rate) debt. This is consistent with Calomiris and Kahn (1991) and Flannery (1994) who suggests
that banks incur particularly large agency costs of debt and so issue short-term or repricable debt to mitigate these
costs.


                                                          31
small BHCs). Thus, even a simple analysis of summary statistics suggests a connection between

the high market-to-book ratios of large BHCs and their relatively large magnitudes of loans and

noninterest income. Indeed, in the next section we demonstrate that loans and noninterest income

explain significant portions of the cross-sectional variation in market-to-book ratios.



4. EMPIRICAL TESTING OF THE VALUATION MODEL

4.1 Explaining Market Valuations

       Table 2 presents summary statistics from nineteen separate cross-sectional quarterly

regressions of equation (7) for the period Q1:2001-Q3:2005. For each coefficient, we report the

time-series mean across the regressions, its t-statistic, the median, and the lower and upper

quartiles. To mitigate the effect of potential auto-correlation in the estimated coefficients, the t-

statistics are calculated assuming the quarterly coefficients follow an AR(1) process over time. In

addition to the coefficient estimates, we use equations (4), (5) and (6) to calculate the cross-

sectional mean values of vLOANS, vNONINTDEPO and vINTCOREDEPO, respectively, and we report

summary statistics for these quantities as well (recall that “v” denotes average value per dollar

book value of the subscripted asset or liability). The last four columns report the time-series

means and t-statistics when the regressions are estimated for two subsamples: large BHCs (total

assets > $1 billion) and small BHCs (total assets < $1 billion).

       The average number of observations per quarterly regression is 202 for large banks, 189

for small banks, and 392 for all banks. The variation over time in the number of observations is

relatively small. Thus, although the number of estimated parameters is quite large—32 per

regression—in each of the regressions there are more than 5 observations per parameter. The R2

is consistently high, especially for large BHCs (the average R2 is 0.757 for large banks,




                                                 32
compared to 0.561 for small banks). The larger R2 for large banks could reflect a number of

differences, including the impact of greater risk diversification, which could increase the

persistence of value drivers and accordingly improve the regression’s ability to capture value.

Overall, the models perform well in explaining value. We now turn to discuss the coefficient

estimates.

       As expected, the value of loans increases with the average yield (α2), especially for large

BHCs. Consistent with prior research (e.g., Beaver et al., 1989) the loan loss allowance (α3) does

not subsume the information about credit risk contained in nonperforming loans (α4) and loan

charge-offs (α5). In fact, the allowance coefficient is insignificant, while the coefficients on

nonperforming loans and loan charge-offs are highly significant. Similar to the loan-yield

coefficient, the magnitudes of the credit proxy coefficients are substantially larger for large

BHCs, especially the loan charge-offs coefficient.

       Holding constant the average yield and credit risk of loans, consumer loans (α6) are less

valuable than other loans. This could be due to their shorter maturity. Unfortunately FR Y-9C

reports provide no information on loan maturity, so we cannot incorporate this characteristic into

our model. Note, however, that since the average yield on consumer loans is higher than that of

other loans, the unconditional value of consumer loans is not necessarily smaller than that of

other loans. The remaining loan variables are less important: the commercial loans coefficient

(α7) is insignificant, and the loan growth coefficient (α8) is only marginally significant.

       The vLOANS statistics suggest that the average value of loans is about 7-8 percent above

their gross book value. To the extent that expected value creation in future lending is correlated

with value creation in past lending, vLOANS may also capture the value of lending-related

intangibles. However, vLOANS does not reflect any value due to cross-selling (e.g., taking



                                                 33
borrower deposits, earnings noninterest income by providing services to borrowers), which are

captured separately. More importantly, vLOANS does not reflect the noninterest expense that banks

incur in generating and servicing the loan portfolio. The value impact of cross-selling and

noninterest expense is captured primarily by the noninterest income and expense variables

discussed below.

         As expected, the economic liability attached to noninterest-bearing core deposits is

substantially smaller than their book value (about 89 cents per dollar of book value), reflecting a

substantial gross value premium associated with deposits. Similar to the loans coefficient,

however, this estimate of the gross deposit value premium does not reflect the costs associated

with obtaining and servicing deposits, nor does it reflect the service charges earned on deposits

or the value of cross-selling opportunities that deposits create.20 Similar to the loan growth

coefficient, the coefficients of the deposit growth variables (β2 and δ5) are only marginally

significant. The low significance of the growth variables could be due to the fact that growth is

often driven by acquisitions rather than internal investments. The signs of the coefficients on the

other attributes of interest-bearing deposits are as expected. Similar to loans, the interest rate

variable (δ2) is particularly important.

         The coefficients on long-term debt are close to one, suggesting that long-term borrowing

is a zero NPV activity for banks. The magnitudes of the coefficients on “other liabilities” and

“other assets” are significantly smaller than one, consistent with fact that these items generate no

income streams directly, but instead contribute to the value of other activities (which are




20
  An interesting extension of this study would be to supplement model (7) with equations that quantify the impact
of loans and deposits on noninterest income and noninterest expense, and derive the total (direct and indirect) value
of loans and deposits.


                                                         34
accounted for separately). For example, as noted before, the net valuation of deposits partially

reflects the impact of branches, which are included in “other assets.”

        The noninterest income level variables are all positive and highly significant, with

relatively persistent streams having larger valuation coefficients than less persistent ones. In

contrast, the measures of change in noninterest income have negative coefficients, suggesting

that the effect of mean-reversion in noninterest income outweighs the long-term growth

projections derived from short-term growth. Mean reversion is also the dominant effect for the

measures of change in noninterest expense. Similar to noninterest income, the magnitude of the

coefficient on the level of noninterest expense is large, suggesting that this variable is highly

persistent.

        Considering the last set of variables—bank attributes—we observe that bank size (λ1) and

the dividend ratio (λ6) are both positive and highly significant. The signed gap (GAP) has a

highly significant positive coefficient (λ3), consistent with banks benefiting from engaging in the

carry trade strategy (see the discussion in Section 2.3). In contrast, the coefficient on ABSGAP

(λ2)—our measure of the magnitude of interest rate sensitivity—is insignificant.

        The relationship between the market-to-book ratio and regulatory capital is particularly

interesting—it is U-shaped with a minimum close to the 90th percentile of the distribution of

CAP. That is, for most banks the relationship between value and capital is negative, perhaps

because banks with low regulatory capital also have lower asset risk (e.g., Calomiris and Wilson,

2004). In contrast, when regulatory capital is high, the relationship between value and capital

becomes positive, consistent with the arguments for a positive value of excess regulatory capital

discussed in Section 2.3 (e.g., reflecting a valuable real option to expand operations). Thus, there




                                                35
is evidence of the potential importance of various opposing valuation effects from greater capital

adequacy.21



4.2 Value Creation by Activity

        Equation (7) models the market-to-book ratio as the sum of values associated with

various banking activities, divided by the book value of equity. If we subtract from the value of

each activity the book value of net assets invested in that activity, we can re-express equation (7)

as explaining the market premium over book value (i.e., MTB – 1) using measures of value

creation by each activity (i.e., value in excess of book investment). Specifically,

Value contribution of loans = wLOANS × v LOANS − wLOANS =
                              wLOANS × (α1 + α 2YIELDLOANS + α 3 ALLOW + α 4 NPL + α 5CHARGE
                              + α 6CONSUMER + α 7COMMER + α8GROWTH LOANS − 1)

Value contribution of noninterset-bearing deposits = wNONINTDEPO × v NONINTDEPO + wNONINTDEPO =
                                                     wNONINTDEPO × ( β1 + β 2GROWTH NONINTDEPO + 1)

Value contribution of interest-bearing core deposits = wINTCOREDEPO × v INTCOREDEPO + wINTCOREDEPO =
        wINTCOREDEPO × (δ1 + δ 2 INTINTCOREDEPO + δ 3 NOW + δ 4 SAVINGS + δ 5GROWTH INTCOREDEPO + 1)

Value contribution of noninterest income =
  γ 1 NONINTINC1 + γ 2 NONINTINC 2 + γ 3 NONINTINC3 + γ 4 SAΔNONINTINC + γ 5ΔNONINTINC

Value contribution of noninterest expense =
                                        ρ1 NONINTEXP + ρ 2 SAΔNONINTEXP + ρ 3ΔNONINTEXP

Recall that the “v” terms measure value per dollar invested in the related activity, while the “w”

terms reflect the amount invested in the activity relative to the book value of equity. Since the

book values of deposits represent negative investments, we add rather than subtract the related w



21
  In future work, we plan to examine the valuation effects of capital adequacy in a framework that estimates the
consequences of capital structure for both market-to-book values and bank risk.


                                                        36
terms. For noninterest income and expense, no such adjustment is required since we do not

associate book values of assets or liabilities with these items (the book values of non-financial

assets and liabilities are accounted for separately). We further define “other explained” as equal

to that portion of the fitted premium (i.e., fitted value of equation (7) minus one) associated with

activities other than loans, deposits, noninterest income and noninterest expense. Finally, we

define “unexplained” as the residual of equation (7).

       Panel A of Table 3 provides summary statistics from the distributions of the values

created by the above activities per dollar of equity book value. We report two measures of

central tendency (mean and median) and two measures of dispersion (standard deviation and

inter-quartile range). As discussed in Section 4.1, large BHCs have higher leverage and larger

noninterest income compared to small BHCs. Consequently the contributions of essentially all

activities to the market-to-book ratio are larger for large BHCs compared to small BHCs.

Therefore, to identify differences in the relative importance of the different activities across the

size-based subsamples, we report in panel B the standardized value contributions, calculated by

dividing each column of Panel A by the corresponding sum of components. The primary

contributors to the cross-sectional variation in the market-to-book ratio are the following

activities (in order of importance): noninterest expense, noninterest income, loans, and interest-

bearing deposits. Noninterest-bearing deposits have a relatively small effect, especially for large

BHCs. The value impact of noninterest income is particularly high for large BHCs, explaining

about twice as much of the market-to-book variation compared to interest-bearing deposits. In

contrast, for small BHCs, loans and noninterest-bearing deposits are more important than

noninterset-income in explaining value creation.




                                                37
       Table 4 presents the correlation coefficients (both Pearson and Spearman) between the

estimates of value creation by the various activities for all BHCs (Panel A) as well as for the two

size-based subsamples (Panels B and C). Most notable are the correlations between the value

impact of noninterest income and noninterest expense. These correlations, which range between

-0.81 and -0.64, suggest that noninterest expense is largely driven by strategies to boost

noninterest income, which would imply that the net value impact of noninterest income is

substantially smaller than implied by the estimates of Table 3.

       The value impact of noninterest expense is also negatively related to those of loans and

deposits, suggesting that the estimates of the gross value impact of loans and deposits in Table 3

are overstated as measures of net impact. However, for deposits there is a favorable offsetting

correlation with noninterest income; that is, while deposit-taking involves expenditures that are

reported as noninterest expense, it is also associated with noninterest income. Accordingly, the

estimated gross valuation coefficients for deposits do not necessarily overstate their value

implications.

       Another interesting set of correlations are those between the value creation of loans and

deposits. These correlations are significantly positive, consistent with the fact that lending and

deposit-taking are related activities which are often conducted with the same customers. Thus,

decomposing the value of customer relationships into lending and deposit-taking intangibles is a

difficult task. Any estimates that attempt to do so by ignoring the high correlation between the

two are likely to be quite unreliable.

       The primary differences between the correlations for the two size-based subsamples are

related to the behavior of noninterest income. For small banks noninterest income is strongly

related to the value created by deposit-taking and lending activities, while for large banks the




                                                38
correlations are smaller and, in fact, negative for loans. Also, for small banks lending and

deposit-taking activities exhibit much stronger correlations with non-interest expense compared

to large BHCs.



4.3 Predicting Stock Returns

        The results in Table 2 indicate that equation (7) performs well in explaining cross-

sectional differences in the market-to-book ratio, as reflected in the relatively high R-squared

measures. Yet the root mean squared errors (RMSE) from the cross sectional regressions are far

from negligible: both the mean and median cross-sectional RMSE are about 0.57, suggesting that

for approximately 32 percent of the observations the magnitude of the valuation error is more

than 57% of book value. Alternatively, the regression residual may partially reflect market

mispricing; that is, the prices of some stocks may deviate from intrinsic values. In particular,

relatively large residuals may be due to cases where investors misprice bank attributes. If this

explanation holds, the residuals from model (7) should predict subsequent stock returns. We next

test this hypothesis.

        For each quarter we calculate the predicted market-to-book ratio for each bank, multiply

it by the bank’s tangible common equity to obtain an estimate of the bank’s value, and then

divide this estimate by the bank’s market value. To the extent that valuation model (7) captures

value that investors ignore, banks with high (low) predicted value-to-market ratios (VTM) should

experience subsequent price increases (declines). To test this hypothesis, we perform portfolio

and regression analyses, which examine the ability of VTM to predict subsequent stock returns.

The results of these analyses are presented in Tables 5 and 6, respectively.




                                                39
        Table 5 reports the time-series means and t-statistics of excess future returns for six

portfolios: the first five are constructed by sorting stocks into quintiles based on the VTM ratio,

while the sixth portfolio is long in the high VTM portfolio and short in the low VTM portfolio.

Excess returns are measured relative to the contemporaneous equally-weighted return on all bank

stocks. The return accumulation period starts three months after the end of the quarter, and

continues for one, two, three, or four quarters. To mitigate the effect of auto-correlation in

returns, the t-statistics are calculated assuming the portfolio returns follow an ARMA(1,q-1)

process, where q is the number of quarters in the return period.22 Panel A presents the results

using the full sample, while Panels B and C provide the returns to the long-plus-short combined

investment strategy when the analysis is conducted using only large (Panel B) or small (Panel C)

BHCs.

        In all cases, the predicted value-to-market ratio is strongly related to subsequent stock

returns: banks with low VTM have highly significant negative subsequent excess returns, while

banks with high VTM have positive subsequent returns. The pattern of excess returns suggests

that it takes at least four quarters for prices to converge to predicted values. The average returns

to the long-plus-short investment portfolios for the first subsequent quarter are 4.4% when using

all firms, 3.1% when focusing on large firms, and 5.5% for small firms. The corresponding

annualized returns are 18.8%, 13% and 23.9%, respectively. Moreover, as shown in Figure 1,

these returns are earned quarter-after-quarter, suggesting that they are unlikely to represent

compensation for risk.

        To more directly address the possibility that these excess returns reflect priced risk, we

control for risk factors by running cross-sectional regressions of the following model:


22
  The auto regressive parameter controls for autocorrelation due to firm effects. The moving average parameters
control for overlapping returns in the two, three and four quarters horizons.


                                                        40
     RET = η1 + η2VTM + η3 BTM + η4 LOGMV
           + η5 β market + η6abs( β int erest ) + η7 abs( β slope ) + η8 β spread + η9VOLAT + ε         (8)

where, similar to the previous analysis, the stock return (RET) is measured over horizons of one

to four quarters, BTM is the book-to-market ratio of common equity, LOGMV is the log of the

market value of common equity, the beta variables are estimates of stock return sensitivities to

relevant risk factors, and VOLAT is an estimate of idiosyncratic stock volatility. We estimate the

beta variables by regressing excess monthly stock returns during the sixty months ending in the

valuation quarter on excess market return (market), the monthly change in the one-year U.S.

Treasury bill (interest), the monthly change in the slope of the term-structure (slope, the

difference between the yields on 10 and 1 year U.S. Treasury bond/bill), and the monthly change

in the market credit spread (spread, the difference between Moody’s AAA and BAA Corporate

bond yields). “abs(.)” denotes the absolute value function. VOLAT is measured as the root mean

squared error from the beta regression.

        The risk controls in Model (8) are generally based on prior studies (e.g., Barber and

Lyon, 1997). We use the absolute value of βinterest since investors may demand a risk premium for

holding the stocks of both asset-sensitive and liability-sensitive banks (compared to zero-gap

banks). Similarly, we use the absolute value of βslope since investors may require a risk premium

for exposure to both increases and decreases in the slope of the yield curve. In contrast, expected

returns are likely to be monotonically related to the market and credit spread betas, since

opposite sensitivities (negative for market, positive for spread) may allow investors to reduce

these risks at the portfolio level. In any case, we rerun all analyses using the signed values of

βinterest and βslope and obtain similar results for VTM, the variable of interest. Note that while the

expected signs of βmarket, abs(βinterest) and abs(βslope) are positive (higher sensitivity implies higher




                                                        41
risk), that of βspread is negative (less negative βspread implies lower sensitivity to a credit spread

widening).

        Because many BHCs do not have the five years of previous stock returns required to

measure the beta and volatility variables, we first estimate a model that excludes these variables.

Table 6 presents the regression statistics: Panel A for all firms, Panel B for large banks, and

Panel C for small banks. Panel D gives the estimates for the full model using all firms with

available data. Similar to the excess return statistics in Table 5, the t-statistics are calculated

assuming the cross-sectional coefficients follow an ARMA(1,q-1) process, where q is the

number of quarters in the return period. In all sixteen sets of cross sectional regressions, the

coefficient on VTM is positive and highly significant, confirming that our model captures market

mispricing rather than priced risk.

        Considering the full model, the estimated coefficients of the risk controls are only

partially consistent with expectations. The only coefficient which is consistently significant is

that of LOGMV (negative relation). In some of the regressions, the coefficients of βspread and

VOLAT are as expected—significantly negative and positive, respectively. However, in other

regressions these coefficients are insignificant. In addition, the coefficients of BTM, βmarket, and

abs(βinterest) are insignificant. In contrast to expectations, the abs(βslope) coefficient is significantly

negative in some of the regressions. Interestingly, the coefficient of BTM is positive for large

firms but negative for small firms (Panels B and C respectively). One possible explanation for

this result is that investors in small banks over-emphasize the importance of book value as a

measure of equity value, and this mispricing effect is larger than any priced-risk effect associated

with the book-to-market ratio. In contrast, market prices of large banks, while not fully efficient,

reflect a larger information set than book value.




                                                    42
        Comparing the magnitude of excess returns (in Table 5) and the VTM coefficients (in

Table 6) across the size-based subsamples, we observe that both quantities are negatively related

to size. Since small firms are more likely to be inefficiently priced compared to large firms, this

result is consistent with the model capturing mispricing rather than compensation for risk. In

Section 4.4 below we further investigate the relationship between mispricing and proxies for

information processing, liquidity and transaction costs.



4.4 Explaining Stock Return Predictability

        “Neglected,” illiquid or high transaction cost stocks are more likely to be mispriced

compared to other stocks. Thus, if our VTM strategy indeed captures mispricing rather than

compensation for risk, BHCs with extreme values of VTM are likely to be those that are

overlooked by investors and financial analysts, and their stocks may be more likely to have low

liquidity and high transaction costs compared to other BHCs (which may explain why they are

overlooked by investors). We use the following proxies to examine the explanatory power of

differences in investor attention, liquidity and transaction costs: analysts following (AF),

institutional ownership (IO), size (LOGMV), price per share (LOGP) and turnover (TURN). AF is

the number of EPS forecasts for the current year reported by IBES in the last month of the

quarter. IO is measured as the fraction of the BHC’s outstanding shares held by large

institutional investors at the end of the quarter.23 LOGP is the log of the BHC’s share price at the

end of the quarter. TURN is the logarithm of the average ratio of the stock’s monthly trading




23
  Large institutions are those with more than $100 million of securities under discretionary management, which are
subject to the 13(f) reporting requirements. Institutional ownership information is obtained from Thomson Financial
Securities Data.



                                                        43
volume to total shares outstanding during the twelve months ending at the end of the quarter. Our

regression model is therefore

              MISPRICING = λ1 + λ2 AF + λ3 IO + λ4 LOGMV + λ5 LOGP + λ6TURN + ε                     (9)

where MISPRICING is the absolute value of (VTM – 1).

       Table 7 presents summary statistics from cross-sectional regressions of model (9) for

three samples: all BHCs, and each of the two size-based subsamples. When using all BHCs, the

coefficients of three of the explanatory variables have their expected sign and are significant:

analysts’ following, size and turnover, with turnover being particularly significant (t-statistic =

-15.9). In contrast, price per share is insignificant, and institutional ownership has the opposite

sign. The results for the two subsamples reveal an interesting pattern. For large BHCs, LOGMV

is insignificant and the primary explanatory variable is turnover (t-statistic = -10.5). In contrast,

for small BHCs LOGMV is the most significant explanatory variable (t-statistic = -15.0) and

turnover is only marginally significant. Also, for small BHCs AF switches sign, and the average

R-squared are substantially larger than for large BHCs.

       Overall, these results provide limited support for the hypothesis that mispricing is larger

for neglected, illiquid or high transaction cost stocks. The observed differences between results

for large and small banks suggests that investor attention depends on the absolute amount of

shares available for trading, not the ratio of shares actively traded. For small BHCs, even when

turnover rates are high, the bank is too small to attract investor interest. For larger BHCs, they

can attract investor interest so long as their stocks are traded with sufficient frequency.



5. CONCLUSION

       Standard methods for valuing nonfinancial firms do not lend themselves to the valuation



                                                 44
of bank holding companies, due to fundamental differences between the structures and functions

of financial intermediaries and nonfinancial firms. Debt is not just a financing source for banks;

when it takes the form of deposits it is one of the value drivers of the banking franchise. For

nonfinancial firms, EBITDA or some related measure of operating income is used to measure

current and prospective cash flows. But income streams of banks do not lend themselves to this

approach, since bank income flows from differing sources of interest income, noninterest fee

income, and trading income, which differ in their margins of profitability and in their

persistence.

       Our approach to valuation begins by dividing all available information about income and

expenses into separate categories that permit potential differences in profitability margins and

persistence across categories to reflect themselves in different coefficients that relate a dollar of

income (within a particular category) to firm value. Our approach also makes use of book asset

and liability data for selected activities. We argue, on a priori grounds, that such balance sheet

data should be useful for measuring net investment for some categories of bank activities, and

market value for some categories of tradable assets.

       Our valuation model focuses on the value-to-book ratio, which we argue is a natural way

to approach the valuation of banks. The model generally does not impose coefficient values, but

rather estimates them under the assumption that, at each moment in time, the average empirical

relationships between income categories and firm value are reflected in observed market-to-book

values. Our results are promising in the sense that this approach explains a substantial amount of

the cross-sectional variation in observed market-to-book values.




                                                 45
       Bank holding companies that have lower (higher) than predicted market-to-book ratios

within the quarter in which we estimate the model tend to experience large, statistically

significant, predictable increases (decreases) in market values in subsequent quarters.

       We investigate whether the predictable changes in stock prices reflect priced risk factors

and find that they do not. Even when we use a multifactor model of risk pricing, residuals from

our estimation of market-to-book value still retain their importance for forecasting future returns.

       We also investigate whether predictable returns reflect trading costs, and we find limited

evidence consistent with this view. Specifically, firms with small amounts of tradable shares in

the market place (due to a combination of small size and low ratio of volume relative to

outstanding shares) tend to experience large predictable positive and negative returns using our

valuation model.

       One interesting finding from our model is the U-shaped relationship between capital

position and firm value. For some range of capital ratios, lower leverage is associated with

higher value, reflecting perhaps the real option value of excess capital. However, for most levels

of capital ratios, higher leverage is associated with higher value, suggesting that some banks are

able to maintain higher profitability through greater leveraging without generating

commensurately higher risk. In other words, superior risk management may be an important

value driver for banks. Future work should simultaneously model bank value and bank risk

management to further elucidate the connections between endogenous choice of leverage and

value creation.




                                                46
                                                 Appendix A
                                              FR Y-9C Data Items

        This appendix reports the specific data items used in calculating the variables. Since the
analysis uses quarterly measures of performance, while FR Y-9C reports provide year-to-date
income statement data, we adjust the reported revenues and expenses in the second, third and
fourth calendar quarters by subtracting the previous quarter values of these variables. We
indicate this adjustment by adding the word ‘quarterly’ to the respective data items.

Tangible common equity = total equity capital (BHCK3210) - perpetual preferred stock and
related surplus (BHCK3283) - intangible assets (BHCK3163 + BHCK0426)24.

Relative size of loans and leases (wLOANS) = loans and leases including loans held-for sale and
before deducting the allowance for loan and lease losses (BHCK2122), divided tangible common
equity.

Average yield on loans and leases (YIELDLOANS) = the annualized ratio of tax-equivalent
interest and fee income on loans and leases (quarterly BHCK401025 + quarterly BHCK4059 +
quarterly BHCK406526 + tax-equivalence adjustment) to the reported average balance of loans
and leases during the quarter (BHCK3516).27 The tax-equivalence adjustment is calculated as the
product of income on tax-exempt loans and leases (quarterly BHCK431328) and the ratio of the
corporate top statutory federal tax rate (0.35 for our sample period) to one minus the tax rate.
The yield is annualized using a compound interest calculation.

Allowance-to-loans ratio (ALLOW) = the ratio of the allowance for loans and lease losses
(BHCK3123) to the balance of loans and leases excluding loans held for sale and before
deducting the allowance (BHCK2122 – BHCK5369).

NPL-to-loans ratio (NPL) = the total of nonaccrual loans and leases (BHCK5526 –
BHCK3507), accruing restructured loans and leases (BHCK1616), and loans and leases past due
90 days or more and still accruing interest (BHCK5525 – BHCK3506)29, divided by loans and

24
     Prior to 2001, intangible assets were equal to the total of BHCK316, BHCK3164, BHCKB026 and BHCK5507.
25
     Prior to 2001, this item was equal to the sum of BHCK4393, BHCK4503 and BHCK4504.
26
     Prior to 2001, this item was equal to the sum of BHCK4505 and BHCK4307.
27
  The average balance of loans and leases during the quarter is based on daily or weekly averages, as selected by the
BHC. It includes loans held for sale and is measured net of unearned income and gross of the allowance for loan and
lease losses.
28
     Prior to 2001, this item was equal to the sum of BHCK4504 and BHCK4307.
29
  Nonaccrual loans are loans on which interest accruals have been discontinued due to borrowers’ financial
difficulties. Typically, loans are placed on non-accrual status once interest or principal payments are delinquent for a
specified number of days (e.g., 90 or 120 days past due). A loan is considered restructured when the bank for
economic or legal reasons related to the debtor’s financial difficulties grants a concession to the debtor that it would
not otherwise consider.


                                                          47
leases including loans held-for sale and before deducting the allowance for loan and lease losses
(BHCK2122).

Annualized rate of net charge-offs on loans and leases (CHARGE) = the annualized ratio of
net loan charge offs to average loans and leases during the quarter (BHCK3516). Net loan charge
offs are calculated as loan charge offs and write-downs arising from the transfer of loans to the
held-for-sale account (quarterly BHCK4635) minus loan recoveries (quarterly BHCK4605). The
rate is annualized using a compound interest calculation.

Consumer loans-to-loans ratio (CONSUMER) = the ratio of consumer loans (BHCKB538 +
BHCKB539 + BHCK2011)30 to loans and leases including loans held-for sale and before
deducting the allowance for loan and lease losses (BHCK2122).

Commercial loans-to-loans ratio (COMMER) = the ratio of commercial and industrial loans
(BHCK1763 + BHCK1764) to loans and leases including loans held-for sale and before
deducting the allowance for loan and lease losses (BHCK2122).

Noninterest-bearing deposits (NONINTDEPO) = domestic demand deposits (BHCB2210) +
other domestic noninterest-bearing balances (BHOD3189) + noninterest-bearing foreign deposits
(BHFN6636).

Interest-bearing core deposits (INTCOREDEPO) = NOW, ATS, and other interest-bearing
transaction accounts (BHCB3187 + BHOD3187) + money market deposits and other savings
accounts (BHCB2389 + BHOD2389) + time deposits less than $100,000 (BHCB6648 +
BHOD6648).31

Average interest rate on core deposits = annualized ratio of interest expense on core deposits
(quarterly BHCKA518 + quarterly BHCK6761) to the average of the beginning- and end-of-
quarter balances of interest-bearing core deposits.32

Fair value of investment securities = fair value of held-to-maturity (BHCK177133) + fair value
of available-for-sale securities (BHCK1773).34


30
     Prior to 2001, BHCKB538 and BHCKB539 were reported combined as BHCK2008.
31
  Ideally, we would also like to exclude brokered time deposits from the definition of core deposits. However, FR
Y-9C reports do not provide a breakdown of interest expense for brokered versus non-brokered deposits, which is
the primary characteristic that we use to model the value of core deposits.
32
  Ideally, we would like to use daily or weekly averages. Unfortunately, FR Y-9C reports do not provide the
average balance of core deposits.
33
     Prior to 2001, this item was named BHCK8551.
34
  Under SFAS 115, investments in debt and equity securities (other than equity securities that do not have readily
determinable fair values or that were issued by subsidiaries or associated companies) are classified as either held-to-
maturity, trading, or available-for-sale, depending primarily on the purpose of investment. Held-to-maturity
securities are carried on the balance sheet at amortized cost and their estimated fair value is disclosed in the


                                                          48
Cash and cash-equivalent instruments = “cash and balances due from depository institutions”
(BHCK0081 + BHCK0395 + BHCK0397) and “federal funds sold and securities purchased
under agreements to resell” (BHDMB987 + BHCKB989)35.

Net Trading Assets = the fair value of trading assets (BHCK3545) minus the fair value of
trading liabilities (BHCK3548).

Debt maturing or repricing within the next year = Federal funds purchased and securities sold
under agreements to repurchase (BHDMB993 + BHCKB995)36 + domestic time deposits of
$100,000 or more with a remaining maturity of one year or less (BHDMA242) + commercial
paper (BHCK2309) + subordinated notes and debentures and other borrowed money with
remaining maturity of one year or less (BHCK3409 + BHCK2332) + long-term debt that reprices
within one year (BHCK3298) + interest-bearing foreign deposits (BHFN6636).

Fixed-rate long-term borrowing = domestic time deposits of $100,000 or more with a remaining
maturity of more than one year (BHCB2604 + BHOD2604 - BHDMA242) + long term debt that
does not reprice within the next year (BHCK4062 + BHCKC69937 + BHCK2333 - BHCK3409 -
BHCK3298).

Other tangible assets = premises and fixed assets (BHCK2145) + other real estate owned
(BHCK2150) + investment in unconsolidated subsidiaries and associated companies
(BHCK2130) + “other assets” (BHCK2160).

Other liabilities = minority interest in consolidated subsidiaries (BHCK3000) + perpetual
preferred stock and related items (BHCK3283) + net liability for acceptances (BHCK2920 -
BHCK2155)38 + “other liabilities” (BHCK2750).

Traditional noninterest income (NONINTINC1) = service charges on deposit accounts in
domestic offices (BHCK4483) + income from fiduciary activities (BHCK4070).




footnotes. Available-for-sale and trading securities are reported on the balance sheet at fair value. Unrealized gains
and losses on trading securities are included in income, while unrealized gains and losses on available for sale
securities are excluded from net income and are reported in shareholders’ equity on the balance sheet. Trading
securities are included in the trading assets category discussed below.
35
     Prior to 2002, these items were reported combined as BHCK1350.
36
     Prior to 2002, these items were reported combined as BHCK2800.
37
     This item is included since 2005.
38
   The net liability for acceptances is calculated as the difference between “liability on acceptances executed and
outstanding” (BHCK2920) and “customers liabilities on acceptances outstanding” (BHCK2155). Empirically, the
asset and liability are very small and similar in magnitude. Accordingly the net liability for acceptances is negligible
in essentially all cases. From Q1:2006, these items are no longer reported separately (they are included in “other
liabilities”).


                                                          49
Non-traditional but relatively persistent noninterest income (NONINTINC2) = investment
banking, advisory, brokerage, and underwriting fees and commissions (BHCKB490) + insurance
commissions and fees (BHCKC386 + BHCKC387)39 + net income from servicing real estate
mortgages, credit cards and other financial assets held by others (BHCKB492) + “other
noninterest income” (BHCKB497).

Non-traditional low-persistence noninterest income (NONINTINC3) = trading revenue
(BHCKA220) + venture capital revenue (BHCKB491) + net securitization income (BHCKB493)
+ net gains (losses) on sales of loans and leases (BHCK8560).

Noninterest expense (NONINTEXP) = salaries and employee benefits (BHCK4135) + expenses
of premises and fixed assets (BHCK4217) + “other noninterest expense” (BHCK4092).

Earning assets = total assets - intangible assets - “other tangible assets” (as defined above).

Interest-sensitive earning assets = earning assets that are repriceable within one year or mature
within one year (BHCK3197).

Fixed-rate earning assets = earning assets - interest-sensitive earnings assets.

Financial liabilities = total assets (BHCK2170) - total common equity (BHCK3210-
BHCK3283) - “other liabilities” (as defined above).

Interest-sensitive liabilities = interest-bearing deposit liabilities that reprice within one year or
mature within one year (BHCK3296) + federal funds purchased and securities sold under
agreements to repurchase (BHDMB993 + BHCKB995)40 + commercial paper (BHCK2309) +
subordinated notes and debentures and other borrowed money with remaining maturity of one
year or less (BHCK3409 + BHCK2332) + long-term debt that reprices within one year
(BHCK3298) + variable rate preferred stock (BHCK3408).

Fixed-rate financial liabilities = financial liabilities - interest-sensitive liabilities.

Capital ratios: tier 1 leverage ratio (BHCK7204), tier 1 risk-based capital ratio (BHCK7206),
and the total risk-based capital ratio (BHCK7205).

Dividend-to-equity (DIV) = cash dividends declared on common stock (BHCK4460) divided by
the book value of tangible common equity.




39
     Prior to 2003, these items were reported combined as BHCKB494.
40
     Prior to 2002, these items were reported combined as BHCK2800.


                                                        50
                                          References

Barber, B. M., and J. D. Lyon. 1997. Firm Size, Book-to-Market Ratio, and Security Returns: A
       Holdout Sample of Financial Firms. Journal of Finance 52(2): 875-883.

Beaver, W.H., C. Eger, S. Ryan and M. Wolfson. 1989. Financial reporting, supplemental
       disclosures, and bank share prices. Journal of Accounting Research 27: 157-178.

Berger, A.N., R.S. Demsetz, and P.E. Strahan. 1999. The consolidation of the financial services
       industry: Causes, consequences, and implications for the future. Journal of Banking and
       Finance 23(2-4): 135-194.

Calomiris, C.W., and C.M. Kahn. 1991. The Role of Demandable Debt in Structuring Optimal
      Banking Arrangements. American Economic Review 81: 497-513.

Calomiris, C. W. and B. Wilson. 2004. Bank capital and portfolio management: The 1930 “
      capital crunch” and the scramble to shed risk. Journal of Business 77(3): 421-455.

Collins, J. H., D. A. Shackelford, and J. M. Wahlen. 1995. Bank differences in the coordination
       of regulatory capital, earnings, and taxes. Journal of Accounting Research 33 (Autumn):
       263-291.

Demsetz, Rebecca S., and Philip E. Strahan. 1997. Diversification, Size and Risk at Bank
      Holding Companies. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 29: 300-314.

Diamond, Douglas. 1984. Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring. Review of
      Economic Studies 51 (July): 393-414.

Elliott, J. A., J. D. Hanna and W. H. Shaw. 1991. The evaluation by the financial markets of
         changes in bank loan loss reserve levels. The Accounting Review 66: 847-861.

Flannery, M. J. 1994. Debt maturity and the deadweight cost of leverage: Optimally financing
       banking firms. American Economic Review 84(1): 320-331.

Furlong, F. T., and M. C, Keeley. 1987. Bank capital regulation and asset risk. Economic Review
       2 (Spring): 20-40.

Griffin, P. A. and S. J. R. Wallach. 1991. Latin American lending by major U.S. banks: The
        effects of disclosures about nonaccrual loans and loan loss provisions.” The Accounting
        Review 66: 830-846.

Hughes, J.P., L.J. Mester, and C.C. Moon. 2001. Are scale economies in banking elusive or
      illusive? Incorporating capital structure and risk-taking into models of bank production.
      Journal of Banking and Finance 25 (December): 2169-2208.




                                               51
Jayaratne J., and D. P. Morgan. 2000. Capital market frictions and deposits constraints at banks.
       Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 32(1): 74-92.

Keeley, M. C. 1990. Deposit insurance, risk, and market power in banking. American Economic
       Review 80(5): 1183-1200.

Lintner, J.. 1956. Distribution of income of corporations among dividends, retained earnings, and
       taxes. American Economic Review 46(2): 97-113.

O’Hara, M., and W. Shaw. 1990. Deposit insurance and wealth effects: The value of being ‘Too
      big to fail’. The Journal of Finance 45 (December): 1587-1600.

Penas, M. F., and H. Unal. 2004. Gains in bank mergers: Evidence from the bond markets.
       Journal of Financial Economics 72: 149-179.

Stiroh, K. J. 2004. Diversification in banking: Is noninterest income the answer? Journal of
        Money, Credit, and Banking 36(5): 853-882.

Stern, Gary H., and Ron J. Feldman. 2004. Too Big to Fail: The Hazards of Bank Bailouts.
       Washington, D.C.: Brookings.

Warfield, T. D., and T. J. Linsmeier. 1992. Tax planning, earnings management, and the
       differential information content of bank earnings components. The Accounting Review 67
       (July): 546-562.




                                               52
                                                                              Figure1
                                                       Quarter-by-Quarter Returns to a Zero-Investment Strategy

                                       14.00%



                                       12.00%



                                       10.00%
  Excess Quarterly Portfolio Returns




                                       8.00%



                                       6.00%



                                       4.00%



                                       2.00%



                                       0.00%
                                                q3:01 q4:01 q1:02 q2:02 q3:02 q4:02 q1:03 q2:03 q3:03 q4:03 q1:04 q2:04 q3:04 q4:04 q1:05 q2:05 q3:05 q4:05

                                       -2.00%



                                       -4.00%
                                                                                                 Return Period

                                                                                      All BHCs   Large BHCs      Small BHCs



This figure presents quarter-by-quarter returns to a zero-investment strategy that takes equal size long positions in
high VTM firms (highest quartile) and short positions in low VTM firms (lowest quartile). VTM is the predicted
value-to-market ratio, where predicted value is the fitted value from equation (7) times the bank’s tangible common
equity. Each return period starts three months after the end of the quarter for which VTM is calculated.




                                                                                                 53
                                                  Table 1
                                       Distribution of the Variables

                                             All BHCs                           Large BHCs        Small BHCs
                                            (N = 7,443)                         (N = 3,846)       (N = 3,597)
                              Mean      STD     Q1      Med.           Q3      Mean     Med.     Mean     Med.
Total Assets ($ mil.)         14,706    82,084       541    1,050     3,145    27,951    2,992      544      528
Equity / Total Assets          0.076     0.025     0.061    0.074     0.087     0.070    0.068    0.083    0.081

MTB                            2.419     1.057     1.706    2.220     2.881     2.877    2.666    1.930    1.821

wLOANS                         9.296     3.131     7.302    9.000    11.013     9.739    9.509    8.821    8.482
YIELDLOANS                     0.072     0.012     0.063    0.070     0.078     0.069    0.068    0.074    0.072
ALLOW                          0.014     0.005     0.011    0.013     0.015     0.015    0.014    0.014    0.013
NPL                            0.008     0.008     0.003    0.006     0.010     0.008    0.007    0.008    0.006
CHARGE                         0.003     0.005     0.000    0.002     0.004     0.004    0.002    0.002    0.001
CONSUMER                       0.082     0.087     0.023    0.055     0.115     0.098    0.074    0.065    0.041
COMMER                         0.165     0.102     0.095    0.146     0.210     0.178    0.160    0.150    0.132
GROWTHLOANS                    0.117     0.149     0.033    0.099     0.178     0.117    0.096    0.117    0.104

wNONINTDEPO                    1.293     0.817     0.729    1.154     1.643     1.283    1.169    1.304    1.140
GROWTHNONINTDEPO               0.085     0.343    -0.004    0.110     0.229     0.084    0.104    0.085    0.115

wINTCOREDEPO                   7.500     2.587     5.921    7.224     8.782     7.659    7.427    7.329    6.969
INTINTCOREDEPO                 0.021     0.011     0.013    0.018     0.026     0.019    0.017    0.023    0.020
NOW                            0.109     0.092     0.034    0.079     0.166     0.086    0.049    0.133    0.127
SAVINGS                        0.537     0.197     0.396    0.530     0.689     0.600    0.605    0.470    0.452
GROWTHINTCOREDEPO              0.116     0.157     0.024    0.085     0.175     0.120    0.086    0.112    0.083

FVSEC                          3.306     2.120     1.926    2.907     4.174     3.759    3.318    2.821    2.399
FVCASH                         0.803     0.742     0.415    0.606     0.951     0.791    0.566    0.815    0.661
FVTRADING                      0.037     0.249     0.000    0.000     0.000     0.069    0.000    0.002    0.000
FVSTD                          2.659     2.193     1.301    2.158     3.280     3.294    2.686    1.980    1.682
wLTD                           1.229     1.150     0.475    0.982     1.616     1.356    1.079    1.093    0.896
wOTHERASSET                    0.724     0.455     0.473    0.643     0.837     0.835    0.723    0.606    0.566
wOTHERLIAB                     0.354     0.564     0.097    0.209     0.457     0.462    0.318    0.240    0.122

NONINTINC1                     0.019     0.019     0.009    0.016     0.024     0.025    0.020    0.014    0.012
NONINTINC2                     0.023     0.036     0.008    0.013     0.023     0.029    0.018    0.016    0.010
NONINTINC3                     0.008     0.031     0.000    0.002     0.006     0.009    0.002    0.007    0.001
SAΔ NONINTINC                  0.006     0.028     0.000    0.003     0.009     0.006    0.004    0.005    0.003
Δ NONINTINC                    0.002     0.023    -0.002    0.001     0.004     0.002    0.001    0.001    0.001

NONINTEXP                      0.111     0.060     0.080    0.100     0.127     0.117    0.105    0.105    0.094
SAΔ NONINTEXP                  0.010     0.027     0.002    0.008     0.017     0.010    0.008    0.010    0.008
Δ NONINTEXP                    0.002     0.021    -0.001    0.002     0.006     0.002    0.002    0.002    0.002

LOGTA                         14.297     1.576   13.201    13.865    14.961    15.398   14.911   13.120   13.177
ABSGAP                         2.089     2.156    0.748     1.542     2.873     2.169    1.613    2.004    1.484
GAP                            0.160     2.998   -1.434     0.150     1.635    -0.119   -0.170    0.457    0.469
CAP                            0.285     0.198    0.155     0.252     0.373     0.257    0.226    0.315    0.281
CAP2                           0.120     0.229    0.024     0.064     0.139     0.101    0.051    0.142    0.080
DIV                            0.013     0.010    0.007     0.012     0.018     0.016    0.016    0.009    0.009

The sample covers the period Q1:2001-Q3:2005. The variables are defined in Section 2.


                                                      54
                                         Table 2
         Summary Statistics from Cross-sectional Regressions of Valuation Model (7)

MTB = wLOANS × (α1 + α 2YIELDLOANS + α 3 ALLOW + α 4 NPL + α 5CHARGE
                 + α 6CONSUMER + α 7 COMMER + α 8GROWTH LOANS )
 + wNONINTDEPO × ( β1 + β 2GROWTH NONINTDEPO )
 + wINTCOREDEPO × (δ 1 + δ 2 INTINTCOREDEPO + δ 3 NOW + δ 4 SAVINGS + δ 5GROWTH INTCOREDEPO )
 + FVSEC + FVCASH + FVTRADING − FVSTD + wLTD vLTD + wOTHERASSET vOTHERASSET + wOTHERLIAB vOTHERLIAB
 + γ 1 NONINTINC1 + γ 2 NONINTINC 2 + γ 3 NONINTINC 3 + γ 4 SAΔNONINTINC + γ 5ΔNONINTINC
 + ρ1 NONINTEXP + ρ 2 SAΔNONINTEXP + ρ 3ΔNONINTEXP
 + λ1LOGTA + λ2 ABSGAP + λ3GAP + λ4CAP + λ5CAP 2 + λ6 DIV + ε

                                    All BHCs                         Large BHCs            Small BHCs
                                   (N = 7,443)                        (N = 3,846)           (N = 3,597)
                Mean     t-stat        Q1        Med.      Q3      Mean        t-stat    Mean        t-stat
α1               0.915      36.5       0.874      0.907    0.964    0.864         35.6    0.923         35.6
α2               2.452       8.1       2.209      2.478    2.660    3.523         15.3    2.346          3.6
α3              -0.055      -0.1      -1.065     -0.304    0.317    0.062          0.2    0.060          0.1
α4              -0.883      -6.8      -1.173     -0.974   -0.566   -1.375         -5.1   -0.774         -5.3
α5              -1.201      -3.9      -1.871     -1.052   -0.523   -2.548         -4.4   -0.533         -2.0
α6              -0.086      -7.7      -0.098     -0.085   -0.072   -0.108         -9.5   -0.082         -4.8
α7              -0.047      -1.8      -0.089     -0.064    0.008   -0.043         -1.2   -0.015         -0.6
α8               0.026       1.6       0.002      0.026    0.069    0.059          2.6    0.025          1.6
vLOANS           1.066      40.1       1.042      1.057    1.110    1.077         44.7    1.081         83.9

β1              -0.905    -46.4       -0.955     -0.900   -0.856   -0.885       -46.6    -0.894       -38.3
β2               0.075      2.8        0.040      0.094    0.149    0.029         0.5     0.060         1.5
vNONINTDEPO     -0.899    -48.0       -0.947     -0.895   -0.857   -0.884       -59.5    -0.889       -39.7

δ1              -0.902    -27.6       -0.944     -0.913   -0.819   -0.871      -25.9     -0.864       -39.6
δ2              -5.263     -3.8       -6.032     -5.048   -3.954   -6.255       -5.4     -4.417        -6.6
δ3               0.084      5.5        0.041      0.074    0.136    0.082        2.3      0.041         1.9
δ4               0.086      2.4        0.039      0.090    0.130    0.090        1.5      0.035         2.5
δ5               0.054      1.6        0.022      0.050    0.088    0.019        0.6      0.049         2.1
vINTCOREDEPO    -0.938   -130.3       -0.951     -0.936   -0.918   -0.918     -165.4     -0.927       -61.0

vLTD            -0.996    -30.5       -1.047     -0.977   -0.945   -0.983       -40.2    -1.038       -70.6
vOTHERASSET      0.789      9.9        0.590      0.831    0.933    0.785         6.0     0.695        18.9
vOTHERLIAB      -0.743     -6.3       -0.917     -0.769   -0.518   -0.816        -7.6    -0.947       -16.8

γ1             23.238      19.4      20.031      24.006   25.396   25.399        17.0    15.807        19.8
γ2             17.009      21.8      15.634      17.595   18.434   19.975         4.7    11.376         6.7
γ3             15.221      10.0      11.609      16.111   19.563   17.686        21.4     9.808         8.9
γ4             -1.900      -3.7      -3.307      -2.063    0.067   -1.705        -1.4    -1.949        -3.2
γ5             -4.757      -5.7      -7.997      -4.856   -2.097   -5.471        -4.4    -2.926        -3.7




                                                   55
                                               Table 2 continued

                                        All BHCs                                Large BHCs              Small BHCs
                                       (N = 7,443)                               (N = 3,846)             (N = 3,597)
                  Mean         t-stat      Q1      Med.            Q3         Mean        t-stat      Mean        t-stat
ρ1               -14.566         -10.4 -16.877 -15.421           -11.740     -16.874        -25.6    -11.112         -9.4
ρ2                 2.991           2.1    -0.672   2.888           5.093       3.860          2.1      3.417          2.5
ρ3                 3.821           5.6     1.572   3.740           5.653       5.817          5.1      2.444          2.0

λ1                 0.042          7.4      0.028       0.038       0.055       0.034          5.2      0.014            3.8
λ2                 0.006          1.1     -0.008       0.005       0.014       0.019          1.8     -0.008           -0.8
λ3                 0.033          9.7      0.022       0.037       0.046       0.047         14.9      0.026            4.2
λ4                -1.223         -6.0     -1.684      -1.185      -0.688      -1.371         -3.9     -0.333           -2.8
λ5                 0.938         11.9      0.717       0.911       1.110       1.297          4.6      0.234            2.3
λ6                28.255          6.7     18.059      29.272      33.440      29.034          8.1     19.219            4.6

R-Square            0.708                   0.669       0.708       0.739       0.757                   0.561
N                     392                     376         399         404         202                     189

The sample covers the period Q1:2001-Q3:2005. The statistics are derived from the time-series distribution of the
cross-sectional quarterly regressions. The t-statistics are calculated assuming the quarterly coefficients follow an
AR(1) process. The variables are defined in Sections 2 and 3.




                                                          56
                                                        Table 3
                                               Value Creation by Activity

Panel A: Value contribution
                                        All BHCs                       Large BHCs                     Small BHCs
                                       (N = 7,443)                     (N = 3,846)                    (N = 3,597)
                               Mean    Med.     Std     IQ     Mean    Med.    Std     IQ     Mean    Med.    Std     IQ
Loans                           0.63    0.58    0.61    0.78    0.80    0.70   0.71    0.92    0.72    0.67   0.43    0.54
Noninterest-bearing deposits    0.14    0.11    0.13    0.14    0.15    0.13   0.12    0.13    0.15    0.13   0.14    0.15
Interest-bearing deposits       0.48    0.42    0.44    0.53    0.64    0.58   0.48    0.58    0.54    0.49   0.40    0.49
Noninterest income              0.93    0.69    0.99    0.64    1.32    0.99   1.40    0.79    0.45    0.35   0.43    0.31
Noninterest expense            -1.58   -1.43    0.97    0.91   -1.92   -1.71   1.13    0.93   -1.11   -0.99   0.68    0.69
Other explained                 0.83    0.75    0.47    0.55    0.88    0.81   0.52    0.59    0.19    0.20   0.30    0.37
Unexplained                     0.00   -0.05    0.55    0.63    0.00   -0.03   0.54    0.65    0.00   -0.04   0.43    0.49
Total                           1.42    1.22    1.06    1.18    1.88    1.67   1.13    1.18    0.93    0.82   0.69    0.82


Panel B: Standardized value contribution (percentage points)
                                        All BHCs                       Large BHCs                     Small BHCs
                                       (N = 7,443)                     (N = 3,846)                    (N = 3,597)
                               Mean    Med.     Std     IQ     Mean    Med.    Std     IQ     Mean    Med.    Std     IQ
Loans                            44      54       15     19      43      48      15     20      77      84      15     18
Noninterest-bearing deposits     10      10         3      3      8       9        3      3     16      16        5      5
Interest-bearing deposits        34      39       11     13      34      39      10     13      57      61      14     16
Noninterest income               65      64       24     15      71      67      29     17      48      44      15     10
Noninterest expense            -110    -134       23     22    -103    -116      23     20    -118    -125      24     23
Other explained                  58      70       11     13      47      55      11     13      20      25      11     12
Unexplained                       0      -5       13      15      0      -2      11      14      0      -5      15      16
Sum                             100     100     100     100     100     100    100     100     100     100    100     100

IQ is the inter-quartile range. In Panel A, the variables measure value-creation by activity per dollar of equity book
value. They are calculated using the coefficient estimates form equation (7) (Table 2). Precise definitions are
provided in Section 4.2. Panel B is derived from Panel A by dividing the columns of Panel A by the corresponding
sum of components.




                                                               57
                                             Table 4
                     Correlations between Values Created by Various Activities
                    (Pearson below the Diagonal, Spearman above the Diagonal)

Panel A: All BHCs
                                         V1       V2       V3       V4        V5       V6       V7       V8       V9
V1   Total                                        0.82     0.28     0.17      0.45     0.37    -0.24     0.39     0.46
V2   Explained                           0.85              0.31     0.19      0.54     0.48    -0.29     0.47    -0.06
V3   Loans                               0.24     0.28              0.35      0.22    -0.04    -0.36    -0.36     0.00
V4   Noninterest-bearing deposits        0.16     0.19      0.33              0.28     0.22    -0.51    -0.08     0.01
V5   Interest-berating deposits          0.44     0.52      0.24     0.25              0.30    -0.50     0.12    -0.04
V6   Noninterest income                  0.49     0.58      0.01     0.14     0.21             -0.64     0.33    -0.06
V7   Noninterest expense                -0.32    -0.37     -0.36    -0.39    -0.44    -0.77             -0.09     0.02
V8   Other explained                     0.70     0.54     -0.33    -0.06     0.13     0.32    -0.15             -0.03
V9   Unexplained                         0.53     0.01      0.01     0.01     0.01     0.01    -0.01     0.01

Panel B: Large BHCs
                                         V1       V2       V3       V4        V5       V6       V7       V8       V9
V1   Total                                        0.83     0.25     0.20      0.34     0.28    -0.19     0.31     0.44
V2   Explained                           0.88              0.28     0.23      0.43     0.38    -0.25     0.36    -0.07
V3   Loans                               0.22     0.25              0.26      0.02    -0.25    -0.13    -0.31    -0.01
V4   Noninterest-bearing deposits        0.21     0.24      0.24              0.14     0.18    -0.32    -0.08    -0.01
V5   Interest-berating deposits          0.38     0.44      0.04     0.16              0.19    -0.34     0.05    -0.05
V6   Noninterest income                  0.52     0.59     -0.13     0.14     0.17             -0.68     0.22    -0.09
V7   Noninterest expense                -0.37    -0.42     -0.17    -0.26    -0.33    -0.81             -0.14     0.04
V8   Other explained                     0.38     0.43     -0.27    -0.06     0.08     0.20    -0.19             -0.01
V9   Unexplained                         0.47    -0.01      0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00     0.01    -0.01

Panel C: Small BHCs
                                         V1       V2       V3       V4        V5       V6       V7       V8       V9
V1   Total                                        0.78     0.45     0.21      0.52     0.25    -0.24     0.20     0.51
V2   Explained                           0.79              0.57     0.26      0.63     0.32    -0.31     0.24    -0.08
V3   Loans                               0.46     0.58              0.25      0.43     0.26    -0.54    -0.29    -0.03
V4   Noninterest-bearing deposits        0.21     0.26      0.27              0.28     0.32    -0.49    -0.08     0.00
V5   Interest-berating deposits          0.49     0.63      0.47     0.24              0.34    -0.57    -0.09    -0.02
V6   Noninterest income                  0.21     0.26      0.29     0.24     0.31             -0.70     0.00    -0.03
V7   Noninterest expense                -0.21    -0.26     -0.54    -0.41    -0.56    -0.79              0.07     0.00
V8   Other explained                     0.17     0.22     -0.34    -0.14    -0.17    -0.12     0.15             -0.02
V9   Unexplained                         0.62     0.00      0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00

Correlation coefficients greater than 0.04 in absolute value are significant at the 5% level. The variables measure
value-creation by activity per dollar of equity book value. They are calculated using the coefficient estimates form
equation (7) (Table 2). Precise definitions are provided in Section 4.2.




                                                         58
                                               Table 5
                  Portfolio Analysis of the Predictability of Excess Stock Returns
                             Using Predictions of Valuation Model (7)

Panel A: All BHCs
    Portfolio               1 quarter               2 quarters             3 quarters                1 year
  1 (low VTM)                  -2.1%                  -3.8%                   -4.7%                   -5.8%
                                -6.0                   -5.7                    -4.1                    -8.4

         2                     -1.0%                  -1.9%                   -2.8%                   -3.7%
                                -4.1                   -5.5                    -5.1                    -2.7

         3                     -0.1%                  -0.1%                   -0.6%                   -0.4%
                                -0.7                   -0.3                    -1.0                    -2.2

         4                     1.0%                    1.9%                    2.7%                   2.9%
                                2.9                     4.3                     4.4                   13.9

  5 (high VTM)                 2.3%                    3.5%                    4.9%                   6.3%
                                9.6                     6.1                     4.3                    6.1

       5–1                     4.4%                    7.4%                    9.6%                   12.1%
                                9.3                     6.5                     4.7                    9.3

Panel B: Large BHCs
    Portfolio               1 quarter               2 quarters             3 quarters                1 year
      5–1                      3.1%                    5.8%                    7.9%                   9.8%
                                5.9                     7.8                     6.2                    5.5

Panel C: Small BHCs
    Portfolio               1 quarter               2 quarters             3 quarters                1 year
      5–1                      5.5%                    8.4%                   10.8%                   14.1%
                               10.1                     8.1                    6.8                     7.3

The table reports time-series means and t-statistics for excess returns on selected portfolios. The t-statistics are
calculated assuming the portfolio returns follow an ARMA(1,q-1) process, where q is the number of quarters in the
return period. For each portfolio, excess returns are measured as the difference between the equally-weighted
portfolio return and the equally-weighted contemporaneous return on all bank stocks. Portfolios are constructed each
quarter by sorting stocks based on the predicted value-to-market ratio (VTM), where predicted value is the fitted
value from equation (7) times the bank’s tangible common equity. The return accumulation period starts three
months after the end of the quarter.




                                                        59
                                        Table 6
           Summary Statistics from Cross-sectional Regressions Examining the
    Predictability of Abnormal Stock Returns Using Predictions of Valuation Model (7)

     RET = η1 + η2VTM + η3 BTM + η4 LOGMV
           + η5 β market + η6abs( β int erest ) + η7 abs( β slope ) + η8 β spread + η9VOLAT + ε

Panel A: Restricted model, all BHCs
  Horizon      Intercept        VTM                   BTM            LOGMV                R2      N
1 quarter        0.075          0.057                 -0.012           -0.007            0.069    384
                     1.9              7.1              -0.6             -2.3

2 quarters         0.196             0.093            -0.025           -0.015            0.086    377
                    2.2               6.7              -0.7             -1.8

3 quarters         0.307             0.114            -0.015           -0.021            0.108    370
                    1.8               2.3              -0.3             -2.2

1 year             0.423             0.123            0.015            -0.029            0.121    363
                    1.0               3.6              0.2              -1.0

Panel B: Restricted model, large BHCs
  Horizon       Intercept       VTM                   BTM            LOGMV                R2      N
1 quarter         0.067         0.037                 0.022            -0.006            0.066    198
                     1.4              3.7              0.9              -1.8

2 quarters         0.149             0.066            0.046            -0.011            0.087    195
                    1.6               3.3              1.4              -1.7

3 quarters         0.221             0.095            0.085            -0.017            0.114    191
                    2.2               2.8              1.1              -2.8

1 year             0.300             0.097            0.153            -0.022            0.132    187
                    0.8               3.5              2.8              -0.9

Panel C: Restricted model, small BHCs
  Horizon       Intercept      VTM                    BTM            LOGMV                R2      N
1 quarter         0.131        0.085                  -0.044           -0.012            0.061    186
                     1.8              8.3              -3.0             -2.1

2 quarters         0.381             0.134            -0.099           -0.031            0.068    182
                    1.7               6.2              -3.5             -2.4

3 quarters         0.620             0.162            -0.124           -0.047            0.070    179
                    2.0               5.7              -5.2             -2.7

1 year             0.859             0.183            -0.136           -0.064            0.070    176
                    2.5               3.6              -2.3             -1.4



                                                        60
Panel D: Full model, all BHCs
 Horizon      Intercept    VTM               BTM        LOGMV         βmarket    abs(βinterest) abs(βslope)        βspread      VOLAT            R2           N
1 quarter       0.057     0.054             -0.013       -0.007       0.012          -0.003         -0.021         -0.018         0.183        0.109         277
                    1.6           8.0        -0.9         -3.2         0.9            -0.1           -0.7           -1.9           1.0

2 quarters        0.148          0.094      -0.026       -0.015       0.027          -0.007         -0.089         -0.035         0.474        0.133         271
                   0.9            4.2        -1.0         -2.2         1.0            -0.1           -0.9           -1.9           1.3

3 quarters        0.218          0.123      -0.016       -0.021       0.040          -0.003         -0.176         -0.049         0.831        0.162         265
                   1.5            7.0        -0.3         -2.4         1.1             0.0           -1.8           -1.4           2.7

1 year            0.299          0.142       0.000       -0.028       0.046          0.023          -0.329         -0.067         1.191        0.185         258
                   1.3            4.7         0.0         -1.4         0.7            0.1            -6.3           -1.1           1.0

The table reports time-series means and t-statistics from cross-sectional regressions of stock returns on the predicted value-to-market ratio (VTM) and control
variables. The predicted value is the fitted value from equation (7) times the bank’s tangible common equity. The return accumulation periods starts three months
after the end of the quarter. The t-statistics are calculated assuming the coefficients follow an ARMA(1,q-1) process, where q is the number of quarters in the
return period. The control variables are the book-to-market ratio (BTM), the log of market value of common equity (LOGMV), estimates of stock return
sensitivities to relevant risk factors (the β variables), and an estimate of idiosyncratic stock volatility (VOLAT). The beta variables are estimated by regressing
excess monthly stock returns during the sixty months ending in the valuation quarter on excess market return (market), the monthly change in the one-year U.S.
Treasury bill (interest), the monthly change in the slope of the term-structure (slope, the difference between the yields on 10 and 1 year U.S. Treasury bond/bill),
and the monthly change in the market credit spread (spread, the difference between Moody’s AAA and BAA Corporate bond yields). “abs(.)” denotes the
absolute value function. VOLAT is measured as the root mean squared error from the beta regression.




                                                                                61
                                              Table 7
                        Summary Statistics from Cross-sectional Regressions
                          Explaining the Predictability of Stock Returns

              MISPRICING = λ1 + λ2 AF + λ3 IO + λ4 LOGMV + λ5 LOGP + λ6TURN + ε

                   Intercept        AF          IO        LOGMV          LOGP        TURN           R2           N
All BHCs             0.254        -0.010       0.143       -0.012        -0.014      -0.115       0.046         378
                      4.3          -2.5         3.0         -2.8          -0.7        -15.9
Large BHCs           -0.009       -0.034       0.132        0.003        0.019       -0.101       0.058         199
                      -0.1         -4.2         2.7          0.7          1.2         -10.5
Small BHCs           1.685        0.024        0.227       -0.150        0.005       -0.041       0.143         179
                      14.3         2.8          3.8         -15.0         0.4         -1.5

The table reports time-series means and t-statistics from cross-sectional quarterly regressions. The t-statistics are
calculated assuming the quarterly coefficients follow an AR(1) process. MISPRICING is the absolute value of (VTM
– 1), where VTM—the predicted value-to-market ratio—is calculated as the product of the fitted value from equation
(7) times the bank’s tangible common equity and divided by the market value of common equity. AF is the number
of EPS forecasts for the current year reported by IBES in the last month of the quarter. IO is measured as the
fraction of the firm’s outstanding shares held by large institutional investors at the end of the quarter. LOGMV is the
log of market value of common equity. LOGP is the log of the firm’s share price at the end of the quarter. TURN is
the logarithm of the average ratio of the stock’s monthly trading volume to total shares outstanding during the
twelve months ending at the end of the quarter.




                                                          62
