NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MACROECONOMICS AND FINANCE:
THE ROLE OF THE STOCK MARKET

Stanley Fischer
Robert C. Merton

Working Paper No. 1291

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 198b

Prepared for the Carnegie—Rochester Conference on Public Policy,
November 18—20, 1983. We are indebted to Fischer Black, Olivier
Blanchard, Bennett McCallum, James Poterba, Julio Rotemberg, and
William Schwert for comments and/or discussions, to David Wilcox
for research assistance, and to the National Science Foundation for
research support. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed
• are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper 111291
March 1984

Macroeconomics and Finance: The Role of the Stock Market

ABSTRACT

The treatment of the stock market in finance and macroeconomics
exemplifies many of the important differences in perspective between the two

fields. In finance, the stock market is the single most important market with

respect to corporate investment decisions. In contrast, macroeconomic
modelling and policy discussion assign a relatively minor role to the stock

market in investment decisions. This paper explores four possible
explanations for this neglect and concludes that macro analysis should give

more attention to the stock market. Despite the frequent jibe that "the stock
market has forecast ten of the last six recessions," the stock market is in

fact a good predictor of the business cycle and the components of GNP. We
examine the relative importance of the required return on equity compared
with the interest rate in the determination of the cost of capital, and hence,

investment. In this connection, we review the empirical success of the Q
theory of investment which relates investment to stock market evaluations of

firms. One of the explanations for the neglect of the stock market in
macroeconomics may be the view that because the stock market fluctuates
excessively, rational managers will pay little attention to the market in

formulating investment plans. This view is shown to be unfounded by
demonstrating that rational managers will react to stock price changes even if

the stock market fluctuates excessively. Finally, we review the extremely
important issue of whether the market does fluctuate excessively, and conclude
that while not ruled out on a priori theoretical grounds, the empirical
evidence for such excess fluctuations has not been decisive.

Professor Robert Merton

Professor Stanley Fischer

Sloan School of Management

Department of Economics

MIT E52.-453

MIT E52-28OA

Cambridge, MA 02139

Cambridge, MA 02139

(6l7)2536617

(617)253—6666

January 1984
Revised

MACROECONOMICS AND FINANCE:
THE ROLE OF THE STOCK MARKET

Stanley Fischer and Robert C. Merton
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Although most would agree that corporate investment and financing
decisions along with the study of the behavior of financial markets and
institutions are within the sphere of finance, the boundaries of this sphere,

like those of other specialities, are both permeable and flexible. A broader
description of the subject would be the study of Individual behavior of
households in the intertemporal allocation of their resources in an
environment of uncertainty and of the role of private—sector economic

organizations in facilitating these allocations. Macroeconomics analyzes the
behavior of the entire economy, and. hence, by definition, encompasses and

innn th ft1d nf f4nru,p_
Macroeconomics has traditionally had a common interest with finance in the

modeling of financial markets and asset pricing. Some clear examples are the
theories of the term structure of interest rates, portfolio demand functions,

and corporate investment decisions. Models of Interteraporal optimization are

widely used in both fields, The emphasis In the use of these models in
macroeconomics has

been

to analyze consumption and investment decisions; in

finance, they provide the basis for asset demands, equilibrium capital asset
pricing, and corporate investment decisions.

—3—

While the role of risk and uncertainty is central 1n each of these areas,
it is perhaps not surprising that finance with its focus on security pricing
and corporate investment decisions has placed greater emphasis on the explicit

analysis of risk than does macroeconomics. Indeed, in the absence of
uncertainty, much of what is interesting in finance disappears.

Under

certainty, all securities are perfect substitutes (except for different tax
treatments) and therefore, only one financial market is required for the

economy. Corporate investment decisions moreover, require nothing more than a
net present value calculation of known

future

net cash flows discounted at the

known risk—free interest rate. It is the complexity of the interaction of
time and uncertainty that provides intrinsic excitement to the study of

finance.
To help locate the distinction between the treatment of uncertainty in
traditional macroeconomics and finance, consider the role of regression models

which are, of course, used in both fields. In traditional macro, the emphasis
is on the explanatory variables and the residuals are treated as simply noise

which preferably should not be there. By contrast, in finance, it is
precisely the noise (or as it is formally described, "the non—forecastable
components" of the relevant economic variables) that represent the

uncertainties which significantly influence economic behavior. In short, if
there were no residuals, then there would be no subject of finance.
The differences between the two fields in making explicit the treatment of

risk is no doubt in part, a function of the difficulty in doing so. To
develop the risk analysis of assets (as, for example, in the Capital Asset
Pricing Model in finance), it is necessary only to specify the stochastic

structure of asset returns. In a complete macroeconomic model, the implied

—4—

distributions of asset returns must be derived from the stochastic structure

of preferences, technology, and policy. The last fifteen years have
nevertheless seen a significant development of stochastic macroeconomics.

Following the early unpublished work by Mirrlees (1965), Brock and Mirman
(1972; 1973), Bourguignon (1974) and Merton (1975) among others extended the
neoclassical growth model to Include uncertainty about technological progress

and demographics. The role of stochastic disturbances in business cycles was
long ago recognized by Slutsky (1937), and it has in the last decade become
common to include these disturbances explicitly in theoretical models of the

business cycle. It is also becoming standard in econometric studies to
provide a model of the error term rather than simply tack an error term onto a
deterministic equation.
Exemplifying the two—way direction of the flow of ideas between finance
and macroeconomics are models by Lucas (1978), Brock (1982) and Merton (1984),
that explicitly connect the distribtztion of financial asset returns with real

sector production techniques. Brock (1979) and Malliaris and Brock (1982)
represent more ambitious attempts to integrate the two fields.
The notion that arrangements for dealing with risk may have important
macroeconomic consequences is reflected In one strand of the analysis of labor

contracts, In the Azarladis (1975)—Baily (1974) approach, labor contracts
with constant real wages are a mechanism by which risk neutral firms provide
insurance to risk averse workers. Such contracts, have been taken as providing
a rationalization for stickiness of wages, though it should be noted that the

model is one of real rather than nominal wage rigidity. The inclusion of
capital markets In the Azariadis—Baily analysis provides an alternative source

of diversification for workers.

information Is a second general heading under which much that is common to

the two fields falls. The concept of efficient capital markets and the
question of the extent to which prices reveal Information provided the impetus

for analytical and empirical developments In this area. Both fields have
drawn on information to provide explanations of basic puzzles. In finance,
signalling theory has been used as a possible explanation for the payment of

dividends by firms. Determinacy of the corporate debt structure under
conditions in which the Modigliani—Miller theorem would otherwise hold If
there were perfect information can be obtained by viewing the firm's
management as the agent of the principal (stockholders).
The rational expectation equilibrium approach to macroeconomics developed
In the past fifteen years Is an information—based attempt to explain the

business cycle and the nonneutrality of money. In the original Lucas (1972)
model, individuals use observed local prices to make inferences about the
unobserved aggregate price level, thus producing a nonexploitable Phillips

type tradeoff. Subsequent extensions (for example Lucas (1975), Kydland and
Prescott (1982)) In which error terms are sums of unobserved components of
differing degrees of serial correlation permit the basic approach to generate
persistent, and thus business—cycle like, deviations of output from the full
Information equilibrium level.
Incomplete Information has also been used as the basis for the alternative
view of labor contracts, In which the form of the contract depends on the firm
having better information about the state of the world than do workers (Hart,

1983). WIth risk averse firms, such contracts can generate states in which
there Is underemployment when the firm has a low marginal revenue product.

—6--

Information can also be used to explain asset price dynamics. Huang
(1983) has shown that if the arrival of information in the economy can be
modeled by a finite—dimensional diffusion process, then security returns will
follow the Ito processes which are widely used to model these returns in
finance models. Duff le and Huang (1983) were able to show that with
continuous trading, a finite number of securities (and therefore, in this
case, an incomplete market) is a perfect substitute for complete Arrow—Debreu

markets. That is, they have shown that frequency of trading (which appears to
be satisfied by real world financial markets) is a substitute for large

numbers of state—contingent securities (many of which are obviously missing in
the real world).
As is readily apparent from even this cryptic survey, there is much to be
discussed in detailing the links between the fields, tracing both the direct
influence of each field on the other, and the extent to which the fields have
simultaneously drawn on and contributed to developments in economic theory.
The dynamic developments underway In both fields would quickly render obsolete

any single attempt to do so. Rather than attempt such a survey, we,
therefore, focus the paper on a single theme——the role of the stock market in

macroeconomics, and particularly In the Investment decision—with the hope

that

this

teaser will encourage both financial and macroeconotaists to explore

and keep up with further developments In each other's fie1ds
The treatment of the stock market in finance and macroeconomics
exemplifies many of the important differences In perspective between the two

fields. The stock market Is the single most Important market in finance.
Although firms finance a significant portion of their investments by debt,
stock prices are seen as providing the key price signals to managers regarding

—7-.

corporate investment choices. These prices also serve as a measure of
performance for past investment decisions. In contrast, macroeconomics
assigns a relatively minor role to the stock market in investment decisions.
Despite the contributions by Tobin, Brunner and Meltzer (1976) and others that
give the stock and other asset markets at least an equal claim for attention,
the important financial markets in macroeconomics have traditionally been the

money and debt markets. This focus, especially with respect to policy, is
underscored by the current discussions of the effects of fiscal and monetary
policy on investment that are dominated by the high levels of real interest
rates in the bond market.
The balance of the paper is organized around four possible explanations
for the lack of emphasis on the stock market in macroeconomic analyses of the

business cycle. First, there may be a widespread belief that, as an empirical
matter, the stock market is a poor predictor of the rate of investment and

other components of GNP. We examine the predictive abilities of the market in
Section 2.

'___l J___
ee iuLbL. Ld.L.e. is ..'L.
(•__
.ue
Ud•__I.LI
oecuuu, it uiy uei.ieveu

indicator

of the cost of capital, even in an uncertain environment. Such a

belief could stem from the habit of formulating models in a (quasi) certainty

environment. The emphasis on the interest rate as the cost of capital would
also be Justified if changes in the cost of capital were perfectly correlated

with changes in the interest rate, We examine the question of the appropriate
discount rate for investment in Section 3. Because the appropriate cost of
capital includes stock market variables, we continue the discussion of the
role of stock prices in affecting investment in Section 4, using the framework

of

theory.

A third possible reason to ignore the stock market arises from a view held
by some macroeconomists that the focus of business cycle analysis should be on
the "deep" parameters of tastes and technology, and the economic policies and
disturbances that interact with tastes and technology to produce the cycle.

On such a view, the stock market is, at most, simply a passive predictor of

subsequent economic events. In a general equilibrium sense, all prices are of
course endogenous, and such a narrow focus would therefore rule out interest

in

financial

market variables. Presumably even those who want to focus on

the structure of the economy should also be interested in the mechanisms by

which the "truly" causal economic variables affect the business cycle. In
Section 5, we consider exogenous events that primarily affect stock prices and
describe the mechanism by which the resulting stock price changes can affect

investment. We then address the issue of whether these events are any less
significant in their impact on investment than those that, transmit their

effects primarily through interest rates.

A finalexplanation for the lack of emphasis on the stock market may be a
widespread distrust of the reliability of stock prices as indicators or causes
of investment because it is believed that stock market participants are rather
poorly informed and/or that stock prices are significantly influenced by

irrational waves of optimism and pessimism among investors. Keynes'

description

of the stock market as a casino struck this chord, which continues

to vibrate sympathetically among macroeconomists even today. The critical
question of stock market rationality with its wide—ranging implications for
both finance and macroeconomics is the topic of discussion in our concluding
Section 6.

2. The Stock Market as a Predictor of the Business Cycle
Economic theory tells us that in a well—functioning and rational stock
market, changes in stock prices reflect both revised expectations about future

corporate earnings and changes in the discount rate at which these expected

earnings are capitalized.1 Corporate profits are an important part of GNP
and are also likely to be positively correlated with other components of CNP.

The forward—looking property of stock prices would, therefore, appear to

qualify the stock market as a predictor of the business cycle. If, moreover,
the information reflected in stock prices is of high quality, then stock
prices should provide accurate predictions.
While the stock market has long been recognized as a predictor of the
business cycle in theory, macroeconomic forecasters have hesitated to attach

significance to its predictions. In the 1920s, stock prices were the main
component of the (leading) 'IA" curve in the Harvard ABC system developed by

Warren Persons to track the business cycle. The original Mitche1l-Burns list

of leading indicators (1938) included an index of stock prices. While
Standard and Poor's 500 Index of stock prices is currently among the Coimnerce.

Department's leading indicators (see Moore (1983, Chapter 25)), it receives
rather modest attention by comparison with other indicators such as interest
rate and money supply changes which are frequently highlighted in business

cycle forecasts by macroeconomists, Although many forecasters do use stock
prices as an important input in their business cycle predictions, the
predictive ability of the stock market as perceived by macroeconomists
generally is probably well—described by the often—quoted remark that "the
market has forecast ten of the last six recessions."

—10—

Moore (1983, Chap. 9) reviews and interprets the evidence from 1873

through 1975 on the stock market as a business cycle indicator. Writing in
1975, he noted that since 1873, stock prices had led the business cycle at

eighteen of twenty three peaks and at seventeen of twenty three troughs. For
the post—World War II period, the "only instances since 1948 of an economic

slowdown where there was no substantial decline in stock prices were in
1951—1952 land 19801." (p. 147, material in brackets added by Moore.)
Figure 1 shows the Standard and Poor's 500 index (deflated by the CNP
deflator) and the real GNP for the period since 1947, with recessions marked

off by vertical lines. The stock market falls in the quarter before each of
the eight recessions, except in 1980, and typically continues falling well

into the recession. On several occasions (1962; 1966; 1971, and 1977—1978),

the market fell sharply without being followed by a recession. Thus, the
standard comment about the market would appear to be accurate. It is perhaps
not appropriate, however, to count all these "false" predictions against the
market since in both 1962 and 1966 output did grow less rapidly following the

stock prIce declIne. That 1s, the market should have predicted eight of the
last six recessions.
A more relevant question is, of course, whether there are better business

cycle predictors than the stock market. Moore's (Chap. 25, p. 386) tabulation
of the forecasting record for 1873—1975, measuring success by the percentage
of turning points (up as well as down) predicted, has the stock market
narrowly edging out the liabilities of business failures as the best leading

indicator. By this criterion, the stock market is therefore, the best single
leading Indicator.

FIGJRE I
REAL CxrrRrr ND THE SOK MARKE'r

125

1945 19S0 1955 1960
Note: Stock Market is the S&P
CNP deflator.

1965

1970 1975 1980

500, deflated by

the implicit

—lOa—

Table 1: Variance Decomposition for Real GNP Forecasts,
Ten Variable Monthly Vector Autoregression Model.

Innovations in:

Percentage of Variance Accounted for
at Specified Horizon (in Months)
13

1

48

Ml

.03

6.6

8.5

Standard and Poor's 500

.63

16.4

35.7

Three month TB rate

.25

10.2

32.7

0.2

0.3

0.1

0.4

Total nonfinancial debt

0

GNP deflator

.09

Change in business inventories

47.5

22.2

4.4

Real GNP

51.5

42.7

13.5

Federal outlays

0

0.2

0.6

Federal receipts.

0

1.3

3.0

Exchange rate

0

0.2

0.9

Notes: 1. Model is described in Doan, Litterman and Sims (1983).
2. Variance decompositions are based on ordering of variables shown
above.
3. Interpretation of variance decomposition is, e.g. that 6.6% of the
variance of GNP forecast for 13 month horizon is accounted for by
innovations in Ml over the next twelve months

RIO

R9

ES

GGR

CDGR

4.43
(4.73)
0.03
(0.43)

0.089
(1.57)

(3.05)

3.52
(2.65)

0.067
(3.22)

3.75

0.05
(4.39)

2.38
(9.08)

R7

0.06
(5.32)

CONGR

(4.16)

2.37
(9.82)

0.16

0.27
(4.85)

R6

(210)

2.67

0.09
(5.36)

3.07
(3,01)

IOR

RHO

—0.93
(—1.07)

—0.06
(—0.41)

—0.22
(—0.34)

0.06
(0.58)

—1.63
(—3.84)

0.02
(0.09)

0.00
(0.02)

0.26
(1.31)

—0.05

(1.14)

0.21

0.35
(1.80)

(1.14)

(—0.63)

—1.21
(—4.60)

0.54

(2.29)

(—1.53)
0.21

0.41

—0.17

(1.48)

(o.os)

(—2.49)

—1.79
(—3.63)

0.01

—0.51

(2.98)

0.08
(0.43)

GNPGR1

(6.62)

DINF_1

—

0.50

DRAAAX_1 DRTBX1

Independent Variable

0.11

STOCX_1

R5

R4

3.19

R3

(658)

3.09
(4.81)

3.16
(3.85)

GNPGR

Ri

R2

CONST

Variable

#

—

1.95

1.24

7.48
-0.03

1.86

1.98

1.99

1.96

1.79

1.94

5.09

6.91

112

1.09

3.85

5.79

1.68

1.97

1.62

2.84

1.90

DW

SER

—S--—

0.57

0.21

0.43

0.45

0.73

0.39

0.64

0.54

—0.03

R2

—

Statistics

The Stock Market as Predictor of Real GNP Growth and its Components Annual Data, 1950—1982

Regression

2:

Dependent

Table

is the percentage annual growth rate of real
government purchases.
is the percentage annual growth rate of real value
Standard and Poàr's 500 index, December to December.(deflated

GGR
STOCX

is the change in the OPIU inflation rate, December over
December.

DINF

where the real Treasury bill rate is
the average of realized real rates for each
quarter, defined as the rate in the last
month of the greater minus the CPIU inflation
rate over the subsequent three months.

is the change in the real
Treasury bill rate,

DRTBX

DRAAAX is the change in the real AAA bond
rate, December to December, where the real rate
is equal to nominal rate minus CPI inflation over
the subsequent 12 months.

by CPIU)

the

is the percentage annual
growth rate of real durable consumption expenditures.

CDCR

of'

is the percentage annual
growth rate of real nondurable cosumption expenditures.

real total investment.

CONGR

of'

is the percentage annual growth rate

ICR

percentage annual growth rate of real GNP.

i8

GNPGR

the

t—statistics in parenthesis.

Variable Definitions:

Note:

Table 2 (continued)

C)

0

3:

(0.32)

0.03

-0.05
(—0.39)
0.015
(2.50)

(3.82)

0.03

0.14
(1.34)

0.08
(0.71)

(2.33)

0.31

(5.30)

0.21

(4.80)

0.21

(5.61)

0.27

0.26
(5.33)

STOCX1

—0.25
(—3.29)

—1.22
(—0.87)

—0.28
(—0.23)

—1.38
(—4.11)

—1.74
(—3.39)

(0.09)

0.01

—0.39
(—0.34)

(1.11)

0.42

DRAAAX1 DRTBX..1

—

(—3.97)

—0.16

—2.27
(—3.63)

(—4.67)

—3.54

(—2.69)

—0.69

(—1.01)

—0.28

DINF_1

—

Independent Variable

—1.67
(—2.26)

0.64
(2.32)

0.49
(1.49)

GNPGR_1

(1.70)

0.37

(2.22)

0.41

(2.17)

0.41

0.30
(1.40)

0.36
(1.96)

RHO

4.86

0.49

0.64

0.30

0.54

0.49

—0.03

0.12

0.67

0.56

0.78

10.02

10.56

14.99

13.84

3.89

4.17

4.96

0.47

0.63

SE1

R2

_______

Statistics

2.14

1.53

1.71

1.69

1q67

1.61

2.05

1.81

1.89

1.76

DY

R21

0.37

—0.10
2.18
0.016
—0.12
0.71
0.50
—0.25
(-.3.53)
(—2.64)
(2.36)
(3.01) (—5.64)
Note: t—statistics in parentheses.
Variable Definitions: BFIGR is the percentage growth rate of business fixed investment.
RFIGR is the percentage growth rate of residential fixed investment.
11CC is the percentage ratio of the change in inventory investment to lagged GNP,
GNP is
i.e., GNP..j where ICH is the real change in inventories.
(Division
used rather than division by ICH...i because ICH is sometimes negative.)

R20

IICG

7.60

R18

R19

2.46
(1.30)

R17

(2,02)

2.45
(0.94)

1.29
(0.53)

R16

RFIGR

1.27
(0.86)

R14

R15

3.55
(2.93)

R13

3.24
(2.42)

1.50
(0.91)

BFIGR

CONST

R12

Ru

#

Dependent
Variable

financial Variables as Predictors of the Growth Rates of the Components
of Real Investment, Annual Data, 1950—1982

Regression

Table

—11-S

Regression analysis, which provides more formal measures of predictive

power, also shows that the stock market helps predict GNP. As part of his
explanation of the negative relationship between stock returns and inflation,
Fama (1981)2 showed that stock returns are positively related to the

subsequent rate of growth of real GNP. Fama also showed that the stock market

predicts a measure of the average rate of return on physical capital. He
described his evidence as suggesting "a 'rational expectations' or 'efficient
markets' view in which the stock market is concerned with the capital
investment process and uses the earliest information from the process to

forecast its evolution." (p. 555) Fama did not make any more specific claims
about the role of the stock market in the business cycle. In particular, he
chose not to distinguish between the stock market as predictor of the cycle
and the stock market as possibly a causal factor in the cycle.3
Doan, Litterman and Sims (1983) in their ten variable vector
autoregressive model, find the stock market playing a prominent forecasting

role. Table 1 shows, for different forecast horizons, the share of the
/1

variance

of GNP accounted for by innovations in the specified variables.

After one year, stock returns and changes in business inventories are the

leading variables whose innovations account for movements in GNP. Over the
longer four year horizon, innovations in stock prices are the single most
important factor accounting for the variance of GNP.

Tables 2 and 3 present regressions that show the stock market as a

predictor of the growth rate of GNP and its major components. The data are
annual. Regression R2 confirms that the stock market contributes
substantially to the prediction of •the growth rate of real GNP. The stock

market variable used is the increase in the real value of the Standard and

—12—

Poor's 500 Index over the twelve months preceding the year for which the GNP

growth rate Is being forecast. Regression R3 suggests that the stock market
is the most powerful single forecaster of the growth rate of real CNP. This
claim is further supported by separate regressions of the growth rate of real

GNP on each of the other financial independent variables In R3.5
The remaining regressions in Table 2 show that the stock market's
forecasting ability of GNP can be traced to the fact that stock prices lead

both investment and consumption expenditures. Stock prices and the inflation
rate provide strong predictive power for investment although the long term

real interest rate also has a significant coefficient. In the case of durable
consumption, stock prices by themselves are a significant predictor of

consumption; in a multiple regression the

lagged

change In the inflation rate

is the single most powerful predictors with changes in stock prices (a

distant) second and other financial variables trailing. Stock prices are the
only financial variable that help predict the growth rate of real nondurable

consumption expenditures.6 A 20% increase in the real value of the Standard
and Poor's 500 index implies that the annual growth rate of consumption should
be expected to rise by about 1.0%, for example, from a growth rate of 3% per

annum to 4.0%. With both consumption expenditures and household (Including
non—profit organization) equity ownership at about two trillion dollars, a 20%
increase in the real value of the stock market would be expected to increase

consumption expenditures by about 20 billion.7 The stock market is a poor
predictor of government expenditures, as are apparently all other financial

variables.8
Table 3 examines the relationship between stock price returns and other
financial variables and the growth rates of the three major components of

—13--

investment. In univariate regressions, Rh, Rl4, and R17, the stock market
helps predict each of the components of investment. The inclusion of lagged
GNP growth in RU and R].4, and the introduction of other financial variables
in R13 and R14, have very little effect on the coefficient of lagged stock
prices.

The picture for residential fixed investment is mixed. The predictive
power of stock prices disappears when other financial variables are

introduced: the change in the inflation rate in particular appears to have
power In predicting residential investment.9 Lagged GNP growth enters Rl8
with a negative coefficient. Stock prices continue to play a role in
forecasting inventory investment, as do real AAA bond rates and the inflation

rate. Once again, lagged GNP growth enters with a negative coefficient, in
R2 1.

In summary, Table 3 shows, using annual data, that the change In stock
prices taken by itself has predictive power for each component of the change
In investment, and that it retains its power to predict (especially) business
fixed investment and inventory investment even when other financial variables
and lagged real CNP growth enter the regression equations.
In Table Al in the appendix, we present quarterly regression results for

equations like those in Table 2 The quarterly results are similar to those
for the annual data, with the stock market appearing if anything as a more

powerful predictor In the quarterly data. The predictive power of the stock
market can be gauged by comparing the standard error of the regression in A2
of 3.82Z per annum, with the standard error obtained by Litterman in his six
variable quarterly vector autoregressive model estimated over approximately

the same

period, of 3.58.°

—14—

We do not, of course, claim that the stock price changes are the only

predictors of business cycles. Indeed, even if stock prices were known to
reflect all available information, we would not expect this to be so because

the market is not directly in the business of predicting GNP. As noted,
rationally—determined stock prices should be estimates of the present

discounted value of expected future dividends or earnings As shown in Marsh
and Merton (1983), the one—year lagged percentage change in stock price is a
strong predictor of the subsequent year's percentage change in dividends.
Further evidence for this view can be found in IUeidon (1983) and Marsh and
Merton (mimeo) where it is shown that price changes also predict subsequent

changes in aggregate corporate profits. The correlation between changes in
current stock prices and future changes in GNP therefore, arises from the
market's attempt to forecast future earnings, which are correlated with GNP.

This view is consistent with the evidence presented here. Stock prices were
the best predictor of the business fixed component of investment and
consumption and a poor predictor of government expenditures and residential
housing investment.
Although our regression evidence, the work on leading indicators, and the
Doan et al. study appear to suggest that stock price changes are the best
single variable predictor of the business cycle, it is possible that an
expanded study including more variables with a range of lags would uncover a

better predictor. It is however unlikely that the result of such an
expanded study would be to eliminate the significance of stock price changes.
It is a well—known empirical fact that there are no lagged variables which

explain a meaningfully—large part of subsequent stock market returns. There
are, moreover, few, if any, variables (other than speculative price changes)

—15—

which have high contemporaneous correlation with stock returns. Thus, in
those cases where the stock market predicts a large proportion of the
subsequent variation in economic variables, it Is unlikely that the stock

price changes are merely a proxy for some other observable variables. It
seems, therefore, that our regression analysis provides impressive evidence to
reject the belief that stock price changes are a poor predictor of the
business cycle.

—16—

3. Measuring the Discount Rate for Investment
As noted In our introduction, the determination of the cost of capital or
required expected return for corporate investment is a central issue common to

both macroeconomics and finance. If pressed, both macroeconomists and
financial economists would probably agree that the required expected return on
aggregate investment is the weighted average of the expected return on equity
and the interest rate where the weights are the market proportions of equity

and debt outstanding. Despite this apparent agreement, even a casual
Inspection of the macroeconomics and finance

literature

reveals that the

methods used In the two fields for measuring the aggregate cost of capital are

widely different. In this section, we summarize the key differences in
methodology between the fields and explore some of the possible explanations
for these differences.

In discussing the discount rate for investment, macroeconomists
traditionally focused on the real interest rate as determined from the bond
market, while financial economists place most of their attention on the real

expected return in the stock market As already noted, the emphasis by
macroeconomists on the interest rate may in part be due to the historical use

of models of the financial markets derived in a certainty environment. In
such models, and ignoring transaction costs, all securities are perfect
substitutes, and therefore, the required return on equity is the same as the
return on debt.

While the existence of uncertainty is, of course, recognized by
macroeconomists, the common practice in their models was either to assume that
investors were risk—neutral or simply to replace the economic variables

assumed to be known for certain in the formal model structure by their

—17—

expected values. The existence of risk on some investments would be accounted
for simply by adding a constant risk premium to the base risk free interest

rate. There has also been a tendency to rely on nonrisk explanations of
differential expected returns on securities such as differential tax
treatments or transactions costs as in the Baumol—Tobin theory of the
transactions demand for money.
Early empirical work in investment used interest rates as the cost of

capital (for example, Hall and Jorgenson 1967). Soon thereafter, it became
common to recognize explicitly the role of securities other than bonds in
measuring the cost of capital (for example, Jorgenson and Stephenson, 1967).
Initially, the dividend—to—price or earnings—to—price ratio was used as the

equity rate component of the cost of capital. More recently, the Q theory of
investment (to be discussed in Section 4), uses stock prices as one of its
principal variables,

Even with these more recent developments, there are nevertheless, still
considerable differences between the macroeconomic and finance approaches to

measuring the cost of capital. While financial economists would surely accept
different tax treatments and transactions costs as a reasonable explanation
for the return differential between a short—term municipal bond and a treasury
bill or a T—bill and a demand deposit, they would probably treat these nonrisk
reasons as second order in explaining the expected return differential between

debt and equity. Because dividends reflect only a portion of the total return
on equity and because dividend changes are "sticky," financial economists
generally attach little significance to changes in the dividend—to—price ratio
as an Indicator of the change In the equity component of the cost of capital.
Because earnings are an accounting variable which reflects primarily

—18—

current—transactions cash flows of firms,

they

uay

not

be a good proxy for

"long—run" or permanent earnings which presumably is what is being capitalized

by rational stock prices. Hence, financial economists would tend not to
accept changes in the earnings—to—price ratio as a reliable indicator of

changes in capitalization rates. While finance provides a number of strong
arguments against using changes in these variables as proxies for changes in
the aggregate cost of capital, it has, until recently, had relatively little
to say about what are the good proxies, to use to measure these changes. The
reason is that finance has tended to focus on the relative pricing of
financial and capital assets and therefore, unlike macroeconomists who are

more concerned with chan& in the aggregate cost of capital over time,
financial economists in their models have concentrated more on measuring the

cross—sectional differences in equilibrium expected returns among securities.

The best—known

finance

model of equilibrium expected returns is the

Sharpe—Lintner—Mossin Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPH) which was developed
almost twenty years ago and is derived by applying market clearing conditions

to the Markowitz—Tobln mean—variance theory of portfolio selection. While
there have been many subsequent improvements and extensions of the CAPM

(e.g.,

Arbitrage Pricing Theory of Ross (1976); the Intertemporal CAPM of Merton
(1973), and the Consumption CAPM

of

Breeden (1979)), it will suffice, for the

purpose at hand, to limit the discussion to the original CAPM.

In

these models, differences in equilibrium expected returns among assets

are treated as being entirely due to differences in risk. An asset is said to
be "riskier" than another if its equilibrium required expected return is

larger. If one further defines "uncertainty about the return on an asset" so
that it is measured by the amount of dispersion of the assets return around

—19—

it means, then the CAPM provides a conceptual and specific quantitative

distinction between "risk' and 'uncertainty." That is, the oniy risk in the
capital market is the macro uncertainty about the return on the aggregate
market (which contains all assets held in proportion to their market values).
Since all other uncertainties associated with individual assets can be
eliminated by diversification, no investor is required to bear these
uncertainties and therefore, in a well—functioning capital market, there will
be no compensation in terms of a higher equilibrium expected return for

bearing these risks. The risk of an individual security is measured by its
marginal contribution to aggregate or market risk and the equilibrium expected

return on each security i, R ,

will

satisfy the Security Market Line (SML)

condition:
(1)

where RN is the expected return on the market portfolio; R is the
Interest rate; and

Cov(Rj,RN)/Var(RN). "Beta" is the measure

of a security's (relative) risk and it can be estimated reasonably accurately
by using past time series and cross—sectional data.

While the CAPM is a rather attractive and practical model for evaluating
differences In relative risk among assets, it has nothing to say about the
determination of the risk—free Interest rate (or, alternatively, the zero beta

rate of return when there is no safe interest rate). It is because the CAPH
is short of one rate of return, that it is a theory of relative rates of

return. Macroeconomists who have been more concerned with changes In the rate
of return over time have concentrated on theories of the rate of interest,
which can be thought of as the rate of return missing from CAPM.

-20—

Bef ore turning to the determination of the aggregate cost of capital,

(RM, in the CAPM), we digress to point out one important insight provided by
the SML relative pricing relationship which can be directly applied in

macroeconomics. In discussing cost—benefit analysis and the evaluation of
public investments and expenditures, it is commotplace to talk about the
"social discount rate." As in the private market, there will not in general be
a single rate which can be applied to the evaluation of all public investments

because the risks of these investments will be different. An extended version
of the CAPZ4 can be used to determine these rates. Let

denote the

expected return on the combined private sector—public sector "market"
portfolio, which takes into account assets held in both. the public and prfvate

sectors. If there are adequate trading opportunities in the private markets
so that the public sector does not provide significant additional risk—sharing
opportunities, and if the risk characteristics of (nontraded) public
investments are not significantly different from those in.

uu

tLe

interest

e et.L.e

the

private sector,

LeI.UU ULL d pLVJe(L. iii XCSS UI Ii

rate is proportional to ( — a) where the proportionality factor

is its beta measured now with reference to this broader market portfolio.12
If these conditions are not met, then a generalized form of the Security
Market Line relation can be derived along the lines of Mayers (1972) who
examines the effects of nontraded assets on capital market equilibrium

prices. In this model, as with the more general intertemporal asset pricing
models, which have more than one dimension of risk, aggregate market risk as
measured by the variation in

is likely to be the most important

systematic source of risk. The simple CAPM function is, therefore, likely to

—21—

provide a good approximation of the appropriate discount rate to be applied to

most projects.
If individuals are risk averse and if there is aggregate uncertainty for
the whole private—cum--public sector economy, then

— R

will be positive,

and public Investments with different "betas" will have different social

discount rates. For example, in evaluating the present value of the costs
associated with a government unemployment benefits program, the proper
discount rate to apply to the expected costs Is likely to be lower than the
riskless Interest rate, and therefore, the present value of the cost of the

program will be higher than if the interest rate were used. We say this
because these costs are likely to be negatively correlated with the general

economy and therefore, the "social beta" will be negative. The common sense
of this analysis is that expenditures are likely to be higher than expected if
the-economy is weak and therefore, taxes will be higher or expenditures on
other programs will be lower, precisely when the economy Is less wealthy.
Similarly, the benefits of public investments whose returns are also likely to
be counter—cyclical (and therefore, have negative social betas) should be

discounted at a rate below the interest rate producing a correspondingly

higher present value.13 In summary, pro—cyclical (with positive social
betas) investments and costs should be discounted at a rate higher than the
risk free interest rate and counter—cyclical projects should be discounted at
a rate lower than the interest rate.
As indicated in this digression, the aggregate cost of capital for either
public or private investments will not equal the risk free interest rate

unless all uncertainty can be diversified away. Despite the large number of
people and firms In the U.S. (or for that matter, the World) economy, the Law

of Large Numbers cannot be validly applied to make this diversification
argument because the economic activities of these entities are

interdependent. Thus, as both an empirical and theoretical matter, there
exists significant macro uncertainty.
As already noted, the focus of financial economists has been on the

relative riskiness of capital assets. Their empirical research on the cost of
capital has, therefore, emphasized the measurement of betas for individual

firms and industries. In this endeavor, they have developed sophisticated
time series—cross section estimation techniques which take into account

changes in betas over time. Hence, these finance models capture the dynamic

changes in the relative costs of capital among assets, The estimation
techniques for determining the aggregate cost of capital are, in contrast,

quite primitive. In principle, the aggregate expected excess return on the

market, RN — R, is determined in the CAPM as a function of aggregate risk
preferences of investors and the variance of the return on the market.
Although, as an empirical matter, the variance rate on the market changes
substantially over time, the traditional practice in finance is to assume

that RN — R

Is a constant and to use a long time series (typically fifty

years) average of the realized excess returns on the market to estimate it.
It is also not uncommon to assume that the real risk free interest rate is a

constant as well)4 While such estimates may provide a reasonable
assessment of the long—run level of the real cost of capital, they provide
little help to macroeconomists who are more concerned with the short and
intermediate runs and therefore, with traisient changes in the cost of capital.
Although It might appear tempting to use the change in aggregate stock

—23—

prices as an indicator of the change in the cost of capital in a fashion
analogous to the change in bond prices, stock price changes——unlike bond price
movements——reflect both the change in assessments of expected future cash
flows and the change in the rate at which these cash flows are discounted.
Stock price changes are likely, therefore, to be a very noisy estimator of the

change in the cost of capital. Some recent work in finance may, however
provide a means for measuring such changes.

In the CAPM or for that matter, in a number of other models of capital
market equilibrium, the expected excess return on the market will satisfy the

condition KM — K

g(a2) where a2 is the variance of the return

on the market and g is an increasing function of a2 with g(0)

0.

Hence, if changes in a2 can be reasonably well estimated, then these
changes can be used to estimate changes in KM — K.

Estimation of models of

this sort are presented in Merton (1980). As discussed there, It is much
easier to obtain accurate estimates of

and Its changes from the past

time series data of stock returns than It is to estimate RM — R

from these

data directly. The central importance of volatility in the Black—Scholes
(1973) option pricing theory and its many extensions, has stimulated
considerable research by finance academics and practitioners to improve the

techniques of estimating variance rates of speculative prices.15 As these
techniques develop, they may provide a significant tool for the macroeconomist
who requires estimates of the cost of capital.
Motivated by the Breeden (1979) model of asset pricing, others (cf.
Grossman and Shiller (1981)) have attempted to use the variation in

consumption as an Indicator of changes In the cost of capital. Although

—24—

appealing in theory, the use of accounting and other nonspeculative price
series to estimate the volatility and required economic returns on assets may
have severe empirical problems. As numerous studies in finance have shown,,
the variations in firms' accounting returns and dividends are considerably
smaller than the variation in the market returns of the corresponding firms'

equities and other liabilities, Hence, techniques which use the volatility of
such nonsecurity price variables are likely to understate the level and the

changes in the cost of capital.
Perhaps notable by its absence from our discussion is the role of taxes In
influencing the cost of capital. While inacroeconomists appear to see the
effects as complicated, but still clear—cut, financial economists who have
also devoted considerable effort to studying these effects find greater

ambiguity. Ranging from the early Modigliani—Miller work through the
more—recent Miller "Debt and Taxes" paper (1977), and Modigliani (1982), there
appears to be no theory of taxes which is consistent with rational behavior by

corporate managers and the observed financing policies of firms. For example,
virtually every model of taxes implies that firms should prefer to make share

repurchases instead of paying dividends. (This conclusion is further
reinforced when transactions costs are considered.) Yet, few firms undertake

to repurchase their stock and most firms pay dividends. Even if the IRS
limitson substituting share repurchase for dividends are taken into account,
it is clearly the case that firms are, In practice, nowhere near the margin.
Similarly, it is difficult to reconcile a tax—advantage to debt financing with

the observed debt—equity mixes chosen by firms. Moreover, firm's investment
and funding practices of their pension funds also appear to be Inconsistent
with most theories of taxes.

—25—

The different reactions of some macroeconotnists and finance economists to

these difficulties illustrate their different attitudes to the stock market

and firm behavior. Public finance economists see the tax issue as clear—cut
and concentrate on explaining an apparent "irrationality" in firm behavior.
Finance economists assume that firm behavior is well understood and that tax
incidence needs to be explained.
The empirical work attempting to identify from security returns whether
changes in the level of tax rates or differences in the rates applied to the
returns on securities (e.g., capital gains vs. ordinary income) significantly

affect the cost of capital, have generally produced ambiguous results. There
is, for example, considerable controversy over whether or not firms with a
higher dividend—component of total return have higher required expected

returns. Upon closer inspection of the details of the tax law, it becomes
apparent why such an empirical ambiguity might be found. For example, because
of the 85—percent dividend exclusion, corporations would. prefer to receive

dividend income over capital gains. Under the current law, the firm can
undertake a form of tax arbitrage by purchasing shares of other firms sixteen
days prior to the ex—date and selling the shares for a capital loss on that

date. These "dividend—roll" transactions are further facilitated by the
options markets. Because dividend payments made by short—sellers of stock are
investment expenses which can be used to offset ordinary income (without the
interest deduction limitation), it pays for high—bracket individuals to take

the "other side" of the "dividend—roll" transaction. There are, of course, a

number of tax—exempt institutions including more than 8OO billion in pension
funds who presumably are indifferent to the form in which returns come. In
this light, what would one predict about the magnitude of the differential

effect of paying dividends on the cost of capital? While we surely do not
have the answer, we do believe that both macroeconomics and finance will gain
much from further theoretical and empirical study which carefully takes into
account the more detailed structure of the tax code.
To conclude, we briefly indicate why changes in the real interest rate may

not be a reliable Indicator of the change in the cost of capital. If, for

example, R rises at the same time that cr2 falls, then it is entirely

possible that

= R + g(a2) may remain unchanged or even fall. Black

(1976) has found empirical evidence that stock price changes are negatively

correlated with changes in the variance rate of stock returns. Therefore, one
should be particularly careful about using the change In the interest rate as
a proxy for the change In the cost of capital In periods when both the stock
market and the real interest rate rises, as appears to be the most recent

experience. Moreover, as explained In the section to follow, it is entirely

possible that a rise in both RN and R (which implies an increase in the
cost of capital), may nevertheless be accompanied by an increase in the rate
of investment.

—27—

4. The Cost of Capital, Q, and Investment
In the previous section, we noted that the rates of return on both stocks

and bonds determine the cost of capital, or the hurdle rate that investment

projects have to meet. Although this point is well understood both in
principle and in modern empirical analyses of the determinants of investment
spending, the tendency In policy discussion has nevertheless been to
concentrate on the real Interest rate (perhaps but not usually tax adjusted)

as the measure of the cost of capital. To take only the most obvious

example,

the major concerns about the current state of the economy are that the high
real Interest rate will cut short the recovery and, by keeping investment low,
cause continued low secular productivity growth.

To understand the concentration on the real interest rate on bonds,
consider the general formula for the price of equity:

D

p(t) E{

t+i

i0 (1 + rc÷j)

}

(2)

,

where Et iS the conditional expectation operator; the term D(t + I)
the cash flow available for distribution to current stockholders

Is

In period (t

+ I) and (1 + rc(t + 1)) is the (possibly stochastic) discount rate

applied

to such flows. Because stock prices may rise either because estimates of
future earnings increase, or because the discount factor or the cost of
capital decreases, it is difficult to deduce changes in the cost of equity

capital from stock price movements. Despite its shortcomings as an indicator
of the cost of capital, the Interest rate, because It Is observable, appears
to be a "hard number" which makes It attractive as an estimate of the cost of

capital and thus of Investment prospects. However, this seemingly attractive
aspect of the interest rate may be somewhat Illusory. First, the real

—28—

interest rate on nominal

bonds is not a hard number—and this is particularly

true for the long—term real rate which is presumably more relevant to

investment. Second, even if the real investment rate were observable and even
if it were the appropriate measure of the cost of capital, changes in this

rate—like changes in stock prices—can occur either because earnings
prospects have changed, with a consequent shift in the demand for funds,
and/or because the quantity of funds supplied at a given interest rate has

changed. An improvement in investment prospects will lead firms to increase
borrowing, and thereby drive up the real rate of interest. If changes in the
real interest rate are primarily a result of shifts In the demand for funds,
caused for instance by changes in estimates of future earnings, high real
Interest rates will be associated with high rather than low investment.
Researchers who work on the relation between investment and the cost of
capital typically try to avoid the Identification problem by asserting that
the supply of funds to the corporate sector Is infinitely elastic and

therefore independent of shifts In the corporate demand for funds. This
argument is not entirely persuasIve given that net corporate invetment is on
average more than 50% of net domestic saving.16 An appeal to the rest of
the world as a source of unlimited capital at a real interest rate independent
of the demand for corporate investment In the United States is also less than
convincing because the demands for capital are likely to be highly correlated
across countries and the U.S. is a large component of the World market.

Thus, to use the real Interest rate as an indicator of investment

prospects can be misleading. Indeed, precisely because stock prices can move
as a result of changes in both expected earnings and discount rates, stock
prices are likely to provide a better indicator of investment prospects than

—29—

do interest rates. For instance, an improvement in investment opportunities,
and hence, earnings prospects, that raises the demand for funds and thus the
cost of capital, will nonetheless result In a rise in stock prices, which will
appropriately signal an increase in investment.
The Q theory of investment centers around the relationship between

investment and stock prices. Tobin and Brainard (1977) quote Keynes to give
the essence of the approach:

[The] daily revaluations of the Stock Exchange, through they are
primarily made to facilitate transfers of old investments between one
individual and another, inevitably exert a decisive influence on the
rate of current investment. For there is no sense in building up a
new enterprise at a cost greater than that at which a similar
existing enterprise can be purchased; whilst there Is an inducement
to spend on a new project what may seem an extravagant sum, if it can
be floated off on the Stock Exchange at an Immediate profit.17
Q theory, associated particularly with James Tobin, and which has been
developed more by macroeconomists than finance theorists, is now the preferred

theoretical description of investment. The rate of investment is determined
by the condition that the marginal cost for the firm of adding to its capital
stock Is equal to the prIce at which It can sell a weIghted average package of
equity and debt claims on that capital.
Empirically Q has generally been calculated as the ratio of the stock plus
bond market valuations of firms to the estimated reproduction costs of their

capital.18 Although Q typically enters regression equations for the rate of
investment significantly,'9 the empirical success of the Q theory Is

generally regarded as mixed. There are two main difficulties. The first is
that the residuals from the investment (relative to capital stock) on Q

equation are heavily serially correlated.2° Because the standard form of
the adjustment cost function used in developing the theory Implies that the

—30—

rate

of

investment is determined solely by current Q, the

serial

correlation

is inconsistent with the simplest forms of the Q theory. But modification of
the adjustment cost function to incorporate lags in the investment process
implies that lagged Q also affects current investment (Fischer (1984)).

Alternatively, the serial correlation may simply reflect errors in measurement

caused by accounting measures of investment. Second, despite the implication
of existing forms of the Q theory that Q is a sufficient statistic for the
rate of investment, other variables, particularly GNP and/or profits, appear

to affect investment over and above the effects of Q. However, provided these
additional variables are instrumented to remove simultaneity bias, Q still has

explanatory power for investment.2'
These difficulties in the empirical implementation of the Q theory of
investment should not however obscure the main point, which is that there are
good theoretical reasons and, as we have seen, convincing empirical evidence

to suggest that the stock market should be a predictor of the rate of

corporate investment. Further, because the real interest rate may be high
either because of demand or supply conditions in the market for debt finance,

it is not surprising that—as in the results presented in Section 2—the real
interest rate is a less good predictor of corporate investment.22

We are not here arguing that estimated real interest rates do not function
as predictors of corporate investment, nor that they should not be considered,

along with equity capital, as a component of the cost of capital. Rather we
are arguing against the practice in policy discussions of considering only the

real interest rate as the cost of capital and predictor of investment. If
indeed, it were necessary to consult only one piece of financial information,
then we believe that it would be preferable to look at stock prices, instead

—31--

of interest rates—but of course there is no need to consider only a single
indicator.

Although it would not be appropriate in this paper to undertake an
extended discussion of the current (November 1983) economic outlook, a brief

discussion is in order. The stock market is at a high level relative to
recent years. Q is currently at about 0.9, compared with an average of 0.76
over the 1974 to 1982 period, and 0.68 for 1980_1982.23 Short—term and
possibly even long—term real interest rates are, however, at unprecedently

high levels. The stock market looks good for investment; real interest rates

look bad. What should be the overall assessment? There is no avoiding the
fact that the signals conflict. Nevertheless, we place great weight on the
stock market as a signal that earnings prospects for corporate capital are

good. Changes in depreciation and other investment related allowances in the
1981 and 1982 tax bills reduced the after—tax cost of capital to
corporations24 and thus effectively offset part of the increase in the cost

of debt capital produced by higher real Interest rates. This factor may
further reduce the weight that should be given to high real interest rates as
predictors of low corporate investment.

The situation Is different for residential Investment. The tax changes of
1981 and 1982 reduced the cost of capital for corporate relative to
residential investment; the prospects for residential investment indeed are

worse than they were in the seventies. But there is no reason to think that
this change in the relative cost of capital for housing and corporate
Investment is inconsistent with the objectives of policymakers.
To say that the stock market is signalling good investment prospects is
not, of course, to assert that policy measures that reduce the cost of capital

would not increase investment, or that lower real interest rates would not
significantly reduce the problems of debt—burdened developing countries.
There are good reasons to think that policy actions that lower real interest

rates would have some desirable consequences. But it is not obvious that the
current unprecedented high real interest rates are signalling a period of
unprecedentedly .ow corporate investment in the United States.
Why, despite the theoretical and empirical case for treating the stock
market as an indicator of future investment, is the interest rate nonetheless

still the focus of policy discussions? Perhaps Bosworth's (1975, p. 286)
comment on Q summarizes best what many macroeconomists still regard as the
main difficulties with investment theories based upon stock values:

The most serious problem with the approach [Q theory] as a
vehicle for understanding investment behavior is that it shifts the
focus from what determines a firm's investment to what determines
values in the stock market. It does not seem practical to focus upon
responses in the stock market to measure the impact on investment of
a change in the tax law0 Nor does it seem reasonable to believe that
the present value of expected corporate Income actually fell in
1973-1974 by the magnitudes Implied by the stock—market decline of
that period, when q declined by 50 percent. Of course, an
equilIbrium relationship must eZist between the market value of a
firm and the replacement cost of its capital. But it is quite
another thing to infer a causal mechanism from this relationship and
to allege that changes in stock prices reflect only revised
evaluations of the discounted value of prospects for corporate
earnings. As long as management is concerned about long—run market
value and believes that this value reflects 'fundamentals,' It would
not scrap investment plans in response to the highly volatile
short—run changes in stock prices.
Bosworth's criticism can be partitioned into four assertions: 1) There is
a distinction between the determinants of investment and the determinants of

stock values. 2) It may be difficult to infer the effects of policy changes,
such as tax incentives, using Q theory. 3) There is no useful sense in which

the stock market can be said to cause investment. 4) Because the market

—33—

fluctuates excessively, and investment takes time to plan and bring on line,
firm managers will pay little attention to Q.
In concluding this section, we respond briefly to the first two of these
assertions, which relate to Q, and leave to the sections to follow a more

extensive response to the last two. First, stock prices and investment may
indeed move in opposite directions in response to events that have

differential effects on average and marginal Q. For instance, an oil price
shock, that reduces the productivity of existing capital will reduce average Q,

but marginal Q will be high for investment in fuel—efficient capital. Or, an
increase in the investment tax credit for new investment accompanied by a
decline In depreciation allowances for capital already in place might reduce

average Q while increasing marginal Q. Because average and marginal Q may
move in opposite directions, it is preferable where possible to work with
marginal Q, for instance by attempting directly to estimate marginal Q, or by
trying to find stock values for firms whose values depend to differing degrees

on existing capital and prospective Investment. As noted above, there Is
evidence both that marginal and average Q tend to move In the same direction
and that Investment and average Q are closely related.
In arguing that the determinants of investment and stock values may
differ, Bosworth may also mean that market participants are subject to bursts
of animal spirits that have little to do with rational expectations of the

prospects for the outcomes of investment projects—and that investment
decisions are not affected by such animal spirits. This interpretation Is
similar to his assertion 3, and it presumes that stock market prices reflect
either Irrationality or relatively low—quality Information when compared with

our macroeconomic models. We therefore delay further comment until Section 6,

—34—

which addresses the issue of stock market rationality.
Bosworth's second point is that it may be more difficult to infer the

effects of policy measures on Q than on the cost of capital. Provided that
stock prices are rationally determined, use of the fundamental valuation
formula for equity makes it possible to determine the effects on Q of tax
changes that affect both the cost of capital and expected future profits.
Both must, of course, be determined to predict the effect on investment.
Further, modern econometric methods aim at estimating adjustment cost

functions, so that the relationship between Q and investment can also be
25

predicted

—35--

5. Stock Prices As a Cause of Investment
As mentioned in the introduction, one possible explanation for the neglect
of the stock market in business cycle studies is the view held by some
macroeconomists that the only variables worth examining are those that "cause"

the business cycle. The analysis in Section 2 shows that stock prices Granger
cause investment, which is to say that given past rates of investment, stock

prices help predict investment. However, this notion of causation is
presumably not the one used by those who question whether stock prices cause

investment. In the general equilibrium sense, all prices are endogeneously
determined, and therefore, changes in stock prices cannot be exogeneous. By
such a demanding criterion, It may, however, be difficult to identify any

"truly" exogeneous economic variables. Thus, changes in preferences may at
least in part be determined by economic events. The development of new
technologies as well as the discovery of natural resources are surely

influenced by economic activity. Pollution from industry and air travel call
into question the exogeneity of even the weather. Further, even if such
exogeneous varIables were Identlf led on a prIorI grounds, their changes may

not be directly observable as is generally the case for preferences. If so,
then economists will have to use eridogeneous but predetermined variables for

prediction, policy, and theory—testing purposes.
Is there any way of determining whether or not stock prices cause

investment in this more limited "surrogate" sense? One apparently simple
method for doing so is to estimate a vector autoregressive model that includes
stock prices together with other observable variables, such as interest rates

and profits, whose forecasts may determine stock values. If a component of
innovations in stock prices that is orthogonal to other innovations were

—36—

found, then we would conclude that stock prices are predetermined with respect

to these other variables. If, further, this orthogonal component Granger
causes investment, we might then conclude that it is, at least, a proxy for

some of the otherwise unobserved causal variables. We are, moreover,
confident that this procedure would find such a causal role for stock prices.
A first indication is provided by the results in Table 1 of Doan et a].. who

find a significant orthogonal component In stock price Innovations in a model

which includes many of the relevant variables. A second, but not independent,
Indication comes from the repeated failures to produce good explanatory

equations for stock prices using nonspeculative price variables. Given that
stock prices reflect expectations and are, therefore, forward—looking

variables, we are, however doubtful that vector autoregressions, which rely
on timing to identify causation, can ever determine decisively the issue of
whether stock prices are exogeneous, even in this surrogate sense.
Since this issue is not likely to be resolved without some degree of a
priori economic reasoning, we now turn to a brief theoretical analysis of
whether or not exogeneous events whose only direct effect Is to change stock
prices, can also Indirectly cause corporate investment to change through the

stock price mechanism. This analysis also addresses the validity of the
previously—quoted Bosworth claim that rational managers will not change their
investment plans In response to what they may perceive as short run changes in
stock prices.
Suppose that Investors make their consumption and portfolio decisions so

as to maximize

where 1I is investor k's

estimate of the probability of state I and U is the utility of
investor k in state i. Firms hold assets already in place (i.e., the

—37—

capital stock) and their managers make their investment decisions to acid to

the capital stock so as to maximize economic profits. Consider an equilibrium
set of prices and investment plans where the equilibrium expected return on
the market is 15 percent and firms' marginal new investment projects yield 15

percent. Suppose there is an exogeneous increase in aggregate risk aversion
which causes stock prices to decline to the point where shares on the existing

capital stock yield an expected return of 20 percent. Since there has been no
change in technology or in the probabilities of future states, the marginal
investments planned in the "old" equilibrium will still only yield 15 percent

in the new. Hanagers of firms that had planned to finance these marginal
investments through retained earnings will now see that these resources can be
used to earn a higher return by purchasing either their own

or

other firms'

shares. Those that had planned to finance their 15—percent investments
externally by Issuing additional corporate liabilities will surely not do so

if these securities are priced to yield 20 percent. By this mechanism which
Is similar to the one described in the previously—cited Keynes quotation,
lower stock prices and higher yields caused by the change In risk aversion
lead to the cancellation of all planned Investments with expected returns
below 20 percent.

Whether the net resources released by this change result in higher current
consumption or additional investment in the noncorporate sector is not

Important. The point is that corporate Investment plans change as a result of
the change In preferences. While there are perhaps other paths for the
"message" of this exogeneous change in preferences to be transmitted to firms,

the change In stock prices is surely the fastest and most direct. Especially
in a large, diverse and decentralized economy, it Is difficult to identify

—38—

what other observable economic variables would be likely to reflect this

change in risk preferences. There is, for example, no reason to believe that
the riskiess interest rate observed in the debt market will be higher in the

new equilibrium. The increase in risk aversion may indeed make investors
willing to pay a larger premium (in terms of a reduced expected return) to
receive a sure return in which case the equilibrium interest rate could even

be lower in the new equilibrium

In the old.

There is nothing controversial In this textbook type illustration of how
prices in a well—functioning market transmit Information which leads to a

change In the allocation of physical resources. Indeed, most would agree that
in the Pareto optimum sense, there should be a reduction in corporate

Investment as a result of this change in preferences—provided, of course,
that there Is agreement on the probabilities of the states and these common

assessments are objectively correct. Suppose however that stock prices do not
reflect the objectively correct probabilties. Suppose, as apparently some
believe, that Investors' animal spirits cause stock prices to be significantly

affected

by irratIonal waves of optimism and pessimism. Does thi& meaü, as

Bosworth suggests, that firm managers will Ignore stock prices in making their

investment decisions? Should economists, therefore, ignore alleged irrational
changes

In stock prices much as they would ignore a poor tout whose inaccurate

predictions have no impact on the outcome of Sunday's football game?
To address these questions, consider once again an equilibrium set of
rational prices and Investment plans where the equilibrium expected return on

the market is 15 percent. Instead of a change in preferences, suppose now
that there is an exogeneous and completely Irrational change In investors'

perceptions of the probabilities of the future states. Suppose further that

—39—

this revision in probability assessments causes stock prices to fall to the

same level as in our first analysis where preferences changed. Now, however,
from the perspective of the investors' {fl}, the expected return on
the market in the new equilibrium is still 15 percent. To make our point, we
further assume the wholely unrealistic polar case where firm managers'
assessments are completely unaffected by such animal spirits and they know

with certainty the true objective probabilities of the states. Thus, from the
managers' perspective, stock prices are too low because they have an expected
return of 20 percent when all that investors require is 15.
In this posited environment, would one expect rational managers to ignore
this irrational change in stock prices and continue with the investments

planned prior to this change? We think not. By the same mechanism described
in our first analysis, rational managers could earn a higher 20 percent return
by using retained earnings to purchase their own or other firms' shares than
by investing in new physical capital which would earn only 15 percent.

Similarly, they would be reluctant to issue equity at these depressed" prices
to finance new investments with expected returns of less than 20 percent. Why
not borrow in the meantime to undertake the physical investment that will

later be worth more? If riskiess debt capital were available to the firm,

then,

as with the internally generated funds of the firm, it would still make

sense to use the cash to buy underpriced shares rather than to invest in

physical capital. Moreover, unlike the arbitrages in models of certainty,
firms are limited as to the amount of (virtually) riskiess debt they can

Issue. As a firm issues more debt, that debt will be seen as increasingly
more risky and therefore, the same irrationality that caused equity rates to

be too high will also cause risky debt rates to be too high.26 Thus,

actions by rational and informed managers will not offset the effects of
irrational investors on investment.

The impact of investors animal spirits on investment is basically
symmetrical. If managers believe that equity prices are high relative to the

fundamentals, then they will increase the rate of investment. Since the main
reinvestment opportunities for stockholders receiving dividend payments would
be in financial securities at inflated prices (and therefore, low rates),

rational managers would retain more instead of increasing dividend rates. By
selling new equity at a high price, the firm could increase its capital stock
cheaply and thereby, profitably undertake projects which would not otherwise

be justifiable. Existing shareholders would benefit from future revenue
streams associated with the capital financed by today's irrationally low
27

equity yields.
Thus, managers will adjust investment expenditures in response to stock
price changes even in the extreme case where managers hold their beliefs with
certainty and the stock price changes are Inconsistent with these 'beliefs.

The mechanism by which changes in stock market prices lead. to changes in

investment works whether the reasons underlying the price changes are rational

or irrational While this nondistinguishing mechanism may under some
conditions be a curse, for others it can be a blessing. If, for example,
managers' assessments are that their stock prices are too low, but in fact
they are wrong and the market's assessment Is correct, then this mechanism
leads managers to make the right Investment decisions (albeit, for the wrong
reasons).
In his previously—quoted statement, Bosworth (1975) asserts that
management 'r..WOUld not scrap investment plans in response to the highly

—41—

volatile short—run changes in stock prices." If the market "corrects" itself
so quickly that managers do not have time to react to irrational changes in

prices, then there would, of course, be no effect on investment. Unless this
is the "short—run" to which Bosworth refers, the mechanism we describe is
strengthened by the belief that Irrational price changes are likely to be

corrected sooner instead of later. Indeed, financial economists would argue
that such predictably "short—lived" aberrations provide the greatest profit

opportunities for both rational managers and investors. An extension of that
argument leads them to conclude that such opportunities, if they exist at all,
will be rare.
Unlike in our polar example, managers (and for that matter, we economists)
do not know for certain whether a particular change in stock prices reflects
rational changes in tastes and expectations or Irrational animal spirits.
Consider, for instance, the 1973—1974 stock market decline cited by Bosworth

as an apparently obvious example of the latter. Even if the premise of stock
market irrationality were granted, it is not clear that this seemingly
unwarranted decline ended with stock prices at an irrationally low level.
Under this same premise, the decline could have instead been a rational
correction of too high stock prices caused by an earlier (perhaps long) wave

of optimistic animal spirits. Hence, even if he believes that the market can
fluctuate excessively, a rational predictor of Investment values knowing that
the market may have Information about investment prospects and future earnings

that he does not, will use stock prices changes to modify his priors. Thus,
the uncertainty about whether or not a particular stock price change is
warranted serves to strengthen further the effect of stock price changes on

investment. We therefore conclude that investmentplans of rational managers

—42—

will react to stock price changes even if managers have good reason to believe
that stock prices fluctuate excessively.

We end this section with a provocative question: 018 there a case for
conducting open market operations in equities?' Although the question cannot
be adequately dealt with here, in the spirit of much of this paper we offer
some remarks in the hope of stimulating further discussion.
As has been shown, changes in stock prices predict changes in investment

considerably better than real interest rates. To the extent that either have
causal effects, this empirical finding is consistent with the a priori
economic reasoning that the influence of stock price changes on investment is

more predictable and stronger than that of debt market interest rates, If,
therefore, the monetary authorities are concerned with Investment, then
intervention in the stock, rather than debt, market would seem tO be a more

effective way to move investment in the direction they desire. While making
this point, Tobin (1977, p. 439, originally published in 1963) argued that
direct Fed purchases of equity would be out of the question because of the
arbitrary allocative effects of the Fed's choice of particular stocks to buy.
While Tobin's view that the Fed would not undertake equity transactions is
probably still correct, the particular objection that the Fed would affect
relative stock prices could be avoided If it conducted Its operations in
Indexed mutual funds composed of the entire market.

The case for Fed open market purchases in the stock market becomes
stronger if stock prices could be shown to fluctuate excessively. Even If the
Fed were merely causing the money supply to grow at a constant rate, a steady
source of demand for equity could exercise a stabilizing Influence on the

market. Going further, If there were any confidence that under— or overvalued

—43—

prices could be detected, the Fed might improve resource allocation by sales

or purchases designed to move the market back to its true value. It could be
argued that it would be sufficient when the Fed views stock prices as too low

merely to announce that fact. But because talk is cheap, it would probably be
more effective for the Fed to put its money where its mouth was, and to
intervene directly in the equity markets if there were times it had good

reason to believe the market was unreasonably low or high. The Fed's profits
in its portfolio activities would in addition provide a measure of its success
at stabilizing the market.
How seriously should the possibility of open market operations in equity

be taken? The answer comes back to two empirical questions. First, again,
and fundamentally, is the stock market (at least at times) irrational, or at

an inferior equilibrium? Second, if so, can those irrationalities or inferior
equilibria be detected at the time?

The major focus of this section has been the demonstration of the
mechanism by which stock prices affect investment, whether or not, as an

empirical matter, the stock market is rational. Because stock prices affect
investment even if they fluctuate excessively, the resolution of this
empirical issue is of great significance for the efficient allocation of

resources. We therefore discuss that issue in the next section.

—44—

6. On the Rationality of the Stock Market
Perhaps no single empirical issue is of more fundamental importance to
both the fields of financial economics and macroeconomics than the question of
whether or not stock prices are a well—informed and rational assessment of the

value of future earnings available to stockholders. The Efficient Market
Hypothesis that stock market prices are rational and reflect a high quality of
information is one of the cornerstones of modern financial economic theory.

Although often discussed in the context of profit opportunities for agile and
Informed investors, failure of the Efficient Market Hypothesis has
Implications far beyond wealth transfers between the quick—and--smart and the

slow—and—not—so—smart.

It implies broadly that decentralized production

decisions based on stock prices as signals will lead to Inefficient capital

allocations.28 Moreover, as was discussed In Section 5, irrational stock
prices can cause inefficient corporate investment decisions even if managers
are rational and do not rely on stock prices as an accurate assessment of
future earnings.
The issue of stock market efficiency is of no lesser importance to

macroeconomics. Many of the majqr developments in the field during the last

decade—associated wih the rational expectations—equilibrium framework—are
based upon the assumption of efficient market allocations under imperfect

information. Among major markets, the structure of the U.S. stock market most
closely approximates the hypothesized conditions for a perfect market.29
Even leaving aside the issue of allocative efficiency, If the application of
rational expectations theory to the ideal conditions provided by the stock
market fails, then what confidence can economists have in ita application to

labor and goods markets which are surely more imperfect? We need hardly

-.45—

mention the implications of this question for the debate over the dual Issue
of whether government intervention in the financial markets can have an effect
and whether It should be undertaken.
Given the Import of the stock market Information efficiency issue and the
substantial and growing theoretical and empirical literature on the topic, we
can do little more here than briefly touch on the empirical evidence.
Financial economists as a group are reasonably uniform in their deep
attachment to the view that financial markets are essentially efficient at

processing Information. This view is In part based on the large number of
empirical studies which have failed to reject the Efficiency Market
Hypothesis; In part on a "folk" theorem to the effect that if the markets were
not efficient, then there must necessarily be vast profits to be made by
making them efficient; and in part to the sheer intellectual difficulty of
knowing how to begin analyzing markets that are not efficient.30

The empirical studies fall into three categories: I) Searches for
mechanical trading rules (using past data and sophisticated filtering

techniques) which beat the market. ii) Tests of whether or not publicly
available accounting and other noninarket Information can be used to beat the

market. For example, is the market "fooled" by cosmetic accounting changes
which affect reported earnings per share, but do not affect the firm's cash

flows? iii) Tests of whether or not professional money managers who might
have proprietory techniques for superior stock selection beat the market. An
example of this class of studies would be the classic study of mutual fund

performance by Jensen (1968). While some of these studies have produced
anomalies, based on a pure "body count," the overwhelming majority of these

studies are consistent with the Efficient Markets Hypothesis.31 The

—46—

empirical evidence presented here and elsewhere that stock price changes are
among the better forecasters of future changes in earnings, dividends, and
other business cycle variables might also be counted in the support of the

hypothesis of stock market rationality.
It is unlikely however that empirical evidence alone will ever resolve the

market rationality issue. Every one of the empir1ca studies is a joint test
of market rationality and at least one other condition. The other condition
may be, for example, that the expected real return on the market is a constant

or that futures prices are unbiased estimates of future spot prices. Thus,
rejection may occur because of the failure of these other conditions and not

market rationality. To decide the likelihood of which condition to reject
requires a priori economic reasonthg. In making this assessment, financial
economists tend to rely heavily on the fol.k theorem restated more graphically

as the rhetorical question, "if you are so smart, why arentt you rich?" Arid

if that is not enough, the follow-up question, "If you're rich, how do you

know that you werent just lucky?" Perhaps the only empirical test which
would reject market rationality is the existence of persistent and true

arbitrage. Since such evidence is unlikely to be found (even if the market is
indeed irrational), one might almost conclude that market rationality is a

postulate that cannot be tested Nevertheless, as will be discussed, ft is a

theorem in the sense that It
possible to have a frrational stock
market where there is no private market opportunity to make a profit
folk

Like "linear," "competitive markets," and equilibriuni," "market
information

efficiency" Is a welldefined concept. Like "non1iner,"

"noncompetitive markets," and "disequiiibrium" "marke.t information
inefficiency" is merely the complement: to a welldefined set, and therefore,

—47—

there Is little content to the concept of a 'general theory of market

irrationality." Thus, the intellectual difficulty faced by financial
economists in analyzing inefficient markets is much the same as that faced by

economists generally in developing a disequilibrium theory. It is perhaps not
surprising that they are reluctant to undertake such an analysis unless
definitive evidence rejecting market efficiency is presented.
The view among macroeconomists on market information efficiency is less

uniform. As discussed, it Is difficult to reconcile having a belief in the
rational expectations equilibrium approach to models and a disbelief in stock

market rationality. We therefore presume that those macroeconomists who
support such models support stock market efficiency. There is an alternative
long—standing tradition among macroeconomists dating back at least to Keynes'
(1936) famous pronouncements on the American stock market, that the stock
market is dominated by psychological games—playing with only a modest relation

to rational phenomena. More generally, macroeconomists tend to believe that
stock prices fluctuate far too much to be justified by rational economic

assessments.
While often quite colorful, until recently, the evidence provided by
niacroeconomists for stock market irrationality was mostly anecdotal. However,
the empirical studies by Shiller (1981) and LeRoy and Porter (1981) have been

Interpreted by some to imply that the market fluctuates excessively. If so
interpreted, these studies imply a serious challenge to market efficiency
because the apparent violations are so large and because their data sets

extend over a long past history. These studies measure stock price volatility
relative to the movements in an estimate of "true" stock prices based on

fundamentals. Such studies are, therefore, tests of the joint hypothesis that

—48—

stock prices are rational and that the model of the fundamentals (In these
particular cases, that dividends arid earnings follow stationary processes) is

correct. Thus, to interpret rejection as implying stock market irrationality
requires that one have more faith in the model's assessment: of the

fundamentals than the market's.

Because their belief in market efficiency is so strong, It would take a
substantial amount of evidence to persuade most finance economists that the

market was not pricing assets on the basis of fundamentals. Hence, despite
the apparent sharpness of the challenge to this viewpoint posed by Shiller
(1981), LeRoy and Porter (1981) and others, there was hardly a rush by finance
theorists or empiricists to the barricades to defendniarket efficiency.

Instead, It was apparently taken for granted that the Invaders weakness would
soon be discovered and the nuisance go away. As exemplified by these studies,
a priori economic reasoning plays a crucial role In interpretation. Thus,
Kleldon (1983) and Marsh and Merton (1983a; 1983b) reexamine these same

variance—bound tests and conclude that the seeming vIolations are entirely
consistent with market efficiency.

Is there any a priori reason to believe that the stock market could

fluctuate excessively? As noted, that the market prices assets efficiently is
close to being an article of faith among finance economists. In addition to
empirical evidence, this belief Is based on the assumption that any violations
of efficiency would imply that individuals or firms could make large profits
by trading on the Inefficiency, and in the process would restore efficiency.
There is as yet, however, no theorem that shows there are profits to be made

any time animal spirits affect stock prices0 There are, moreover, examples In
the literature of models with multiple rational expectations equilibria where

—49—

each equilibrium corresponds to a different set of expectations held by

economic agents. These are so—called sunspot equilibria. If the economy Is
in one sunspot equilibrium, there is not necessarily a profit to be made by a
single investor or firm who tries to move the system to a better equilibrium.
In this sense, the market could be inefficient.32
There are also models of speculative bubbles, including probabilisitc
bubbles in which individuals buy an asset whose price Is expected to continue
rising fast even though there Is a chance that the price will return to its

fundamental level.33 Such speculative behavior produces excess volatility
of asset prices relative to their fundamental values.

What goes wrong with the notion that there are excess profits to be made

In these two cases? When there are speculative bubbles, the probability of a
return to fundamentals is just sufficient that the capital loss that will
occur if the stock price falls is offset by the complementary probability of

the gain obtained by the rapidly rising asset price. In the case of multiple

equlbrIa, changes In expectations by market participants cause resource
reallocations and move the economy to a new equilibrium In which there are no

excess profits. For instance, an Increase in investor pessimism could result
in lower Investment rates that produces the lower output levels that generate

the lower profits that justify the pessimism. Although excess volatility
could in principle, be detected if actual equilibria were not rational, such
tests would not detect a case In which investors' expectations move the

economy between different rational equilibria. The possibility of multiple
rational expectations equilibria, one of which is superior in a welfare sense
to the others, highlights the Important distinction between stock market

information efficiency and pareto optimality, An Informationally—efficient

—50--

market can settle at one of the Inferior equilibria.
It is thus not possible to dismiss the argument that stock prices could

fluctuate excessively entirely on a priori grounds. The empirical evidence
against efficiency, while hardly predominant, cannot always be trivially

disposed of. Because of Its importance to both macroeconomics and finance,
the issue of stock market information efficiency should continue to occupy the
research efforts of both financial and macro—economists.

(1.65)

1.

Notes:

3.

2.

GOR

AlO

(1.88)

0.043
(1.98)

(0.49)

0.03

(1.44)

0.08
(1.41)

A

—1.98
(—1.35)

(-.1.29)

-15.10

—3.33
(—1.62)

1

EDRAAAX —

0.86
(1.10)

6.10
(1.00)

(0.73)

0.79

1

—1.41
(—1.12)

-6.97
(—0.69)

—1.80
(—1.02)

(ii.o)

0.692

(0.40)

0.231

(3.24)

0.35

XNPGR—

I

1

3

DRTBX . EDINF—

3

(—2.32)

-0.20

—0.05
(—0.58)

(1.90)

0.18

0.18
(2.11)

0.27
(2.96)

0.33
(3.98)

RHO

0.48

0.13

0.21

0.14

0.26

0.24

0.26

0.32

0.32

0.15

R2

DW

1.56

1.99

7.28 1.90
(H=0.83

18.65 1.96

3.09 2.00

3.24

22.64 1.82

22.91

22.59 1.84

3.83 1.99

3.82 2.02

4.27 1.80

SER

Statistics

Only first two lagged GNPGR1 included.
Only first lagged GNPGR included.
Variable definitions as in Table 2 of the text, except DRTBX is the change in the three month real
(using actual inflation) Treasury bill note. Bill rate is average for last month of quarter.

1.07 —0.016 —0.016
(1.4o)(—o.75) (—0.73)

(1.23) (2.80)

0.11

0.16

CDGR

A9

1.96

2.32
0.042 -0.015
(6.72) (4.17) (—1.42)

A8
0.015

0.016

0.048

—0.005

2.04

0.30
-0.00
(3.90) (—o.oo)

0.035
(0.46)

0.33
(4.57)

0.036
(0.53)

0,34
(5.10)

0.009
(0.74)

0.015
(1.27)

(6.69) (4.87) (—0.55)

A7

CONGR

1.88
0.23
(0.63) (3.18)

A6

0.67
0.20
(0.25) (3.oo)

—0.13
0.19
(—o.o5) (2.78)

IGR

A5

A4

0.041

(3.18)

0.049

2.69

0.046
(4.06)

(4.84) (3.92)

A3

2.35
(4.49)

2.46
0.046
(4.51) (4.01)

GNPGR

STOCX

3

Independent Variable

STOCX— 1 STOCX-.2 STOCX

A2

Al

Regression Dependent
#
Variable CONST

Table Al: The Stock Market as Predictor of Real GNP Growth and Its
Components, Quarterly Data, 1950:1 to 1983:2,

—51—

FOOTNOTES

1

Strictly, it is not "corporate earnings" but "net cash flow available for
distribution to the current stockholders" which is capitalized in stock

prices. The two are, of course, closely related, especially at the
aggregate level.

2

Regression 4, Table 5.

3

As noted, we discuss this distinction In Section 5.

4

We are grateful to Robert Litterinan for making these data available.

5 Equivalently, the stock market variable on the right hand side of R3 has
the highest simple correlation with the growth rate of real GNP of all the
independent variables.

6

Hall (1978) noted that lagged stock values helped predict consumption; he
took this to be a rejection of the permanent Income theory of consumption.

7 The implied coefficient on stock market wealth in the consumption function
of 0.05 Is close to that reported for the MPS model, for instance by
Bosworth (1975).

—52—

8

The regressions that demonstrate the lack of predictive power of other
financial variables are not shown in Table 2.

9

This finding might suggest that nominal interest rates rather than real
rates are good predictors of residential investment, which would be
consistent with the focus on nominal interest rates in modelling housing

market demand. However, nominal interest rates did not enter prediction
equations for residential investment with significant coefficients.

10 We are grateful to Robert Litterman for providing this information.

Translating the standard errors into R2, the

for Litterman's GNP

equation would be 0.40 compared with 0.32 for regression A2.

11 We have checked the possibility that the growth rates of Ml and M2 are
such variables; they are not.

12 See Bailey and Jensen (1972) for further discussion including arguments

for using the private market RN for R.

—53--

13 Neglecting any fixed costs associated with the program it may appear that
such transfer programs always have a zero net present value. This is
tautologically true for all discount rates if costs and benefits are both

defined to be equal to expenditures. If, however, costs are measured by
expenditures and benefits (both positive and negative) measure all the
utility and externality effects of the program, then a dollar's worth of
expenditures need not imply a dollar's worth of benefits, and the net
present value of the project will not be invariant to the discount rate.

14 This contention was advanced by Fama (1975), with—to the amazement of
many macroeconomists—some empirical success over the 1951—1971 period.
Ex ante real bill rates do not appear to have been constant over other

periods. Macroeconomists' reactions to this paper were similar to the
reactions of finance economists to the claim that the stock market
fluctuates excessively.

15 Although outside the mainstream theme of our paper, option pricing theory
has been demonstrated to have applicability in the analysis of a wide

range of economic problems. For an extensive bibliography and a survey of
its application to corporate finance and investment decisions, see Mason
and Nerton (1984).

16 Data presented Lu Chapter 4 of the 1983 Economic Report of the President
show net domestic saving (adjusted for inflation) to have averaged 6.8% of

GNP over the period 1951—1981. Over the same period, net business fixed
investment plus inventory investment averaged 3.8% of GNP.

—54—

17 Keynes (1936), p. 151. See also p. 188 of the General Theory for further
discussion of investment along the lines of the Q theory.

18 See Cicollo (1977), von Furstenberg (1977), and for a tax—adjusted Q
series, Summers (1981). Abel and Blanchard (1983) construct direct
estimates of Q by predicting future earnings and discount rates associated

with increased investment, thus bypassing the stock market. The reason to
make a direct calculation is that the stock market gives an average Q
value, while their calculation in principle calculates marginal Q, the

measure relevant to investment. They find a .971 correlation of their
(marginal) Q with von Furstenberg's stock market based estimate.

19 Given that the estimated reproduction cost of capital varies slowly,
movements In estimated Q result predominantly from changes in stock

prices. Accordingly, the regression results reported in Section 2 in
which changes in stock prices predict changes in investment are consistent
with the empirical results obtained by researchers using the Q theory of
investment.

A general question arises with Q theory of whether properly measured
marginal Q should not be equal to one for firms that are investing, and
less than or equal to one for firms that are not investing. Provided it

is understood that estimated Q measures the reproduction cost of capital
at some normal level of investment, it is not necessary that marginal Q,

as measured, need be unity. Alternatively, it is possible for there to be

an aggregate relationship between Q and investment even if the above

—55—

relationship does hold at the individual firm level: in this case iucreases
in aggregate investment correspond to more firms investing, and therefore more

firms having marginal Q at unity rather than below. In this latter case,
properly measured (aggregate) marginal Q would be less than or equal to
unity.

20 See for example Summers (1981), Tables 4 and 5, pp. 93—94.

21 See for example, Blanchard and Wyplosz (1981, p. 15). We should tiote also
that the possible difference between average and marginal Q is sometimes
cited as a potential cause of the empirical difficulties encountered by
the theory. }Iayashi (1982) discusses conditions under which average and

marginal Q are equal. As noted above, Abel and Blanchard, did not find
significant differences between their marginal q and stock—market based
measures on average q.

22 It might be argued that the weaker re1aton we find for the real interest
rate is a result of our using an inappropriate estimate of the expected

inflation rate—but that only reinforces the point that the real interest
rate is not in practice an observable number.

—56—

23 Averages for recent periods calculated from Economic Report of the
President, 1983, p. 263; current value estimated from Q value for fourth
quarter of 1982 of 0.80 given on p. 92 of ibid., adjusted for cumulative
increase in real value of Standard and Poor's index of close to 20% since
the beginning of 1983, and assuming no change in bond values since the
beginning of the year.

24 See Economic Report of the President, 1983, p. 93 for some estimates of
the investment incentives created by the tax bills.

25 See Summers (1981) for use of the Q theory to analyze the effects of tax
policy changes on investment.

26 See Merton (1974) for a discussion of the riskiness of debt.

—57—

27 The argument here is less compelling, since there Is a question of which
shareholders the managers should look out for. Pre—existing shareholders
will benefit by obtaining low—cost equity. The people who buy the equity
in the mistaken belief that earnings will be high, suffer for their

mistake if the firm goes ahead and invests. Thus a manager concerned with
their interests might abstain from investing. This argument suggests,
incidentally, that investment might be more sensitive to falls in stock

prices below "true" values than to Increases above "true" values. We have
run preliminary time series regressions that irdeed show investment to be

more sensitive to falls in stock prices than to increases. But these
preliminary results could also be a result of an asymmetry in the speed

with which firms can adjust their Investment expenditures to stock

prices: existing projects can be cut more quickly than the new projects
can be initiated.

28 As we will elaborate below in our discussion of multiple equilibria
models, satIsfaction of the EffIcIent Market HypothesIs Is not a
sufficient condition to ensure Pareto efficiency In the production and

consumption allocation of resources. It Is, however, a necessary
condition if market prices are to be equal to the nowhere—to—be—observed

shadow prices of the benevolent and informed hypothetical central planner

associated with this optimal allocation. While the two different uses of
the term "efficiency" may be confusing at times, it is likely to be
equally confusing to change a terminology which has been used for more
than twenty yearse

—58—

29 It is an enormous market with centralized trading of standardized
instruments with continuously—quoted prices. The scale is such that huge
rewards can be earned by beating the market. There are many participants
including individuals, corporations and financial institutions from

throughout the world. Transactions costs are low and short—sales are
permitted. Entry and exit from managing money or providing investment

advice is virtually free. There are available huge quantities of data
over a long past history which permit "low cost" learning (without doing).

30 Cohn and Modigliani (1979) provide one hypothesis about a possible market
irrationality.

31 See Journal of Fjnancial Economics (June—September 1978); Summers (1982)
presents a skeptical, but not atypical, macroeconomics view.

32 Early examples of multiple equilibria are in Shiller (1978) and Taylor
(1977). More recent examples constructed assuming maximizing agents in an
overlapping generation model are in Azariadis (1981) and Cass and Shell
(1983).

33 Blanchard (1979). For a description of the classic South Sea bubble, John
Law, and the tulip mania, see MacXay (1841). Of course, some investment
activities that have been labeled "speculative bubbles" with the benefit
of ex post hindsight, may not have been ex ante.

—59-.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Abel, Andrew, and Olivier Blanchard (1983), "The Present Value of Profits and
Cyclical Movements in Investment," National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 1122.
Azariadis, Costas (1975), "ImplIcit Contracts and Underemployment Equilibria,"
Journal of Political Economy 83, 6 (December), 1183—1202.

________________ (1981), "SeU—Fulfilling Prophecies," Journal of Economic
Theory, 25, 3, (December), 380—396.
Baily, Martin N. (1974), "Wages and Unemployment Under Uncertain Demand,"
Review of Economic Studies 41, 1 (January), 37—50.
Bailey, Martin J. and Michael C. Jensen, "Risk and Discount Rate for Public
Investment," In M.C. Jensen (ed.), Studies in the Theory of Capital
Markets, Praeger; New York, pp. 269—293.
Black, Fischer (1976), "Studies of Stock Price Volatility Changes,"
Proceedings of the 1976 Meetings of the American Statistical Association,
Business and economic Statistics Section.
Black, Fischer and Myron Scholes (1973), "The Pricing of Options and Corporate
Liabilities," Journal of Political Economy 81 (May), 637—654.
Blanchard, Oliver J. (1979), "SpeculatIve Bubbles, Crashes, and Rational
Expectations," Economics Letters 3, 387—389.

___________________ and Charles Wyplosz, (1981), "An Empirical Structural
Model of Aggregate Demand," Journal of Monetary Economics 7, 1 (January),
1—28.
Bosworth, Barry (1975), "The Stock Market and the Economy," Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity 2, 257—300.
Bourguignon, Francoise (1974), "A Particular Class of Continuous—Time
Stochastic Growth Models," Journal of Economic Theory 9, 141—158.
Breeden, Douglas T. (1979), "An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model With
Stochastic Consumption and Investment Opportunities," Journal of Financial
Economics 7, 165—296.
Brock, William A. (1979), "An Integration of Stochastic Growth Theory and the
Theory of Finance — Part I: The Growth Model," in J. Green and J.
Scheinkman (eds.), Essays in Honor of L. McKenzie, Academic Press, New
York.

Brock, William A. (1982), "Asset Prices in a Production Economy," in The
Economics of Information and Uncertainty, (ed. J.J. McCall), Chicago,
University of Chicago Press.
Brock, William A. and Leonard Mirman, (1972), "Optimal Economic Growth and
Uncertainty: The Discounted Case," Journal of Economic Theory 4, 3
(June), 479—513.
Brock, William A. and Leonard Mirinan (1973), "Optimal Economic Growth and
Uncertainty: The No Discounting Case," International Economic Review 14,
560—573.

Brock, William A. and Stephen J. Turnovsky (1981), "The Analysis of
Macroeconomic Policies in Perfect Foresight Equilibrium," International
Economic Review 22, 1 (February), 179—202.
Brunner, Karl and Allan Meltzer (1976), "An Aggregative Theory for a Closed
Economy," in Jerome Stein (ed.), Monetarism, Amsterdam: North Holland,
Cass, David and Karl Shell, (1983), "Do Sunspots Matter?" Journal of Political
Economy 91, 2 (April), 193—227.
Cicollo, John H. (1975), "Four Essays on Monetary Policy," Unpublished Ph.D.
Dissertation, Yale University.
Cohn, Richard and Franco Modigliani (1979), "Inflation, Rational Valuation,
and the Market," Financial Analysts Journal (March/April), 3—23.
Diamond, Peter and Drew Fudenberg (1982), "An Example of 'Animal Spirits' and
Endogenous Business Cycles in Search Equilibrium," Unpublished, MIT.
Doan, Thomas, Robert Litterman and Christopher Sims (1983), "ForecastIng and
Conditional Projection Using Realistic Prior Distributions," National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, No. 1202.
Duffie, Darrell and Chi—fu Huang (1983), "A Rational Anticipations General
Equilibrium Asset Pricing Model: The Case of Diffusion Information,"
Unpublished, Department of Economics and Sloan School of Management, MIT.
Fama, Eugene F. (1975), "Short—Term Interest Rates as Predictors of
Inflation," American Economic Review LXV, 3 (June), 269—282.

______________ (1981), "Stock Returns, Real Activity, Inflation, and Money,'t
American Economic Review 71, 4 (September) 545—565.
Fischer, Stanley (1984), "Investment and Lagged Q," Working Paper, Department
of Economics, MIT, January.

—61—

Grossman, Sanford J. and Robert J. Shiller (1981), "The Determinants of the
Variability of Stock Market Prices," The American Economic Review 71, 2,
Papers and Proceedings (May), 222—227.
Hall, Robert E. (1978), "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle—Permanent
Income Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence," Journal of Political Economy 86,
6 (December), 971—988.

______________ and Dale Jorgenson (1967), "Tax Policy and Investment
Behavior," American Economic Review 57 (June), 391—414.

Hart, Oliver D. (1983), "Optimal Labor Contracts Under Asymmetric
Information: An Introduction," Review of Economic Studies L, 1 (January),
3—36.

Hayashi, Fumlo (1982), "Tobin's Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical
Interpretation," Econometrica 50, 1 (January), 213—224.
Huang, Chi—fu (1983), "Information Structure and Equilibrium Asset Prices,"
Unpublished, Department of Economics and Sloan School of Management, MIT.
Jensen, Michael C. (1968), "The Performance of Mutual Funds in the Period
1945—1964," Journal of Finance XXIII (May), 389—416.
Jorgenson, Dale W. and James A. Stephenson (1967), "Investment Behavior in
U.S. Manafacturing, 1947—1960," Econometrica 35 (April), 169—220.

Keynes, J.M. (1936), The General Theoryof Employment, Interest and Money,
MacMillan, London.
Kleidon, Allan W. (1983), "Variance Bounds Tests and Stock Price Valuation
Models," Unpublished, Graduate School of Business, Stanford University.
Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott (1982), "Time to Build and Aggregate
Fluctuations," Econometrica 50, 6 (November), 1345—1370.
LeRoy, Stephen F. and Richard D. Porter (1981), "The Present Value Relation:
Tests Based on Variance Bounds," Econometrica 49, 3 (May)9 555—574.
Lucas, Robert E. (1972), "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal
of Econometric Theory 4, 2 (April), 103—124.

_______________ (1975), "An Equilibrium Model of the Business Cycle," Journal
of Political Economy 83, 6 (December), 1113—1142.

_______________ (1978), "Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy," Econometrica
46 (November), 1429—1445.
Mackay, Charles (1841), Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of
Crowds, Reprinted by Farrar, Stràus and Giroux, New York, 1932.

—62--

Malliaris, A.G. and William A. Brock (l982) Stochastic Methods in Economics
and Finance, North—Holland.
Marsh, Terry A. and Robert C. Merton (1983a), "Aggregate Dividend Behavior and
Its Implications for Tests of Stock Market Rationality," Sloan School of
Management Working Paper Number 1475—83.

________________________________ (1983b), "Earnings Variability and
Variance Bounds Tests for stock Market Prices: A Comment," Unpublished,
Sloan School of Management, MIT.
Mason, Scott and Robert C. Merton (1984), "The Role of Contingent Claims
Analysis in Corporate Finance," Harvard Business School Working Paper;
Boston (January).
Mayers, David (1972), "Non—Marketable Assets and Capital Market Equilibrium
Under Uncertainty," in M.C. Jensen (ed.), Studies in the Theory of Capital
Markets, Praeger: New York, 223—248.
Merton, Robert C. (1973), "An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model,"
Econometrica 44 (September), 867—887.

_________________ (1974), "On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk
Structure of Interest Rates," Journal of Finance XXIX, 2 (May), 449—470.
_________________ (1975), "An Asymptotic Theory of Growth Under Uncertainty,"
Review of Economic Studies XLII, 3 (July), 375—394.

_______________ (1980), "On Estimating the Expected Return on the Market,"
Journal of Financial Economics 8, 323—361.

_______________ (1984), "On the Role of Social Security as a Means for
Efficient Risk Bearing in an Economy Where Human Capital is Not
Tradeable," in Zvi Bodie and John Shoven, (eds.), Financial Aspects of the
United States Pension System, University of Chicago Press.
Miller, Merton (1977), "Debt and Taxes," Journal of Finance 32, 2 (May),
2 16—275.

Mirrlees, James A., "Optimum Accumulation Under Uncertainty," (unpublished),
(December 1965).
Nodigliani, Franco (1982), "Debt, Dividend Policy, Taxes, Inflation, and
Market Valuation," Journal of Finance 37, 2 (May), 255—273.
Moore, Geoffrey H. (1983), Business Cycles, Inflation, and Forecasting,
Ballinger, Cambridge, MA.
Ross, Stephen A. (1976), "The Arbitrage Theory of Capital Asset Pricing,"
Journal of Economic Theory 13, 3 (December), 341—360.

Shiller, Robert J. (1978), "Rational Expectations and the Dynamic Structure of
Macroeconomic Models: A Critical Review," Journal of Monetary Economics
4, 1 (January), 1—44.

________________ (1981a), "Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justified by
Subsequent Changes in Dividends," American Economic Review 71, 3 (June),
421—436.

(l98lb), "The Use of Volatility Measures in Assessing
Market Efficiency," Journal of Finance 36, 2 (May), 291—311.

_________________

Slutsky, Eugene (1937), "The Summation of Random Causes as the Source of
Cyclic Processes," Econometrica V, 105—146.

Summers, Lawrence H, (1981), "Taxation and Corporate Investment: A q—Theory
Approach," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 67—140.

___________________ (1982), "Do We Really Know That Financial Markets Are
Efficient?" mimeo.
Taylor, John (1977), "On Conditions for Unique Solutions in Stochastic
Macroeconomic Models With Rational Expectations," Econometrica 45, 6
(September), l3771386e
Tobin, JameS; (1971), "An Essay on the Principles of Debt Management," in James
Tobin, Essays in Economics, Volume 1 Macroeconomics, Markham, Chicago.

Tobin, James, and William R. Brainard (1977), "Asset Prices and the Cost of
Capital," in Bela Balassa and Richard Nelson, (eds.), Economic Progress,
Private Value, and Public Policy, North Holland, New York.

Von Furstenberg, George M. (1977), "Corporate Investment: Does Market
Valuation Matter in the Aggregate," Brookings Papers on Economic ActIvIty
2, 347—408.
Wallace, Neil (1981), "A Modigliani—Miller Theorem for Open Market
Operations," American Economic Review 71, 3 (June), 267—274.

