NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE TRADE REDUCING EFFECTS OF MARKET POWER IN INTERNATIONAL
SHIPPING
David Hummels
Volodymyr Lugovskyy
Alexandre Skiba
Working Paper 12914
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12914

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2007

The authors thank seminar particpants at Purdue University and especially Dan Kovenock and Steve
Martin for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by David Hummels, Volodymyr Lugovskyy, and Alexandre Skiba. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Trade Reducing Effects of Market Power in International Shipping
David Hummels, Volodymyr Lugovskyy, and Alexandre Skiba
NBER Working Paper No. 12914
February 2007
JEL No. F15,L91,O19
ABSTRACT
Developing countries pay substantially higher transportation costs than developed nations, which leads
to less trade and perhaps lower incomes. This paper investigates price discrimination in the shipping
industry and the role it plays in determining transportation costs. In the presence of market power,
shipping prices depend on the demand characteristics of goods being traded. We show theoretically
and estimate empirically that shipping firms charge higher prices when transporting goods with higher
product prices, lower import demand elasticities, and higher tariffs, and when facing fewer competitors
on a trade route. These characteristics explain more variation in shipping prices than do conventional
proxies such as distance, and significantly contribute to the higher shipping prices facing the developing
world. Markups increase shipping prices by at least 83 percent for the mean shipment in Latin American
imports. Our findings are also important for evaluating the impact of tariff liberalization. Shipping
firms decrease prices by 1-2 percent for every 1 percent reduction in tariffs.
David Hummels
Krannert School of Management
403 West State Street
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907-1310
and NBER
hummelsd@mgmt.purdue.edu
Volodymyr Lugovskyy
University of Memphis
400 Fogelman College Admin Bldg
Memphis, TN 38152
vlgvskyy@memphis.edu

Alexandre Skiba
Department of Economics, University of Kansas
1300 Sunnyside Ave
Lawrence KS 66045
skiba@ku.edu

I. Introduction
Trade and development economists have become increasingly focused on trade barriers and
the costs of remoteness. Geographically remote countries trade less, and this appears to reduce both
the level (Redding and Venables, 2004) and growth rate (Frankel and Romer, 1999) of income.
While we do not know precisely why remoteness matters, an obvious possibility is that isolated
countries face significantly higher transportation costs.
Table 1 provides data on transportation costs for imports into the US and a number of Latin
American countries, and makes clear several basic facts about costs of trade. One, ad valorem
transport costs are negatively correlated with per capita income – they are 1.5-2.5 times higher for
Latin American importers than for the United States, and systematically higher for low income
exporters into a given import market.
Two, transport costs are comparable in size to, or larger than, tariffs. For the median good
in US imports transportation represents 85 percent of the total costs (transport plus tariffs) faced by
an exporter. For Latin American importers, transportation costs represent from 31 to 63 percent of
total costs faced by exporters in the median good.
Three, despite the fact that international transportation technology and the use of
containerized liner shipping is common across goods and exporters, transportation costs vary
enormously. For US imports, the coefficient of variation (across exporters and goods) in advalorem transportation costs is 1.4, meaning that shipments with costs that are one-standard
deviation above the mean have costs 140 percent greater than the mean. Even if we hold constant
the product in question there is tremendous variation in transport costs across exporters to a given
market. For US imports, the exporter one standard deviation above the mean pays shipping prices
89 percent higher than the mean. Variability in Latin America is comparable to or higher than the
US. Given their size and variability, transportation costs are likely to play an especially important
role in changing relative prices – lowering trade volumes in the aggregate and altering patterns of
trade across goods and partners.
In this paper we investigate the hypothesis that the exercise of market power by shipping
companies can help explain the level of shipping costs, their variability across goods and exporters,
and critically, can provide insights into why costs are higher for developing countries. If correct,
transportation costs should not be viewed as some exogenously set friction that limits trade, as is

1

most commonly assumed when adopting the “iceberg” formulation. Rather, transportation costs are
a barrier to trade that, like tariffs, are amenable to reduction through concerted policy action.
There are two reasons to suspect the exercise of market power might be especially important
in international shipping. First, minimum efficient scale in shipping is significant. The capacity of
a modern container ship is large relative to the export volumes produced by smaller countries, and
there are substantial economies of scope in offering transport services over a network of ports. One
way to see this effect is to calculate the number of liner shipping firms operating on a particular
trade route. In the fourth quarter 2006 one in six importer-exporter pairs world-wide was served by
a single liner “service”, meaning that only one ship was operating on that route. Over half of
importer-exporter pairs were served by three or fewer ships, and in many cases all of the ships on a
route were owned by a single shipping firm.1 Figure 1 plots the number of shipping firms operating
between a given exporter and the US, graphed against the GDP of the exporter. Trade routes
involving larger countries have higher trade volumes, more ships and more liner companies
operating on them.
Second, even on trade routes with multiple firms operating, the ferocity of competition is in
question. Shipping companies on densely traded routes are organized into cartels known as liner
conferences that discuss shipping prices and market shares. The role of market power in shipping
has been a long standing concern in policy circles (see Fink et al 2000 for a recent review). More
recently, the European Union Competitiveness Council concluded that cartelization had led to a less
competitive shipping market and higher shipping prices, and repealed a block exemption to its
competition laws for liner conferences.2 Beginning in 2008 liner firms serving the EU will no
longer be able to meet in conferences or to collude in setting prices and market share.
But are these concerns valid? The existence of liner conferences does not prove that they
collude successfully nor indicate how much lower shipping prices would be in their absence. A
theoretical literature on contestability argues that a small number of shipping lines serving a
particular route is not prima facie evidence of market power, so long as entrants stand ready to

1

Data extracted by the Port2Port evaluation tool, www.compairdata.com, December 2006.
Commissioner Charlie McCreevy, who handled the proposal, said “The European shipping industry will benefit from
the more competitive market that will result from the repeal of the block exemption and the EU economy as a whole
stands to benefit from lower transport prices and more competitive exports.” EU Press Release IP/05/1249.
2

2

compete away monopoly profits (Davies, 1986). For example, tramp shipping services may act as a
kind of competitive fringe disciplining the pricing behavior of liner companies.3
The direct evidence linking shipping prices to market power is mixed. Clyde and Reitzes
(1995) find no statistically significant relationship between shipping prices and the market share of
conferences serving on a route. Fink et al (2000) find that shipping prices are higher in the presence
of price-fixing agreements by conferences. Both papers rely on US imports data and, given the
large volumes of cargo and many competitors operating on US trade routes, the results may not be
representative of the shipping industry worldwide. In addition, the test of market power in both
papers relies on variation in liner conference activity across trade routes, and this poses significant
identification problems. That is, liner conferences may drive up shipping prices through collusive
behavior, or liner conferences may be especially active on routes where shipping prices are likely to
be high for other reasons.
In this paper we provide a test of market power in the shipping industry that links shipping
price variation to characteristics of products. This test enables us to identify how much variation in
shipping prices across goods and across markets is due to market power. In addition, we are able to
show how market power leads to systematically higher shipping prices in the developing world and
to calculate their impact on trade flows.
We model the shipping industry as a Cournot oligopoly with a fixed number of firms, and
determine optimal shipping markups as a function of the number of firms and the elasticity of
transportation demand faced by firms. A key insight of the model is that transportation is not
consumed directly; instead shipping firms face transportation demand derived indirectly from
import demand. This implies that the impact of an increased shipping markup on the demand for
transportation depends on the share of transportation costs in the delivered price of the good, and
elasticity of import demand. Both vary considerably across goods, and we can use this variation to
identify whether shipping firms exercise market power.
To make plain the intuition behind the model, suppose the marginal cost of shipping either
of two goods equals $10, and shippers are considering adding a $5 markup. The first good has a
factory price of $10, so the markup will increase the delivered price by 25%. The second good has
a factory price of $90, so the markup increases the delivered price by 5%. The same shipping
markup has a much larger effect on the delivered price of the $10 good because shipping costs
3

Tramp shipping represented 17 percent of US waterborne import cargoes by value (and 5 percent of containerized
value) in 2002, author’s calculations from US Waterborne Imports database, 2002.

3

represent a larger share of the delivered price. Holding fixed marginal costs of transportation, the
optimal markup charged by a shipping firm is then increasing in product prices.
Several previous papers have used this intuition as a simple test of market power in
shipping.4 If the marginal cost of transport is independent of the price of the good shipped, and
markets are competitive, then the prices charged by shipping firms should also be independent of
goods prices. Since shipping prices are positively correlated with goods prices in the data,
previous authors have concluded that market power is being exercised. The problem with this logic
is that marginal costs of transportation are likely not independent of goods prices. There is a wide
range of transport service quality available to exporters. Faster ships, direct routing, and more
careful handling are all available at a premium, and are more likely to be demanded for the transport
of higher quality goods.5 Shipping prices also include insurance charges that are surely increasing
in the value of the goods shipped. That is, one would expect to see a positive correlation between
goods prices and shipping prices even if shipping markets were highly competitive.
Happily our model delivers two more testable implications that do not suffer this
identification problem. First, when considering the impact of shipping prices on the delivered price
of goods, it is necessary to examine product prices inclusive of tariffs. Raising the tariff on a good
raises its price, lowers the percentage impact of a given transportation charge on the delivered price,
and therefore increases the optimal shipping markup. The impact on the markup operates through
precisely the same channel as an increase in prices due to product quality, except that increasing
tariffs does not affect the demand for higher quality transportation. If we find a positive
relationship between tariffs and shipping prices we can attribute this to market power, and not to
variation in the marginal cost of shipping. This channel also suggests a particularly deleterious role
for tariffs in limiting trade. Tariffs raise foreign goods prices directly by taxing them, and indirectly
by inducing higher shipping prices, and both reduce trade flows.
Our second testable implication relates to the responsiveness of trade to increased prices.
Returning to our example above, now suppose we have two traded goods with a factory gate price
of $90 and marginal costs of shipping equal to $10, so that a markup of $5 will yield an equal 5%
increase in the delivered price of each good. The first good is a differentiated product and faces an
import demand elasticity equal to 1.1. Here, a markup that yields a 5% increase in delivered price
4

Sjostrom (1992) reviews and critiques this literature.
Hummels (2007) provides evidence for this claim in an instance, the use of air versus ocean transportation, where
service quality differences can be directly observed.
5

4

reduces traded quantities, and therefore demand for transportation services, by only 5.5% The
second good is a highly substitutable commodity and faces an import demand elasticity of 10.
Here, the markup raises prices by 5% but lowers quantities traded and demand for transportation
services by 50%! In the latter case the identical markup reduces import (and therefore
transportation) demand to a much greater degree, limiting the optimal markup for the shipping firm.
Our model uses these simple insights to show how, conditional on the number of firms,
optimal markups will be increasing in product price and tariffs, and decreasing in the absolute value
of the import demand elasticity. However, the impact of these factors is each lessened as the
number of firms rises. This provides us with the alternative hypothesis: if shipping markets are
sufficiently competitive then shipping firms are unable to exploit their market power to raise prices
even in cases where the derived demand for transportation services is relatively inelastic.
Our empirical work uses data on shipping prices derived from detailed imports data for the
US and Latin America. We relate shipping prices to variation across exporters and products in:
cost shifters, product prices, tariffs, the elasticity of import demand, and the number of shippers.
Our data confirm the theoretical predictions. Price discriminating shippers charge higher markups
on goods with high prices, high tariffs, and a low (absolute) import demand elasticity. Particularly
relevant from a policy perspective, a 1 percent increase in tariffs leads to an increase in
transportation prices of 1-2 percent. Having more shippers on a route directly lowers transportation
prices, and reduces the effect of the import demand elasticity on prices. This confirms that price
discrimination is substantially weakened in the presence of more competition.
We show that the exercise of market power is responsible for a large portion of the observed
variation in shipping costs across goods and exporters. In the US sample, goods with an import
demand elasticity of 3.2 face shipping prices that are, ceteris paribus, 43 percent higher than goods
with an import demand elasticity of 16.5. In the Latin American sample, goods subject to a 23
percent ad-valorem tariff face shipping prices that are 36 percent higher than those goods subject to
no tariff. Exporters served by only two shipping firms face shipping prices that are 22 percent
larger than exporters in which there are 8 firms competing.
Market power helps explain higher ad-valorem shipping prices faced by developing
countries.

On average, non-OECD exporters pay 48 percent more than OECD exporters when

shipping into the US, and 39 percent more when shipping into Latin America. More than half of
this effect is explained by differences in product prices with a relatively minor role played by

5

simple measures of market access like distance. Shipping prices on Latin American imports are, on
average, 25.7 percent higher than shipping prices on US imports. One-third of this difference is
explained by the small number of shippers serving Latin American importers. Another half of the
difference is due to much higher tariffs on Latin American imports that allow shipping firms room
to charge higher markups.
Finally, we provide a back of the envelope calculation of what shipping prices and trade
volumes would be if markups on all traded goods were equal to the smallest markups observed in
the data. For the US, the mean (across goods and exporters) response would be a 34.6 percent
reduction in shipping prices and 12.4 percent increase in trade volumes. In the aggregate freight
expenditures as a percentage of import value would drop from 4.9 to 3.1 percent, and trade volumes
would increase by 4.96 percent. For Latin America, the mean response (across goods and
exporters) would be a 45.4 percent reduction in shipping prices and 17 percent more trade. In the
aggregate, freight expenditures as a percentage of import value would drop from 5.9 to 2.8 percent,
resulting in 21.1 percent more trade.

II. The Model
In this section we develop a simple model of trade in which shippers have market power and
set an optimal shipping price as a function of market and product characteristics. We assume a
fixed number of shippers which compete in quantities (à la Cournot), and relate optimal markups to
the number of firms, the price elasticity of import demand, and the cost share of transportation
services in the delivered price of the traded good.
This approach abstracts from a potentially important real world complication. The
international shipping industry has numerous components including inland freight services, ports,
and ocean shipping lines. In some markets port services are highly competitive while in others
monopoly power reigns. A trade route may exhibit very little market power in the pricing of the
shipping lines or freight forwarders, yet substantial market power can be found at the port level.
Without knowing the details of market microstructure for every market and every product it is
exceptionally difficult to sort out precisely where market power, if any, is exerted. Accordingly, we
examine shipping as an integrated value chain, examine shipping prices paid over the entire chain
and relate these to product characteristics. While this loses some of the institutional richness of the

6

transportation industry it allows us to focus on an object – total transportation charges – that is of
most interest from the perspective of a firm deciding to engage in international trade.

Assumptions
The world consists of i=1,2,…, M symmetric countries each of which consists of one
representative consumer. Consumers have quasi-linear preferences defined over a homogenous
numeraire good and varieties of a good that consumers regard as Armington differentiated by
national origin, with a price elasticity of demand σ . A representative consumer in country i has a
utility function
M

(1)

U i = qi 0 + ∑ qij(σ −1) σ

σ >1,

j =1

where qi 0 – is country i's consumption of the numeraire;
qij – is country i's consumption of a variety purchased from source country j.

The price of the numeraire is normalized to one and it can be traded at no cost. Goods from
country j are sold at price p j which shipping firms take as given.6 The delivered price of traded
varieties includes a per-unit transportation price, f ij , and the ad-valorem tariff rate, τ ij ≥ 1 :
(2)

pij = p jτ ij + f ij .

Transportation prices are set by shipping firms and are taken as given by consumers. The
exclusive rights on shipping from country i to j belong to nij symmetric firms. Each firm’s
technology is defined by the fixed cost Cij and marginal cost cij .

Shipping prices in trade equilibrium
We begin by solving for import demand for good k imported from country j. Consumers
purchase quantities of each good that set the ratio of marginal utilities equal to the ratio of delivered

6

This is equivalent to assuming that the Armington good is produced by a perfectly competitive, constant returns to
scale sector requiring p j units of labor to produce one unit of the good. Alternatively, it is as if the shipping firm is
buying an intermediate input at price p j from country-producer, adds shipping services, and sells it as a final product to
a country consumer.

7

prices. Relative to the numeraire, consumption of a variety from exporter j satisfies:

σ σ1 pi 0
qij =
, which gives us the demand for j’s variety:7
σ −1
pij
(3)

 σ

qij = 
p jτ ij + fij 
σ − 1


(

)

−σ

.

Using this we can calculate the price elasticity of demand for shipping services in the
industry as a whole. It is just the elasticity of import demand with respect to the shipping price fij ,
(4)

∂qij fij
∂f ij qij

= −σ sij .

The key point is that transportation services are not valued for their own sake, and are only
consumed indirectly as a function of import demand. The price elasticity of demand for shipping
services equals the elasticity of import demand with respect to a change in import prices, σ ,
multiplied by the share of the shipping charge in the delivered price sij =

f ij
p jτ ij + f ij

.

A 1% increase in the shipping price fij raises the delivered price of the good by sij percent.
An sij percent change in delivered prices then yields a −σ sij reduction in import (and therefore
transport) demand. When sij is small, shippers can raise shipping prices at the margin without
having a large effect on demand for their services. This is true even if σ is very high and trade
itself is highly sensitive to changes in delivered prices. For example, take an import demand
elasticity near the upper bound of our estimated elasticities from the next section, σ = 25 , meaning
that a 1% increase in import prices reduces import quantities by 25%. If sij = .10 , a 1% increase in
the shipping price lowers shipping demand by only 2.5%. In other words, even goods that face
highly elastic import demands might still face significant markups by the shippers.

7

This differs from a standard CES demand because we are calculating demands for each good relative to the numeraire
rather than relative to a basket of other varieties. In the case without a numeraire, this expression would include a CES
price index that is specific to an importer. Our empirical estimates control for importer specific effects, which can be
read as the price of the numeraire for our function, or as the level of the CES price index for the more standard case
without a numeraire.

8

We can now calculate the optimal shipping prices for our n oligopolists. The profit
functions of shipper l delivering from country j to country i is:

π ijl = Qijl ( fij − cij ) − Cij

∀ l = 1, 2,..., nij ,

where Qijl denotes the quantity of a differentiated variety transported by shipping firms l from j to i,
and nij is the number of shipping firms on the route from j to i. The nij × 1 vector of the first order
condition can be represented as
(5)

∂π ijl
∂Qijl

= f ij + Qijl

∂fij

∀ l = 1, 2,..., nij .

− cij = 0

∂Qijl

The total amount shipped from i to j equals the aggregate demand of country i for variety produced
by j :
(6)

n

Qij1 + Qij2 + ...Qij ij = qij .

From (3) - (6) we obtain the optimal quantity per shipping firm and the profit-maximizing shipping
price:
 σ  c +pτ
 ij
j ij

 
 σ − 1  1 − 1/ σ nij



(7)

1
Qijl =
nij

(8)

fij = cij +

(

cij + p jτ ij
nijσ − 1

)






−σ

.

.

The second summand is a marginal profit of shipping, which is independent of the fixed cost of
shipping. To obtain the shippers markup we divide the freight rate by the marginal cost, µ = f / c ,
or
(9)

µij =

σ sij nij
.
σ sij nij − 1

The term σ sij nij measures the elasticity of demand facing each of the n firms. For the case of a
monopolist, it is precisely equal to the elasticity facing the shipping industry as a whole, σ sij .
Rewriting the markup as a function of exogenous variables we have
(10)

µij = 1 +

1 + p jτ ij / cij
nijσ − 1

.

9

The markup depends on route-specific and product-specific determinants. Markups are decreasing
in the number of shippers on a route nij , the final product’s price elasticity of demand σ , and the
marginal costs of shipping relative to product prices inclusive of tariffs, cij / p jτ ij . We discuss the
intuition for each in turn.
There are large differences across trade routes in the number of shipping firms competing
for cargo – see Figure 1. When comparing shipping prices across routes, equation (10) indicates
that the number of shipping firms has a potentially large effect on the markup rule and shipping
prices. Consider a good with median elastic import demand ( σ = 5 ) and suppose that the marginal
costs of shipping relative to product prices inclusive of tariffs, cij p jτ ij = .05 . With a monopoly
shipper, the optimal markup would be µij = 1 +

1 + 1/ .05
= 6.25 times the marginal costs of shipping,
5 −1

resulting in a 31% ad-valorem trade barrier. Having just one more firm cuts the markup almost in
half to µij = 1 +

1 + 1/ .05
= 3.33 , resulting in a 16.7% ad-valorem trade barrier.
10 − 1

Even fixing n along a particular route, markups will vary considerably since cij / p jτ ij and

σ might vary across goods. Shipping firms markups depend on how elastic is import demand with
respect to a change in shipping prices. As cij / p jτ ij rises, a given shipping markup has a larger
effect on delivered goods prices and reduces import and transport demand to a greater degree.
Similarly, high values of σ mean that a given increase in delivered goods prices reduces import and
transport demand more rapidly, limiting the optimal markups that can be charged.
To formalize our test of market power in the shipping industry we need to assume a
particular functional form for the marginal cost of transportation so we can relate the markup rule to
observable characteristics. Let the marginal cost of shipping depend on the distance between
countries i and j, and on the price of the shipped good, according to
(11)

β1

( ) ( distij )

cij = exp ( β 0 ) p j

β2

.

The effect of distance on costs is obvious, but prices are a bit more subtle. While we have ignored
the quality of shipping services to this point, when confronting the data it is important to realize that
there is a wide range of transport service quality available to exporters. Faster ships, direct routing,
and more careful handling are all available at a premium, and are more likely to be demanded for
the transport of higher quality goods. In addition, our data on shipping costs include insurance

10

charges which surely depend on the value of the good being transported. Plugging this into the
markup equation we have
(12)

 1+ p
j
µij =  1 +



1− β1

( )

β
τ ij exp ( β 0 ) ( distij ) 
2

nijσ − 1

.



Equations (11) and (12) make clear the difficulty with an approach used in the literature to
test for shipping market power. Several papers simply regress shipping prices on goods prices and
conclude that a positive coefficient indicates the presence of market power. If β1 = 1 , marginal
shipping costs depend on goods prices but the markup does not. If β1 = 0 , the markup depends on
goods prices, but marginal costs do not. For values between 0 and 1, both marginal costs and the
markup are affected by goods prices.
Unlike goods prices, tariffs τ ij and the elasticity of import demand σ appear only in the
markup equation. These variables should only affect shipping prices if firms are able to exercise
market power. Moreover, the elasticity of shipping prices with respect to τ ij and σ depends on the
number of firms, and approaches zero as n grows large. On the limit the markup converges to one
and shipping prices equal marginal costs. The alternative hypothesis for our empirical tests is that
nij is sufficiently large that shipping prices are independent of τ ij and σ .

We can now summarize the relationship between the components of shipping prices
(marginal cost and markups) and observable characteristics, holding the number of firms fixed.
These comparative statics can be thought of as a short run response of shipping prices to changes in
exogenous variables before entry / exit of shipping firms occurs in the long run. Alternatively, one
can think of the comparative statics as describing variation in shipping prices across different kinds
of goods along the same shipping route. That is, the number of firms shipping goods between
Brazil and the United States is fixed at a point in time, but there is still variation across goods on the
Brazil-US route in goods prices, tariffs, and the elasticity of substitution.
The signs of the model’s comparative statics are reported in the first two columns of Table
2, with the contrasting case of marginal cost pricing reported in the final two columns. Marginal
costs are increasing functions of goods prices and distance as given by equation (11). The markup

11

is increasing in the factory price and tariff, and decreasing in distance8, number of firms, and price
elasticity of demand. In the empirical work we examine the elasticity of shipping prices with
respect to the changes in the observed variables, and given the functional form of (10) there are
important interactions between the variables. In particular, the elasticity of the shipping price with
respect to σ k is decreasing in nij and decreasing in cij / p jτ ij .

III. Empirics

In this section we relate shipping prices to product characteristics to test for the existence of
market power in shipping. The precise functional form implied by our model is difficult to capture
empirically as it involves nonlinear interactions between the levels of variables we are unable to
measure exactly. In particular, we know some correlates of marginal costs (product price, distance),
but not the intercept or other factors like product bulkiness or special handling requirements.
Accordingly, we use a simple log linear expression and interactions meant to capture the sign of the
comparative statics summarized in Table 2. We use two data samples, and exploit somewhat
different sources of variation in the two cases.
The first data sample comes from the US Census Imports of Merchandise, years 1991-2004.
We employ data on US imports in each year t, disaggregated by exporter j, product k (HS 6 digit
data which includes roughly 5,000 product categories) and transport mode m (air, ocean). We
observe value, weight, duties paid, and shipment charges for each j-k-m-t observation. We only
employ ocean shipping data, and hereafter drop the mode m subscript.
We run several specifications. The first is

(13)

ln f jkt = α jt + β1 ln p jkt + β 2 ln τ jkt + β 3σ k + e jkt

where f jkt is the freight price per kg shipped, p jkt is the value/kg price of the good, τ jkt is the advalorem tariff, σ k is the elasticity of import demand, and α jt is a vector of exporter-time fixed
effects. This is equivalent to holding fixed the number of shipping firms between the US and
exporter j and exploiting only variation across product characteristics. It also holds fixed many
8

Distance is an interesting variable since it directly raises marginal costs but indirectly lowers the markup. As distance
increases the share of shipping charge in the delivered price goes up, shippers pricing behavior has a stronger effect on
total demand and this limits their market power. The magnitude of the direct effect outweighs the indirect effect.

12

difficult to capture features of the shipping industry that are exporter specific, including cargo
reservation policies (Fink et al 2000), the strength of liner conference activity (Fink et al 2000,
Clyde and Reitzes 1995), and port efficiency (Wilmsmeier et al 2006, Blonigen and Wilson, 2006,
Clark et al 2004).
In the second specification, we omit exporter fixed effects and include data on the number of
shippers operating on a route, both in levels and interacted with the price elasticity of demand.

(14)

ln f jkt = α + β1 ln p jkt + β 2 ln τ jkt + β 3σ k + β 4 DIST j + β5 n j + β 6 n jσ k + e jkt

All variables except the number of shippers and the elasticity of import demand are taken
directly from the US import data. The number of shippers is calculated using the Port2Port
Evaluation Tool from www.compairdata.com. This database reports shipping schedules for each
vessel carrying cargo between each port-port pair worldwide, including the liner company or
consortium operating each vessel. From this we calculate the number of distinct companies
operating on each route. The data were collected for the 4th quarter of 2006, and cover shipping
schedules in that period. We do not have time series data for the number of shippers and so treat it
as constant for a given exporter to the US over the sample period. For reference, Figure 1 displays a
scatterplot of (log) number of firms against (log) exporter GDP.
Not all exporters have direct connections to US seaports and so do not appear in the
schedule data. In these cases we impute the number of firms using information on indirect routings.
For example, there is a service between Singapore and the US but no direct shipments between
Kenya or Tanzania and the US. These exporters must first ship goods to ports in Singapore where
they are aggregated into larger ships and sent along to the US. For exporters with no direct service
to the US we use the number of shippers between the origin ports and the hub ports from which they
are subsequently shipped to the US. In our sample there are 52 exporters for which we have direct
observations on numbers of firms, to which we add 36 more exporters in which we can reasonably
impute values. We drop the remaining exporters from our set of US data. Our tables report results
that include the imputed data, but we have experimented and our results are very similar when we
use only those exporters with direct service to the US.
The elasticity of import demand is a critical variable for our study, so we experiment with
values taken from two sources. First, we use estimates of σ k at the 3 digit level of Standard

13

International Trade Classification revision 3 (SITC) taken from Broda-Weinstein (2006). Their σ k
elasticities are estimated using a procedure developed by Feenstra (1994) that exploits time series
variation in the quantity shares of exporter j selling product k to the US market as a function of time
series variation in the price of j-k. Second, we directly estimate σ k , using trade costs to trace out
price variation across source countries j quantity shares. The details on our estimation method are
contained in the appendix, along with a discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of our
approach relative to Broda-Weinstein, and some summary statistics on the estimated values.
Briefly, our estimates are more disaggregated, and estimated specifically for the transportation
mode, country sample, and time period employed in the shipping price regressions. If
substitutability varies by level of aggregation, mode, countries or time, the elasticities we estimate
would be preferred. When using the BW elasticities we still employ shipping data at the HS 6 level
so as to avoid aggregating away interesting variation in the f jkt , p jkt , and τ jkt data. In this case each
SITC 3 digit estimate of σ k is used in multiple HS 6 products.
Our second data sample comes from the BTI trade database for 2000.9 In this case we have
multiple Latin American importers (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, Peru, Uruguay) and
therefore many importer-exporter pairs, but lack time series variation. The specifications are
similar to equations (13) and (14), except that all time “t” subscripts are replaced with importer “i”
subscripts. The corresponding equations are

(15)

ln f ijk = α j + β1 ln pijk + β 2 ln τ ijk + β3σ k + eijk

(16)

ln f ijk = α + β1 ln pijk + β 2 ln τ ijk + β 3σ k + β 4 DISTij + β5 nij + β 6 nijσ k + eijk

In the first specification we control for the number of shippers using a vector of exporter fixed
effects α j . In the second we omit the fixed effects but include data on the number of shippers and
an interaction with σ k .
All variables except nij and σ k come from the BTI data. As with the US data, nij comes
from the Port2Port evaluation tool at www.compairdata.com. Compared to the US case there are
9

We are grateful to Jan Hoffman at UN ECLAC for providing these data.

14

far fewer exporters for which we either have schedule data directly or can infer reasonable
substitute exporters to impute values, and this substantially reduces our sample. We have compared
estimated elasticities in the fixed effect regressions that omit nij for the larger and the reduced
samples, and coefficients are all very similar except distance, where truncating the sample
significantly reduces the estimated coefficient. Since the main variables of interest are robust to the
two sample types and we wish to maintain comparability of samples across columns we employ the
smaller samples for all Latin American regressions.
Because the elasticity of import demand σ k may be different in the Latin American and US
import markets, we estimate values of σ k that are specific to this dataset (details in the appendix).
We also use our estimates of σ k from the US data, and Broda-Weinstein estimates of σ k from the
US data, and results are qualitatively similar in each case.

Results
Table 3 reports estimates of equations (13) and (14) using US imports data. The first three
columns use our elasticities estimated at the HS6 level. All signs match our theory. Shipping prices
are increasing in distance, and in product prices. As we note above, the positive correlation
between shipping prices and product prices has been shown elsewhere in the literature and could
reflect market power if marginal costs of shipping are independent of goods prices. A much
stronger test of market power is found in the other variables. Shipping prices are higher for goods
with lower import demand elasticities (elasticity -.22 to -.25). That is, shipping firms are best able
to take advantage of their position between producer and consumer to increase markups when
consumption decisions are less sensitive to changes in delivered prices. Shipping prices are
increasing in tariffs with an elasticity close to 1, meaning that a 1 percent tariff increase calls forth
an additional 1 percent increase in shipping costs. The results on product prices, import demand
elasticities and tariffs go through whether we use exporter-time fixed effects (and omit distance and
number of shippers) or omit the fixed effects and enter distance and number of shippers directly.
Finally, the coefficient on number of shippers operating on a route is negative and the interaction
between number of shippers and demand elasticity is positive. This means that that adding more
shippers to a route directly lowers shipping prices and weakens the ability of firms to charge higher
markups on goods facing a less elastic import demand.

15

The last three columns of Table 3 employ SITC 3 digit demand elasticities from BrodaWeinstein (2006). The coefficients on the demand elasticity are roughly half the size as those
estimated with our HS 6 values for σ k , but still negative and highly significant, and all other
variables have a similar affect on shipping prices. A likely explanation for the difference in the σ k
coefficients is that the Broda-Weinstein elasticities are estimated on more aggregated data and using
samples which do not exactly match the data in question. In this case their estimates are noisy
indicators of the true elasticity of import demand facing shippers, and so the coefficients are subject
to attenuation bias toward zero.
Table 4 reports estimates of equations (15) and (16) using Latin American data. As with the
US data shipping prices are increasing in distance, product prices, and tariffs, and decreasing in the
import demand elasticity, and the number of shippers. The coefficients on the import demand
elasticity are comparable in magnitude to those estimated on the US data in Table 3, while the
coefficients on tariffs and the number of shippers are larger (in absolute magnitudes). When using
the BW elasticities the interaction between the import demand elasticity and number of shippers is
positive, meaning that adding more shippers to a route weakens the ability of firms to charge higher
markups on goods facing a less elastic import demand. The interaction term is insignificant in the
regressions using HS 6 σ k data, but the net effect of both the number of shippers and the import
demand elasticity is negative when evaluated at both variables means.
The differences between the US and Latin American samples in the tariff and number of
shippers effects are particularly interesting. In the US, where tariffs are relatively small, a 1 percent
increase in tariffs leads to a 1 percent increase in shipping prices. In Latin America, where tariffs
are larger and exhibit much greater variation across products, a 1 percent increase in tariffs yields a
1.3 to 2.1 percent increase in shipping prices. This suggests that tariff reductions in and of
themselves could be a useful tool for lowering shipping prices facing Latin American importers.
US trading routes have higher volumes and more shippers competing than on Latin American trade
routes. In this case, doubling the number of shippers reduces shipping costs by 6 to 9 percent. In
Latin America, doubling the number of shippers reduces shipping costs by 11 to 15 percent.

The Strength of Market Power
Tables 3 and 4 provide strong support for the idea that market power allows shipping firms
to price discriminate across cargoes, charging higher prices when shipping is a smaller portion of

16

the delivered price, and when increases in the delivered price will result in a smaller reduction in
import (and therefore transport) demand. Next we examine how important market power is relative
to other factors in explaining variation across goods and exporters in shipping prices.
In many trade applications distance is used to proxy for transportation costs. In the US
sample, Table 3, we see that a 10% increase in distance shipped raises US transportation prices by
1.5%. Whether distance explains a large or small portion of total variation in shipping prices
depends on how much distance varies in the sample. We can show this by calculating the predicted
value of shipping prices for exporters at various distances from the US, holding other variables at
their means. For example, exporters at 5th, 50th and 95th percentile values of distance are 3233 km,
8830 km and 13,326 km away from the US, respectively. The model predicts that, ceteris paribus,
the exporter at 13,326 km distance faces shipping prices to the US that are 24 percent higher than an
.15

exporter at 3233 km,

f DIST 95  DIST 95 
=

f DIST 5  DIST 5 

.15

 13326 
=

 3233 

= 1.24 ,

while an exporter at median distance of

8830 km faces prices 17 percent higher than an exporter at 4880 km.
How does this variation compare to that induced by the variables that capture market power?
Table 5 reports the estimated coefficient for each variable taken from the fifth columns of Table 3
(for the US) and Table 4 (for Latin America) along with the 95th/5th percentile comparisons and
50th/5th percentile comparisons for each explanatory variable. Values of each variable at 5th, 50th
and 95th percentiles – hereafter referred to as “low”, “median” and “high” – are reported in the
Table notes.
There is enormous variation across goods in factory prices measured in units of dollars per
kg (compare microchips to cement), and this results in considerable variation across goods in
shipping prices. Goods with high factory prices have shipping prices 18 (Latin America) to 21 (US)
times greater than goods with low factory prices. As we argue above, some of the difference in
shipping prices may reflect differences in the marginal cost of providing shipping services of
variable quality, but this may also reflect market power effects.
The elasticity of shipping prices with respect to the import demand elasticity is estimated to
be -0.10 (for SITC 3 digit σ k values) to -0.22 (for HS 6 σ k values). In the US data, goods with a
low elasticity of import demand have shipping prices that are 33 percent (SITC3) to 43 percent
higher (HS6) than goods with a high elasticity of import demand. Note that when comparing the
effect for HS v. SITC, the elasticity of shipping prices with respect to σ k is half as big for SITC 3

17

digit, but the range of SITC 3 digit σ k values is larger. This means that the range of variation in
shipping prices due to σ k variation is comparable whether we use our estimated σ k or BrodaWeinstein’s. The range of variation in shipping prices explained is similarly comparable for Latin
America.
Tariffs exhibit less variation over goods than we see with product prices or import demand
elasticities. However, the elasticity of shipping prices with respect to tariffs is much larger. In the
US, high tariff goods face shipping prices that are 17 percent greater than low tariff goods. In Latin
America, where tariff variation is greater, high tariff goods face shipping prices 36 percent greater
than low tariff goods.
Finally, the elasticity of shipping prices with respect to the number of shippers is much
greater in Latin America than in the US, but there is less variation in the number of shippers. As a
result, number of shippers explains a comparable amount of variation in shipping prices in both
samples. Exporters with a small number of shippers (1 for the US, 2 for Latin America) face
shipping prices that are 22-23 percent higher than exporter with a high number of shippers (32 for
the US, 8 for Latin America).
Using distance as a proxy for transportation costs has become commonplace, but it explains
relatively little of the variation in shipping prices. Each of our variables that clearly indicate market
power (import demand elasticity, tariffs, number of shippers) has an effect comparable to or larger
than distance. Product prices, which likely capture a combination of marginal costs of shipping and
market power, explain variation in shipping prices an order of magnitude larger than that explained
by distance variation.

Market Power and Shipping Prices in Developing Countries
Table 1 shows that Latin American importers face higher shipping prices than do US
importers, and developing country exporters face higher shipping prices into most import markets.
We next use our estimates to identify how much of this effect is due to the exercise of market power
in the shipping industry.
First we compare non-OECD to OECD exporters shipping into each import market. We reestimate the model from equations (14) and (16) for the US and Latin American samples, with two

18

differences. First, the dependent variable is the ad-valorem (rather than per kg) shipping price.10
This makes it easier to think in terms of the effect of shipping on the delivered price of the product,
and also helps us to explain the observed differences in freight expenditures relative to import
values reported in Table 1. Second, we include separate intercepts for OECD and non-OECD
exporters to capture differences in the level of costs that we cannot attribute to explicitly measured
variables. This yields

US Imports

f 
ln  jkt  = α t − 3.66 − .18OECD j − .11ln σ k − .47 ln p jkt + 1.14 ln τ jkt + .18ln DIST j − .01ln n j
 p jkt 



Latin America:

f 
ln  ijk  = −1.99 − .11OECD j − .10σ k − .48ln pijk + 1.38ln τ ijk + .02 DISTij − .15nij
 pijk 



We can now attribute differences between OECD and non-OECD exporters to differences in
the intercepts plus difference in shipment characteristics, that is, differences in the average product
price, demand elasticity, tariff, distance, and number of shippers for the two groups. Table 6
reports for each variable the mean differences between non-OECD and OECD exporters in the
explanatory variables. In the US sample, non-OECD prices are lower, P non − oecd / P oecd = .61 . To get

the difference between shipping prices from OECD and non-OECD exporters attributable to
differences in product prices, we calculate, −.47 ( ln p non −OECD − ln p OECD ) = .224 and similarly for
each explanatory variable. Summing over all the differences in explanatory variables, plus the
difference in the intercept, yields the total difference in mean shipping prices facing OECD and
non-OECD exporters.

10

Coefficients on all variables except product prices are the same whether shipping prices are expressed on a per kg, or
on an ad-valorem basis. Since we have effectively subtracted ln(p) from both sides, the coefficient on product prices in
the ad-valorem regression is -1 smaller than in the per kg regressions. That is, higher product prices result in higher per
kg shipping prices with an elasticity of roughly 0.5, and lower ad-valorem shipping prices with an elasticity of roughly
-0.5.

19

For the US, ad valorem shipping prices from non-OECD exporters are 1.48 times shipping
prices from OECD exporters (log difference equal to .393). Of this, 57 percent comes from OECD
exporters having higher prices, 7 percent comes from OECD exporters being served by more
shippers and 5 percent comes from OECD exporters being closer to the US.11 Most of the
remaining difference, or 34 percent, represents higher non-OECD shipping prices conditional on the
other variables. The import demand elasticity plays very little role here because the average values
for the elasticity are quite similar for the OECD and non-OECD.
For the Latin American import sample, non-OECD exporters have shipping prices 1.39
times larger than OECD exporters (log difference of .327). Of this, two-thirds come from OECD
exporters shipping higher priced goods, and the remaining third comes form the OECD intercept.
Next we decompose the difference in shipping prices into the US import market compared
to the Latin American import markets. To decompose the sources of this difference we first
estimate equation (14) on a pooled sample for the US and Latin America in 2000,

f 
ln  ijk  = 3.10 − .10 ln σ k − .47 ln pijk + 1.14 ln τ ijkt + .12ln DISTij − .076 ln nij
 pijk 



Latin American importers face shipping prices that are, on average, 1.257 times that of the US as
importer (log difference .228). Half of this difference is due to Latin American importers imposing
higher tariffs on goods, one-third is due to the smaller number of shipping firms operating on Latin
American routes, 13 percent is due to Latin American countries being further from their export
sources, and 4 percent is due to the US buying higher priced products.

Trade Volumes: A Back of the Envelope Calculation
As a final exercise we calculate the reduction in trade volumes that results from shipping
firms pricing above marginal cost. Starting from the import demand equation (3), express the actual
volume of trade relative to a counterfactual quantity of trade that would taken place had shipping
firms priced at marginal cost

11

China is a large outlier in the number of shippers serving the market. If we drop China from the calculation, the
number of shippers serving non-OECD/OECD markets = 0.41 and number of shippers explains 10 percent of the
difference in shipping costs.

20

qs  psτ s + f s 
=

qs∗  psτ s + cs 

−σ s

where qs∗ is the counterfactual quantity of trade with marginal cost shipping prices, and the
subscript s denotes shipment. The dimensionality of this variable depends on the data in question.
For our Latin American data, s represents importer i, exporter j, commodity k. For the US data, s
represents exporter j, commodity k, time t.
We do not observe the marginal cost of shipping, but we can approximate it by manipulating
our empirical specification for shipping prices. The shipping price for shipment s is empirically
specified in equations (14) and (16). Ignoring the interaction term the equation can be rewritten as

(17)

f s = eα psβ1 DISTsβ4τ sβ 2 σ sβ3 nsβ5 eε s

Three variables, the elasticity of import demand, tariff, and the number of shippers affect only the
markup. That is to say, theoretically the shipping price equals marginal cost only if the elasticity
and the number of shippers are infinitely large and tariff is equal to one. We approximate this by
choosing very large (99th percentile) values for the import demand elasticity and the number of
shippers and very small values (1st percentile) for tariffs. Our approximation of marginal cost is
then

(18)

β5
β 2 β3
 eε s
cs = eα psβ1 DISTsβ4  τ 1%
σ 99% n99%

The error term from the estimation is equal to the actual shipping price relative to the fitted shipping
price from the empirical model, or
eε s =

fs
e ps τ s σ s DISTsβ4 nsβ5
α

β1

β2

β3

Substituting the error term into the cost equation and simplifying gives us
(19)

 τ β 2 σ β3 n β5 
f s = cs  βs2 βs3 sβ5  .
 τ 1%σ 99% n99% 

Strictly speaking the term in brackets is not precisely the shipping markup over marginal cost.
Rather it is the ratio of the observed values τ sβ2 σ sβ3 nsβ5 that affect markups for a particular shipment s

21

β5
β 2 β3
and the values for the smallest markup we can see in our data τ 1%
σ 99% n99%
. The true markup over

marginal cost for shipment s must be at least this large.
We can now construct a counterfactual volume of trade for each shipment s:12


qs 
psτ s + f s
=
β5
β 2 β3
∗
qs 
τ 1%
σ 99% n99%
p
+
f
τ
s
 s s
τ sβ 2 σ sβ3 nsβ5









−σ s

This calculation provides a conservative estimate of the size of the markup and the
corresponding effect on trade volumes. First, we attribute all of the effect of higher product prices
on higher shipping prices to marginal cost differences and none to markup differences. Second, we
choose values for σ , n that are at the high end of those observed in the data, rather than choosing
some infinite value. The counterfactual is then equivalent to the following: suppose all shipments
were charged the same markup as the smallest observed markup in the data. How much lower
would shipping prices be, and how much higher would be the resulting trade volumes?
The summary of estimated markups and counterfactual trade volumes amounts of trade are
as follows. For US imports, shipping prices for the mean shipment are 1.53 times higher than
prices for the lowest markup shipment (standard deviation of 0.23). In ad-valorem terms shipping
markups result in delivered prices that are 1.024 times higher for the mean shipment (stdev = .03),
resulting in trade volumes that are 12.4 percent lower. These calculations weight all observations
equally, and the aggregate results are somewhat smaller. Aggregate freight expenditures as a
percentage of imports would drop by 1.8 percentage points, from 4.9 to 3.1 percent ad-valorem, if
shipping prices for each shipment were lowered to reflect the smallest observed markup. This
would lead to a 4.96 percent increase in trade.13
For Latin American imports, shipping prices for the mean shipment are 1.83 times higher
than prices for the lowest markup shipment, with a standard deviation of .28. In ad-valorem terms
12

Our trade volume calculation employs a useful property of the quasi-linear utility function we initially assumed.
Lowering delivered prices by 1 percent yields a σ percentage increase in trade volumes even if all exporters have
similar price declines. That is, expenditures on the imported goods grow while expenditures on the numeraire shrink.
In a standard model with CES utility over the imported goods and no numeraire, changes in delivered prices would shift
expenditures from one exporting source relative to another, or relative to the domestic versions of the imported good.
13
The “before” aggregate ad-valorem numbers do not match those from Table 1 for two reasons. One, we focus here
only on waterborne shipments. Two, due to data availability constraints we have reduced the sample of countries and
goods on which this calculation can be performed.

22

shipping markups result in delivered prices that are 1.038 times higher for the mean shipment (stdev
=.06), resulting in trade volumes that are 17 percent lower. Aggregate results are somewhat larger.
Aggregate freight expenditures as a percentage of imports would drop by 3.1 percentage points,
from 5.9% to 2.8%, if shipping prices for each shipment were lowered to reflect the smallest
observed markup. This would lead to a 21.1% percent increase in trade.
Shipping prices inclusive of markups are much larger (53 percent for US imports, 83 percent
for Latin America) than would be observed for the shipment with the smallest markup, which
implies that the total markup is larger still. Is this plausible? Recall from the modeling section
(p.9-10) that, for a monopoly shipper, markups 6 times marginal cost can be generated under
plausible parameter values.

IV. Conclusion

Many recent papers have focused on the importance of transportation costs, or more simply
distance, in shaping trade flows. A common feature of these papers is the assumption of Samuelson
iceberg shipping cost in which ad-valorem shipping costs are treated as an exogenous constant, and
most typically captured solely by the distance between markets. We get inside the black box of the
transportation industry to show how the exercise of market power drives much of the variation in
shipping prices.
Our test of market power in the shipping industry focuses on the ability of shipping firms to
price discriminate across products. The elasticity of demand facing a shipping firm is a function of
the elasticity of import demand and the degree to which changes in shipping prices affect the final
delivery price of a product. Shippers can charge especially large markups on goods whose import
demand is relatively inelastic, and on those goods where the marginal cost of shipping represents a
small percentage of delivered prices. That is, increases in factory gate product prices and increases
in tariffs give shippers more room to price discriminate. Further, a larger number of shipping firms
competing on a route lowers both the level of shipping prices and the ability of firms to price
discriminate across products.
These theoretical predictions are strongly supported by shipping data taken from US and
Latin American imports. Shipping prices are increasing in product prices and tariffs, and
decreasing in the elasticity of import demand the number of shippers on a route. Each of these

23

market power variables has an impact on shipping prices equal to or greater than the effect of
shipping cargoes greater distances.
Our findings suggest that high transportation costs in the developing world are not an
unfortunate technological fact of life, and provide two important policy implications. First,
because the demand facing the shipping industry as whole can be highly inelastic even a little entry
can go a long way in reducing market power and markups in shipping. The recent decision by the
EU Competitiveness Council to bar shipping firms from participating in liner conferences and from
colluding on price and market share agreements is worth watching in this regard. Second, high
tariffs are especially harmful to trade. They directly increase the delivered price of traded goods
and indirectly lead to increased shipping markups. We estimate that a 1% increase in tariffs leads to
a 1-2% increase in transportation costs. This effect is especially pronounced in Latin America
where tariffs are much larger and more variable to begin with. Cutting these tariffs would yield a
double dose of trade growth for liberalizing countries.

24

References.

Broda, Christian and Weinstein, David E. (2006) "Globalization and the Gains from
Variety," Quarterly Journal of Economics Volume 121, Issue 2 - May 2006, pp. 541-586
Blonigen, Bruce, and Wilson, Wesley (2006) “New Measures of Port Efficiency Using International
Trade Data,” NBER Working Paper 12052.
Clark, Ximena, Dollar, David, Micco, Alejandro (2004) “Port Efficiency, Maritime Transport
Costs, and Bilateral Trade,” NBER Working Paper 10353.
Clyde, Paul, and Reitzes, James (1995) “The Effectiveness of Collusion under Anti-Trust
Immunity, the Case of Liner Shipping Conferences,” Federal Trade Commission, December.
Davies, J.E. (1986) “The Theory of Contestable Markets and its Application to the Liner Shipping
Industry,” Canadian Transport Commission.
Fink, Carsten, Mattoo, Aaditya, and Neagu, Ileana Cristina (2000), Trade in International Maritime
Services: How Much Does Policy Matter?” World Bank Economic Review 16(1), pp. 81-108.
Frankel, Jeffrey A and Romer, David (1999) “Does Trade Cause Growth?” The American Economic
Review, Vol. 89, No. 3, pp. 379-399.
Graham M.G. and D.O. Hughes, (1985), Containerisation in the Eighties, Informa UK Ltd.
Hummels, David (2001) “Toward a Geography of Trade Costs”, Purdue University, mimeo
Hummels, David (2007) “Time as a Trade Barrier”, Purdue University, mimeo
Redding, Stephen and Venables, Anthony (2004) “Economic geography and international
inequality.” Journal of International Economics, 62, 53-82.
Sjostrom, William (1992) “Price Discrimination by Shipping Conferences”, Logistics and
Transportation Review; Jun 1992; 28(2), p. 207
Stopford, Martin (1997) Maritime Economics, Routledge; 2 edition.
Wilmsmeier, Gordon, Hoffmann, Jan, and Sanchez, Ricardo (2006) “The impact of port
characteristics on international maritime transport costs”, in Port Economics, Research in
Transportation Economics, Volume 16, edited by Kevin Cullinane and Wayne Talley, Elsevier

25

Appendix: Estimating the Price Elasticity of Demand for Imports
A key parameter for our study is the import elasticity of demand σ k and its variance over
products. This parameter can be thought of either as the own-price elasticity of demand for a
particular good from a particular exporter, or as the degree of substitutability between varieties of
good k being exported from two or more distinct exporters.
Identifying σ k requires us to estimate the slope of a demand curve using some variation in
prices. Broda-Weinstein (2006) estimate values for σ k using a procedure developed by Feenstra
(1994) to analyze a simultaneous system of export supply and import demand. The procedure
exploits time series variation in the quantity shares of exporter j selling product k to the US market
as a function of time series variation in the price of j-k. This approach has advantages and
disadvantages. One advantage is that it allows for slope in the export supply curve rather than
assuming that exporters have a constant marginal cost. A disadvantage is that the parameters of
interest are only identified if there are no simultaneous shocks to the error terms in the supply and
demand equations. The necessary identifying assumption would be violated if, for example, the
quality of a given product k varies over time for an exporter. Nevertheless, the Broda-Weinstein
estimates seem sensible, and are becoming something of an industry standard for studies that
require an estimate of the price elasticity of import demand.
We employ BW values while also estimating σ k values of our own using a different
identification method. Our method follows Hummels (2001) and identifies the slope of the import
demand curve using variation in trade costs. It allows us to better match our estimates of σ k to the
level of aggregation, transportation mode, country sample, and time period that we employ in our
shipping price regressions. If σ k varies across level of aggregation, mode, country or period, our
estimates will provide better information about the elasticity of import demand facing a shipping
firm as it makes pricing decisions.
Our identification technique works as follows. Equation (3) in the text captures quantity
demanded by a single representative consumer in importer j for a single variety from exporter j.
Rewrite this to reflect variation across products k in prices, trade costs and the elasticity of import
demand
(20)

 σ

qijk = 
p jk φijk 
σ − 1


−σ k

where the last term in the brackets φijk = τ ijk +

f ijk
p jk

is total ad-valorem trade costs. In the case where

product quality varies across exporting sources, this can be further augmented to include a priceequivalent quality shifter of the form.
(21)

qijk

 σ

=
p jk φijk 
σ − 1


−σ k

σk

( λ jk )

Trade flows between individual consumers and firms are not observable in our data, so to get
something observable (total imports in product k between exporter j and importer i) we multiply

26

both sides by the number of varieties produced by an exporter and the total expenditures of an
importer and take logs
(22)

( )

ln Qijk = a + ln Yi + ln n jk + σ k ln λ jk − σ k ln p jk − σ k ln φijk

where Qijk = n jk qijk are total quantities traded. In our Latin American data we have many importer
i-exporter j pairs for each product k. This allows us to run a separate regression for each k (an HS 6
good) of the form
(23)

( )

ln Qijk = ak + α ik + α jk − σ ln φijk + eijk

In this case, the value of σ k is identified off the bilateral variation in trade costs. The exporter fixed
effects eliminate exporter j-product k specific variation in product prices, and unobserved variation
in the number of varieties and product quality. The importer fixed effects eliminate importer iproduct k variation in real expenditures. In our simple model with quasi-linear utility this is just
real incomes since all prices are written relative to a numeraire. In the more common model with
CES preferences there would be an additional CES price index that is i-k specific, but such a term
would be differenced out of the estimation of (23) in any case.
A key difference between BW and our technique is that BW is identified off price variation
in the time series, assuming that there are no simultaneous shocks to the supply and demand
equations as would be caused by changing quality over time. If quality is changing over time then
we have the classical simultaneity problem in estimating a demand curve off of prices – there is an
unobserved term (quality) that is positively correlated with both supply prices and demand quantity.
This biases estimates of σ k toward zero.
Because we have multiple importers for each exporter, we can control for exporter-specific
quality variation using a fixed effect. In this case, we eliminate prices from the equation, but we
can still identify σ k through the variation in trade costs.
This approach assumes that, for a given HS 6 good k, exporters send identical quality levels
to each importer. Suppose instead that quality is i-j-k specific. In this case we must rewrite
equation (22) as
ln Qijk = a + ln Yi + ln n jk + σ k ln λijk − σ k ln pijk − σ k ln φijk

( )

Our estimating equation becomes
(24) ln Qijk = ak + α ik + α jk + β1k ln pijk − σ ln φijk + eijk

( )

and the coefficient on prices is biased due to unobserved (ijk specific) quality variation that shifts
out demand and is correlated with prices. However, our measure of trade costs still cleanly
identifies σ k . We use equation (24) to estimate σ k for each HS 6 product in the Latin American
imports data.
For the US imports we do not have multiple importers but we do have a time series and we
have multiple (HS 10) observations per HS6 product. Rewriting (22) to reflect this we have

(

ln q jt , g∈k = a + ln Yt + ln n jtk + σ k ln λ jtk − σ k ln p jt , g∈k − σ k ln φ jt , g∈k

27

)

Where g ∈ k means that we pool over all HS 10 products g within a given HS 6 classification, and
we assume that exporter quality and number of varieties are symmetric within an HS 6. We can
then estimate this separately for each HS6 and use exporter fixed effects to yield
(25)

(

ln q jt , g∈k = at + α jk + β1k ln p jt , g∈k − σ k ln φ jt , g∈k

)

Using an exporter fixed effect eliminates the time-invariant components of quality, prices, and
number of varieties. If we believed that quality was time invariant, as in Broda-Weinstein, we
could read the coefficient directly off the price term to get σ k . If we do not believe this, we can
still read the coefficient in front of trade costs to get σ k .
We can either use quantities on the left hand side of equations (24) and (25), or we can
multiply by both sides of the equation and use values. This increases the predicted coefficient on
prices by 1, but does not otherwise change the estimating equation. We use import values since
they tend to be measured with less noise than import quantities.
In the US imports data, after we restricted our attention to the HS 6-digit categories with at
least 50 observations we were left with 4756 separate estimates of elasticity. Out of these, we are
able to estimate elasticities in the theoretically sensible range (smaller than -1) and statistically
significant in 3750 cases. Using quantities as a dependent variable instead yields only 2321 usable
estimates, but the correlation coefficient of 0.88 between these and the elasticities estimated using
values as a dependent variable. Similarly for Latin America, we start with 4585 goods for which we
have at least 50 observations, and estimate statistically significant elasticities smaller than -1 in
2877 cases.

28

Figure 1

0

Number of Shippers (logs)
1
2
3

4

Number of Shippers on the Route to the US (logs)

15

20
25
GDP of Exporter (logs)

ln ( n j ) = −4.96+ .25 ln ( GDPj )
(.743)
2

(.031)

N = 95 R = .42

30

Table 1 The Importance of Transportation Costs.
US

Argentina

Bolivia

Brazil

Chile

Ecuador

Paraguay

Peru

Uruguay

All exporters

3.5%

5.9%

8.4%

5.7%

8.1%

9.2%

9.7%

8.5%

5.8%

OECD exporters

2.6%

5.7%

8.6%

5.2%

6.8%

8.4%

9.9%

8.3%

6.7%

Non-OECD exporters

4.5%

6.2%

8.1%

6.2%

9.6%

10.1%

9.4%

8.6%

5.5%

Freight bill as a % of total trade costs (1)

85%

31.3%

45.7%

31.0%

42.4%

45.5%

63.0%

39.5%

31.5%

Coefficient of variation in ad-valorem
transportation costs across goods (2)

1.4

5.24

1.83

1.34

1.70

1.68

1.64

1.28

1.59

.89

.82

.71

.95

.81

.86

.72

.82

.59

Aggregate freight expenditures
(% of imports value)

Coefficient of variation in ad-valorem
transportation costs across exporters (3)

Notes:
(1) For each importer, calculate ad-valorem transportation expenditures for each exporter j-HS6 product k as

τ jk . g jk /( g jk + τ jk ) is freight bill as a percentage of total trade costs for each exporter j-HS6 product k.
j-k) for each importer.
(2) The Coefficient of variation is

g jk = f jk / p jk = Fjk / PQ jk . Ad-valorem tariff is

Table entry reports median values of this statistic (over all

c.o. v.( g jk ) = stdev( g jk ) / mean( g jk ) . Table reports median value of c.o.v.( g jk ) over all jk for each importer.

(3) For each importer, calculate ad-valorem transportation expenditures for each exporter j-HS6 product k, relative to product k means as
coefficient of variation is

h jk = ( g jk ) /( g k ) . The

c.o. v.(h jk ) = stdev(h jk ) / mean(h jk ) . The table reports median values of c.o. v.(h jk ) over all jk for each importer.

Table 2. Model Comparative Statics

Key variables

Oligopoly with fixed
number of firms

Marginal cost pricing

Marginal Cost Markup Marginal Cost
Import Demand
Elasticity σ
Distance, dij

Markup

0

-

0

0

Tariff, 1 + τ ij

+
+
0

+
+

+
+
0

0
0
0

Number of shipping
firms, nij

0

-

0

0

Interaction Term,
σ × nij

0

+

0

0

Factory price, p j

Table 3. Ocean Cargo Prices and Market Power, US Imports
Dependent variable: Ocean Shipping Costs per Kilogram ln f jtk

HS 6 demand elasticities
(our estimates)

SITC 3 digit demand elasticities
(Broda-Weinstein)

Product Price
ln p jtk

.59
(.001)

.58
(.001)

.58
(.001)

.55
(.001)

.54
(.006)

.54
(.001)

Import Demand
Elasticity
ln (σ k )

-.22
(.002)

-.22
(.002)

-.25
(.004)

-.10
(.002)

-.10
(.002)

-.16
(.004)

Tariff
ln (1 + τ jtk )

.98
(.019)

1.07
(.018)

1.08
(.018)

1.09
(.019)

1.17
(.019)

1.18
(.019)

-.06
(.001)

-.09
(.003)

-.06
(.001)

-.08
(.002)

Number of
Shippers
ln ( n j )
Interaction
ln ( n j ) × ln (σ k )

.02
(.002)

Distance
ln ( dist j )
Exporter-year
fixed effects
Adj-R2
n-obs

.17
(.002)

.17
(.002)

Yes

No

No

.47

.48

.48

725,030

.03
(.002)
.15
(.002)

.15
(.002)

Yes

No

No

.48

.48
799,215

.48

Notes:
1.
2.
3.

Table contains estimates of equations (13) and (14), data from US Imports of Merchandise, oceanborne imports only. See appendix for estimation procedure for import demand elasticities.
Standard errors in parentheses.
Sample includes only those exporters for which data on “n” are available.

Table 4. Ocean Cargo Prices and Market Power, Latin American Imports
Dependent variable: Ocean Shipping Costs per Kilogram ln fijk
HS 6 demand elasticities
(our estimates)

SITC 3 digit demand elasticities
(Broda-Weinstein)

Product Price
ln pijk

.55
(.002)

.54
(.002)

.54
(.002)

.53
(.002)

.52
(.002)

.52
(.002)

Import Demand
Elasticity
ln (σ k )

-.181
(.004)

-.195
(.006)

-.187
(.009)

-.097
(.004)

-.104
(.004)

-.117
(.008)

Tariff
ln (1 + τ ijk )

2.00
(.057)

1.27
(.055)

1.26
(.055)

2.10
(.051)

1.40
(.050)

1.40
(.050)

-.13
(.004)

-.11
(.015)

-.14
(.004)

-.15
(.007)

Number of
Shippers
ln ( nij )
Interaction
ln ( nij ) × ln (σ k )

-.008
(.007)
.034
(.005)

.034
(.005)

Yes

No

No

.59
61,053

.58
61,053

.58
61,053

Distance
ln ( distij )
Bilateral pair
Fixed Effects
adj-R2
n-obs

.012
(.006)
.028
(.005)

.029
(.005)

Yes

No

No

.58
75,532

.57
75,532

.57
75,532

Notes:
1.
2.
3.

Table contains estimates of equations (15) and (16), data from BTI database, ocean-borne imports
only. See appendix for estimation procedure for import demand elasticities.
Standard errors in parentheses.
Sample includes only those exporters for which data on “n” are available.

Table 5 Explaining Variation in Shipping Costs per kg
Contribution of Explanatory Variables

US Imports

Estimated Elasticity

.54

Import
Demand
Elasticity
(SITC 3digit)
-.10

f ( X 50 pctile ) / f ( X 5 pctile )

8.50

.92

.80

1.03

.85

1.17

20.91

.75

.70

1.17

.81

1.24

Tariff

Number
of
shippers

Distance

1.48

-.14

.028

Product
Price

f ( X 95 pctile ) / f ( X 5 pctile )

Import
Demand
Elasticity
(HS 6)
-.22

Tariff

Number of
shippers

Distance

1.17

-.06

.15

Latin American Imports

.51

Import
Demand
Elasticity
(SITC 3digit)
-0.104

Import
Demand
Elasticity
(HS 6)
-0.195

5.75

.92

.85

1.19

.88

1.03

18.36

.79

.70

1.36

.82

1.06

Product
Price
Estimated Elasticity
f ( X 50 pctile ) / f ( X 5 pctile )

f ( X 95 pctile ) / f ( X 5 pctile )

Notes:
1. Estimated elasticities taken from 5th columns of Tables 3,4
2. For each column calculate the predicted freight rate for 5th, 50th, and 95th percentile values of the explanatory
variable weighted by value of trade, holding other variables at means. f ( X 50 pctile ) / f ( X 5 pctile ) then reports
the ratio of freight rates at the 50th and 5th percentiles.
3. The values of each variable at (5th,50th, and 95th) percentiles are: Import demand elasticity (SITC 3digit) –
US (1.23, 2.69, 22.15), LA (1.22, 2.69, 11.37); Import demand elasticity (HS 6) – US (3.23, 9.10, 16.50),
LA(3.53,8.09,21.85); Tariff – US (1,1.02,1.17), LA (1,1.12,1.23); Product price – US (0.14, 7.66, 40.66), LA
(0.13, 4.06, 39.56); Distance – US (3233, 8830, 13326), LA (2344, 7915, 18372); Number of shippers – US (1,
15, 32), LA (2,5,8).
4. 99th percentile elasticity of substitution (estimated at SITC 3digit) for Latin America and for US is 25.03.

Table 6. Decomposing Differences in Shipping Costs by Income Level
Advalorem
Shipping
Costs

X non −OECD / X OECD
Contribution to
fitted values
ln fˆnoecd − ln fˆoecd

X non −OECD / X OECD
Contribution to
fitted values
ln fˆnoecd − ln fˆoecd

X LA / X US
Contribution to
fitted values
ln fˆLA − ln fˆUS

1.48

Explanatory variable
OECD
intercept

Product
Price

Import
Demand
Elasticity

Tariff

Number of
shippers

US Imports Shipment Characteristics:
non-OECD exporter means / OECD exporter means
0.61
1.02
0.995
0.52

Distance

1.16

0.393

0.132

0.224

-0.002

-0.007

0.027

0.019

(100%)

(34%)

(57%)

(-.5%)

(-2%)

(7%)

(5%)

1.39

Latin American Imports Shipment Characteristics:
non-OECD exporter means/OECD exporter means
0.63
0.94
1.01
1.14

1.17

0.327

.11

0.222

0.006

0.007

-0.019

0.003

(100%)

(33%)

(67.8%)

(1.8%)

(2%)

(-5.8%)

(1%)

1.257

Shipment Characteristics:
Latin America Imports Mean/ US Imports Mean
.98
.97
1.10
.38

1.28

0.228

0.009

0.003

0.112

0.074

0.030

(100%)

(3.9%)

(1.3%)

(49%)

(32.5%)

(13.2%)

Notes:
1. Difference in predicted non-OECD freight rate attributable to product price is calculated as β p ( ln p non − OECD − ln pOECD ) .

2. Calculations based on these regressions (all coefficients significant at 1%, SITC 3 elasticities
US imports: ln ( f / p ) = α t − 3.66 − .18OECD − .11n σ − .47 ln p + 1.14 n τ + .18ln DIST − .04ln n .

Latin American: ln ( f / p ) = −1.99 − .11OECD − .10 ln σ − .48ln p + 1.38ln τ + .02 ln DIST − .15ln n
US v. Latin America imports: ln( f / p ) = 3.10 − .10 ln σ − .47 ln p + 1.14 ln τ + .12 ln DIST − .076 ln n

