                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DOES A HIGHER MINIMUM WAGE ENHANCE THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THE
                       EARNED INCOME TAX CREDIT?

                                          David Neumark
                                          William Wascher

                                        Working Paper 12915
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12915


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2007




The authors are grateful to Stephen Ciccarella for outstanding research assistance. Neumark's research
on this project was supported by the Employment Policies Institute. The views expressed are the authors'
alone, and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Board or its staff, those of the
Employment Policies Institute, or those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by David Neumark and William Wascher. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Does a Higher Minimum Wage Enhance the Effectiveness of The Earned Income Tax Credit?
David Neumark and William Wascher
NBER Working Paper No. 12915
February 2007, Revised March 2009
JEL No. H24,I38,J2,J38

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the effects of minimum wages and the EITC in the post-welfare reform era. For the minimum
wage, the evidence points to disemployment effects that are concentrated among young minority men.
 For young women, there is little evidence that minimum wages reduce employment, with the exception
of high school dropouts. In contrast, evidence strongly suggests that the EITC boosts employment
of young women (although not teenagers). We also explore how minimum wages and the EITC interact,
and the evidence reveals policy effects that vary substantially across different groups. For example,
higher minimum wages appear to reduce earnings of minority men, and more so when the EITC is
high. In contrast, our results indicate that the EITC boosts employment and earnings for minority
women, and coupling the EITC with a higher minimum wage appears to enhance this positive effect.
 Thus, whether or not the policy combination of a high EITC and a high minimum wage is viewed
as favorable or unfavorable depends in part on whose incomes policymakers are trying to increase.


David Neumark
Department of Economics
3151 Social Science Plaza
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu

William Wascher
Federal Reserve Board
Stop 80
Washington, DC 20551
william.l.wascher@frb.gov
I. Introduction

         The Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) was enacted in 1975 and has, over time, become a staple

of U.S. antipoverty policy. At the federal level, significant expansions in the generosity of the credit took

place in the 1980s and 1990s, boosting the credit rate from 10% in 1984 to 40% (with two children) in

1996, where it has remained since. In addition, some states have introduced their own EITC programs,

which typically provide families in the state with a percentage supplement to the federal EITC. The

number of states with such an EITC increased from seven states in 1996 to 19 states and the District of

Columbia in 2007, raising the percentage of the 16-64 year-old population residing in states

supplementing the federal EITC from 14% to nearly 40%.1

         Previous studies of the EITC typically find that this program is effective at increasing the labor

force attachment and earnings of low-income women and families with children. For example, Eissa and

Liebman (1996) show that the federal EITC increases employment of young, unskilled women with

children, Meyer (2002) concludes that a higher federal or state credit boosts employment of single

mothers, and Liebman (1998) and Scholz (1994) find that a large proportion of EITC payments go to poor

families.2 Similarly, our own previous research indicates that the EITC outperforms the minimum wage

in terms of its beneficial effects on the distribution of family earnings.3

         However, some researchers point out that the labor supply response associated with the EITC

may cause the market wage to fall.4 If so, some of the gains from the EITC that are intended for eligible


1
  This calculation is based on the CPS data described below. The 19 states with EITC supplements in 2007 were
   Delaware, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Nebraska, New Jersey,
   New Mexico, New York, Oklahoma, Oregon, Rhode Island, Vermont, Virginia, and Wisconsin, and the
   supplemental EITC in those states ranges from 4 to 43% of the federal credit. In addition, EITC supplements
   became effective in 2008 in Louisiana, Michigan, and North Carolina.
2
  Extensive surveys of previous research on the EITC can be found in Hoffman and Seidman (2003) and Hotz and
   Scholz (2003). Leigh (2005) also finds evidence of a positive supply response on the intensive margin (hours).
   The only study we know of that fails to find positive labor supply effects on those likely to be eligible for the
   EITC is Cancian and Levinson (2005), which examines the effects of Wisconsin’s higher EITC supplement for
   families with three children.
3
  Indeed, the minimum wage appears to have no beneficial effects on low-income families and may even adversely
   affect them. See Neumark and Wascher (2001), as well as Burkhauser et al. (1996) and Neumark and Wascher
   (forthcoming).
4
  See, for example, Leigh (2007) and Rothstein (2008), who find that an increase in the generosity of the EITC puts
   downward pressure on the wages of low-skilled workers already in the labor market. One might expect
   employers of low-wage workers to favor the EITC (over, for example, the minimum wage) if the incidence of the

                                                         1
workers will instead be reaped by employers, and there may be negative spillovers on the wages and

incomes of low-skilled workers not eligible for the EITC.5 In light of these potential general equilibrium

effects, some economists and policymakers have recently pointed to the minimum wage as a way to

mitigate any fall in wages. In particular, these advocates claim that the EITC and the minimum wage may

be mutually reinforcing (i.e., complementary), with a higher minimum wage enhancing the effectiveness

of the EITC in helping poor and low-income families.6

         In this paper, we examine potential interactions between the EITC and the minimum wage. We

begin in the next section of the paper with a theoretical discussion of how these two policies might

interact, noting that some models suggest that the two policies are reinforcing, while others suggest that

they are offsetting, at least for some subgroups of the population. To preview that discussion, the

explanation we regard as most compelling begins by allowing for heterogeneity of individuals who would

earn wages near the minimum if they worked. In that case, either a minimum wage or an EITC can

induce some individuals to enter the labor market, perhaps (especially in the case of the minimum wage)

displacing others of lower productivity.7 However, there may be other individuals with higher reservation

wages who enter the labor market only when there is both a high minimum wage and a more generous

EITC. If these individuals are the ones to whom we would like to try to redistribute income (e.g., if

single mothers with children have particularly high reservation wages among roughly comparably-skilled

workers), then combining the EITC with a higher minimum wage may enhance the beneficial

distributional effects of the EITC.



   EITC is on workers. Although it is difficult to establish explicitly whether businesses support particular policies,
   once piece of evidence in this regard is that the Employment Policies Institute, which reportedly receives funding
   from the restaurant industry (Greenhouse, 2006; Kilborn, 1997), strongly favors the EITC over the minimum
   wage (Garthwaite, 2004).
5
  As explained below, a very small EITC payment is available to families without children. As a result, many low-
   skilled workers (unless they are under age 25 or over age 64) are not strictly “ineligible” for the EITC but rather
   are simply unlikely to gain much from it. We use “ineligible” as a short-hand for those who are not eligible for
   the much more generous EITC available to families with children.
6
  See, e.g., Bernstein (2004), Fiscal Policy Institute (2004), and Levitis and Johnson (2006).
7
  The conventional theory does not imply that employment of any particular subgroup will decrease in response to a
   higher minimum wage; it only predicts that overall labor demand for less-skilled workers will fall. In particular,
   individuals for whom the market wage was previously below the reservation wage could, after a minimum wage
   increase, be drawn into the labor force. For example, Neumark and Wascher (1996) find that an increase in the
   minimum wage induces some higher-skilled teenagers to leave school and enter the labor market.

                                                           2
        On the other hand, for groups less likely to be eligible for the EITC, such as teenagers and low-

skilled adult males, a high minimum wage coupled with an EITC could represent a “double hit,” with the

minimum wage reducing their employment prospects via the higher wage floor imposed on employers,

and the EITC reducing their employment prospects via the increased supply of women entering the labor

market. Thus, the effects of interactions between these policies, and how these interactive effects vary

across different groups, are potentially quite complex. Widespread interest in the effectiveness of these

policies at the federal level, along with the increasing number of states implementing state EITCs as well

as higher state minimum wages, makes it important to study how they interact.

II. Minimum Wage-EITC Interactions

        The limited research that compares the effects of minimum wages and the EITC has generally not

considered the potential for interactions between the two policies. However, the policies are not mutually

exclusive, and, in practice, many individuals are subject to both, raising the possibility that such

interactions could arise. Indeed, several arguments as to how a higher minimum wage could enhance the

effectiveness of the EITC have been put forward. Although some are clearly invalid, others are possible

but require empirical testing to which they have not yet been subjected.

        One argument often made by minimum wage advocates is that a higher minimum wage is needed

to prevent or mitigate the reduction in market wages associated with the labor supply response to a more

generous EITC. In the simplest model of the labor market—a competitive labor market with

homogeneous labor—it is clearly wrong to argue that a higher minimum wage will enhance the

effectiveness of the EITC. In this setting, the EITC induces a labor supply increase among eligible

individuals that, in the absence of a minimum wage, would be expected to result in a lower wage and

higher employment for low-wage workers. A minimum wage will reduce the extent to which the wage

can fall in response to the increase in labor supply, but this will, in turn, reduce the job opportunities

available to individuals who enter the labor market because of the EITC. Indeed, in the extreme case in

which all EITC eligible individuals are priced out of the labor market by the minimum wage, the EITC

would not result in any change in employment, but only in an increase in unemployment.


                                                       3
         This intuition is illustrated in Figure 1. In the absence of a minimum wage or an EITC, the

equilibrium levels of employment (E0) and the market wage (W0) are determined by the intersection of

the labor demand curve (LD) and the labor supply curve (LS). If an EITC is implemented, which we

oversimplify by modeling it as a simple tax credit,8 then the labor supply curve shifts out to LS’, with

equilibrium employment level E1 (and a lower market wage W1). If a minimum wage of Wmin is

introduced as well, the wage does not fall as far. But the minimum wage reduces employment, generating

excess labor supply E1 − Emin. Indeed, if the minimum wage is set at W0, the EITC has no effect on the

labor market, except to increase the excess of labor supply over the quantity of labor demanded to E1 −

E0. That is, the minimum wage inevitably leads to lower employment and a higher wage than would be

the case with the EITC; the EITC simply determines the wage and employment level that would

otherwise prevail.

         This analysis also undermines the argument that the minimum wage needs to keep up with

inflation (whether by formal indexation or by more frequent increases) to maintain the effectiveness of

the EITC. Proponents of the minimum wage note that because the maximum credit that a family can

receive is indexed to inflation while the minimum wage is not, a family that receives the EITC and for

which earnings partly depend on minimum wage work will tend to face a declining real EITC payment

when the real value of minimum wage declines.9 However, this argument ultimately rests on the idea that

a higher minimum wage—regardless of the generosity of the EITC—will help low-income families and

thus is really an argument about the distributional effects of the minimum wage rather than an argument

that a higher minimum wage increases the effectiveness of the EITC. In this regard, the research

literature fails to find positive distributional effects of the minimum wage,10 suggesting that an EITC

coupled with a higher minimum wage will likely lead to poor and low-income families being worse off

than they would be with just the EITC.



8
  The discussion ignores variation in the size of the credit with family income and family structure. But the
   qualitative effect of increasing labor supply is captured in the figure.
9
   See Economic Policy Institute (2004).
10
   For a review of the evidence, see Neumark and Wascher (forthcoming).

                                                          4
           Thus, different arguments are needed to make the case that a higher minimum wage complements

the EITC. One route would be to drop the assumption of a competitive labor market. For example, some

researchers have claimed that low-skilled labor markets are better characterized by monopsony power

stemming from labor market frictions.11 In such a case, a minimum wage could increase employment and

earnings of less-skilled workers, making more of them eligible for EITC payments or raising the size of

the payments for which they are eligible. However, our recent exhaustive review of the effects of

minimum wages on employment concludes that the body of evidence is much more consistent with the

competitive model of labor markets (Neumark and Wascher, 2007a).

           An alternative argument is that a higher minimum wage may reduce the distortionary impact of

the EITC on labor supply. In particular, a higher minimum wage enables a family to achieve the same

level of income (earnings plus EITC) at the maximum EITC credit with a smaller EITC payment. This, in

turn, results in a lower marginal tax rate over the phase-out range of the credit, which could reduce the

associated labor supply disincentives (Blank and Schmidt, 2001). However, this argument is really about

how the EITC parameters get set rather than about the minimum wage. In particular, it does not imply

that, for a given set of EITC parameters, a minimum wage makes the EITC more effective in reducing

poverty or helping low-income families. Rather, it suggests that with a higher minimum wage we might

observe a different set of EITC parameters that have better distributional effects than the EITC parameters

chosen when the minimum wage is lower. As this hypothesis is not explicitly about minimum wage-

EITC interactions, testing it is beyond the scope of this paper.

           As noted in the Introduction, a more promising avenue for motivating interactions between

minimum wages and the EITC in terms of their effects on low-income families is to allow for

heterogeneity of individuals who would earn wages near the minimum if they worked. Suppose that there

are two types of workers: teenagers in middle-income families (ineligible for the EITC) with a low

reservation wage; and poor single mothers who are eligible for the EITC, are slightly more productive

than teenagers, and have significantly higher reservation wages, perhaps because of fixed costs of

11
     See, for example, Manning (2003) and Machin and Manning (1994).

                                                       5
working (e.g., making arrangements for child care). In the absence of a minimum wage and with no

EITC, the difference in reservation wages can lead to a situation in which the teenagers are employed

while the single mothers are not.

           Suppose we just raise the minimum wage. For a sufficiently high minimum some teenagers will

become non-employed. Demand will shift towards more-skilled single mothers, but the market wage (or

the higher minimum) may still fall short of their reservation wage. In this case, the minimum wage

delivers no benefit to poor single mothers because none of them are drawn into the labor market. If we

just raise the EITC (in particular, the phase-in rate), the effective wage may still fall short of the

reservation wage, in which case teenagers will continue to be employed (since their wage has not

changed) and poor single mothers are again no better off. However, a higher EITC coupled with a higher

minimum wage may raise the effective wage above the reservation wage of single mothers, leading to

more substitution of single mothers for teenagers, and hence better distributional effects of the EITC.12

           The case for single mothers (assumed here to face a fixed cost of employment) is depicted in

Figure 2. The individual’s indifference curves between non-working time (t) and earnings (w⋅[T-t]) are

given by the curved lines, while the budget constraint at the market wage is given by the solid line (with

maximum earnings of wT). Because of the fixed cost of employment, the individual does not work in the

absence of a minimum wage or an EITC. Moreover, neither the minimum wage in isolation (which shifts

the budget constraint to the dotted and dashed line) nor the EITC in isolation (the dotted line) is sufficient

to induce labor market entry. In contrast, the combined policy of both a minimum wage and an EITC (the

dashed line) raises the return to work by enough to induce labor market entry. Of course, policymakers

could devise a set of EITC parameters in isolation that would yield the same interior solution depicted in

Figure 2. But fiscal concerns or fears over introducing stronger distortions on the phase-out range may

place constraints on setting EITC parameters in this way. Indeed, as a consequence of the potential for

labor supply disincentives with a very high EITC, it is not only possible that a higher minimum wage

12
     If mothers are no more productive than teenagers, then although more mothers may be drawn into the labor
     market, employers are indifferent between the two groups and so demand does not shift toward them. In this case,
     the qualitative effect would be the same, but it would be weaker.

                                                           6
could enhance the positive distributional effects of the EITC, but also that the distributional effects of a

minimum wage and a modest EITC are better than those of a high EITC that generates the same effective

wage along the phase-in range.13

         Figure 2 illustrates how a higher minimum wage could enhance the effectiveness of the EITC.

However, it is also possible that a higher minimum wage will reduce the effectiveness of the EITC. In

particular, if the wages of those eligible for the EITC are already bound by the minimum wage, then a

further increase in the wage floor will just reduce their employment relative to the case of an EITC in

isolation (taking us back to a case similar to that depicted in Figure 1).

         In addition, low-skilled individuals who are not eligible for the EITC can take a double hit from a

high minimum wage coupled with an EITC, with the minimum wage reducing their employment

prospects via the higher wage imposed on employers, and the EITC reducing their employment prospects

via the increased supply of EITC eligible individuals. For example, in the model described above, the

minimum wage plus EITC combination leads to more labor market entry by the higher-skilled workers—

single mothers—and hence more disemployment of the lower-skilled workers—teenagers, in that

example, but more generally low-skilled individuals without children.

         The past decade is a propitious period in which to study the effects of policy interactions between

the minimum wage and the EITC. Paralleling the rapid proliferation of state EITCs has been a similar

expansion in state minimum wages, with the number of states with minimum wages above the federal

minimum rising to 29 (plus the District of Columbia) as of the beginning of 2007. At the same time,

focusing on the post-welfare reform period lets us abstract from major changes in work incentives

associated with the transition from AFDC to TANF. Although welfare policies continued to change after

TANF was enacted in 1996, preliminary analyses indicated that key welfare reforms such as time limits

and work requirements did not have discernible effects on the dependent variables we study, and so we

focus on minimum wage-EITC interactions.14


13
   Estimates of the regression models described below can be used to simulate the distributional effects of alternative
   policy combinations and parameters—but such simulations are likely reliable only within the range of the data.
14
   This is not to say that the change from AFDC to TANF had no effects on labor market outcomes. Our sample

                                                          7
III. Data

         We combine data on wages, employment, hours, and earnings (individual and family) with state-

level information on minimum wages and earned income tax credits for the period 1996 to 2007. The

minimum wage data are compiled from annual summaries of federal and state labor legislation reported

each year in the Department of Labor’s Monthly Labor Review. Most state minimum wages equal or

exceed the federal minimum wage, although some states have a minimum wage below the federal level,

often applying to small groups of workers not covered by the federal law. Because we do not have the

detailed information on who is covered by state law and because coverage of the federal minimum wage

is extensive, we simply use the higher of the state or federal minimum as the effective state minimum.

         The information on state EITCs comes from a series of reports published by the Center on Budget

and Policy Priorities. State EITCs specify a percentage of the federal EITC that is paid to state taxpayers

via the state income tax system, as a “supplement” to the federal EITC. Our state EITC variable is this

percentage. In two states, this percentage varies with the level of income and/or with the number of

children. For Wisconsin, where the supplement varies with the number of children, we use the

supplement for families with two children (14%). Minnesota’s EITC is not specified as a simple

percentage of the federal credit, so we use the reported average supplement of 33%.15 Although the state

credit is refundable in most states, a few states have a nonrefundable (or only partially refundable) credit

and in a couple of states the recipient has a choice; for these latter states, we use the refundable rate on the

presumption that most eligible families would prefer that rate. (A refundable EITC gives money back to

the family even if there is no tax liability, whereas a non-refundable EITC only reduces any existing tax

liability.) Over the sample period we use, the federal EITC was unchanged with a phase-in tax credit of

40% for families with two or more children, and 34% for families with one child. The federal EITC also

provides a very small credit of 7.65% to those without children.16


   period begins in 1997 and thus covers the post-welfare reform period. As a result, the welfare reform effects we
   can identify are mainly the effects of minor timing differences between the states and variation in the state
   policies adopted. Some of these earlier results are described in Neumark and Wascher (2007b).
15
   See http://www.stateeitc.com.
16
   In addition to the phase-in rate, the EITC establishes a maximum credit (in 2007, $4,716 for families with two or

                                                          8
         We merge these state-level policy variables with data from CPS Annual Demographic Files

(ADF). The ADF files are used to construct individual-level measures of wages, employment, and hours,

as well as demographic and human capital indicators. In addition, we use the ADF files to construct

family-level measures of earnings and the poverty line for each family. Finally, we append to each record

the state unemployment rate in each year to control for variation in economic conditions at the state-by-

year level. The unemployment rate is potentially endogenous, but by using the state-wide unemployment

rate (from the Local Area Unemployment Statistics) rather than a rate for groups more strongly affected

by the minimum wage, we hope to capture the exogenous influence of changes in aggregate demand.17

IV. Methods

         We use a reduced-form approach to estimate the effects of the interactions between the EITC and

minimum wages on labor market outcomes. In principal, one could estimate a structural model of labor

supply in the context of a non-linear budget constraint that incorporates changes in both the EITC and the

minimum wage (as well as other policy changes).18 However, a reduced-form approach allows us to more

naturally extend the prior literature that focuses on the effects of the EITC on labor supply and poverty

(e.g., Cancian and Levinson, 2005; Eissa and Liebman, 1996; Eissa and Hoynes, 2004; Neumark and

Wascher, 2001) by expanding the specifications used in these studies to incorporate interactions between

the EITC and the minimum wage. In addition, many potentially eligible individuals have imperfect

information about the EITC, and most workers are not able to freely choose their work hours over the

course of the year (Liebman, 1998; Romich and Weisner, 2000), which may limit the appeal of using an

approach based on utility maximization with respect to an explicit non-linear budget constraint.19

Nonetheless, it is clear that the structural and reduced-form approaches are complementary.


   more children, $2,853 for families with one child, and $428 for those with no children), a “plateau” or income
   range over which the maximum benefit remains fixed (in 2007, for families with two or more children, from
   $11,791-$15,399), and a phase-out rate at which the credit is reduced as income rises further (currently 21.06%
   for families with two or more children).
17
   We also experimented with the inclusion of state real GDP growth per capita in the various specifications we
   estimate. However, the estimated coefficient of this variable was never statistically significant (in contrast to the
   estimated coefficient of the unemployment rate), and its inclusion had no impact on the results, so we omit it in
   the specifications reported in the paper.
18
   A recent study using this approach is Bingley and Walker (2008).
19
   For example, Berube et al. (2002) note that two-thirds of EITC recipients use a tax preparer and hence likely do

                                                            9
         We estimate models for employment, hours, wages, earnings, and family earnings relative to

poverty thresholds for a variety of demographic and skill groups.20 The earnings estimates are

unconditional rather than conditional on employment, so that the estimates reflect changes on both the

extensive (employment) and intensive (hours of work if employed) margins of work, as well as changes

in wages. We look at hours conditional on work to focus on the intensive margin, for which—at least for

women—the predicted effects of the EITC are different than for employment. All specifications are

estimated at the individual level, with standard errors adjusted to account for non-independence among

observations within the same state and over time.21

         We begin by focusing on the effects of the EITC. When we study women, we estimate models

for employment, hours, and earnings, as well as whether families’ earnings are above or below the

poverty line (or other thresholds). The strongest prediction is for employment, which theory says will be

increased by the EITC. However, estimates of the effect of the EITC on overall individual earnings

provide a useful summary statistic for changes along various dimensions (including wages), while family

earnings are of interest because the family is typically the unit of interest in anti-poverty policy.

         In particular, we estimate the following baseline model:

(1)      Yist = α + β1 EITC st + β 2 EITC st ⋅ Kidsist + X ist λ + Gs μ + M tν + ε ist ,

where Y is the dependent variable, EITC is the state EITC supplement expressed in percentage terms, and

Kids is a dummy variable indicating the presence of dependent children age 18 or under in the home

(which is what is measured in the CPS). The matrix X includes main effects for the number of children,

as well as a large set of controls discussed below. Gs and Mt are vectors of state and year fixed effects,


   not know the details of the EITC, Leigh (2005) notes that low education and low language skills among many
   eligibles likely contribute to poor information, and Rothstein (2008) concludes that individuals respond to changes
   in average rather than marginal tax rates induced by variation in the EITC. In addition, it is undoubtedly difficult
   for individuals to predict how their particular labor supply choices during the year will affect their EITC
   payments, given that most EITC recipients take their full credit for the previous year when they file their taxes.
20
   Note that we focus on earnings and not income. Although it is possible to measure other sources of pre-tax
   income in the CPS data we use, there is no information on EITC payments received or taxes paid. In addition, we
   are more interested in how the EITC affects labor market incentives and hence earnings, while recognizing that
   this means that in some cases we understate the gains (or overstate the losses) from the EITC.
21
   Specifically, each observation comes from a particular state and year. However, we cluster the data at the state
   level to compute standard errors robust to heteroscedasticity and arbitrary correlations across individuals in the
   same state either contemporaneously or over time (Bertrand, et al., 2004).

                                                          10
included to control for other differences across states that might be correlated with policy differences, and

for changes in other factors over time that are common to states (such as those generated by federal

policies) but that might be correlated with the policies we study. Finally, the ‘i,’ ‘s,’ and ‘t’ subscripts

denote individuals, states, and years, respectively.

           Some details of this specification merit additional explanation. First, because the EITC is much

more generous for families with children, we view β2 as especially indicative of the effect of the EITC on

labor market outcomes. One might interpret β1 as the effect of the EITC on those without children.

However, because the model does not include a full set of state-by-year interactions (in which case β1

would be unidentified), we cannot be entirely sure that this parameter reflects the effects of the EITC

rather than the effects of shocks specific to state and year cells that are correlated with EITC. In that

sense, our estimating equation can be thought of as a difference-in-difference-in-differences estimator, in

which β2 identifies the effect of the EITC from the differential effect for those with and without children.

We also verify that the estimates of β2 are robust to more flexible specifications that include either state-

specific time trends or a full set of state-by-year interactions.

           Second, X includes as controls: dummy variables for education (high school dropout, high school

degree, some college, bachelor’s degree or higher); dummy variables for number of children as well as

the number of children under age 6 (all possible values); dummy variables for marital status (never

married, married spouse present, married spouse absent, and divorced, widowed, or separated); dummy

variables for black or Hispanic; age and its square; and the state unemployment rate. In addition, the

model includes a full set of interactions between Kids and both the year dummy variables and the state

dummy variables. These interactions are intended to capture changes across time in the relationship

between the presence of children in the home and labor market outcomes, as well as differences across

states; for example, these interactions may capture the effects of changes in state welfare policies.22 For




22
     When these interactions were excluded, the results were sometimes sensitive to how we controlled for the number
     of children and their ages (using the highly flexible manner just described or a more restrictive specification).
     However, when these interactions were included, the results were very stable.

                                                           11
some samples, some of these controls drop out (e.g., some of the marital status controls when we study

single women).

           When we study the effects of the EITC on low-skilled individuals without children (who we

loosely classify as “ineligible”), an interaction with Kids is clearly inappropriate. Instead, we identify the

effect of the EITC on this group from the difference in labor market outcomes between those with higher

and lower skills. We classify individuals as having higher skills if they have at least some college and as

having lower skills if they have a high school degree or less. We also estimate alternative specifications

that focus instead on low-skilled blacks or Hispanics, who tend to have even lower wages and hence are

likely to be more adversely affected by an outward supply shift induced by the EITC—especially,

perhaps, when coupled with a higher minimum wage (in specifications discussed later). For the unskilled

ineligibles, the strongest prediction is that a higher EITC reduces the wage. If the substitution effect

dominates the income effect or if the decline in the wage increases the extent to which these workers are

bound by the minimum wage, we might also expect declines in hours or employment. Thus, our

specification becomes:

(2)         Yist = α + β1 EITC st + β 2 EITC st ⋅ Lowskillist + X ' ist λ + Gs μ + M tν + ε ist ,

where the vector of controls X’ excludes the variables related to children and includes the low-skill

indicator, and β2 captures the effect of the EITC on low-skilled individuals.23

           After estimating the effects of the EITC, we move on to specifications that are augmented to

allow for interactions between the EITC and the minimum wage. For women, we estimate models for the

same outcomes, asking whether the effects of the EITC discussed above vary with the level of the

minimum wage. The augmented version of equation (1) is

            Yist = α + β1 EITC + β 2 EITCst ⋅ Kidsist + γ 1MWst + γ 2 MWst ⋅ Kidsist
(3)
                 +δ1 EITCst ⋅ MWst + δ 2 EITCst ⋅ MWst ⋅ Kidsist + X ist λ + Gs μ + M tν + ε ist ,



23
     An alternative approach would be to estimate this model with female labor supply measures on the right-hand
     side, and instrument for them with variation in the EITC. In this context, equation (2) can be interpreted as a
     reduced-form specification for wages and other labor market outcomes.

                                                            12
where MW is the log of the minimum wage, and δ2 identifies how variation in the minimum wage changes

the effect of the EITC on those with children relative to those without. Again, we verify the robustness of

the results for the policy variables interacted with Kids (the coefficients β2, γ2, and δ2) to the inclusion of

state-specific linear trends or a full set of state-year interactions. Reflecting earlier findings indicating

that the effects of minimum wages take some time to become fully apparent (Baker, et al., 1999), we view

it as desirable to include both contemporaneous and lagged values of the minimum wage. However, to

simplify the specification, we specify the minimum wage variable in these models as the average of the

current and lagged (one year) minimum wage. In addition, we demean the policy variables (EITC and

MW) in this specification so that the main effects of the EITC and the minimum wage that we report are

effectively evaluated at the sample means and hence are comparable to those from specification (1).

           For individuals without children at home, the higher minimum wage may mute the reduction in

wages caused by the general equilibrium effects of the EITC, but this would lead us to expect larger

declines in hours or employment. Thus, for these individuals we estimate models for employment, hours,

wages, and earnings (as a summary measure) using an augmented version of equation (2):

           Yist = α + β 1 EITC + β 2 EITC st ⋅ Lowskill ist + γ 1 MWst + γ 2 MWst ⋅ Lowskill ist
(4)
                 + δ 1 EITC st ⋅ MWst + δ 2 EITC st ⋅ MWst ⋅ Lowskill ist + X 'ist λ + G s μ + M tν + ε ist .

           In this specification, δ2 identifies how variation in the minimum wage alters the effect of the

EITC on low-skilled childless individuals relative to high-skilled childless individuals.24

V. Results

Descriptive Statistics

           Tables 1A-1C report descriptive statistics of key variables at the individual and family levels,

including those for the outcomes we study. The tables cover the period 1997-2006 and present statistics

for a variety of groups included in our analysis, including single and married women between the ages of

18 and 45 (Table 1A), childless individuals between the ages of 18 and 35 (Table 1B), and families with a


24
     Note that a higher EITC should reduce wages of the less-skilled whether or not they have children. But the
     predicted labor supply effects are different for the childless.

                                                           13
head between the ages of 18 and 45 (Table 1C).25 As indicated in the top panel of Table 1A, about 45%

of single women (which includes women who have never married as well as those who are divorced,

widowed, or separated) have at least one child at home, and 22% have more than one child. These

percentages are somewhat higher for less-educated or minority single women, although still lower than

the percentages for less-educated married women. Single women are also more likely to be black than

less-educated married women in this age range, while the average age in each category is just under 30.

With regard to education, shown in the next panel, single black or Hispanic women are somewhat less

likely to have completed high school than single white women (and are labeled high school dropouts,

although some of them may complete high school later), and are somewhat less likely to have a college

degree.26

        Average economic outcomes for these groups of women are shown in the remaining panels. For

the sample of single women as a whole, the average employment rate is 79% and is higher for women

without children than for women with children. Among employed single women, total hours average

1,633 hours per year, and log earnings average 7.53. Both of these figures are again higher for childless

women than for women with children. Looking across the columns, less-educated and minority women

have lower employment rates and lower earnings than single women overall, although employed minority

women work more slightly more hours. On the other hand, less-educated married women without

children are more likely to be employed, work somewhat more hours, and have higher earnings than less-

educated or minority single women without children.

        Table 1B presents summary statistics for childless men and women and for several subsets of this

group. In particular, we compare economic outcomes for three less-educated groups—all those with at

most a high school degree, then just low-skilled minorities, and then low-skilled minority single men—to

25
   Table 1C also includes unrelated individuals (including unrelated subfamilies) living in others’ households or
   primary individuals in their own households. Together, these three types of families are used by the Census
   Bureau in measuring poverty at the family level. (See http://pubdb3.census.gov/macro/032007/pov/povnotes.htm,
   viewed July 15, 2008.)
26
   The education classifications are based on education attained and whether the person reports a high school
   diploma or GED. We do not distinguish between the latter two cases, although there is evidence suggesting that
   this distinction is important for employment outcomes (e.g., Cameron and Heckman, 1993). Separate information
   on diploma and GED holders is first available in the CPS in 1998.

                                                       14
each other and to those with some college or higher. Average economic outcomes are worse for the less-

educated groups, with lower employment rates, hours, wages, and earnings. In addition, employment

rates, wages, and earnings are lower for less-educated minorities than for the sample of less-educated

individuals as a whole.

        Table 1C presents summary statistics at the family level. About 46% of families (which includes

unrelated individuals) are headed by a woman, while 45% of families consist of married couples. Within

the group of families headed by single women, 42% have children at home. About 22% of the sample of

single women family heads is black and 13% is Hispanic; the percentage black is noticeably higher than

for all families, while the percentage Hispanic is slightly lower. Among single women family heads, 54%

have completed at most a high school education, while 13% have not completed high school; these

percentages are not much different than for the sample of family heads as a whole. In contrast, the

economic outcomes differ noticeably across family types. About 20% of families with heads between the

ages of 18 and 45 had earnings below the poverty line, and about 13% had earnings less than ½ the

poverty line (sometimes referred to as “extreme poverty”). However, the percentages with low levels of

earnings rise sharply for families headed by single women, and even more so for families headed by less-

educated or minority women. Moreover, the differences are especially large for female-headed families

with children: 55% of families headed by a less-educated or minority woman had earnings below the

poverty line and more than one-third had earnings below ½ the poverty line.

        The policy variables are shown in Figures 3 through 6. As indicated in Figure 3, the prevalence

of state minimum wages and state EITC supplements increased over our sample period. The percentage

of families residing in states with an EITC rose from 17% in 1997 to 32% in 2006, while the percentage

of families in states with a minimum wage higher than the federal level rose from 18% in 1998 to about

50% in 2006, with especially sharp increases in 2005 and 2006. In addition, state EITCs and state

minimum wages have become more generous over time. For example, the average size of the supplement




                                                    15
in states with an EITC rose from 8% in 1997 to more than 15% in 2006 (Figure 4),27 while the level of the

minimum wage in states where the minimum was above the federal level moved up from just over $5 per

hour in 1997 to about $6.50 per hour in 2006 (Figure 5); in contrast, the federal hourly minimum wage

was raised to $5.15 in late 1997 and was held at that level through 2006.

           Figure 6 presents a scatter plot of state minimum wages and EITC supplements in 2006. As

indicated by the upward-sloping regression line, states with higher minimum wages tended to have a more

generous EITC supplement. However, the dispersion of points around the line is considerable, suggesting

that states varied considerably in their use of these policies. In particular, some states implemented high

minimum wages but low (or no) EITC supplements, and others had high EITC supplements but low

minimum wages. We use this variation to identify how the interaction of state minimum wages and state

EITC supplements influenced economic outcomes at the individual and family level.

Effects of the EITC on Employment, Hours, and Earnings

           We begin with regression estimates of the effects of the EITC on employment, hours, and

earnings. Table 2 reports results for various groups of women expected to be differentially affected by

the EITC (estimates of equation (1)). Column (1) reports the relevant coefficient estimates for a sample

that includes all single women between the ages of 18 and 45. As indicated in the second row in each

panel, the coefficient on the EITC variable itself is generally small and insignificant, suggesting that the

EITC has negligible effects on labor market outcomes for single women without children. More

important, the coefficient on the EITC-kids interaction (the first row) indicates that the EITC has a

positive and significant (at the 10% level) effect on the employment and earnings of single women with

children. The 0.18 estimate for employment implies that a 10% EITC supplement boosts the probability

of employment among single mothers by 1.8 percentage points relative to single women without children,

while the 1.80 estimate for earnings implies that a 10% supplement raises their earnings by 18%. These




27
     Over 80% of the observations on families in states that supplement the EITC were from states with a refundable
     EITC, and in almost all cases the EITC was fully refundable.

                                                          16
results are generally consistent with previous research on the EITC (e.g., Hoffman and Seidman, 2003)

indicating that the EITC boosts employment and earnings of single mothers.

           The next two columns narrow the sample to two groups that are often considered likely to be

more strongly influenced by the EITC—less-educated women and minority women. These individuals

are likely to reap the most from the EITC because their earnings are low and thus less likely to be in the

plateau or phase-out range where the EITC can generate incentives to work less. Consistent with these

priors, the coefficient on the EITC-kids interaction is positive for employment and earnings and larger in

each case than for the broader sample of single women. Although the standard errors also become larger,

the estimated effects are statistically significant at the 5% or 10% level for less-educated women. In

contrast, the hours effects (conditional on employment) are small and statistically insignificant.

           Finally, the last column reports results for less-educated married women. For many in this group,

family earnings are above the maximum EITC income threshold and at a level where we would not

expect the EITC to have an effect on their labor market outcomes. However, there may be others who are

in the plateau or phase-out range where the EITC is predicted to reduce hours worked (and perhaps

employment). The results are generally consistent with this expectation, pointing to negative effects of

the EITC on employment, hours, and earnings for married women with children, although none of the

estimates are statistically significant. Clearly, though, the results are substantially different from those for

single women, confirming what theory would lead us to expect, and hence bolstering a causal

interpretation of the estimates for single women.28

           A potential side effect of the EITC is that the positive supply response for eligible mothers may

lead to negative spillover effects on other less-skilled individuals who are ineligible for the EITC but who

compete for jobs with the new labor force entrants. Table 3A presents results for different groups of such

individuals (estimates of equation (2)). In this specification, we identify the effect of the EITC from an

interaction between the EITC supplement and an indicator for low skills, which we define as having at



28
     These findings parallel those in Eissa and Hoynes (2004), although Eissa and Hoynes sometimes find statistically
     stronger evidence that the EITC reduces labor market participation of less-educated married women.

                                                           17
most a high-school degree. To focus in on those individuals more likely to be substitutes in production

for women benefiting from the EITC, we limit the sample to men and women between the ages of 18 and

35. We first estimate the model for all individuals in this age range. We then restrict the treatment group

to less-skilled minorities, and finally to less-skilled minority single men (keeping the control group the

same). This last treatment group is of interest for at least two reasons. First, single men may be less

skilled or less productive than otherwise comparable married men (e.g., Korenman and Neumark, 1991).

And second, single, less-skilled, and especially minorities, have been the focus of policy proposals

regarding extensions of the EITC (e.g., Gitterman et al., 2007).

         The first column of the table presents the effects of the EITC on the wages, employment, hours

(conditional), and earnings of less-educated men and women without children at home. The estimates

always indicate negative effects of the EITC, although only the estimated effect on hours (conditional on

employment) is statistically significant. For less-educated blacks and Hispanics, reported in column (2),

the results are sharper and somewhat different. In particular, the estimated effects of the EITC on

employment and earnings are negative and statistically significant, and the point estimates are larger than

in column (1), implying that this group is more adversely affected by the EITC. There is no evidence of

an effect on hours conditional on employment, while the estimated negative effect on wages is at best

marginally significant. Finally, as indicated in column (3), the results for less-educated single minority

men are similar to and stronger than those in column (2), with the estimates pointing to negative effects of

the EITC on wages, employment, and earnings.29

         Table 3B presents some additional evidence on spillover effects from the EITC to childless, less-

skilled individuals.30 In particular, we might expect the spillover effects to be stronger in labor markets



29
   We also estimated similar models for the low-skilled only, dropping the interactions in equation (2). In this case,
   the estimates did not reflect the predicted negative wage or employment effects (with all of the estimates near zero
   and statistically insignificant), suggesting that using the high-skilled group captures other economic shocks across
   states and years. We do note, however, that Leigh (2007) reports wage regression estimates for the low-skilled
   only that are consistent with the predicted negative effects of the EITC on the unskilled, although the sample
   period and specification differ in other ways. Rothstein (2008) explores this issue more fully in the context of
   federal increases in the EITC in the 1990s, noting the importance of controlling for demand shifts to detect the
   adverse effects of the EITC on wages.
30
   We are grateful to Jim Poterba for suggesting this analysis.

                                                          18
where more women enter the labor force in response to a more generous EITC. In Table 3A, differences

in spillovers across labor markets are assumed to be related to variation in the size of the EITC

supplement. However, the supply response is also a function of how many women are eligible for the

EITC. We measure the proportion of women likely to be eligible for the EITC in two ways. Our first

measure is the percentage of tax returns in each state that claimed the federal EITC.31 Our second

measure is the estimated share of single mothers in the state. Although neither measure directly

corresponds to the share of EITC-eligible women, both should be highly correlated with that share.

         We augment equation (2) to include an interaction between the EITC effect for the low-skilled

and these shares. To avoid endogeneity stemming from the fact that the childless can file for the EITC, or

from an EITC effect on household structure, we drop our first sample year (1997) from the analysis, and

use the share in 1997.32 Thus, the specification we estimate is:

         Yist = α + β1 EITCst + β 2 EITCst ⋅ Lowskillist + β 3 EITCst ⋅ Lowskillist ⋅ Share97 s
(2’)
         + β 4 EITCst ⋅ Share97 s + β5 Lowskillist ⋅ Share97 s + X 'ist λ + Gs μ + M tν + ε ist ,

where Share97 is one of our measures of EITC eligibility. Note that the main effects of this share are

capture by the state dummy variables. The parameter of most interest is β3.

         Estimates for the sample of 18-35 year-old childless individuals are reported in Table 3B. The

results indicate that the spillover effects of the EITC on low-skilled, childless individuals are larger in

states where a greater proportion of women are potentially affected by the EITC. In the wage regression

estimates shown in column (1), for example, the estimated coefficient of the interaction between the EITC

variable, the low-skill indicator, and the share of EITC filers is negative and significant, implying that the

negative effect of the EITC on the wages of childless, low-skilled men and women is stronger in states

where a higher percentage of tax filers claimed the EITC. Similar statistically significant negative

interactions are evident in the regressions for employment and earnings. As indicated in column (2), we

31
   These data are derived from the Internal Revenue Service’s Stakeholder Partnerships, Education, and
   Communication (IRS-SPEC) database. We are grateful to Elizabeth Kneebone from the Brookings Metropolitan
   Policy Program for providing us with the state tabulations.
32
   The mean filing share across states in 1997 is 0.16, ranging from 0.09 in Alaska to 0.32 in Mississippi. The mean
   share of the adult population that consists of single mothers (with children at home) is 0.07, ranging from 0.05 in
   Maine to 0.10 in Mississippi.

                                                          19
also find evidence of negative interactions using the proportion of single mothers in the state as the share

variable.33 The evidence that the effects of the EITC are more adverse when a larger share of the

population is potentially affected by the EITC strengthens the conclusion that we are detecting spillover

effects of the EITC.

           In Table 4, we turn to the effects of the EITC on the total earnings of families with heads between

the ages of 18 and 45, which provides a way of aggregating the effects for men and women shown in the

previous tables. Because we are interested in how the EITC influences the lower tail of the earnings

distribution, we focus on two metrics that are illustrative of these effects: the probability that a family’s

earnings are below the level of income associated with the poverty line, and the probability that family

earnings are below ½ the poverty line. As indicated in the first column, for the sample of all families, the

EITC appears to be associated with reductions in the proportion of families with very low earnings.

However, the estimated coefficients of the EITC-kids interactions are relatively small and not statistically

significant. The results are somewhat stronger when the sample is restricted to families headed by single

females (column (2)), or to families headed by less-educated single females (column (3)); in these cases,

the estimated coefficient of the EITC-kids interaction is significant at the 10% level for the probability

that families are below ½ of the poverty line. For families headed by minority single women, the

evidence is weaker. Overall, however, the evidence is in the direction of previous research findings that

the EITC is effective at boosting the earnings of very poor families.

Interactions between the EITC and the Minimum Wage

           We next turn to evidence on our central question regarding the effects of interactions between the

EITC and minimum wages. As in Tables 2-4, we focus on the three main groups likely to be affected by

the EITC. As noted earlier, for women who are eligible for the EITC, the disemployment effects of a

higher minimum wage could reduce the positive employment effect of the EITC. Alternatively, the

33
     We also estimated these models for the other subsamples considered in Table 3A. The qualitative conclusions
     based on the point estimates were fairly similar, with one exception. In particular, for low-skilled minorities, the
     point estimates did not suggest that a higher share filing or a higher share of single mothers is associated with
     sharper negative effects of the EITC on wages. This may reflect the lower wages of minorities, implying that
     more of them are bound by the minimum wage so that the wage cannot decline as much in response to the labor
     supply increases induced by the EITC.

                                                             20
interaction for these women could be positive, because a higher minimum wage makes the EITC more

valuable for eligible families. In contrast, for groups not likely to be eligible for the EITC, or eligible for

only a small credit, a high minimum wage coupled with an EITC could be a particularly bad combination,

with the minimum wage reducing their employment prospects via the higher wage floor imposed on

employers, and the EITC reducing their employment prospects via the increased supply of eligible

women entering the labor market. For single women and families, this latter effect pertains to childless

women and thus would be captured by the coefficient on the EITC-minimum wage interaction. For

childless low-skilled individuals, this latter effect pertains to the triple interaction between the EITC, the

minimum wage, and the low-skill indicator.

        Table 5 reports results for employment and log earnings of single women. As shown in the first

column of the top panel, the EITC effect on employment is positive and significant for single women with

children, similar to the results we reported in Table 2. Moreover, the coefficient on the interaction term

between the minimum wage, the EITC, and children is positive and significant, indicating that a higher

minimum wage amplifies the positive labor supply response of the EITC for single mothers. The results

are even stronger for less-educated and minority mothers (columns (2) and (3)). In contrast, for single

women without children, the coefficient on the EITC-minimum wage interaction is negative, and notably

so for minorities and less-educated women, albeit not statistically significant.

        The effects on earnings are shown in the bottom panel. Consistent with the positive effects on

employment, both the EITC variable and the EITC-minimum wage interaction have a positive and

significant effect on the earnings of women with children, with larger effects evident for the samples

restricted to minorities or less-educated women than for the sample as a whole. This suggests that the

combination of an EITC and a higher minimum wage may be especially powerful in raising the earnings

of low-skilled single mothers. However, these specifications also suggest that the positive labor supply

response of single mothers eligible for the EITC may reduce earnings and employment opportunities for

other subsets of the population. In particular, the results in this table indicate that the combination of an

EITC and a high minimum wage reduces employment and earnings among single women without


                                                      21
children, especially for minority women. Below, after presenting some additional analyses on these

spillover effects, we provide some calculations that provide a better sense of how to interpret the

coefficient magnitudes in Table 5.

        Table 6 reports results for unskilled childless individuals. In principle, a higher minimum wage

coupled with an EITC could cut in different ways for this group of individuals. On the one hand, a high

minimum wage that leads to more labor market entry among women eligible for the EITC could put

additional downward pressure on wages for those earning more than the minimum wage. On the other

hand, a high minimum wage could create a floor below which wages cannot fall despite the increased

labor supply of women, in which case the combined policies might reduce employment more strongly.

As shown in Table 6, the evidence is more consistent with the latter type of effect.34 The effects of the

EITC on wages (shown in the top panel) are negative, but there is no evidence that this adverse effect is

compounded by a higher minimum wage, as the estimated interactive coefficients for low-skilled

childless individuals are positive and insignificant.35 In contrast, the point estimates of the triple

interaction (MW × EITC × low-skill) for employment are all negative, and larger and statistically

significant when we focus on minorities and single males (in columns (2) and (3)). Coupled with the

negative effects of the EITC on employment of the less-skilled (in the first row of the middle panel), these

results imply that a higher minimum wage exacerbates the negative impact of the EITC. Finally, as

indicated in the lower panel, the presence of either an EITC or a minimum wage tends to reduce the

relative earnings of the low-skilled, and these effects are heightened when both policies are in effect—

with a statistically significant interaction evident for blacks or Hispanics and the narrower subgroup of

minority single males.

        Teenagers are another group for which the combination of a high minimum wage and an EITC

may produce adverse effects. Previous researchers have found evidence of substitutability between

34
   We do not report hours effects since there was little evidence of EITC effects on hours (conditional on
   employment) in Table 3.
35
   This finding appears consistent with the only other instance we are aware of in which research has explored the
   effects of minimum wage-EITC interactions. In particular, in his analysis of how the EITC affects wages of low-
   skilled workers, Leigh (2007) notes that he estimated models with minimum wage-EITC interactions and found
   that a higher minimum wage did little to influence the effects of the EITC.

                                                        22
women and youth (e.g., Grant and Hamermesh, 1981), raising the possibility than an EITC-induced

outward supply shift for women with children may depress labor market opportunities for teenagers. As

for other groups, this substitutability could lead to downward pressure on wages or reduced employment.

        To investigate this possibility, we estimate models for 16-19 year-old males and for 16-19 year-

old females that, similarly to those presented above, allow for interactions between the EITC and

minimum wages. Because limiting the sample to teenagers substantially reduces the number of

observations in the ADF dataset, we switch to the CPS monthly outgoing rotation group (ORG) files for

this part of the analysis. This requires some differences in specification from the annual regressions

shown in previous tables in that we create a monthly minimum wage variable that captures the exact

timing of minimum wage changes,36 and we include a set of dummy variables for calendar year and

month and a set of state-specific time trends. In addition, reflecting the time period covered by the

regularly monthly CPS surveys, our analysis is limited to employment, wages, and earnings, all of which

refer to a one-week period during the survey month. The sample period for these regressions extends

from January 1997 to December 2007.

        The results for teenage males are presented in Table 7A, while those for females are shown in

Table 7B; we show results separately for all races, all non-black, non-Hispanic individuals, and blacks or

Hispanics. Because previous analyses of the youth labor market have often focused solely on the effects

of minimum wages and because teenagers are not generally eligible for the EITC, the first column in each

pair shows the coefficients from a standard regression of employment, wages, or earnings on the

minimum wage; the second column in each set then adds in an EITC variable and the EITC-minimum

wage interaction.37 In the standard regression for male teenagers (Table 7A), the minimum wage has a

negative effect on the employment rate of all teenage males, a positive effect on wages, and a negative

effect on weekly earnings, consistent with much earlier research.38 And, as can be seen in columns (3)

and (5), the minimum wage has more adverse effects on blacks and Hispanics than on whites. Adding in

36
   The EITC supplements refer to an entire tax year, and thus have the same value in every month within the year.
37
   Consistent with our analysis using the ADF dataset, the minimum wage is defined as the average (in logs) of the
   current minimum wage and the minimum wage lagged one year (i.e. twelve months).
38
   See Neumark and Wascher (forthcoming).

                                                        23
variables for the EITC and EITC-minimum wage interaction provides weak evidence that the

combination of a high EITC and high minimum wage leads to a larger loss of earnings for male teens,

mainly by reducing their employment opportunities. However, most of the key coefficients in this

specification are not statistically significant.

        Clearer evidence of substitutability between low-skilled adult women and teenagers can be seen

in the regressions for female teenagers (Table 7B). For the minimum wage variable alone, the patterns

are broadly similar to those seen for male teens, with reductions in employment rates and earnings, but

increases in wages for those who remained employed. However, the second specification shows large

negative coefficients on the interaction terms in every case, with most of them statistically significant.

Evidently, the additional increase in labor supply among adult women in response to the combination of a

high minimum wage and generous EITC leads to noticeable reductions in both the employment rates and

wages of female teenagers, thereby reducing their earnings sharply. This suggests that the types of jobs

taken by low-skilled adult women drawn into the workforce by the EITC are similar to those typically

filled by teenage women.

        In Table 8, we ask how minimum wages influence the effects of the EITC on family earnings

relative to the poverty line or ½ the poverty line. Consistent with the results we presented above, we find

that the EITC, by itself, tends to reduce the likelihood that families are poor, and even more so below ½

of the poverty line. However, the interaction effects are particularly striking. Most important, the

combination of an EITC and a higher minimum wage tends to have a strong beneficial effect on the

earnings of families with children, especially for those headed by single women, who, as we have seen,

increase their participation in the labor market in response to this set of policies. In contrast, to the extent

that we are willing to interpret the “main” EITC-minimum wage interaction as causal, the positive

estimated coefficient of this interaction suggests that the added inflow of single mothers stemming from a

high EITC/ high minimum wage policy tends to reduce earnings (and hence depress family earnings) for

other low-skilled individuals; note that this latter effect is larger when we focus on less-educated single

females, but not when we focus on minority women.


                                                       24
           To help interpret the coefficient estimates, Tables 9-11 present implied effects of various policy

combinations on a subset of the labor market outcomes we considered in the previous tables; here we

focus on the groups and outcomes for which we found the strongest evidence of effects of the EITC. For

example, in the first column of Table 9, we show the effect of introducing a 10% state EITC supplement

on the employment status of single women under three different values of the minimum wage—a wage

floor set at the sample mean, a minimum wage set 10% above the sample mean, and a minimum wage set

25% above the sample mean. As indicated in the top panel, introducing a 10% EITC supplement in a

state where the minimum wage is set to the sample average increases employment among single women

with children but has little effect on the employment of childless women. With a higher minimum wage,

the effects of the EITC on the employment of single mothers become more strongly positive, while the

effects on the employment of single women without children are essentially unchanged. The difference in

the responses of women with and without children to the EITC is statistically significant in all cases, as is

the change in the relative response of women with children when the minimum wage is raised. Thus,

these comparisons clearly indicate that the EITC and the minimum wage interact in a way that induces a

larger absolute and relative labor supply response among women with children when the minimum wage

is high.

           The remaining two columns show corresponding effects for low-skilled and minority single

women. The results are slightly stronger for these two groups, with a larger positive labor supply

response for single women with children, especially among minorities. In addition, the effect of the EITC

on less-skilled or minority women without children becomes negative at higher levels of the minimum

wage, although these estimates are not statistically significant. In any event, the differences in the

interactions between the EITC and the minimum wage for single women with and without children are

significantly different for all three samples, suggesting that a higher minimum wage boosts the positive

effects of the EITC on the employment of women with children who are relatively more likely to be

eligible for generous EITC payments.




                                                       25
           In Table 10, we present the implied effects of a similar range of policy combinations on the

earnings of childless individuals. In this case, we differentiate between the effects of policy on the

earnings of lower-skilled/minority and higher-skilled individuals. As indicated in the top panel, the

combination of a 10% EITC supplement and a minimum wage set at its sample mean leads to a small loss

in earnings among the low-skilled, although the effect is only significant for the estimates in columns (2)

and (3). However, the difference between the effects on low-skilled vs. high-skilled individuals indicates

more strongly that the EITC reduces the relative earnings of low-skilled childless individuals; moreover,

this relative earnings effect is negative for low-skilled childless individuals at each value of the minimum

wage shown in the table, and is statistically significant for the two estimates for low-skilled minorities.39

In addition, a higher minimum wage strengthens the negative EITC earnings effects for the less-skilled,

both absolutely, and relative to higher-skilled childless individuals. The evidence for the interaction

effect on earnings of low-skilled vs. high-skilled childless minorities is statistically significant at the 5%

level for men and women combined, as well as for single men; in general, it is these relative effects on

which we focus in this paper, given that the estimated “effects” for the high-skilled control group may

reflect other influences correlated with the policy variation we study.

           Table 11 shows the effects of these various policy combinations on family earnings relative to the

two poverty thresholds we considered. As suggested by the results in Table 8, the top panel of Table 11

indicates that a 10% EITC implemented at the average value of the minimum wage tends to reduce the

incidence of poverty among families with children (and relative to childless families). These beneficial

effects are especially pronounced for families headed by a single female, and the difference between the

effects for single mothers and single women without children is statistically significant for the proportions



39
     To clarify this calculation, in the top three rows of Table 10, the estimate shown for “Low-skill” is the sum of the
     (EITC × low-skill) and EITC coefficient estimates in the bottom panel of Table 6, multiplied by 0.1; the estimate
     shown for “High-skill” is the EITC coefficient estimate from that same panel of Table 6, also multiplied by 0.1;
     and the estimate shown for “Difference” is the difference between the low-skill and high-skill estimates. When
     these are evaluated at a higher minimum wage, the corresponding coefficients for the EITC-minimum wage
     interactions multiplied by the minimum wage increase are added. Thus, for example, the 0.030 estimate for
     “High-skill” in the second panel of column (1) is calculated by adding the 0.50 coefficient estimate on EITC in
     column (1) of the bottom panel of Table 6 to −2.01× 0.1 (the coefficient on MW × EITC multiplied by the
     increase in the minimum wage), and then multiplying this sum by 0.1 (the size of the EITC supplement).

                                                             26
with earnings less than ½ the poverty line (column (4)). Moreover, at higher levels of the minimum

wage, these beneficial effects become noticeably larger. As indicated in column (4), for example, a 10%

EITC supplement reduces the proportion of single mothers with earnings below ½ the poverty line by

0.0309 at an average level of the minimum wage, and by 0.0491 with a minimum wage 25% above the

average. The difference in these effects (−0.0182) is statistically significant. In contrast, the estimates

suggest that a combination of a higher minimum wage and a generous EITC supplement tends to increase

the proportion of childless families with earnings below the poverty line. Our strongest conclusion from

the estimates in Table 11, however, is that a higher minimum wage does appear to increase the likelihood

that the EITC lifts families with children out of extreme poverty.

        Finally, we assessed the robustness of our conclusions on EITC-minimum wage interactions in

two other ways not described in the tables. First, to check whether the estimated interactions were simply

picking up omitted nonlinearities in the main policy effects, we re-estimated the specifications adding

quadratic terms in all of the policy variables except for the EITC-minimum wage interactions (including,

in equation (3), for example, the main policy effects as well as their interaction with the dummy variable

for children in the home). The estimated EITC-minimum wage interactions were very similar, and the

evidence was in some cases statistically stronger. Second, to check whether our identification was

coming from the linear restrictions on the main and interactive effects, we created four indicators for each

policy, with the first designating state/years for which no policy (or in the case of the minimum wage, a

minimal policy) was in effect and the latter three designating state/years with low, medium, and high

versions of the policy (roughly the eighth, ninth, and tenth deciles, where the variation in policy occurs).

We then estimated models with the full set of indicators and interactions corresponding to equations (3)

and (4). In all cases, we still found evidence that higher minimum wages enhanced the effects of the

EITC, although sometimes this evidence only emerged over particular ranges of the EITC (e.g., the

minimum wage enhanced the effect of a “medium” EITC relative to no EITC).




                                                      27
VI. Conclusions

           The expansion of the federal EITC and the implementation of EITC supplements and higher

minimum wages at the state level have noticeably altered the low-wage labor market over the past 15

years. In this paper, we study how this combination of policies has influenced work incentives and labor

market outcomes for various groups of low-skilled individuals, and we examine the concomitant effects

on the economic well-being of families. We first develop a simple theoretical model that illustrates the

ways in which minimum wages and the EITC could interact, and show that such interactions could

differentially affect various groups.40 In particular, we show that a higher minimum wage could enhance

the effect of the EITC for women by inducing particular subgroups to increase their willingness to work

to a greater extent than would be caused by the EITC alone. But it is also possible for a high EITC

coupled with a high minimum wage to have adverse effects, especially for low-skilled adults or teenagers

who may have to compete with the women who are drawn into the labor market by a higher EITC. We

then estimate models that allow for interactions between minimum wages and the EITC to assess the

relevance of these possibilities.

           Our results confirm earlier research indicating that the EITC is an effective means of encouraging

work among less-skilled single mothers. We also find that the EITC interacts with the minimum wage in

a way that amplifies the labor supply response and increase in earnings among single women with

children, suggesting that the combination of an EITC and minimum wage can provide an additional boost

to the incomes of such families. However, we also find that the EITC and minimum wage have adverse

effects on the employment and earnings of less-skilled and minority individuals without children in the

home, suggesting that the benefits afforded to single women come at a cost, with minimum wages

exacerbating the potentially adverse effects of the EITC on low-skilled individuals not eligible for the

EITC.



40
     We have framed this discussion in terms of how variation in the minimum wage alters the effects of the EITC,
     mainly because this is how the policy argument is often couched. Of course, an interaction between the two
     policies in a regression model can just as well be interpreted as how a higher EITC influences the effects of the
     minimum wage.

                                                            28
           Thus, whether or not the policy combination of a high EITC and a high minimum wage is viewed

as favorable or unfavorable ultimately depends on whose earnings or incomes policymakers are targeting.

The distributional goals of public policy typically focus more on family income than on individual

income. Moreover, it seems fair to say that policymakers have been most concerned with increasing

resources for families with children, via the EITC, welfare, and other policies. However, the recent

policy debate has also refocused attention on those without children in the home, and in particular on the

low-skilled men who, according to our estimates, are hit especially hard by a combination of a high EITC

and a high minimum wage. For example, in support of an expansion in the EITC for those without

children, Berlin (2007) argues that policies that increase income from labor market participation for less-

skilled men might reduce the relative attractiveness of illicit sources of income, as well as make such men

more attractive marriage partners and thus help to reverse the declines in marriage and increases in out-of-

wedlock childbearing and childrearing that have occurred in recent decades.41 In addition, Gitterman et

al. (2007) point out that many men who are non-custodial parents still have financial responsibility for

their children. These arguments suggest that policymakers should not focus solely on how policies affect

earnings of families with children and low-skilled or female heads.

           Finally, the evidence of policy interactions between the EITC and the minimum wage indicates

that research on the distributional effects of one policy in isolation may be too limited. As one example,

we noted in Section II that the existing research does not find beneficial distributional effects of the

minimum wage. However, this research did not consider policy interactions, and in our review of this

work (Neumark and Wascher, forthcoming), we suggested that the distributional effects of minimum

wages may vary with the institutional and policy setting. Indeed, the evidence that there are interactive

effects between the EITC and the minimum wage points to just one of a number of possible avenues by

which changes in welfare and incentives to work over the past decade in the U.S. may have altered the


41
     Our estimates do not speak directly to this alternative type of EITC. At the same time, the evidence of adverse
     effects of the present EITC on low-skilled individuals without children also suggests that a substantially more
     generous EITC for those without children could pose negative tradeoffs with respect to the women whose
     employment and earnings are boosted by the EITC as it is currently structured.


                                                           29
effects of the minimum wage. These avenues merit further study. And, of course, the question can be

turned around to extend the question this paper studies, asking how other policy changes may have

influenced the effectiveness of the EITC.




                                                  30
                                                References

Baker, Michael, Dwayne Benjamin, and Shuchita Stanger. 1999. “The Highs and Lows of the Minimum
       Wage Effect: A Time-Series Cross-Section Study of the Canadian Law.” Journal of Labor
       Economics, Vol. 17, No. 2, April, pp. 318-50.
Berlin, Gordon L. 2007. “Rewarding the Work of Individuals: A Counterintuitive Approach to Reducing
        Poverty and Strengthening Families.” The Future of Children, Vol. 17, No. 2, Fall, pp. 17-42.
Bernstein, Jared. 2004. “Helping Working Families: The Earned Income Tax Credit, Hoffman and Seidman
        (book review).” Social Service Review, Vol. 78, No. 1, March, pp. 153-57.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much Should We Trust
        Differences-in-Differences Estimators.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 119, No. 1, February,
        pp. 249-75.
Berube, Alan, Ann Kim, Benjamin Forman, and Megan Burns. 2002. “The Price of Paying Taxes: How Tax
        Preparation and Refund Loan Fees Erode the Benefits of the EITC.” Washington, D.C.: Brookings
        Institution and Progressive Policy Institute.
Bingley, Paul, and Ian Walker. 2008. “The Labor Supply Effect of In-Kind Transfers.” Unpublished paper,
       University of Warwick.
Blank, Rebecca M., and Lucie Schmidt. 2001. “Work, Wages, and Welfare.” In Rebecca M. Blank and Ron
        Haskins, eds., The New World of Welfare (Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution), pp. 70-102.
Burkhauser, Richard V., Kenneth A. Couch, and Andrew J. Glenn. 1996. “Public Policies for the Working
       Poor: The Earned Income Tax Credit Versus the Minimum Wage.” Research in Labor Economics,
       Vol. 15, pp. 65-109.
Cameron, Stephen, and James J. Heckman. 1993. “The Nonequivalence of High School Equivalents.”
      Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 11, No. 1 (Pt. 1), January, pp. 1-47.
Cancian, Maria, and Arik Levinson. 2005. “Labor Supply Effects of the Earned Income Tax Credit: Evidence
       from Wisconsin’s Supplemental Benefit for Families with Three Children.” NBER Working Paper
       No. 11454.
Economic Policy Institute. 2004. “The Minimum Wage and Earned Income Tax Credit: Partners in Making
      Work Pay.” Available at www.epinet.org/content.cfm/webfeatures_snapshots_05052004 (viewed
      May 24, 2004).
Eissa, Nada, and Jeffrey Liebman. 1996. “Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax Credit.”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 112, No. 2, May, pp. 605-37.
Eissa, Nada, and Hilary Williamson Hoynes. 2004. “Taxes and the Labor Market Participation of Married
        Couples: The Earned Income Tax Credit.” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 88, No. 9-10, August,
        pp. 1931-58.
Fiscal Policy Institute. 2004. “State Minimum Wages and Employment in Small Businesses.” Fiscal Policy
        Institute, New York, NY.
Garthwaite, Craig. 2004. “Better Ways to Help Those Earning Little.” Atlanta-Journal Constitution (op-ed),
       September 6.
Gitterman, Daniel P., Lucy S. Gorham, and Jessica L. Dorrance. 2007. “Expanding the EITC for Single
       Workers and Couples Without Children (aka Tax Relief for Low-Wage Workers).” Unpublished
       paper, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
Grant, James H., and Daniel S. Hamermesh. 1981. “Labor Market Competition among Youths, White
        Women, and Others.” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 63, No. 3, August, pp. 354-60.
Greenhouse, Steven. 2006. “Group Starts Anti-Union Campaign.” New York Times, February 14.
Hoffman, Saul D., and Laurence S. Seidman. 2003. Helping Working Families: The Earned Income Tax
      Credit. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Hotz, V. Joseph, and John Karl Scholz. 2003. “The Earned Income Tax Credit.” In Robert A. Moffitt, ed.
       Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp.
       141-97.
Kilborn, Peter T. 1997. “A Minimal-Impact Minimum Wage.” New York Times, April 6.
Korenman, Sanders and David Neumark. 1991. “Does Marriage Really Make Men More Productive?”
      Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 26, No. 2, Spring, pp. 282-307.
Leigh, Andrew. 2005. “Who Benefits from the Earned Income Tax Credit? Incidence Among Recipients,
        Coworkers, and Firms.” The Australian National University Centre for Economic Policy Research,
        Discussion Paper No. 494.
Leigh, Andrew. 2007. “Who Benefits from the Earned Income Tax Credit? Incidence Among Recipients,
        Coworkers, and Firms.” Unpublished paper, Australian National University.
Levitis, Jason A., and Nicholas Johnson. 2006. “Together, State Minimum Wages and State Earned Income
         Tax Credits Make Work Pay.” Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. Available at www.cbpp.org/7-
         12-06sfp.htm (viewed November 28, 2007).
Liebman, Jeffrey B. 1998. “The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit on Incentives and the Income
      Distribution.” In James Poterba, ed. Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 12 (Cambridge, MA: MIT
      Press), pp. 83-199.
Machin, Stephen, and Alan Manning. 1994. “Minimum Wages, Wage Dispersion and Employment:
       Evidence from the UK Wages Councils.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 47, No. 2,
       January, pp. 319-29.
Manning, Alan. 2003. Monopsony in Motion: Imperfect Competition in Labor Markets. Princeton, NJ:
      Princeton University Press.
Meyer, Bruce. 2002. “Labor Supply at the Extensive and Intensive Margins: The EITC, Welfare, and Hours
       Worked.” American Economic Review, Vol. 92, No. 2, May, pp. 373-79.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 1996. “The Effects of Minimum Wages on Teenage Employment
      and Enrollment: Estimates from Matched CPS Data.” Research in Labor Economics, Vol. 15, pp. 25-
      64.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2001. “Using the EITC to Help Poor Families: New Evidence and a
      Comparison with the Minimum Wage.” National Tax Journal, Vol. 54, No. 2, June, pp. 281-318.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2007a. “Minimum Wages and Employment.” Foundations and
      Trends in Microeconomics, Vol. 3, Nos. 1-2, pp. 1-186.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2007b. “Minimum Wages, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and
      Employment: Evidence from the Post-Welfare Reform Era.” NBER Working Paper No. 12915.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. Forthcoming. Minimum Wages (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Romich, Jennifer L., and Thomas Weisner. 2000. “How Families View and Use the EITC: Advance Payment
      versus Lump Sum Delivery.” National Tax Journal, Vol. 53, No. 4, December (Part 1), pp. 1245-64.
Rothstein, Jesse. 2008. “The Unintended Consequences of Encouraging Work: Tax Incidence and the EITC.”
        Unpublished paper, Princeton University.
Scholz, John Karl. 1994. “The Earned Income Tax Credit: Participation, Compliance, Antipoverty
        Effectiveness.” National Tax Journal, Vol. 47, No. 1, March, pp. 63-87.
               Figure 1: Minimum Wages and the EITC in a
                        Competitive Labor Market
          w                                                LS




                                                                          ’
                                                                     LS

        W0

        Wmin

        W1


                                                            LD

                                                                 E
                                E0     Emin   E1



                       Figure 2: Minimum Wage-EITC
                                 Interactions


   w


wminT




 wT




                                                                              Fixed cost




                                                                     T         t
                          Figure 3: Changes in Shares of Families Covered by
                             Higher State Minimum Wage or State EITC
         .5
         .4
Share
         .3
         .2




                   1996      1998                2000           2002            2004     2006
                                                        Year

                                    Minimum wage                       EITC supplement




                          Figure 4: Average EITC Supplements Across States
         .15
 EITC supplement
.05      0   .1




                   1996      1998                2000           2002            2004     2006
                                                        Year

                                    All states                 EITC supplement states
                                Figure 5: Average State Minimum Wages Across States


          6.5
           6
Minimum wage
5.5       5




                     1996              1998                2000                2002            2004            2006
                                                                     Year

                                    All states                                      High minimum wage states
                                    Federal minimum wage




                          Figure 6: State Minimum Wages and State EITC Supplements, 2006

                                                 Slope (standard error) = .26 (.08)
         .4     .3
EITC Supplement
       .2.1
         0




                      0                  .1                  .2          .3                     .4              .5
                                                              Minimum wage
                      Note: State minimum wage is percent deviation from federal.
Table 1A: Descriptive Statistics for Individual Women, 1997-2006
                           Single Single women, 18- Single women, 18- Married women,
                           women,       45, high school         45, black or      18-45, high school
                            18-45       degree at most           Hispanic           degree at most
                              (1)              (2)                    (3)                  (4)
 1 child                     .23              .26                    .26                  .26
 2+ children                 .22              .26                    .31                  .54
 Black                       .21              .23                    .61                  .09
 Hispanic                    .14              .16                    .51                  .26
 Age                         28.4             27.4                   29.0                 28.1
 Highest education
 High school dropout          .16              .22                    .24                  .20
 High school degree           .57              .79                    .58                  .80
 Some college                 .07               0                     .07                   0
 Bachelor’s or higher         .18               0                     .11                   0
 Economic outcomes
 Employed                    .79              .74                    .72                  .66
 Annual hours,              1,633            1,510                                       1,585
 conditional
 Log annual earnings         7.53             6.90                   6.89                 6.30
 Economic outcomes,
 no children
 Employed                    .81              .76                    .74                  .79
 Annual hours,              1,727            1,586                  1,652                1,762
 conditional
 Log annual earnings         7.94             7.16                   7.22                 7.63
 Economic outcomes,
 with children
 Employed                    .75              .72                    .70                  .63
 Annual hours,              1,513            1,439                  1,594                1,528
 conditional
 Log annual earnings         7.03             6.68                   6.65                 5.96
 N                        163,320           121,967                54,681               52,703
 N (hours)                129,786            92,056                40,060               35,428
The children variables are based on the presence of children 18 or under in the household.
“Single” means divorced, widowed, or separated. “Married” means married, spouse present. For
log earnings, $1 is substituted for zero earnings prior to taking logs. All estimates are weighted.
Table 1B: Descriptive Statistics for Individuals, 1997-2006
                                              Childless men and
                                                women, 18-35
                                                      (1)
 Male                                                .43
 Black                                               .13
 Hispanic                                            .14
 Age                                                 25.7
 Married                                             .21
 Highest education
 High school dropout                                  .12
 High school degree                                   .54
 Some college                                        .07
 Bachelor’s or higher                                 .27
 Economic outcomes
 Employment                                           .84
 Annual hours, conditional                          1,793
 Log wage                                            2.40
 Log annual earnings                                 8.26
 Economic outcomes, high school
 degree at most
 Employment                                           .80
 Annual hours, conditional                          1,687
 Log wage                                            2.22
 Log annual earnings                                 7.70
 Economic outcomes, high school
 degree at most and black or Hispanic
 Employment                                           .75
 Annual hours, conditional                          1,723
 Log wage                                            2.17
 Log annual earnings                                 7.21
 Economic outcomes, high school
 degree at most, single male, and
 black or Hispanic
 Employment                                           .77
 Annual hours, conditional                          1,753
 Log wage                                            2.19
 Log annual earnings                                 7.41
 Economic outcomes, some college or
 higher
 Employment                                           .91
 Annual hours, conditional                          1,975
 Log wage                                            2.70
 Log annual earnings                                 9.35
 N                                                 177,393
 N (log wage, hours)                               150,748
See notes to Table 1A.
Table 1C: Descriptive Statistics for Families, 1997-2006
                                                           Single women, 18-   Single women,
                                          Single             45, high school   18-45, black or
                              18-45     women, 18-45         degree at most       Hispanic
 Family head or                (1)          (2)                    (3)               (4)
 individual
 Female                        .46             1                  1                   1
 1 child                       .17           .19                 .21                .23
 2+ children                   .31           .23                 .28                .34
 Black                         .14           .22                 .26                 .65
 Hispanic                      .15           .13                 .16                .37
 Age                          32.8           31.2               30.6                31.4
 Married, spouse present       .43             0                  0                   0
 Married, spouse absent        .02             0                  0                   0
 Divorced, widowed, or         .17           .35                 .38                .31
 separated
 Highest education
 High school dropout           .13            .13                .20                .23
 High school degree            .51            .54                .80                .56
 Some college                  .09           .09                  0                 .07
 Bachelor’s or higher          .28            .24                 0                 .13
 Economic outcomes
 Earnings < poverty            .20           .37                 .47                .46
 Earnings < .5·poverty         .13            .25                .33                .32
 Economic outcomes, no
 children
 Earnings < poverty            .21           .30                 .40                .35
 Earnings < .5·poverty         .15            .21                .29                .26
 Economic outcomes,
 with children
 Earnings < poverty            .20           .49                 .55                .55
 Earnings < .5·poverty         .11            .32                .36                .37
 N                         376,793         105,383             72,730              36,495
See notes to Table 1A. “Families” include primary or unrelated individuals.
Table 2: Estimated EITC Effects on Women, 1997-2006
                                                Single, 18-45,     Single, 18-45,    Married, 18-45,
                                                 high school          black or         high school
                             Single, 18-45 degree at most            Hispanic        degree at most
  Employment                        (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)
     EITC × kids                   .18                .25                .29               -.14
                                  (.10)              (.13)              (.22)              (.24)
     EITC                          .01               -.03                .01                .10
                                  (.04)              (.06)              (.10)              (.18)
     N                          163,320            121,967            54,681             52,703
  Hours, conditional
     EITC × kids                  26.8               15.2               37.5             -176.5
                                (152.4)            (196.5)            (218.7)            (277.5)
     EITC                         -94.4             -131.7             -248.2             247.5
                                 (78.2)            (123.0)            (328.9)            (170.0)
     N                          129,786             92,056             40,060            35,428
  Log earnings
     EITC × kids                  1.80               2.58               2.25              -1.90
                                 (1.00)             (1.28)             (2.18)             (2.52)
     EITC                          -.09              -.54                .19               1.32
                                  (.37)              (.63)              (.12)             (1.77)
  N                             163,320            121,967            54,681             52,703
In the log earnings specification, $1 is substituted for zero earnings prior to taking logs. The
estimated coefficients of the EITC-kids interactions are robust to including state-specific linear
trends, or state-year interactions; in the latter specification the main EITC effect drops out. All
estimates are weighted and standard errors are clustered on states.
Table 3A: Estimated EITC Effects on Low-Skilled, Childless, Individuals, Aged 18-35, 1997-
2006
                                                                                      Less-educated
  Low-skilled group:                  Less-educated            Less-educated         single black or
                                        individuals          black or Hispanic        Hispanic men
  Log wages                                  (1)                     (2)                     (3)
     EITC × low-skill                       -.12                    -.12                    -.17
                                            (.09)                   (.08)                  (.09)
     EITC                                    .12                     .10                     .08
                                            (.08)                   (.11)                  (.12)
     N                                    150,748                 85,050                  70,768
  Employment
     EITC × low-skill                       -.07                    -.16                    -.18
                                            (.06)                   (.05)                  (.06)
     EITC                                    .03                     .04                     .03
                                            (.04)                   (.04)                  (.03)
  N                                       177,393                 99,336                  79,944
  Hours, conditional
     EITC × low-skill                      -156.2                  -27.0                   -38.8
                                           (69.5)                  (70.9)                 (86.6)
     EITC                                   30.2                   -51.7                     2.8
                                           (69.1)                  (63.6)                (109.2)
     N                                    150,748                 85,050                  70,768
  Log earnings
     EITC × low-skill                       -.85                   -1.66                   -1.96
                                            (.63)                   (.50)                  (.61)
     EITC                                    .47                     .60                     .63
                                            (.46)                   (.50)                  (.34)
     N                                    177,393                 99,336                  79,944
Notes from Table 2 apply. The log wage regressions condition on positive earnings and hours of
work in the previous year. “Low-skilled” is defined as high-school degree at most. For the
results shown, the sample includes all those with at least some college and the low-skilled
treatment group as defined in the column heading. The estimated of the EITC-low-skill
interactions are robust to including state-specific linear trends, or state-year interactions.
Table 3B: Estimated EITC Effects on Low-Skilled, Childless, Individuals, Aged 18-
35, Variation with Share Affected by EITC, 1998-2006
                                             Using share filing    Using share of single
                                                  for EITC                mothers
 Log wages                                             (1)                   (2)
     EITC × low-skill                                 -.24                  -.05
                                                     (.04)                  (.04)
     EITC                                              .10                   .03
                                                     (.08)                  (.08)
     EITC × low-skill × 1997                          -.33                  -.66
     filing/single mother share (× 10)               (.15)                  (.32)
     N                                             139,099                139,099
 Employment
     EITC × low-skill                                 -.18                  -.03
                                                     (.02)                  (.02)
     EITC                                             -.01                  -.03
                                                     (.06)                  (.05)
     EITC × low-skill × 1997                          -.23                  -.62
     filing/single mother share (× 10)               (.10)                  (.15)
     N                                             164,166                164,166
 Hours, conditional
     EITC × low-skill                               -163.8                 -133.1
                                                    (77.4)                 (72.8)
     EITC                                             96.4                    .4
                                                   (146.9)                 (96.8)
     EITC × low-skill × 1997                           -.9                  -5.1
     filing/single mother share (× 103)              (2.1)                  (4.5)
     N                                             139,099                139,099
 Log earnings
     EITC × low-skill                                -1.96                  -.52
                                                     (.20)                  (.23)
     EITC                                              .10                  -.23
                                                     (.70)                  (.55)
     EITC × low-skill × 1997                          -.25                  -.64
                                     2
     filing/single mother share (× 10 )              (.10)                  (.16)
     N                                             164,166                164,166
See notes to Table 3A. The sample corresponds to column (1) of that table. Data from
1997 are omitted; estimates corresponding to Table 3A excluding 1997 were very
similar to estimates in Table 3A. The share in the interaction is demeaned, so the EITC
× low-skill coefficient measures the relative effect of the EITC on the low-skilled at the
mean of the corresponding share.
Table 4: Estimated EITC Effects on Family Earnings Relative to Poverty, 1997-2006
                               Family       Single female       Single female           Single female
                               head or      family head or     family head or           family head or
                             individual,      individual,  individual, 18-45, high individual, 18-45,
                                18-45            18-45      school degree at most     black or Hispanic
 P(Earnings<Poverty)              (1)              (2)               (3)                       (4)
     EITC × kids                 -.03             -.16              -.23                      .08
                                (.08)            (.16)              (.17)                    (.24)
     EITC                        -.02             -.05              -.01                      -.13
                                (.05)            (.08)              (.10)                    (.15)
 P(Earnings<
 .5·Poverty)
     EITC × kids                 -.07             -.30              -.36                      -.06
                                (.06)            (.18)              (.22)                    (.25)
     EITC                        .00              -.01               .03                      -.19
                                (.04)            (.07)              (.09)                    (.14)
 N                             376,793          105,383            72,730                   36,495
See notes to Table 3A. The sample is restricted to heads of families, primary individuals, or unrelated
individuals. The estimated coefficients of the EITC-kids interactions are robust to including state-
specific linear trends, or state-year interactions.
Table 5: Estimated Effects of EITC-Minimum Wage Interactions on Women, 1997-
2006
                                                Single, 18-45, high      Single, 18-45,
                             Single, 18-45 school degree at most black or Hispanic
 Employment                          (1)                  (2)                   (3)
      EITC × kids                   .18                  .25                    .28
                                   (.09)                (.10)                 (.16)
      EITC                          .01                  -.03                   .01
                                   (.04)                (.06)                 (.08)
      MW × kids                     .03                  .02                    .06
                                   (.05)                (.06)                 (.12)
      MW                            .03                  .05                   -.01
                                   (.04)                (.05)                 (.09)
      MW × EITC                     -.03                 -.22                  -.43
                                   (.24)                (.39)                 (.34)
      MW × EITC ×                   .47                  .64                   1.17
      kids                         (.21)                (.32)                 (.45)
 Log earnings
      EITC × kids                  1.76                 2.56                   2.21
                                   (.81)               (1.00)                (1.59)
      EITC                          -.06                 -.54                   .18
                                   (.34)                (.55)                 (.89)
      MW × kids                     .40                  .30                    .95
                                   (.42)                (.47)                (1.34)
      MW                            .23                  .27                   -.35
                                   (.33)                (.38)                (1.00)
      MW × EITC                     -.96                -2.67                 -5.17
                                  (2.17)               (3.15)                (3.83)
      MW × EITC ×                  5.33                 6.57                   12.9
      kids                        (1.95)               (2.59)                 (4.8)
 N                              163,320               121,967                54,681
See notes to Tables 2 and 3A. The minimum wage variable (MW) is the average of
the log of the contemporaneous and lagged minimum wages. In the minimum wage-
EITC interactions, the minimum wage variable is demeaned, so the EITC coefficients
have the same interpretation (at the means) as in Table 2. The estimated coefficients
of the EITC-kids, MW-kids, and EITC-MW-kids interactions are robust to including
state-specific linear trends, or state-year interactions. Sample sizes are as in Table 2.
Table 6: Estimated Effects of EITC-Minimum Wage Interactions on Low-Skilled, Childless Individuals,
Aged 18-35, 1997-2006
 Low-skilled group:              Less-educated           Less-educated black or    Less-educated single
                                   individuals                  Hispanic          black or Hispanic men
 Log wages                              (1)                          (2)                      (3)
     EITC × low-skill                  -.11                         -.12                     -.17
                                       (.09)                       (.07)                    (.08)
     EITC                               .13                          .11                     .10
                                       (.06)                       (.06)                    (.07)
     MW × low-skill                    -.05                         -.11                     -.13
                                       (.04)                       (.07)                    (.07)
     MW                                 .19                          .18                     .16
                                       (.05)                       (.07)                    (.08)
     MW × EITC                        -1.04                       -1.00                      -.99
                                       (.29)                       (.32)                    (.32)
     MW × EITC ×                        .59                          .36                     .21
     low-skill                         (.44)                       (.84)                    (.95)
 Employment
     EITC × low-skill                  -.06                         -.16                     -.19
                                       (.06)                       (.05)                    (.05)
     EITC                               .03                          .04                     .03
                                       (.03)                       (.03)                    (.03)
     MW × low-skill                    -.05                          .03                     .04
                                       (.02)                       (.03)                    (.04)
     MW                                 .09                          .05                     .02
                                       (.02)                       (.02)                    (.03)
     MW × EITC                         -.12                         -.10                     -.06
                                       (.13)                       (.10)                    (.11)
     MW × EITC ×                       -.26                         -.79                     -.83
     low-skill                         (.20)                       (.24)                    (.27)
 Log earnings
     EITC × low-skill                  -.80                       -1.68                     -1.99
                                       (.62)                       (.44)                    (.52)
     EITC                               .50                          .66                     .70
                                       (.31)                       (.28)                    (.25)
     MW × low-skill                    -.51                          .31                     .44
                                       (.25)                       (.26)                    (.35)
     MW                                 .97                          .47                     .33
                                       (.22)                       (.17)                    (.21)
     MW × EITC                        -2.01                       -1.53                     -1.32
                                      (1.29)                      (1.04)                   (1.22)
     MW × EITC ×                      -2.37                       -8.50                     -9.39
     low-skill                        (2.39)                      (3.23)                   (4.36)
     N                               177,393                     99,336                   79,944
See notes to Table 3A. “Low-skilled” is defined as high-school degree at most. In the minimum wage-
EITC interactions, the minimum wage variable is demeaned, so the EITC coefficients have the same
interpretation (at the means) as in Table 3A; the EITC variable is also demeaned in the interactions, so the
minimum wage coefficients estimate the minimum wage effects at the mean EITC. The estimated
coefficients of the EITC-low-skill, MW-low-skill, and EITC-MW-low-skill interactions are robust to
including state-specific linear trends, or state-year interactions.
Table 7A: Estimated Effects of EITC-Minimum Wage Interactions on Teenage Males, 1997-2007
                                                          Non-black, non-
                                         All                   Hispanic         Black or Hispanic
 Employment                        (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)       (5)          (6)
      MW                         -.065        -.032      -.052        -.007      -.103       -.088
                                 (.036)      (.037)      (.047)       (.051)    (.052)       (.066)
      EITC                                    -.042                   -.050                   .001
                                             (.073)                   (.090)                 (.183)
      MW × EITC                               -.348                   -.471                  -.132
                                             (.215)                   (.250)                 (.480)
 Log wages
      MW                          .236         .245       .351         .382      -.158       -.207
                                 (.065)      (.069)      (.072)       (.075)    (.075)       (.095)
      EITC                                     .143                    .076                   .410
                                             (.120)                   (.123)                 (.180)
      MW × EITC                                .037                   -.250                   1.03
                                             (.591)                   (.609)                  (.78)
 Log earnings
      MW                         -.318        -.258      -.123        -.105      -.789       -.647
                                 (.199)      (.235)      (.239)       (.291)    (.195)       (.232)
      EITC                                    -.396                   -.465                  -.123
                                             (.373)                   (.479)                 (.839)
      MW × EITC                               -.903                   -.571                  -1.42
                                             (1.26)                   (1.34)                 (1.72)
 N                                     105,724                  78,407                27,317
The sample consists of individuals between the ages of 16 to 19 who are included in the monthly
ORG files from the Current Population Survey between January 1997 and December 2007.
Standard errors are clustered on state. All specifications include controls for the share of the
population in the group studies, the statewide unemployment rate, education (16 categories),
black, Hispanic, marital status (7 CPS categories), state, calendar year and month, and state-
specific time trends. The minimum wage variable is the average of the log of the current month’s
state-specific minimum wage and the log of the minimum wage lagged one year. In the
interactive specifications, the interaction is between the minimum wage variable minus its mean
and the state EITC supplement. Earnings are the product of wages and weekly hours, and are set
to zero if hours are zero; observations with nominal wages less than $1 are dropped. N refers to
the size of the samples used in the employment and earnings regressions. The sample size for the
wage regressions is smaller because individuals with zero hours are excluded. All estimates are
weighted.
Table 7B: Estimated Effects of EITC-Minimum Wage Interactions on Teenage Females, 1997-
2007
                                                  Non-black, non-
                                      All              Hispanic        Black or Hispanic
 Employment                     (1)         (2)    (3)          (4)      (5)         (6)
     MW                       -.080        .003  -.122        -.046     .017        .115
                             (.057)       (.051) (.068)       (.071)   (.068)      (.065)
     EITC                                 -.096               -.038                -.252
                                          (.073)              (.101)               (.099)
     MW × EITC                            -.865               -.746                -1.14
                                          (.297)              (.412)                (.32)
 Log wages
     MW                        .224        .348   .214         .341     .197        .278
                             (.092)       (.079) (.092)       (.093)   (.126)      (.098)
     EITC                                 -.006                .006                -.032
                                          (.131)              (.143)               (.198)
     MW × EITC                            -1.33               -1.30                -1.04
                                           (.34)               (.43)                (.67)
 Log earnings
     MW                       -.271        .103  -.407        -.057    -.017        .411
                             (.260)       (.277) (.304)       (.372)   (.345)      (.274)
     EITC                                 -.343               -.012                -1.28
                                          (.408)              (.549)                (.60)
     MW × EITC                            -3.85               -3.35                -5.14
                                          (1.44)              (1.69)               (1.68)
 N                                  104,807             77,616               27,191
See notes to Table 7A.
Table 8: Estimated Effects of EITC-Minimum Wage Interactions on Family Earnings Relative to
Poverty, 1997-2006
                              Family      Single female Single female family          Single female
                              head or      family head        head or individual,     family head or
                            individual, or individual,        18-45, high school    individual, 18-45,
                               18-45           18-45            degree at most      black or Hispanic
 P(Earnings<Poverty)             (1)              (2)                  (3)                  (4)
     EITC × kids                -.03             -.16                 -.24                  .08
                               (.06)            (.12)                (.13)                 (.21)
     EITC                       -.02             -.05                 -.01                 -.14
                               (.03)            (.06)                (.07)                 (.13)
     MW × kids                  .04              -.07                 -.05                 -.10
                               (.03)            (.07)                (.08)                 (.13)
     MW                         -.08             -.04                 -.07                 -.05
                               (.03)            (.06)                (.06)                 (.09)
     MW × EITC                  .41              .47                   .64                  .23
                               (.23)            (.34)                (.52)                 (.63)
     MW × EITC ×                -.49             -.85                 -.72                 -.67
     kids                      (.28)            (.57)                (.90)                (1.01)
 P(Earnings<
 .5·Poverty)
     EITC × kids                -.06             -.29                 -.35                 -.05
                               (.04)            (.12)                (.15)                 (.21)
     EITC                       -.01             -.02                  .02                 -.19
                               (.03)            (.06)                (.08)                 (.13)
     MW × kids                  .04              -.04                 -.00                 -.14
                               (.03)            (.08)                (.09)                 (.15)
     MW                         -.08             -.10                 -.15                 -.01
                               (.03)            (.06)                (.08)                 (.11)
     MW × EITC                  .27              .36                   .59                  .30
                               (.23)            (.45)                (.72)                 (.87)
     MW × EITC ×                -.47            -1.09                -1.42                 -.95
     kids                      (.29)            (.65)                (.98)                (1.14)
See notes to Tables 3A and 4. In the minimum wage-EITC interactions, the minimum wage
variable is demeaned, so the EITC coefficients have the same interpretation (at the means) as in
Table 4. The estimated coefficients of the EITC-kids, MW-kids, and EITC-MW-kids interactions
are robust to including state-specific linear trends, or state-year interactions. Sample sizes are as in
Table 4.
Table 9: Implied Effect on Employment of 10% State EITC Supplement on Single Women, at Different
Minimum Wage Levels, Based on Table 5 Estimates
                                                              Single female, 18-       Single female, 18-
                                          Single female,       45, high school             45, black or
                                               18-45            degree at most              Hispanic
                                                  (1)                  (2)                      (3)
   At sample mean of minimum wage
         With children                           .019                 .022                     .029
                                               (.008)                (.009)                   (.011)
         Childless                               .001                -.002                     .001
                                               (.004)                (.006)                   (.008)
         Difference                              .018                 .025                     .028
                                               (.008)                (.010)                   (.016)
   Minimum wage 10% higher
         With children                           .023                 .026                     .036
                                               (.009)                (.010)                   (.011)
         Childless                               .001                -.005                    -.003
                                               (.005)                (.008)                   (.008)
         Difference                              .023                 .031                     .040
                                               (.009)                (.010)                   (.016)
     Difference relative to effect at
     mean minimum wage
         With children                           .004                 .004                     .007
                                               (.002)                (.002)                   (.002)
         Childless                              -.000                -.002                    -.004
                                               (.002)                (.004)                   (.003)
         Difference                              .005                 .006                     .012
                                               (.002)                (.003)                   (.004)
   Minimum wage 25% higher
         With children                           .030                 .033                     .047
                                               (.011)                (.013)                   (.013)
         Childless                               .000                -.008                    -.010
                                               (.008)                (.013)                   (.010)
         Difference                              .030                 .041                     .057
                                               (.010)                (.012)                   (.017)
     Difference relative to effect at
     mean minimum wage
         With children                           .011                 .011                     .018
                                               (.005)                (.005)                   (.005)
         Childless                              -.001                -.005                    -.011
                                               (.006)                (.010)                   (.008)
         Difference                              .012                 .016                     .029
                                               (.005)                (.008)                   (.011)
t-statistics are the same by construction for the calculation of differences relative to the mean
minimum wage using the minimum wage 10% or 25% above the sample mean. The estimated
differences are robust to including state-year interactions; in these specifications only the differences
are identified. See notes to Table 5.
Table 10: Implied Effect on Log Earnings of 10% State EITC Supplement on Childless Individuals Aged 18-35, at
Different Minimum Wage Levels, Based on Table 6 Estimates
  Low-skilled group:                         Less-educated        Less-educated black or       Less-educated single
                                              individuals                Hispanic             black or Hispanic men
   At sample mean of minimum wage                  (1)                       (2)                        (3)
         Low-skill                                -.030                     -.101                      -.129
                                                 (.050)                    (.054)                     (.058)
         High-skill                               .050                      .066                       .070
                                                 (.031)                    (.028)                     (.025)
         Difference                               -.080                     -.168                      -.199
                                                 (.062)                    (.044)                     (.052)
   Minimum wage 10% higher
         Low-skill                                -.074                     -.202                      -.236
                                                 (.042)                    (.052)                     (.056)
         High-skill                               .030                      .051                       .056
                                                 (.036)                    (.031)                     (.025)
         Difference                               -.104                     -.253                      -.292
                                                 (.053)                    (.038)                     (.045)
     Difference relative to effect at
     mean minimum wage
         Low-skill                                -.044                     -.100                      -.107
                                                 (.016)                    (.027)                     (.036)
         High-skill                               -.022                     -.015                      -.013
                                                 (.013)                    (.010)                     (.012)
         Difference                               -.024                     -.085                      -.094
                                                 (.024)                    (.032)                     (.044)
   Minimum wage 25% higher
         Low-skill                                -.140                     -.352                      -.397
                                                 (.040)                    (.072)                     (.088)
         High-skill                               -.000                     .028                       .037
                                                 (.050)                    (.042)                     (.035)
         Difference                               -.140                     -.380                      -.433
                                                 (.059)                    (.069)                     (.090)
     Difference relative to effect at
     mean minimum wage
         Low-skill                                -.110                     -.251                      -.268
                                                 (.041)                    (.068)                     (.089)
         High-skill                               -.050                     -.038                      -.033
                                                 (.032)                    (.026)                     (.031)
         Difference                               -.059                     -.212                      -.235
                                                 (.060)                    (.081)                     (.109)
t-statistics are the same by construction for the calculation of differences relative to the mean minimum wage using
the minimum wage 10% or 25% above the sample mean. High-skill refers to individuals with at least some
college; low-skill is defined as a high-school degree at most. The estimated differences are robust to including
state-year interactions; in these specifications only the differences are identified. See notes to Table 6.
Table 11: Implied Effect on Family Earnings of 10% State EITC Supplement on Family Earnings Relative to
Poverty, at Different Minimum Wage Levels, Based on Table 8 Estimates
                                          Family head       Family head        Single female       Single female
                                         or individual, or individual,        family head or       family head or
                                              18-45             18-45        individual, 18-45 individual, 18-45
                                          P(earnings <      P(earnings <       P(earnings <         P(earnings <
                                            poverty)         .5⋅poverty)          poverty)           .5⋅poverty)
 At sample mean of minimum wage                  (1)               (2)                 (3)                 (4)
       With children                          -.0047            -.0070              -.0212              -.0309
                                             (.0034)           (.0026)             (.0090)             (.0100)
       Childless                              -.0021            -.0006              -.0054              -.0015
                                             (.0034)           (.0035)             (.0064)             (.0058)
       Difference                             -.0026            -.0064              -.0158              -.0294
                                             (.0056)           (.0040)             (.0121)             (.0120)
 Minimum wage 10% higher
       With children                          -.0055            -.0089              -.0250              -.0382
                                             (.0033)           (.0025)             (.0072)             (.0087)
       Childless                               .0019             .0021              -.0007               .0021
                                             (.0044)           (.0049)             (.0064)             (.0079)
       Difference                             -.0075            -.0111              -.0243              -.0403
                                             (.0057)           (.0051)             (.0099)             (.0111)
    Difference relative to effect at
    mean minimum wage
       With children                          -.0008            -.0020              -.0039              -.0073
                                             (.0009)           (.0010)             (.0029)             (.0029)
       Childless                               .0041             .0027               .0047               .0036
                                             (.0023)           (.0023)             (.0034)             (.0045)
       Difference                             -.0049            -.0047              -.0085              -.0109
                                             (.0028)           (.0029)             (.0057)             (.0065)
 Minimum wage 25% higher
       With children                          -.0068            -.0118              -.0308              -.0491
                                             (.0038)           (.0031)             (.0064)             (.0076)
       Childless                               .0080             .0062               .0063               .0076
                                             (.0071)           (.0079)             (.0092)             (.0134)
       Difference                             -.0148            -.0180              -.0371              -.0568
                                             (.0080)           (.0085)             (.0121)             (.0158)
    Difference relative to effect at
    mean minimum wage
       With children                          -.0021            -.0049              -.0097              -.0182
                                             (.0023)           (.0025)             (.0074)             (.0073)
       Childless                               .0102             .0068               .0117               .0091
                                             (.0058)           (.0058)             (.0085)             (.0113)
       Difference                             -.0123            -.0116              -.0213              -.0273
                                             (.0070)           (.0073)             (.0143)             (.0163)
t-statistics are the same by construction for the calculation of differences relative to the mean minimum wage
using the minimum wage 10% or 25% above the sample mean. The estimated differences are robust to
including state-year interactions; in these specifications only the differences are identified. See notes to Table
8.
