NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OCCUPATIONAL CHOICE AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM
Matthias Doepke
Fabrizio Zilibotti
Working Paper 12917
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12917

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2007

The authors would like to thank Daron Acemoglu, Michele Boldrin, Francesco Caselli, Juan-Carlos
Cordoba, Nicola Gennaioli, Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, Maria Saez Marti, Alan Taylor, Joachim Voth,
and the audiences at many seminar and conference presentations for helpful comments and suggestions.
David Lagakos and Andreas Mueller provided excellent research assistance, and Sally Gschwend provided
valuable editorial comments. Financial support by the National Science Foundation (grant SES-0217051),
the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Jan Wallander's and Tom Hedelius' Research Foundation, and
the Bank of Sweden Tercentenary Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2007 by Matthias Doepke and Fabrizio Zilibotti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Occupational Choice and the Spirit of Capitalism
Matthias Doepke and Fabrizio Zilibotti
NBER Working Paper No. 12917
February 2007
JEL No. J24,N2,N3,O11,O15,O40
ABSTRACT
The British Industrial Revolution triggered a reversal in the social order of society whereby the landed
elite was replaced by industrial capitalists rising from the middle classes as the economically dominant
group. Many observers have linked this transformation to the contrast in values between a hard-working
and frugal middle class and an upper class imbued with disdain for work. We propose an economic
theory of preference formation where both the divergence of attitudes across social classes and the
ensuing reversal of economic fortunes are equilibrium outcomes. In our theory, parents shape their
children's preferences in response to economic incentives. This results in the stratification of society
along occupational lines. Middle-class families in occupations that require effort, skill, and experience
develop patience and work ethics, whereas upper-class families relying on rental income cultivate
a refined taste for leisure. These class-specific attitudes, which are rooted in the nature of pre-industrial
professions, become key determinants of success once industrialization transforms the economic landscape.
Matthias Doepke
University of California, Los Angeles
Department of Economics
405 Hilgard Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
doepke@econ.ucla.edu
Fabrizio Zilibotti
Institute for Empirical Research in Economics
University of Zurich
Blümlisalpstrasse 10
CH-8006 ZÃ¼rich
zilibott@iew.uzh.ch

1 Introduction
The Industrial Revolution was more than capital accumulation and growth. It also set
off a social and political transformation that redefined hierarchies in society and reshaped the distribution of income and wealth. Before the onset of industrialization in
eighteenth-century Britain, wealth and political power were associated with the possession of land. Over the course of the nineteenth century, a new class of entrepreneurs
and businessmen emerged as the economic elite. For the most part, the members of
this class rose from humble beginnings and had their social origin in the urban middle
classes. The landed elite of old was left behind, and eventually lost its political and
economic predominance.
Many observers of the time linked this reversal in economic fortunes to differences
in values, attitudes, and ultimately preferences across social classes. There are countless examples, both in scholarly and fictional writing, of portrayals of members of the
landowning class as averse to work, unwilling to save, ill-disposed to commercial activity, and unable to consider money as something to be profitably invested. In contrast,
the new industrialists are described as frugal, thrifty, and hard-working.1
The role of values and culture as determinants of socio-economic change is the subject
of a long-standing debate in the social sciences. Karl Marx regarded economic relationships as the “base of society,” and viewed culture, religion and ideology (the “superstructure”) as mere reflections of the material interests of the class in control of the
means of production. Max Weber reversed Marx’s perspective, and argued culture and
religion to be key driving forces of the process of industrialization in the nineteenth
century. In both Marx’s and Weber’s view there is a one-way relationship between economic conditions and culture, albeit in opposite directions.
In this paper, we develop a theory of preference formation that is rooted in the rational
choice paradigm, and ask whether such a theory can help explain the socioeconomic
transformation that accompanied the Industrial Revolution. In our theory, the link between economic conditions and cultural values (or, more precisely, class-specific prefer1
Adam Smith 1776 writes, for instance: “A merchant is accustomed to employ his money chiefly in
profitable projects; whereas a mere country gentleman is accustomed to employ it chiefly in expense. The
one often sees his money go from him and return to him again with a profit: the other, when once he parts
with it, very seldom expects to see any more of it” (p. 432). In a study of early industrialists, Crouzet
(1985) cites accounts of the time relating that Mancunian manufacturers of the late eighteenth century “. . .
commenced their careers in business with but slender capitals. . . . Patience, industry and perseverance
was their principal stock” (p. 37).

1

ences) runs both ways. Like Weber, we argue that heterogeneity in preferences is a key
determinant of social change. However, preferences and values are themselves shaped
by the economic conditions that the members of different social classes face.
In our theory, altruistic parents strive to shape their children’s preferences in a way that
best fits with their future material circumstances. We focus on two key aspects of preferences: the rate of time preference (patience) and the taste for leisure (or, conversely, work
ethic). Parental investments in patience interact with the steepness of lifetime income
profiles. Lifetime earnings are relatively flat in some professions, while high returns are
achieved only late in life in others, in particular those requiring the acquisition of skills.
A parent’s incentive for investing in a child’s patience increases in the steepness of the
child’s future income profile. Conversely, a child endowed with high patience will be
more likely to enter professions entailing the accumulation of skill and, hence, the delay
of material rewards. Parental investments in their children’s taste for leisure hinge on
the role of labor effort. Parents who expect their children to be wholly reliant on labor
income will tend to instill them with a strong work ethic, i.e., a tolerance for hard work
and a reduced taste for leisure. In contrast, parents who anticipate their children to
be rentiers with ample free time will teach them to appreciate refined leisure activities,
from performing classical music to fox hunting.
The two complementarities in our theory (between patience and steep income profiles
and between the taste for leisure and low work effort) imply that within a given dynasty,
the choices of a specific occupation and of preferences suitable for that occupation are
mutually reinforcing over time. As a consequence, even if the population is initially homogeneous, preferences gradually diverge across the members of different occupations.
Hence, the society is endogenously stratified into “social classes” defined by occupations and their associated preferences and values.
The theory can account for the reversal in the economic fortunes of different social
classes at the time of the Industrial Revolution. For centuries, members of the preindustrial middle class—artisans, craftsmen, and merchants —had to sacrifice consumption and leisure in their youths to acquire skills. Artisans, for instance, could become
prosperous masters of their professions only after undergoing lengthy stages of apprenticeship and journeymanship. We argue that in response to this economic environment,
the middle classes developed a system of values and preferences centered around parsimony, work ethics, and delay of gratification. For the landed upper class, in contrast, neither work ethics nor patience were particularly valuable, because the members
2

of this class could rely on fairly stable rental incomes from their estates. As a result,
the landowning elite cultivated refined tastes for leisure and grew less future-oriented.
In an otherwise stationary society, such differences in preferences and values had limited consequences. However, patience and work ethics became a key asset—a “spirit of
capitalism”—when opportunities of economic advancement through entrepreneurship
and investment arose at the outset of the Industrial Revolution. In an already stratified
society, it was members of the patient, hard-working middle class who made the most
of the new opportunities and ultimately gained economic ascendency over the landed
elite.
Although we do not focus explicitly on religion, our theory is related to Weber’s view
that the spirit of capitalism derived from the values of the protestant reformation. Protestant values, and especially Puritanism, were widespread among the urban upper-middle
classes and may have been instrumental in their economic advancement. Our theory
would suggest that Puritanism was successful among certain groups precisely because
Puritan values were compatible with their economic conditions. In addition, religious
instruction may have been one of the tools used to transmit economically advantageous
values from one generation to the next.2
Our theory predicts the triumph of the thrifty and hard-working bourgeoisie at the outset of the Industrial Revolution. However, this success carries the seed of its own destruction. Whereas first-generation entrepreneurs started out poor, their descendants
inherited the family business. The founders’ children and grandchildren could thus
rely on considerable capital income, making them less dependent on their own labor
income. Just as for the landowners, this creates an incentive to invest in the appreciation
of leisure: the industrial dynasties ultimately mimic the tastes of the old elite. In the
extreme, this effect can lead to the downfall of a dynasty (the “Buddenbrooks” effect);
at a minimum, the descendants will achieve less growth than the founders.3
The theory also implies that the cultural divergence across social classes is related to
financial development. If people are able to borrow and lend in perfect credit markets
2

Max Weber describes the effects of Puritan values on capital accumulation as follows: “When the limitation of consumption is combined with this release of acquisitive activity, the inevitable practical result
is obvious: accumulation of capital through ascetic compulsion to save. The restraints which were imposed upon the consumption of wealth naturally served to increase it by making possible the productive
investment of capital” (p.172).
3
The increasing leisure taste is counteracted by increasing patience, because investing in a family business steepens intra- and intergenerational consumption profiles. If only the taste for leisure was endogenous, the ultimate downfall of an industrial dynasty would be unavoidable. Endogenous patience is
therefore central for explaining the reversal of fortunes between the middle and upper classes.

3

to smooth consumption, the link between occupational choices and consumption profiles is severed. Thus, divergence in patience across classes only emerges when financial
markets are shallow, while financial development leads to more homogeneous societies.
This prediction accords with the broad observation that class differences are less accentuated in modern industrial economies than in traditional societies.
In the following section, we relate our work to the existing literature. In Section 3 we analyze the decision problem at the heart of our theory in partial equilibrium. In Section 4,
we embed the choice problem in a general-equilibrium model of a pre-industrial economy. The Industrial Revolution arrives in Section 5 in the form of a technology shock
that opens new investment opportunities. Historical evidence and alternative theories
are discussed in Sections 6 and 7, and Section 8 concludes. All proofs are contained in
the mathematical appendix.

2 Related Literature
Our work contributes to the recent literature on the economics of the Industrial Revolution (see Galor and Weil 2000, Hansen and Prescott 2002, and Doepke 2004). Within this
literature, a few authors emphasize the role of preference formation for long-run development, but rely on genetic selection rather than conscious investment as the mechanism (Galor and Moav 2002, Clark and Hamilton 2004, and Galor and Michalopoulos
2006). We view the selection and investment approaches to endogenous preference formation as complementary, because they operate on different time scales and lead to
distinct implications. The evolutionary literature is concerned with changes in the composition of genetic traits that affect entire populations and take place over long time
horizons. For example, Galor and Moav (2002) argue that selection pressures which
generated preferences favorable for economic growth have been operating at least since
the Neolithic Revolution nearly 10,000 years ago. In contrast, our focus is on the divergence of preferences across social classes, and our mechanism operates at a time scale
from two or three generations (the “Buddenbrooks” effect) to at most a few centuries.
Our paper provides a new perspective of the effects of wealth inequality on development in the face of financial market imperfections. A number of existing theories point
out that if financial markets are absent, poor individuals may be unable to finance otherwise profitable investment projects, and are therefore forced to enter less productive
professions (see Banerjee and Newman 1993, Galor and Zeira 1993, and Matsuyama
4

2006). A common feature of this literature is that the rich, who are least constrained
by credit market imperfections, generally do best and are the first beneficiaries of new
investment opportunities. Therefore, these theories cannot explain how a new class of
entrepreneurs rose from humble beginnings to leapfrog over the landed pre-industrial
elite, at a time when wealth inequality was quite extreme and financial markets shallow
by modern standards.
Our theory is also related to a recent literature on the effects of religious values on economic performance and the income distribution. Using international survey data, Barro
and McCleary (2003) find that economic growth responds positively to the beliefs in hell
and heaven. One interpretation of this finding is that a habit of contemplating the distant future generates individual behavior favorable for economic performance. Similar
findings are documented by Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2003).4 In a different vein,
Botticini and Eckstein (2005, 2006a, and 2006b) argue that Jews originally specialized in
artisanship, trade, and finance because of religious reforms that fostered literacy among
Jewish farmers. After the reforms, Jews progressively migrated to towns to exploit their
comparative advantage in education in skilled urban occupations. Thus, as in our theory, group-specific values and attitudes have long-lasting effects on economic decisions.
However, the impetus in Botticini and Eckstein is a cultural shock to a particular group
(a reform in the Jewish religion), while our mechanism relies entirely on economic incentives faced by an initially homogeneous population.
The notion of patience as an asset that agents can invest in was first introduced in
the economic literature by Becker and Mulligan (1997), who consider the problem of
a consumer who lives for a finite number of periods and makes a one-time choice of
a discount factor. In contrast, we embed the choice of patience in a dynamic model
of preference formation with the additional dimensions of choosing an occupation and
investing into the taste for leisure. Moreover, we analyze the evolution of preferences
in an environment with imperfect capital markets, which is a key factor for our results
on the stratification of preferences as well as the application of the model to the Industrial Revolution.5 An alternative mechanism of preference transmission is advocated by
4

However, according to the calibration analysis of Cavalcanti, Parente, and Zhao (2003), differences in
religious affiliation alone cannot explain differences in the timing and diffusion of the Industrial Revolution across countries.
5
Also related are Mulligan (1997), where parents choose their own level of altruism towards their
children, and Haaparanta and Puhakka (2003), where agents invest in their own patience and in health.
Lindbeck and Nyberg (2006) focus on the negative effects of public transfers on parents incentives to instill
a work ethic in their children. The macroeconomic consequences of inherited (as opposed to chosen)

5

the literature on cultural transmission (see Bisin and Verdier 2000 and 2001, Fernández,
Fogli, and Olivetti 2004, Hauk and Saez-Marti 2002, and Saez-Marti and Zenou 2006).
As in our work, parents’ incentives for forming their children’s preferences depend on
economic conditions. However, parents invest because they desire to make their children’s behavior conform with their own wishes. In our model, in line with mainstream
dynastic models, parents do not judge their children’s choices other than through the
children’s own eyes; preference formation is a gift that altruistic parents pass on to their
children.
If patience and the work ethic are accumulated and transmitted within dynasties, parents’ and children’s propensities to save and invest should be positively correlated. This
implication is confirmed by Knowles and Postlewaite (2004), who show that in the PSID
parental savings behavior is an important determinant of their children’s education and
savings choices, after controlling for a variety of individual characteristics. Moreover,
the correlation is stronger between children and mothers, who are usually more involved in a in child’s upbringing than fathers. Our theory also posits that agents with
steeper income profiles are more patient. This is consistent with the results of a field
experiment conducted on Danish households by Harrison, Lau, and Williams (2002)
showing that time discount rates of highly educated adults (who tend to have steeper
income profiles) are about one third lower than those of adults with less education.6
A recent empirical literature highlights the role of patience, work ethics, and other noncognitive skills for determining how well people can focus on long-term tasks and exert
self-restraint (see Mischel, Shoda, and Rodriguez 1992, Heckman and Rubinstein 2001,
Heckman, Hsee, and Rubinstein 2003, Segal 2004, and Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua
2006). Similarly, Coleman and Hoffer (1983) argue that the emphasis on patience and
self-discipline is the key to the effectiveness of Catholic schools in the United States.
The literature also shows that non-cognitive skills depend on nurture and family upbringing.7
preferences have been examined by de la Croix and Michel (1999, 2001) and Artige, Camacho, and de la
Croix (2004). In the latter paper, inherited consumption habits can lead to the downfall of a temporarily
wealthy country or region.
6
Other evidence of a positive correlation between steep income profiles and patience includes Carroll
and Summers (1991), who document that in both Japan and the United States consumption-age profiles
are steeper when economic growth is high, and Becker and Mulligan (1997), who show that consumption
growth is high for adults who either have income themselves (which is associated with steep income
profiles) or who had rich parents.
7
See in particular Heckman (2000) and Carneiro and Heckman (2003), who review the evidence from a
large number of programs targeting disadvantaged children. Similar conclusions are reached by studies in

6

3 A Model of Occupational Choice and Endogenous
Preference Formation
In this section, we develop a theory of endogenous preference formation that is driven
by parents’ desire to instill certain tastes into their children. The parents’ efforts in raising their children respond to economic incentives; as a consequence, preference formation interacts with other economic decisions taken by both parent and child. Our
particular focus is on the question of how preferences both determine and depend on
the choice of an occupation.
We concentrate on two dimensions of preferences, the taste for leisure and patience.
Investments in the taste for leisure comprise all parental efforts that cultivate a child’s
ability to enjoy free (non-working) time. Examples are teaching one’s child to swim, to
play a sport, to ride a horse, or to play a musical instrument. Since a high appreciation of
leisure raises the opportunity cost of working, parental efforts in the opposite direction
(those that lower the taste for leisure) can be interpreted as increasing a child’s tolerance
for hard work. Parents may achieve this objective by preaching the virtues of an austere
life.8 Investments in patience determine the weight that a child attaches, in adult age,
to utility late in life relative to the present. Instilling parsimony and thrift into children
are examples of this type of investment. Religious ideas stressing the value of frugality
and industry—the “protestant ethics” of Max Weber—can also be regarded as vehicles
for the accumulation of patience and the work ethic.
We first describe the model, and then analyze the dynamic individual choice problem.
We model patience and the taste for leisure as state variables for the members of a dynasty. We show that, unlike in standard models, the value functions are convex in the
state variables. This is due to choice complementarities between investments in preferences and occupational choices as well as labor supply decisions. Despite the convexity
of the value functions, we can characterize the solution of the choice problem through a
recursive formulation with well-defined policy functions.
child development psychology such as Goleman (1995), Shonkoff and Philips (2000), and Taylor, McGue,
and Iacono (2000). Dohmen, Falk, Huffman, and Sunde (2006) document strong evidence (based on the
German Socio-Economic Panel) that trust and risk attitudes are transmitted from parents to children.
8
Formally, we only model parental investments in a child’s taste for leisure; a parent who wishes to
improve a child’s work ethic would simply do little or none of this investment.

7

3.1 Preferences, Timing, and Occupations
Our model economy is populated by overlapping generations of altruistic people who
live for four periods, two as children and two as adults. People work throughout both
adult periods (young and old), and their earnings may vary over time. Agents consume
and make economic decisions only when they are adult. At the beginning of adulthood,
every agent gives birth to a single child.
All adults have the same basic preferences. However, two aspects of the preferences
are endogenous, namely patience (the relative weight of old versus young adult consumption in utility) and the taste for leisure (the marginal utility of free time). These
taste parameters are determined during an agent’s childhood; more specifically, parents
instill specific tastes into their children through a child-rearing effort. Once an agent
reaches adulthood, preferences no longer change. An adult therefore takes her own
preferences as given, but gets to shape her child’s tastes.
An adult’s lifetime utility depends on her consumption, leisure, and child-rearing effort.
Agents are altruistic, hence an adult also cares about her child’s utility. Agents choose
their labor supply and their child-rearing effort in both adult periods (see the time line
in Figure 1). More formally, a young adult’s lifetime utility is given by:
(1 − B) (log (c1 ) + A (1 − n1 ) − lA,1 − lB,1 ) + B (log (c2 ) + A (1 − n2 ) − lA,2 − lB,2 )
+ z Vchild (A (lA , A), B  (lB , B)). (1)
Here A denotes the taste for leisure, and B is the relative weight attached to old-age
consumption, i.e., patience. Both A and B depend on the agent’s upbringing and are
predetermined for each adult. The first row of (1) is the adult’s felicity: c1 and c2 denote
the consumption choices in the two adult periods, n1 and n2 denote labor supply, and
lA,1 , lA,2 , lB,1 , and lB,2 are the effort choices for investing in the child’s taste for leisure
and patience. To simplify the analysis, we assume that the investments in preferences
are only productive if sustained at the same level over the two adult periods. Parents
will thus always choose lA,1 = lA,2 = lA and lB,1 = lB,2 = lB .
The second row of (1) is the altruistic component: Vchild represents the child’s maximized
utility as a function of its preference parameters, as chosen by the parent. A (lA , A) and

8

B  (lB , B) are the “production functions” for the child’s preferences, which take the form:
A (lA , A) = ψ Ā + (1 − ψ)A + g(lA ),

(2)

B  (lB , B) = ψ B̄ + (1 − ψ)B + f (lB ),

(3)

where ψ ∈ (0, 1] is a constant depreciation rate (assumed, for simplicity, to be the same
for the two state variables), and f and g are non-negative increasing functions. Ā and
B̄ represent the natural levels of the taste for leisure and patience, i.e., the steady states
of A and B in the absence of any investment. The intergenerational persistence of preferences captures the notion that to some extent children learn by imitating parental attitudes. Thus, part of the parents’ preferences are transmitted effortlessly to the child.
The parental effort is bounded, lA ∈ [0, ¯lA ] and lB ∈ [0, ¯lB ]. Also, we normalize the time
endowment to unity, n1 ∈ [0, 1] and n2 ∈ [0, 1] and impose the following restrictions.9
Assumption 1 The function f : [0, l̄B ] → R+ is continuous, differentiable, strictly increasing,

and weakly concave, and g : [0, l̄A ] → R+ is continuous, differentiable, strictly increasing, and


strictly concave. Moreover, g(0) = f (0) = 0 and f (¯lB ) ≤ ψ 1 − B̄ . The parameters z and ψ
satisfy 0 < z < 1 and 0 < ψ < 1.

The assumptions imply the upper bounds for the preference parameters Amax ≡ Ā +
g(¯lA )/ψ and Bmax ≡ B̄ + f (¯lB )/ψ ≤ 1.
In addition to the choice of labor supply and investments in preferences, the third main
element of the young adult’s decision problem is the choice of an occupation. An occupation i is characterized by a wage (or labor productivity) profile {w1,i, w2,i }, where w1,i
and w2,i are strictly positive and w2,i ≥ w1,i (due to a premium to experience and human capital). There is a finite number I of occupations to choose from. Occupations are
indexed by i ∈ {1, 2, ..., I}, and ordered according to the steepness of the wage profile
(without loss of generality, we ignore occupations featuring a dominated profile):
Assumption 2 The productivity profiles satisfy w2,i ≥ w1,i > 0 for all i. Moreover, a higher
index denotes a steeper productivity profile, i.e., j > i implies w1,j < w1,i and w2,j > w2,i .
Adults choose their occupation, their labor supply, and their investments in their child’s
patience and taste for leisure to maximize utility. Since parents are altruistic towards
Note that the investments lA and lB require effort, rather than an explicit time cost. The time endowment is only split between work and leisure. This is for analytical convenience; modeling investment
costs in terms of time would be conceptually identical, but would make the analysis more complex.
9

9

their children and preferences are time consistent, the decision problem can be given a
dynastic interpretation, where the head of the dynasty makes decisions for all subsequent generations.10 We will start our analysis of the choice problem in partial equilibrium, meaning that the productivity profiles {w1,i , w2,i} are taken as given and do not
change over time. Later, we will extend the analysis to a general-equilibrium economy
where the wage profiles are endogenously determined.

3.2 Outcomes with Missing Financial Markets
As will become clear below, the development of financial markets plays a key role in our
analysis. We start under the stark assumption that financial markets are absent. In other
words, households cannot borrow to smooth out consumption, nor can they bequeath
physical assets to their children. Later, we will contrast the results to outcomes with
more developed financial markets.
In this environment, consumption is equal to income in each period, c1 = w1,i n1 and
c2 = w2,i n2 , and the preference parameters A and B are the only state variables for a
dynasty. A young adult’s choice problem can be represented by the following Bellman
equation:
V (A, B) =

max

i∈I,lA ,lB ,n1 ,n2



(1 − B) (log(w1,i n1 ) + A(1 − n1 ))
+ B (log(w2,i n2 ) + A(1 − n2 )) − lA − lB + z V (A , B  )



(4)

subject to (2) and (3). Our decision problem is therefore a dynamic programming problem with two state variables on the compact state space [Ā, Amax ] × [B̄, Bmax ].11 Standard
recursive arguments imply that the Bellman equation (4) has a unique solution.
Since A is constant over an individual’s life, the optimal choice of labor supply in (4) is
constant as well, i.e., n1 = n2 = n. This observation leads to the first important result:
the problems of investing in patience and in the taste for leisure are separable.
10
Note that discounting across generations is not a choice variable and depends on the exogenous altruism parameter z. It could be argued that investments in patience also affect altruism (i.e., z may be
endogenous). Such a model would lead to qualitatively similar results, but the change would come at the
cost of a loss of analytical tractability.
11
Alternatively, the choice problem can be represented in a sequential form by repeatedly substituting for V in (4). We will mostly work with the recursive formulation. The sequential version, which is
sometimes useful for deriving first-order conditions, is written out in the mathematical appendix.

10

Proposition 1 The value function V is additively separable in its arguments, V (A, B) =
vA (A) + vB (B) where:
vA (A) = max {log(n) + A(1 − n) − lA + z vA (A )} ,

(5)

vB (B) = max {(1 − B) (log(w1,i)) + B (log(w2,i )) − lB + z vB (B  )} ,

(6)

lA ,n

i∈I,lB

subject to, respectively, (2) and (3).
The proof of this proposition is immediate and is therefore omitted. Proposition 1 shows
that as long as wages are the only source of income, the occupational choice does not
interact with the investment in the taste for leisure.12 Using this result, we can analyze
the problems of investing in patience and in the taste for leisure separately. We later
extend the analysis to environments where the two choices are not separable.
3.2.1 Investment in Patience
We start by characterizing the value function vB (B), which reflects both the investment
in patience and the choice of an occupation. The policy function for the investment in
patience is denoted lB (B).
Proposition 2 The value function vB is non-decreasing and convex.
The value and policy functions are visualized in Figure 2. That vB is non-decreasing
follows from the assumption that the wage profile is non-decreasing. In particular, if
for sufficiently low patience all members of a dynasty choose an occupation with a flat
income profile (w1 = w2 ), the value function is constant in that range. This corresponds
to the interval [B̄, B1 ] in Figure 2. Within this range, the value function is flat (upper
panel), and agents do not invest in patience (lower panel). As soon as B is sufficiently
large (B > B1 ), a current or future member of the dynasty finds choosing a profession
with w2 > w1 optimal, and the value function becomes strictly increasing in B.
The convexity of vB follows from two key features of our decision problem. First, B
enters utility linearly. Second, there is a complementarity between patience and the
choice of steep income profiles. To gain intuition, consider first the decision problem
12

The additive separability of the value function hinges on logarithmic utility. Since logarithmic utility is a common assumption in problems with endogenous labor supply, our analysis provides a useful
tractable benchmark. The solution can be characterized under more general preferences if one abstracts
from investment in the taste for leisure, see Doepke and Zilibotti (2005).

11

without an occupational choice, that is, with a fixed occupation {w1 , w2 }. If we vary the
initial generation’s B while holding the investment choice lB constant over all generations, utility is a linear function of B (as depicted by the dotted line in the upper panel
of Figure 2). The reason is that initial utility is a linear function of present and future
patience, and initial patience has a linear effect on future patience via the depreciation
factor 1 − ψ. Moreover, given the fixed income profile, choosing a constant lB is optimal:
the marginal return to investing in patience in a given period is given by z log(w2 /w1 ),
which does not depend on B. Generalizing from this observation, the value function is
linear over any range of B such that it is optimal for the current and future members of
a dynasty to hold the occupational choice constant.
In general, however, occupational choices are not fixed. Given that B is the relative
weight on utility late in life, it is optimal to choose an occupation with a steep wage
profile (large i) when B is high, and one yielding a flat profile when B is low. As we
increase B, the slope of the value function increases discretely every time either a current or a future member of the dynasty finds switching into a profession with a steeper
profile optimal. The optimal lB increases at each step, because the marginal benefit of
being patient increases with the steepness of the wage profile. Since there is only a finite set of occupations, the value function is piecewise linear, where the linear segments
correspond to ranges of B for which the optimally chosen present and future income
profiles are constant. In Figure 2, the true value function is therefore represented by
the solid line; the points B1 and B2 are thresholds where either the current or a future
occupation changes. At each of the kinks, some member of the dynasty is indifferent
between (at least) two different profiles. Since the choice of lB depends on the chosen
income profile, there may be multiple optimal choices of lB at a B where the value function has a kink, whereas in between kinks the optimal choice of lB is unique. The next
propositions summarize these results.
Proposition 3 The solution to the program (6) has the following properties: (i) The steepness
of the optimal wage profile, w2,i /w1,i , is non-decreasing in B; (ii) The optimal investment in
patience lB = lB (B) is non-decreasing in B.
Proposition 4 The state space [B̄, Bmax ] can be subdivided into countably many closed intervals [Bs , Bs+1 ] such that over the interior of any such interval the occupational choice of each
member of the dynasty (i.e., parent, child, grandchild and so on) is constant and unique (though
possibly different across generations), and lB (B) is constant and generically single-valued. The
12

value function vB (B) is piece-wise linear, where each interval [Bs , Bs+1 ] corresponds to a linear
segment. Each kink in the value function corresponds to a switch to an occupation with a steeper
income profile by a present or future member of the dynasty. At a kink, the optimal choices of
occupation and lB corresponding to both adjoining intervals are optimal (thus, the optimal policy
function is not single-valued at a kink).
The proposition implies that the optimal policy correspondence lB (B) is a non-decreasing
step function, which takes multiple values only at a step. Propositions 3 and 4 allow us
to characterize the equilibrium law of motion for patience. Since the policy correspondence lB (B) is monotone, the dynamics of B are also monotone and converge to a steady
state from any initial condition.13
Proposition 5 The law of motion of patience capital is described by the following difference
equation:
B  = ψ B̄ + (1 − ψ) B + f (lB (B)) ,
where lB (B) is a non-decreasing step function (as described in Proposition 4). Generically, for
any initial condition B0 the dynasty converges to a steady state with constant B where parents
and children choose the same profession. Multiple steady states are possible.
Despite convergence in patience, the steady state does not have to be unique, even for
a given B0 . For example, if the initial generation is indifferent between two different
occupations, the steady state can depend on which one is chosen.
Up to this point, we have not made any use of differentiability assumptions. If the optimal choice of lB is interior, it must satisfy a first-order condition, which allows us to
characterize the decisions on patience more sharply. In particular, the first-order condition for an interior lB0 is given by:


1 = zf (lB0 )

∞



z (1 − ψ) log
t

t

t=0

w2,t
w1,t


.

The left-hand side is the marginal cost of providing patience (which is constant), and
the right-hand side is the marginal benefit. Notice that the marginal benefit increases in
the steepness of all subsequent generations’ income profiles.
If the production function for patience f (lB ) is linear, in knife-edge economies (i.e., in a zero-measure
subset of the parameter space) the policy correspondence is not single-valued even in between steps.
Convergence in terms of occupational choice is still guaranteed, but dynasties may be indifferent between
multiple patience levels. In generic economies, lB (B) is single valued even in the linear case.
13

13

Since Bt converges to a steady state, there must be a time T such that the occupational
choice of all members of a dynasty is constant from T onwards. Denoting the constant
wage profile from this time onwards as {w1 , w2 }, the steady-state investment in patience,
lss must satisfy (if it is interior):
1=f



ss
(lB
)

z
log
1 − z(1 − ψ)



w2
w1


.

(7)

ss
as an increasing function of the steepness of the steady-state
Equation (7) determines lB
income profile. The dynamics of B are particularly simple once the occupational choice
ss
is constant. Since the law of motion is given by Bt+1 = ψ B̄ + (1 − ψ)Bt + f (lB
), patience
ss
)/ψ. Substituting back for f (¯lB ), we
converges to a steady state given by B ss = B̄ + f (lB
see that patience converges to this steady state at a constant rate:



ss
Bt+1 = ψ B̄ + f (lB
)/ψ + (1 − ψ)Bt .
Similarly, if lss is at either corner, patience converges at a constant rate to one of the
extreme values B̄ or Bmax .
3.2.2 Investment in the Taste for Leisure
Consider, next, the problem of investing in the taste for leisure. Given the maximization
problem (5), optimal labor supply is given by:
n = min{A−1 , 1}.

(8)

Using this result, the following propositions characterize the value and policy functions
vA (A) and lA (A).
Proposition 6 The value function vA is non-decreasing and convex.
More specifically, the value function is strictly increasing over any range of A where
leisure is positive, i.e., n < 1 or, given (8), A > 1. The convexity of the value function
is once again due to a complementarity between preferences and economic decisions
befitting these preferences. The value function would be linear in A if people could not
adjust their labor supply when A changes. However, people do adjust n (they work
less when A increases), rendering the value function convex. Unlike the choice of an

14

occupation, n is a continuous variable, implying that the value function is strictly convex, except in ranges where the n is at a corner. The characterization of vA leads to the
following results regarding the policy function lA (A) and equilibrium law of motion.
Proposition 7 The optimal investment in the taste for leisure, lA = lA (A) is non-decreasing in
A. The law of motion of the taste for leisure is described by the following difference equation:
A = ψ Ā + (1 − ψ) A + g (lA (A)) .
Given an initial condition A0 the dynasty converges monotonically to a steady state with constant A such that either A = Ā, A = Amax , or:
A = Ā + g (g )

−1

1

z 1 − A1


1
.
ψ

(9)

Multiple steady states are possible, depending on the parameterization of g. However,
cross-dynasty differences in the taste for leisure can only arise from differences in initial conditions. If all dynasties start with the same A, they remain identical along this
preference dimension. If lA is interior, it satisfies the following first-order condition:


1 = zg (lA0 )

∞


z t (1 − ψ)t log (1 − nt ) .

(10)

t=0

Thus, the incentive to invest into the taste for leisure depends entirely on the amount of
leisure enjoyed by future members of the dynasty.
3.2.3 Investment in the Taste for Leisure with Unearned Income
We now extend the analysis to income processes entailing an unearned component, i.e.,
non-labor income (such as rents or dividends). In general, the separation result of Proposition 1 does not hold in such an environment. However, there is a useful special case
that remains tractable. Consider a dynasty that permanently works in an occupation
with a flat wage profile {w, w} and also derives a flat stream of unearned income {b, b}.14
The budget constraints are then given by c1 = b+ wn1 and c2 = b+ wn2 . Since the income
profile is flat, optimal labor supply is constant, and the value function is independent of
14
In the historical application discussed in section 4, landowners will be characterized by this type of
income process; the unearned component b corresponds to income derived from renting out their estates.

15

B. The problem can be written as:
V (A, B) = vA (A) = max{(log(b + wn) + A(1 − n)) − lA + z vA (A )},
lA ,n

(11)

subject to (2). The first-order condition with respect to lA is the same as in (10). However,
optimal labor supply is now given by:
n = min A−1 −

b
,1 .
w

(12)

Thus, labor supply is decreasing (and leisure increasing) in the ratio of unearned income
to the wage. Given the first-order condition (10), this feeds back into the investment decision: parents whose children have more time for leisure invest more in the children’s
taste for leisure. Over time, a dynasty earning a rent b > 0 will develop a higher appreciation for leisure than a dynasty that relies on labor income only. This intuition extends
to the case of an increasing productivity profile (w1 < w2 ), although the analysis is more
involved.

3.3 The Role of Missing Financial Markets
In the preceding analysis, we established that members of different professions face different incentives for investing in patience, provided that the steepness of income profiles
differs across professions. A key assumption underlying this result is that access to financial markets is limited. The incentive to invest in patience is determined not by the
income profile per se, but by the lifetime profile of period-by-period utilities. A steep
income profile directly translates into a steep utility profile only if financial markets are
absent or incomplete. We now make this point more precise by considering the opposite
extreme in terms of assumptions on financial markets. Namely, we allow unrestricted
borrowing and lending within each cohort at a fixed rate of return R.15 We will see that in
this setup, the interaction of patience and occupational choices can be severed or even
reverted.
We first focus on the case where financial markets only allow the smoothing of goods
consumption. Formally, we assume that the agent is restricted to supplying the same
amount of labor in both adult periods, which was the equilibrium outcome in the previous section. With borrowing and lending, the Bellman equation describing the young
15

The possibility of wealth transmission across generations is discussed in Section 5.

16

adult’s decision problem becomes:
V (A, B) =

max

{(1 − B) (log(w1,i n − s) + A (1 − n))

i∈I,n,lA ,lB ,s

+ B (log(w2,i n + Rs) + A (1 − n)) − lA − lB + z V (A , B  )}, (13)
where the maximization is subject to (2) and (3). Solving for the optimal saving choice s
and substituting back into the Bellman equation yields:
V (A, B) = max {log w1 +
n,lA ,lB ,s

w2 
+ log (n) + A (1 − n)
R

+ (1 − B) log(1 − B) + B log (B) − lA − lB + z V (A , B  )}.
Clearly, only occupations maximizing the present value of the lifetime wage profile
(w1 + w2 /R) are chosen in equilibrium. The household can freely allocate income among
the two adult periods, so that the choice of a profession has no bearing on the incentives
to invest in patience. More generally, the three problems of choosing an occupation, accumulating patience, and accumulating leisure preference are now fully separable, and
their characterization via the methods discussed in the previous section is straightforward.
If we allow agents to choose separate labor supplies in the two adult periods, the impact
of introducing financial markets becomes even more drastic. Given that the disutility
from labor is linear, workers will choose to work in only one period (at least until they
hit the upper bound on labor supply). An impatient worker (low B) would now prefer
a profession with a steep wage profile, because then the worker could work only in the
second period and enjoy leisure in the highly valued first period. Thus, the interaction
of patience and occupations with different income profiles is reversed. However, this
result is perhaps too extreme, as it is an artifact of the assumptions that wages in a given
occupation are independent of the timing of labor supply and that the marginal utility
of leisure is constant within each period.16
To summarize, at least some financial market imperfections are necessary for occupational choice and investments in patience to be interlinked. It is not necessary, however,
to assume the complete absence of financial markets, as we did in the preceding section
16

For someone in the real-world medical profession, for example, enjoying leisure until age 45 and then
immediately receiving the high wages of a medical specialist would be infeasible. To the extent that these
wages are a return on education and experience, they are high precisely because doctors tend to enjoy
little leisure at young ages.

17

for analytical convenience. As long as the steepness of an income profile is at least partially transmitted to utility profiles, the basic mechanism is at work. A positive implication of this finding is that the degree of patience heterogeneity in a population depends
on the development of financial markets. In an economy where financial markets are
mostly absent, incentives to invest in patience vary widely across members of different professions, and consequently we would expect to observe a large corresponding
variation in actual acquired preferences. These differences should be smaller in modern
economies with less imperfect financial markets. For example, although engaging in a
lengthy program of study (such as medical school) that leads to high future incomes
may still require some patience and perseverance, today’s students have access to educational loans and credit cards. Hence, the modern-day artisans are able to consume
some of their future rewards already in the present, and consequently they (and their
parents) face a smaller incentive to invest in specialized preferences.

4 General Equilibrium in a Pre-industrial Economy
Up to this point the level of income derived in each profession has been taken as exogenous. In this section, we introduce a simple mechanism to endogenize wages. The main
new result is that general equilibrium forces can induce dynasties to sort into different
professions even in an economy where initially everyone has the same preferences. If
these professions differ in the steepness of their income profiles, divergence in patience
necessarily follows. This outcome naturally occurs if the income derived in a given
profession declines with the number of members of the profession, i.e., if there are decreasing returns.
We illustrate this finding within a two-sector economy that also underlies the application of our model to the Industrial Revolution in Section 5. For now, the economy is still
at the pre-industrial stage, and relies on two modes of production: agriculture and artisanship. Agricultural output YF and the artisans’ production YM are perfect substitutes,
so that total output is given by Y = YF + YM . The two technologies differ in terms of
the inputs used. The agricultural technology uses unskilled labor L and land Z, and is
described by the following production function:
YF = Lα Z 1−α ,

18

(14)

where α ∈ (0, 1). The artisan technology is linear in skilled labor H:
YM = qH,

(15)

where q is a productivity parameter. Both sectors are competitive, so that factors are paid
their marginal product. The total amount of land is fixed at Z = 1. Land is not traded
and is owned by a fixed measure of dynasties, each of whom owns an equal share of
land. Each landowner bequeaths the land he owns to his child when he passes away.
Land is only productive if the owner monitors production (the monitoring technology is
discussed below). There is no occupational mobility between landowners and the other
classes. The mass of landless labor-market participants (workers and artisans) is equal
to one in every period.
The main difference between skilled and unskilled labor is the lifetime income profile.
Recall that in equilibrium, all individuals relying only on labor income supply the same
amount of labor n in both periods of their lives. An unskilled worker is equally efficient
at young and at old age, and therefore supplies an equal number n of units of unskilled
labor in both adult periods. Skilled workers (i.e., artisans), in contrast, use some of the
young adult period to acquire skills and experience. Their effective labor supply is given
by n units of skilled labor in the first adult period and by γn units in the second adult
period, where γ > 1. Hence, artisans have a steep lifetime income profile, whereas the
workers’ profile is flat.

4.1 The Landless: Artisans and Workers
We start out by focusing on the lower classes, who, unlike the landowners, have to
choose a profession. Since our goal is to show that preference stratification necessarily arises even if all dynasties originally have the same preferences, a natural initial
condition is a situation where the productivity q of artisanship is so low that only the
agricultural technology is used. As a consequence, all landless agents are workers with
flat income profiles. Patience is not a valuable asset in such an economy, and remains
at the natural level B̄ (see Section 3.2.1), whereas the taste for leisure is given by (9).
Now assume that at time t = 0 the productivity of artisanship q increases unexpectedly. The increase is assumed to be sufficiently large such that all workers remaining in
agriculture cannot be an equilibrium, because everyone would prefer artisanship at the
going wage. But neither can the equilibrium feature everyone switching to artisanship,
because the wage of agricultural workers tends to infinity as the number of workers
19

tends to zero. Thus, adults will endogenously divide between the two occupations, and
wages will adjust to make everyone just indifferent between being a worker and being
an artisan.
The preferences of the cohorts turning adult at times t = 0 and t = 1 were formed before
the (unforeseen) increase in q took place. Hence, these cohorts are still endowed with the
natural patience level B̄. The parents of the cohort turning adult at time t = 2, however,
can condition their investment in patience on the occupational choice of the child: those
who expect their children to be artisans will invest in patience, while those expect their
children to be workers will not. Once again, in equilibrium there must be both workers
and artisans. Thus, wages in period t = 2 will adjust to make parents just indifferent
between investing in patience (inducing their children to be artisans) and not investing
(inducing their children to be agricultural workers).
Once the population has endogenously split into groups of workers and artisans, further stratification in preferences across social classes necessarily follows. In general,
the transition can be complicated with changing fractions of workers and artisans (and
hence wages) over time. To keep the analysis tractable, we now focus on the case where,
after the initial sorting (i.e., from period t = 2 onwards), the number of workers and
artisans remains constant. This implies, in turn, time-invariant wages. More formally,
let μ be the aggregate labor supply in agriculture (that is, the fraction of workers among
the landless adults multiplied by individual labor supply) from t = 2 onwards. Workers
then earn a wage equal to wF = αμα−1 in both periods, whereas artisans earn q in the
first and γq in the second period. Under these time-invariant wages the analysis of the
preceding section applies directly to the decision problem in our general-equilibrium
economy.
The following proposition introduces assumptions guaranteeing that such an equilibrium exists, and derives the implications for occupational choices and the evolution of
preferences. The key assumption is that the production function for patience is linear.17
Proposition 8 Assume f to be of the form f (lB ) = ξlB , where ξ satisfies:
1 − z (1 − ψ)
1
1 − z(1 − ψ)
≤ ξ log(γ) ≤
.
z
z
z (1 − ψ)

(16)

(16) guarantees that all members of the investing dynasties choose artisanship for t ≥ 2, whereas all
others prefer to be workers. Under this assumption, the occupational transition occurs in one generation.
It is possible to characterize equilibria involving longer transitions under weaker parameter restrictions,
but this is omitted for simplicity.
17

20

Suppose that the economy starts out with everyone having the natural patience B0 = B̄ and the
steady-state taste for leisure A, as given in (9). Then for sufficiently large q > 0 there exists an
equilibrium such that for all t ≥ 2 the proportion of workers and artisans in the population is
constant, and the agricultural wage is given by:
¯lB


ξ ¯lB log(γ)
log wF = log αμα−1 = log(q) + B̄ log(γ) −
+
.
z
1 − z (1 − ψ)

(17)

The equilibrium is characterized by occupational segregation, i.e., from t ≥ 2 onwards, parents
and children in the same dynasty choose the same profession. The taste for leisure remains constant in all dynasties. Worker dynasties do not invest in patience (lB = 0), whereas artisan
dynasties invest the maximum amount (lB = ¯lB ). The distribution of patience converges to a
steady state where the patience of all workers remains at the natural level B̄, whereas the patience
of all artisans converges to the maximum BM = B̄ + ξ ¯lB /ψ.
The main feature of this equilibrium is that occupational segregation triggers divergence
in patience across worker and artisan dynasties. Initially, all families are indifferent
between investing and not investing in patience. The initial generation’s indifference
condition pins down the equilibrium wage and the associated fractions of workers and
artisans. After the investment choice of the first generation, all members of the artisans
dynasties are more patient than workers and strictly prefer to be artisans.
Under a concave production function for patience f (lB ), there is a motive for smoothing investment over multiple periods, which can lead to more complicated transitions.
However, the basic forces leading to preference stratification are the same. In Section 5
we numerically solve a model with a concave production function for patience.
The taste for leisure is not affected by the occupational choice, because the members of
both occupations continue to rely exclusively on labor income. Thus, the theory predicts
no sorting across workers and artisans along this dimension of preferences, and both
groups continue to work the same number of hours.18

4.2 The Landowners
Unlike the landless, the landowners in our economy do not have to choose an occupation, because their income is provided by inherited land. However, they still have to
18

This is consistent with the evidence presented by Voth (2000), who documents that the number of
hours worked by workers and artisans in the pre-industrial era were approximately the same. See also
the discussion in Section 6.

21

make decisions on patience and leisure preference. We now characterize how the economic conditions faced by the landowning class affect their incentives for forming their
children’s preferences.
Landowners earn rents from land. We denote the rent accruing per unit of land by r, and
amount of land owned by a given landowner by x. In order to appropriate the entire
rent, landowners have to monitor the workers on their land. The landowners’ income
process is
y1L = rx + (r − r) xn1 and y2L = rx + (r − r) xn2 ,
where n1 and n2 denote the monitoring effort (in units of time) in the two periods. Even
without monitoring (the proverbial “absent landlord”), the landowner owns a minimum return r on the land. Note that, by setting n = 1, landowners can appropriate
the entire rent. Enjoying leisure entails a linear income loss. The return to monitoring
is a reduced-form representation of moral hazard problems, such as the possibility that
administrators steal a part of the rent. The key feature of this income process is that
total income is less elastic with respect to labor effort than the income of artisans and
workers.
Setting b ≡ rx and w ≡ (r − r) x, the analysis of Section 3.2.2 (see equation (11)) applies,
establishing the following proposition (proof omitted).
Proposition 9 In an equilibrium with constant employment shares, landowners do not invest
in patience, and converge to the natural patience B̄. However, landowners invest more than
artisans and workers in the taste for leisure, and (conditional on a common initial A) their taste
for leisure converges to a higher steady state.
The incentives for landlords to invest in patience and the taste for leisure do not depend
on the size of their estate x: in steady state the entire class of landowners will have
identical preferences.
To summarize, the members of the three occupations in our pre-industrial economy
all end up with different preferences, shaped in each case by the economic conditions
characterizing the profession. Both workers and artisans are hard-working, because
they rely exclusively on labor income. Artisans are more patient than workers, however,
because they also face a steep lifetime income profile. The landowners face an income
profile that is equally flat as that of the workers, and they consequently have the same
low patience. Unlike the workers, the landowners derive their income mostly from land
22

instead of labor. As a consequence, the landowners develop a higher taste for leisure (or
conversely a greater aversion to work) than the landless classes.
In the pre-industrial economy, the stratification of preferences across classes is only important to the extent that it determines occupational choices. We now turn to the question how the fate of the different classes in our economy evolves when technological
change alters the economic landscape.

5 From Artisan to Capitalist
In this section, we introduce a physical investment technology into the pre-industrial
economy. The new technology becomes unexpectedly available after preferences have
already diverged across classes. The class-specific preferences, which were formed in
response to economic conditions in the pre-industrial period, also turn out to determine the extent to which members of different classes make use of the new technology.
The basic result is unsurprising in the light of standard economic theory: the most patient and hardest-working classes, i.e., the artisans, are the first to take advantage of
the new opportunity—they possess the “spirit of capitalism.” The artisans leapfrog over
the landowning class, and replace them as the economic elite. However, preferences
continue to evolve after the introduction of the new technology. To some extent, this
process can mitigate the subsequent divergence of wealth across classes. In particular,
as the new industrialists accumulate wealth, they also start accumulating a taste for
leisure. As a result, the children and grandchildren of the first industrialists are less
economically successful as the founding generation.

5.1 The Capitalist Technology
After the introduction of the new technology, each dynasty faces a decision problem
with three state variables: leisure taste A, patience B, and capital K. We interpret the
capital variable as a family-owned enterprise. Young adults decide how much of their
first-period income to consume and how much to invest into the family business. Investments in the business are assumed to be irreversible: agents can consume the output of
the investment technology (as well as their labor and land-rent income), but the capital
stock itself cannot be liquidated and turned into consumption. The capital owned by
an old agent is bequeathed—up to depreciation—to her child.19 We continue to assume
19

Dynastic enterprises were common in the early days of the Industrial Revolution. Caselli and Gennaioli (2003) argue that this was due to the underdevelopment of financial markets: it was unprofitable

23

that agents cannot borrow.
The capital stock of the family business depreciates at the rate δ. The rate of return on
capital depends on labor effort and is denoted by R(n). Here the return is increasing in
n, i.e., a hard-working entrepreneur earns a higher return than a passive owner. This
captures the role of managerial effort and monitoring in a business and is parallel to our
treatment of rental income from land. The return is given by:
R(n) = R + (R − R)nη ,
where R > R > 0 and 0 < η < 1.20 We also assume that the business activity is run
in addition to one of the existing professions. Thus, a young entrepreneur can derive
additional labor income as a worker or artisan, or in the case of landowners, entrepreneurship can be combined with rental income from land. This feature, realistically,
allows businesses to be started at a small scale on top of other activities. In particular,
we want to allow aristocrats to earn rents from their land and invest the proceeds in a
capital market, so as to not exclude them from investment from the outset. For simplicity, we assume that a single effort choice determines labor or rental income as well as
the return on the family business (separating these choice variables would complicate
the notation without changing the main results).
Let K ≥ 0 denote the bequest of capital received by a young adult. The budget constraints and the irreversibility constraint are given by:
c1 + K  = (1 − δ + R(n1,i ))K + y1 ,
c2 = R(n2,i )K  + y2 ,
K  ≥ (1 − δ) K.

(18)
(19)
(20)

Here y1 and y2 denote income derived outside the family business. For workers and
artisans, this consists of labor income (y1 = w1,i n1,i and y2 = w2,i n2,i ), whereas aristocrats
receive the rents from their land x as a function of their monitoring effort (y1 = rx +
(r − r) xn1 and y2 = rx + (r − r) xn2 , see Section 4.2). In the budget constraint (18) for
for parents to liquidate their business instead of leaving it to the children. In our model, the irreversibility constraint implies that differences in investment across families lead to different initial assets for the
next generation. Under reversible investment, similar results could be obtained if the altruism parameter
z (the intergenerational discount factor) was an increasing function of patience B (the intragenerational
discount factor).
20
The curvature in the return function is not essential for the results, but is useful to generate a smooth
relationship between state variables and the entrepreneurial return in the simulations below.

24

the first adult period, total income consists of y1 plus capital income (1 − δ + R(n1,i ))K.
Because of the irreversibility constraint (20), consumption cannot exceed the sum of
current output and labor income: c1 ≤ R(n1,i )K. In the second-period budget constraint
(19), the agent earns y2 plus capital income R(n2,i )K  . Since the capital stock cannot be
liquidated, the agent bequeaths the remaining capital (1 − δ)K  to her child.

21

The recursive representation of the decision problem of a young adult with leisure preference A, patience B, and inherited capital stock K is given by the following Bellman
equation:
V (A, B, K) =

max

c1 ,c2 ,lA ,lB ,n1 ,n2



(1 − B) (log(c1 ) + A(1 − n1 )) + B (log(c2 ) + A(1 − n2 ))
− lA − lB + z V (A , B  , (1 − δ)K  )



where the maximization is subject to the laws of motion for A and B (2) and (3), and the
budget and irreversibility constraints (18), (19), and (20). Moreover, the choice variables
are bounded by c1 , c2 ≥ 0, 0 ≤ n1 ≤ 1, 0 ≤ n2 ≤ 1, 0 ≤ lA ≤ ¯lA , and 0 ≤ lB ≤ ¯lB .
The separation result of Proposition 1 no longer applies in the presence of capital, and
the equilibrium law of motion of A B and K are interdependent. This prevents a full
analytical characterization, and the model must be solved numerically. Nevertheless,
the basic tradeoffs that determine investment in preferences are still the same, so that, at
least qualitatively, the interaction of capital accumulation and preference formulation is
easily understood.
First, consider how preferences determine the investment choice. Here a standard Euler
equation applies: a young adult invests if future marginal utilities weighted by the appropriate time discount factors and investment returns exceed the cost of investing,
i.e., current marginal utility. Thus, unsurprisingly, more patient agents have a higher
propensity to invest. In addition, agents with a low taste for leisure also tend to invest
more, since by working harder they earn a higher return on their investment. If we apply these findings to our economic environment, it follows that the artisans are, at least
initially, the ideal investors, because they are both patient and hard-working. The other
21

In principle, parents could bequeath additional resources to their offspring. However, we focus on
economies where the irreversibility of the capital stock is a binding constraint for the old adults. Namely,
in the last period of their lives agents would like to liquidate part of the capital stock and consume it, but
they are instead forced to leave it to their children as an involuntary bequest. Agents clearly do not leave
any additional bequests in such economies. Formally, this outcome can be guaranteed by choosing the
altruism factor z appropriately.

25

classes either invest less (relative to their income) or not at all. The latter would occur if
an agent would borrow rather than save at the rate of return provided by the investment
technology.
Once a family has entered entrepreneurship, this will feed back into the further evolution of preferences within the dynasty. Here the interactions with leisure preferences
and patience are opposites of each other. In the case of patience, the fact that a dynasty
starts investing will increase the investment in patience, which amplifies the original
drive to invest. The reason is that investment endogenously steepens utility profiles
both within and across generations, i.e., utility drops during the early investment period and increases in the later return periods. As we determined earlier, steep utility
profiles lead to increased investment in patience, which leads to even more investment.
Thus, if patience were the only endogenous aspect of preferences, we would expect to
observe further divergence in preferences across dynasties of entrepreneurs and others,
as well as accelerating wealth accumulation over time within entrepreneurial dynasties.
However, this effect will be mitigated or even reversed by the endogeneity of the taste
for leisure. The optimality conditions for labor supply and investing in leisure are unchanged; thus, labor supply depends on leisure preference as well as the elasticity of
consumption with respect to labor effort, and investment in the taste for leisure depends on future labor effort. Initially, an artisan or worker dynasty entering entrepreneurship has little appreciation for leisure and is therefore hard working, as historically
these dynasties relied on labor income alone. However, the descendants of the initial
entrepreneurs inherit the family firm. Thus, just as the landowners’, their consumption
derives increasingly from capital income and becomes less elastic with respect to labor
effort. As a consequence, the founders’ children and grandchildren work less hard than
their forefathers and develop the same fine tastes for leisure that the land-owning class
already possesses. Of course, the drop in labor effort also lowers the return on investment, which can lead to a slowdown or even reversal in accumulation. Thus, the model
verifies the “Carnegie conjecture:” the initial success of a dynasty can lay the seed for
its ultimate downfall. Whether this effect dominates the increased accumulation of patience depends on parameters. This “Buddenbrooks” effect will be particularly strong if
investment in the taste for leisure is highly elastic and labor effort has a large effect on
entrepreneurial success, i.e., R − R is large.
There are two different possibilities for a dynasty that initially chooses not to invest. The
first is that the dynasty’s preferences are sufficiently tilted against investing to perma26

nently exclude the family from entrepreneurship. The second is that a future member
of the dynasty will eventually become an entrepreneur. In this case, in anticipation of
the future change the dynasty will first invest in the appropriate preferences and then
accumulate capital as a second step.

5.2 A Computed Transition
We now provide a numerical illustration of the equilibrium dynamics of our model after the introduction of a capitalist technology. Table 1 summarizes the parameter values used for the simulation. The functional forms for investing in the taste for leisure
ξA
ξB
and g(lB ) = φB lB
. As described in Section 4,
and patience are given by g(lA ) = φA lA
the economy starts out under uniform preferences in the pre-industrial period long before the capitalist technology becomes available. Then people sort into professions, and
over time preferences approach occupation-specific steady states. In this pre-industrial
steady state, artisans earn a wage of 1.0 in the first and 2.0 in the second period, whereas
√
workers earn a wage of w ≈ 2 in each period. Workers and landowners are at the
natural patience of B = 0.4, while artisans have a higher patience of B ≈ 0.6. Finally,
landowners converge to a high taste for leisure of A ≈ 2, while workers and artisans are
less leisure-oriented with A ≈ 1.5.
Figure 3 displays the dynamics of capital and patience for members of the three occupations. The economy is still in the pre-industrial steady state in period 0; in period 1,
the capitalist technology is introduced unexpectedly. Recall that initially, the artisans
are most likely to invest, the workers less so (they are less patient), and the landowners
are the least likely (they are not just impatient, but also lazy). Given our choices for the
returns of the investment technology, in the case displayed in Figure 3 for the workers nothing changes: the dynasties do not invest, and patience remains at the steady
state. The artisans, however, are sufficiently patient to find investment in capital attractive right away. Investment in capital increases the incentive for investing in patience,
so that both the artisan’s patience and their growth rate of capital increase for a few
periods.
Figure 4 displays the dynamics of the taste for leisure during this transition. Once again,
workers remain in steady state. In contrast, as the artisan-turned-capitalist dynasties
grow richer, their work ethic deteriorates. The new capitalists turn from captains of
industry into rentiers, and start investing into their children’s appreciation of the virtues
of leisure. After a few periods, the tastes of the new capitalists are just as refined as those
27

of the landowners. In Figure 3, the capitalists’ deteriorating work ethic contributes to a
slow-down in the growth rate of capital. In the new balanced growth path, the wealth
of the former artisans continues to grow, but at a slower rate as during the first few
generations.
Given that the workers do not invest, the landowners a fortiori do not do so either. They
have the same flat income profile (although possibly a higher income level) and the same
low patience as the workers, but additionally a higher appreciation for leisure. At the
return offered by the new technology, the landowners would actually want to borrow,
but they cannot do that due to the borrowing constraint. They therefore continue to
live off their land rents, and are soon overtaken by the rising class of capitalists as the
economically dominant group in society.22
An interesting feature of the model is that the same pattern of catch-up and overtaking
can also be generated in an environment where the investment technology is available
from the outset, instead of being introduced later on. If all dynasties start out sufficiently
impatient, initially the investment technology is not used. Some dynasties, however,
sort into artisanship, and start to accumulate patience. After a few generations, the
patience of the artisans reaches a critical level, at which they start to use the investment
technology and turn into capitalists. In this version of the model, it is not the surprise
appearance of a new technology, but the endogenous accumulation of patience capital
that triggers the Industrial Revolution. Arguably, this sequence of events is closer in
spirit to Weber’s original hypothesis.
The outcome displayed in Figures 3 and 4 is extreme in that two classes are entirely excluded from entrepreneurship and wealth inequality grows indefinitely. Clearly, other
long-run patterns are possible depending on the parameters of the production function.
For very low returns on capital, not even the artisans would want to use the new technology. An interesting outcome arises if the return on capital is slightly higher than
what is displayed in Table 1. In this case, workers also start to invest in the new technology, albeit at a lower rate due to their impatience. Thus, former artisans accumulate
wealth more quickly. However, the differences across worker and artisan dynasties diminish over time, because the artisans acquire more leisure taste at earlier dates. If the
slowdown due to an increasing leisure preference is particularly severe, the initial en22

In the model, all landowners are identical, so that there is not a single landowning investor. The separation of classes is less sharp if one adds preference shocks to the model. Then a few patient landowners
can emerge who decide to utilize the new accumulation opportunity. These landowners would become
quite rich, since they can earn income from both the industry and agriculture.

28

trepreneurial dynasties may ultimately stagnate or regress and be themselves overtaken
by workers-turned-capitalists.
As far as the first periods after the introduction of the technology are concerned, the predictions of the theory are quite robust: the most patient and hard-working groups will
be the first to make use of a new investment opportunity. Thus, even if the environment
were such that ultimately even landowners invest, we would still expect the middle
class to get a head start, and possibly overtake the landowning class in the process. To
examine these predictions in more detail, we now turn to the historical circumstances
that accompanied the changing economic fortunes of different social classes during the
British Industrial Revolution.

6 The Historical Context
In this section we document the basic historical facts underlying our theory, starting
with the social origin of the first industrialists. In a study of founders of large industrial
undertakings in Britain between 1750 and 1850, Crouzet (1985) concludes that “neither
the upper class nor the lower orders made a large contribution to the recruitment of
industrialists” (p. 68). The only class that was significantly over-represented among
the industrialists was the middle class.23 Similarly, Jeremy (1990) documents that in a
sample of founders of large British business, among those born before 1870, the majority
had “left school in their mid-teens or earlier and then started to learn a trade, most
frequently by an apprenticeship” (p. 347). The minor involvement of landowners not
only in the establishment, but also in the financing of new enterprises is surprising,
given the extreme concentration of wealth in the hands of the landowning elite at the
23

In the sample analyzed in this study, only 2.3 percent of the industrialists came from peerage and
gentry (see Crouzet’s Table 5). In contrast, 85 percent of the new industrialists had a middle-class background. The professions represented in this class range from bankers and rich merchants at the upper
end to small artisans and tenant farmers at the lower end. As many as 27 percent of the men who entered
large-scale industry and 39 percent of the fathers of industrialists came from the lower ranks of the middle
class: “shopkeepers, self-employed craftsmen and artisans, cultivators of various kind” (Crouzet 1985, p.
127). The contribution of the working class (about 70 percent of the population) was moderate; no more
than 12 percent of the industrialists came from this class. Part of the explanation for the small number of
upper-class entrepreneurs is, of course, that there were few aristocrats to begin with. But the differences
in numbers do not explain the extent of the under-representation of the upper classes. At the beginning
of the nineteenth century, peerage and gentry accounted for about 1.4 percent of the population, while
the middle class made up slightly less than 30 percent. Thus, a much larger share of the middle class than
of the peerage and gentry ended up as entrepreneurs. If we relate the participation of the upper class to
their share of wealth owned instead of their share of the population, their representation is surprisingly
thin.

29

time. As late as in 1880, less than 5000 landowners still owned more than 50 percent of all
land (Cannadine 1990, see also Lindert (1981, p. 378). Given their enormous advantage
in wealth, the aristocrats should have been well placed to profit from new technologies
that were ultimately based on capital investment.
The new class of industrialists progressively replaced the landed elite as the economically dominant group in society, as reflected, with some lag, in changes in the wealth distribution. In the first half of the nineteenth century, large fortunes were still by and large
associated with land ownership. Rubinstein (1981) reports that among the 189 individuals who died between 1809 and 1858 with a fortune exceeding one million pounds, 95
percent were wealthy landowners. However, merchants and industrial capitalists were
already catching up. Lindert (1986, Table 1) documents that in 1810 the average estate
of living gentlemen was more than three times larger than that of merchants and industrial capitalists, whereas in 1875 it was 16 percent smaller. Soon thereafter, landowners
no longer featured prominently among the wealthiest families in the country. Between
1900 and 1939, only 7 percent of the 273 individuals who died as millionaires belonged
to the landed elite (Rubinstein 1981, Tables 3.2 to 3.4.). Among the non-landed millionaires, about half of the new fortunes were generated in the manufacturing sector, with
most of the rest accounted for by commerce and finance.
Our explanation for these patterns relies on differences in preferences which in turn
were shaped by the economic conditions faced by different social classes in the preindustrial period. There is indeed ample evidence that artisans and craftsmen, the typical professions of the pre-industrial middle classes, were required to make large human capital investments, and consequently had steep lifetime income profiles. In most
of Europe, an artisan’s career advanced through three stages: apprenticeship, journeymanship, and mastership.24 Apprenticeship would on average take 5–6 years, but in
some professions one would remain an apprentice for up to 12 years (Epstein 1991).
After apprenticeship, artisans would become journeymen and travel around European
cities, serving as employees at some master’s shop. This wandering period would last
for a minimum of 3–4 years (Friedrichs 1995). Savings and frugality were essential for
journeymen who hoped to become a master one day. “Unless he was able to count on
substantial inheritance or fortunate marriage, a journeyman’s primary interest was to
24

The life of an apprentice was not glamorous. “Upon payment of a placement fee, apprentices took
their place in their master’s household, agreeing to obey and respect him as a father. . . . Not all apprentices reached mastership, but this does not gainsay the fact that the purpose of apprenticeship was
selection and the goal a direct route to mastership” (Farr 2000, p. 33).

30

amass capital for opening their shop or business” (Epstein 1991, p. 115). Having completed his time on the road, the journeyman could apply for admission to mastership,
which was in itself an expensive process.25 Only at that point, if successful, could the
journeyman become a master and a new guild member, and open a shop at his own expense. These accounts suggest that the life of an artisan was investment-intensive, and
the consumption profile very steep (see Phelps Brown and Hopkins 1957, Munro 2004
and Farr 2000 for additional evidence).
In contrast, the age-earnings profiles of agricultural workers and landowners were relatively flat. Burnette (2002) documents that the wages of English farm workers in the
early nineteenth century varied little between the ages of 20 and 60. As far as the landed
gentry is concerned, the available evidence suggests that their income and consumption profiles were fairly flat as well. This class derived its income mostly from owning
land and, to a smaller extent, from mining projects (Beckett 1986). Annual variation in a
landowners’ income stems from two dominant sources: fluctuation in land rental rates,
and changes in the size of the estate through land sales or purchases. While there were
always some economically successful families who were able to increase the size of their
holdings, most aristocratic landowners merely aspired to preserve the estate, so as to ultimately pass to the next generation just as much as they once inherited. In periods of
rising land rental rates, the income of landowners as a class would increase as well; but
given that rents tended to change only slowly over time, these movements would not
generate the steep lifetime income profiles that were typical for artisans and craftsmen.26
In our theory, the different economic conditions characterizing the various social classes
ultimately manifest themselves in class-specific preferences. And indeed, the stark contrast of the new entrepreneurs’ thrift and work ethic with the landed aristocracy’s freespending habits and leisurely lifestyle has long been part of the conventional wisdom on
25

The applicants owed the payment of a series of fees, the completion of a masterpiece according to
the guild regulations, and the outlay (if the masterpiece was accepted) for a luxurious banquet for the
masters he hoped to join. In addition, he had to submit the name of a proposed bride, whom the guild
was supposed to examine and approve.
26
In principle, a flat profile for overall family income need not imply that individual consumption profiles were flat as well. In particular, one might imagine that aristocrats started to consume heavily only
after inheriting their estates, while living frugally during their younger years. However, the available evidence suggests that, if anything, the opposite was true. Young aristocrats typically did not work during
their childhood and young adulthood and were supported by their parents. These family support payments tended to be large, and contributed to aristocratic indebtedness: “family payments were not the
only cause of aristocratic indebtedness, but contemporaries usually regard them as playing a crucial role”
(Beckett 1986, p. 298). Thus, aristocrats usually lived in some comfort during their entire lives and did not
experience the stark contrast of a sober adolescence with relative prosperity during adulthood that was
typical for urban artisans and craftsmen.

31

the Industrial Revolution.27 The leisure orientation of the pre-industrial upper class was
in fact one of its defining characteristics, as evidenced by the observation that the term
“gentleman” traditionally signified a man who did not need to work.28 One indication
for low patience among the landed elite during the time of the Industrial Revolution is
the lack of savings that could have been channeled towards financing industrial enterprises. Given the absence of a contribution from the wealthy upper class, a large share of
the new enterprises had to rely on personal savings and retained earnings to grow. For
instance, Davis and Gallman (2001) note: “It may well have been true, as Postan noted,
that at least two fifteenth-century families could have provided all the finance required
to fund the entire Industrial Revolution. However, those (and other elite) families chose
not to redirect their existing portfolios to meet either the relatively small demands of
the manufacturing sector—demands that were met largely out of retained earnings—
or much more importantly, the demands for supporting investment in infrastructure,
particularly canal construction” (p. 50).
More generally, if the members of the upper class were truly lacking in patience, they
should have been unwilling to invest not only in industrial enterprises, but in other
kinds of financial assets as well. The historical evidence supports this implication. Well
before the Industrial Revolution, the British government became a major borrower, with
multiple bond issues (mostly for war finance) throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. These bonds were mostly purchased by the urban middle classes,
whereas the contribution of the landed classes was insignificant (Dickson 1967, p. 302).
The financing of early public companies follows the same pattern. Bowen (1989) documents that most stockholders of the East India Company between 1756 and 1791 were
“clergymen, bankers, military and naval personnel, officials, brokers, merchants large
and small, and retailers,” whereas “beyond doubt there was no large-scale investment
in the [East India] Company by the landed interest or aristocracy” (p. 195). The preindustrial elite thus played a surprisingly minor role in financing government borrowing and private enterprise well before the Industrial Revolution, despite being far wealthier than the middle class. This stands in marked contrast to the wealth elites in modern
27

For instance, von Mises (1963) writes: “The early industrialists were for the most part men who had
their origin in the same social strata from which their workers came. They lived very modestly, spent only
a fraction of their earnings for their households and put the rest back into the business” (p. 622).
28
The available data show that the differences in work and leisure time between upper and lower classes
were quantitatively large. Voth (2000) documents that in a sample of Londoners in 1760 and 1800 the
involvement of the elite in leisure activities was three to five times as large as that of other social groups,
whereas there were no significant differences between the lower and the middle classes (Tables 3.23 and
3.24, p. 112–13).

32

industrial countries, who generally own disproportionate shares of most types of assets, including government debt and public stock (see Carroll 2001 for evidence on the
United States).29
Rather than investing the rents derived from their estates, many landowners used their
land as collateral to borrow money. The scale of this borrowing substantially increased
when long-term mortgage loans where introduced after the Glorious Revolution of 1688.
Beckett (1986) reports that by the mid-eighteenth century “many families already had an
accumulation [of debt] several generations old” (p. 300).30 Most of this debt was taken
on not to improve existing estates or to buy more land, but resulted from a failure to
match expenditure to income: “Rents and royalties were apparently being sucked into
conspicuous consumption and frittered away in spiraling marriage contracts; and the
gap between getting and spending was filled not by offloading assets such as land, but
by borrowing from—in effect—the commercial, industrial and shopkeeping members
of the populace” (Beckett 1986, p. 316. See also Devine 1971, Kindleberger 1993 (p.175)
and Porter 1982). Aristocratic indebtedness grew severely during the nineteenth century, and a 1847 writer claimed that “between half and two-thirds of English land was
encumbered (i.e. mortgaged)” (Beckett 1986, p. 315). Cannadine (1994) summarizes the
situation as follows: “Whatever might have been the financial state of individual families, it seems clear that the landed aristocracy as a class was in debt through the first
three-quarters of the nineteenth century” (p. 49).31
Given our hypothesis of a low propensity to invest among the upper classes, one might
wonder why the aristocracy did not simply sell land to middle-class buyers. A large part
of the answer is that the land market in Britain was subject to pervasive legal restrictions
29

A possible caveat is that if investments in agricultural estates carried a higher return than financial
assets, the upper classes may have merely held a different (and possibly more profitable) portfolio than
the middle classes, rather than having other preferences. However, there is little evidence of widespread
active involvement of landowners in agricultural investment. Thompson (1994) documents that ever
since 1700, the landowners progressively withdrew from day-to-day involvement in the management of
their estates. The investments and technical innovations in agriculture during the eighteenth and early
nineteenth centuries, which played an important role in the British Industrial Revolution, were carried
out almost entirely by tenant farmers. Also notice that our theory does not posit that landowners were
always impatient; in fact, the first aristocrats in a dynasty, who initially acquired title and estate, may
have plausibly been particularly patient.
30
See also Temin and Voth (2004).
31
While some of this debt was raised for investment in non-agricultural ventures, according again to
Cannadine (1994), “the first [category] was spending which had its objective the enhancement of the social
prestige and the fulfillment of the traditional responsibilities of the landowner. . . . To the extent that
such self-indulgent activities were financed from middle- and working-class savings, . . . this definitely
amounted to a ‘haemorrhage of capital,’ a ‘misallocation of resources,’ as funds from urban and industrial
Britain were diverted to underpin the indulgence of the landed order” (p. 48–49).

33

that made selling land costly or even impossible. Most large estates were entailed, meaning that they could neither be split nor sold by the owner.32 Mortgaging their land to
merchants and banks was therefore the only way in which, de facto, landowners could
run down their assets. Eventually, after statutory reforms and changes in the common
law eased the restrictions on land sales, many families overburdened by debt did sell off
parts or all of their estates. By that time, the economic problems of the upper classes had
become so pressing that land sales reached a massive scope. Cannadine (1990) summarizes the dismantling of aristocratic landownership during the first part of the twentieth
century as follows: “The scale of this territorial transfer was rivaled only by two other
landed revolutions in Britain this Millennium: The Norman Conquest and the Dissolution of the Monasteries” (p. 89). While other factors (taxation, decline of land rents)
contributed to this final outcome, a clear thread links the chronic indebtedness of the
landed aristocracy over centuries with its eventual decline and inability to hold on to
the land.
A final implication of our theory is that once accumulated wealth becomes a major
source of income for the economically successful middle classes, we should observe
a change in attitudes towards leisure, and ultimately a decline in work effort and entrepreneurial success. Consistent with these predictions, Cunningham (1980) documents
an explosion in the demand for leisure by the enriched bourgeois middle class in the
second half of the 1800. Bailey (1989) writes: “One indisputable feature of the period before 1914 was the much greater proportionate expansion of leisure among the wealthier
class. At mid-century the Victorian middle class had been suspicious of the moral temptations of a beckoning leisure world, but had rapidly learned to assimilate it to their
culture. . . . By the end of the century prescriptions had become more permissive—from
‘Be virtuous and you will be happy’ to ‘Be happy and you will be virtuous’—and middle
class leisure grew more expansive and assured” (p.110). Among entrepreneurial dynasties, such an increase in leisure—according to our theory—should go hand-in-hand with
a waning of entrepreneurial success as family firms are passed on from the founding fathers to subsequent generations (the “Buddenbrooks effect”). In an empirical study of
1149 British business leaders born between 1789 and 1937, Nicholas (1999b) documents
strong evidence in support of this prediction. In particular, he finds that “there is a comparatively low lifetime rate of wealth accumulation for firm inheritors. The older the
dynasty, the lower is the rate of return. Third-generation entrepreneurs clearly under32

Through the institution of entail, an aristocratic landowner could prevent his descendants from selling
part or all of the estate.

34

performed relative to firm founders or managers”(p. 706–7). This observation is at odds
with a purely genetic view of entrepreneurial skills and preference transmission.33

7 Discussion of Alternative Hypotheses
The mechanism outlined in this paper is not the only possible explanation of the changing fortunes of different social classes throughout the Industrial Revolution. A first alternative hypothesis is that the upper classes were excluded from industrialization because urban workers possessed skills that were essential for industrial activities, while
the landowners did not. For certain sectors and activities, there is indeed strong evidence showing that prior experience was important in determining who would become
an entrepreneur.34 However, the evidence also suggests that differences in skills cannot
be the only or main explanation. A significant share of the new industrialists had not
previously been involved in any form of manufacturing. For instance, as many as 22
percent of the industrialists’ fathers were yeomen and farmers, groups with no experience in industrial activity (Crouzet 1985). Moreover, there is evidence of substantial
mobility across industrial sectors. Crouzet reports that no more than 40 percent of the
fathers of the industrialists in his sample worked either in the same industry or in an
industry or trade with forward or backward linkages with the branch in which they
set up (Table 8, p.152). Landowners were therefore not at a particular disadvantage in
terms of their skills relative to many of the middle-class entrepreneurs. In fact, a number
of key sectors during industrialization (such as mining, railways, and canals) required
land as a major input. In these sectors, if anything, the landowners should have had an
advantage over middle-class city dwellers.
A related argument is that the landowners, busy managing their rural estates, may have
lacked the time and opportunity to enter industrial activities, which mostly took place in
or near cities. However, many landowners did not actively manage their estates. Even
more telling, it was not only the heirs of estates who shunned business activity; second
and third sons of landowners did so as well. These younger sons had no choice but to
33

This is echoed by Alfred Marshall (1890) who writes: “It would . . . at first sight seem likely that
business men should constitute a sort of caste; . . . But the actual state of things is very different. . . . [W]hen
a man has got together a great business, his descendants often fail, in spite of their great advantage, to
develop the high abilities and special turn of mind and temperament required for carrying it on with equal
success. . . . When a full generation has passed . . . then the business almost invariably falls to pieces. . . . ”
(pp. 299-300).
34
Skills and experience in related activities were particularly important in the textile industry (see
Crouzet 1985, ch. 8, pp. 116-125, and also footnote 79, p.206).

35

enter some activity other than landowning, and were therefore not held back by their
obligations to an existing estate. Nevertheless, they did not enter business in any larger
numbers than their landowning fathers. For instance, consider Table 2, which reports
the occupational choices of Cambridge graduates during the period 1750–1899. The
vast majority of students at Cambridge during this period were sons of the landowning
class, so their occupational choices (other than landowning) give us some idea of which
professions younger sons entered.35 Strikingly, until 1850, not a single graduate got
involved in banking or business (widely defined as any “profit-oriented activity”), and
even after 1850 the percentage remains surprisingly low. This evidence is corroborated
by the study of Crouzet (1985), who documents that few of the new industrialists’ fathers
were landowners (see footnote 23).
The arguments discussed so far do not rely on group-specific preferences. We now turn
to explanations that do involve heterogeneity in preferences, but of a different nature
than in our model. The most prominent of these theories, which is advocated by historians of the Victorian period such as Cain and Hopkins (1993), is that a social norm against
the involvement in entrepreneurial activities excluded the British aristocracy from industrial capitalism: “A gentleman required income, and preferably sizeable wealth, but
was not to be sullied by the acquisitive process” (p. 23). To the extent to which this
exclusion was a matter of personal preference and (possibly acquired) taste, this thesis coincides with our explanation. However, as the classical theory of Veblen (1899)
suggests, social norms may have also served as an instrument of social exclusion. A
gentleman violating the norm would lose the recognition of his peers, with potentially
grave consequences for social standing and access to aristocratic privileges. In this case,
the enforcement would be partly extrinsic: even a gentleman enjoying hard work in
principle may prefer to shun work in practice to avoid social sanctions.
It is difficult to empirically distinguish the individual-preference and social-norm approaches to class-specific preferences, because the implications for individual behavior
are similar. One indication for the importance of individual preferences is that the “gentlemanly values” of the upper class persisted even after the aristocracy lost its predominance. If social norms had no function other than serving as an instrument of social
exclusion, we would expect these norms to disappear once aristocratic privileges lost
their value. The historical evidence suggests that aristocratic norms not only persisted,
35

One group missing here is those choosing the military career, who would attend a military academy
instead of Oxford or Cambridge.

36

but even spread to other social classes throughout the nineteenth century.36 This observation is inconsistent with an explanation for class-specific preferences based on social
exclusion alone, because members of lower classes could not have gained access to social and economic privileges by merely imitating the tastes of the upper class.37
From a theoretical perspective, we regard the two explanations as complementary, because they mutually reinforce each other.38 If we introduced a social norm in our model
that imposed social or economic sanctions on hard-working landowners, a landowning
dynasty’s incentives for investing in the taste for leisure would increase even further;
thus, the imposition of a social norm would generate individual preferences in accordance with the norm. Likewise, when the social norms first arose, the aristocracy may
have chosen to emphasize leisure and refined tastes as an instrument of social exclusion precisely because their income process granted them abundant free time, whereas
members of other classes had no choice but to work. As Veblen put it, “abstention from
labour is the conventional evidence of wealth and is therefore the conventional mark
of social standing; and this insistence on the meritoriousness of wealth leads to a more
strenuous insistence on leisure” (p. 26). Thus, the social norm may have its roots in the
same economic conditions that generate class-specific preferences in our theory.
A last possibility is that aspects of preferences other than patience and leisure appreciation were driving the economic decisions of different social classes during the Industrial
Revolution. For example, risk aversion or attitudes towards innovation may have also
been relevant for the emergence of a spirit of capitalism, although these traits would apply mainly to entrepreneurship narrowly conceived rather than to the general attitude
towards investments. Extending the analysis to these additional aspects of preferences
may provide further insights. For instance, similar to the case of patience, financial development would tend to equalize the attitudes towards risk across dynasties engaged
36

When Britain went into economic decline relative to competitors such as Germany and the United
States after 1870, much of the blame was placed on the British education system (in particular the public
schools and Oxbridge) for spreading aristocratic anti-business and anti-industrial attitudes to the upper
middle classes; see the extensive discussion in Rubinstein (1993).
37
Whereas the industrial elite ultimately started to appreciate leisure, for the most part it did not acquire the main prerequisites of aristocratic privilege, i.e., land and titles. For instance, Nicholas (1999a)
notes that “those who made fortunes in business . . . did not purchase or inherit land on large scale. This
was despite the fact that their wealth gave them an unprecedented opportunity for land acquisition.”
Indeed, many preferred renting land for their leisure’s sake, but did not bother with buying it. This suggests that leisure had intrinsic appeal to them, rather than being enjoyed solely for the purpose of social
advancement (see also Rubinstein 1981, 1996).
38
However, formally embedding social norms of this type in our theory is a non-trivial task and is left
to future research.

37

in different professions. However, it may induce parents to encourage risk-taking behavior in their children, contrary to the analysis of patience in this paper, where financial
development reduces the incentive to invest in patience.

8 Conclusions
The modern theory of economic growth focuses on changes in material conditions and
standards of living, while ignoring, with few exceptions, the role of culture. This approach is legitimate as long as culture, while possibly being shaped by economic conditions, does not feed back into economic decisions. Recently, however, a number of
economists have uncovered growing evidence that preferences, culture, and religion are
important determinants of economic decisions and outcomes.
In this paper, we have developed a theory where economic conditions and culture are
mutually interlinked. The theory is consistent with a number of observations about the
British Industrial Revolution, such as the emergence of a spirit of capitalism among the
urban middle class, as well as the subsequent replacement of the landed aristocracy
by industrial capitalists as the socio-economic elite. The theory also predicts that the
economic success of the bourgeoisie should lead to a cultural transformation of this
class. Starting from a value system that emphasized hard work and disdain for leisure,
the rising role of capital income results in a heightened appreciation of leisure among the
industrial elite. This change in preferences can contribute to explaining the substandard
economic performance of owners of inherited firms relative to the founders of industrial
enterprises.
The theory shows that stratification of preferences across occupations may occur even in
an initially homogeneous society. In reality, historical accidents may have fostered the
stratification process. For instance, the political and religious forces behind the success
of the protestant reformation may have contributed to the formation and transmission of
preferences conducive to hard work and wealth accumulation. Likewise, demographic
changes such as increasing longevity may have also played a role. A longer life horizon
would tend to increase an agent’s propensity to accumulate human capital and material wealth, reinforcing the effects of technological shocks at the time of the Industrial
Revolution.
Although the analysis targets a specific historical episode, we expect the theory developed in this paper to be applicable to other open questions in macroeconomics and
38

economic growth. For instance, a recent macroeconomic literature argues that heterogeneity in discount factors is key for explaining portfolio choices and the dynamics of
the wealth distribution in modern economies (see Krusell and Smith, Jr. 1998, Gourinchas and Parker 2002, Samwick 1998, Browning, Hansen, and Heckman 1999, Ameriks,
Caplin, and Leahy 2002, and De Nardi 2004). Our theory provides a new mechanism for
the emergence and transmission of heterogeneous preferences. The theory also offers
a new perspective on the impact of financial development on economic development.
These and other aspects of endogenous preference formation are left to future research.

A Mathematical Appendix
Sequential Formulation of the Decision Problem: The sequential decision problem corresponding to (4) is given by:
V  (A0 , B0 ) = max

∞


z t (1 − Bt ) log(w1,i t n1 t ) + At (1 − n1 t )
t=0

+ Bt log(w2,i t n2 t ) + At (1 − n1 t ) − lA t − lB t



(21)

subject to it ∈ I n1 t ∈ [0, 1] n2 t ∈ [0, 1] lA t ∈ [0, ¯lAt ] lB t ∈ [0, ¯lB ] At+1 = ψ Ā + (1 − ψ)At + g(lA t )
and Bt+1 = ψ B̄ + (1 − ψ)Bt + f (lB t ).
Proof of Proposition 2: The proof is an application of Corollary 1 to Theorem 3.2 in Stokey and
Lucas (1989). The Bellman equation (6) defines a mapping T on the space of bounded continuous
functions on the interval [B̄, Bmax ], endowed with the sup norm, where the mapping is given by:


sup
(1 − B) log(w1,i ) + B log(w2,i ) − lB + z vB (ψ B̄ + (1 − ψ)B + f (lB )) .
T vB (B) =
i∈I,0≤lB ≤l̄B

(22)
Since we assume 0 < z < 1, Blackwell’s sufficient conditions for a contraction are met, and hence
T has a unique fixed point by the Contraction Mapping Theorem. Using Corollary 1, we can now
establish that the value function (i.e., the fixed point of the mapping T ) is non-decreasing and
weakly convex by establishing that the operator T preserves these properties.
To establish that the value function is non-decreasing, let vB be a non-decreasing bounded continuous function. We need to show that T vB is non-decreasing as well. Choose two points
Bh > Bl from the interval [B̄, Bmax ],. We want to establish that T vB (Bh ) ≥ T vB (Bl ). Since
the right-hand side of (22) is the maximization of a continuous function over a compact set, the
maximum is attained. Let l and {w 1 , w 2 } be choices attaining the maximum for Bl . We then
have:
T vB (Bh ) ≥ (1 − Bh ) log(w 1 ) + Bh log(w 2 ) − l + z vB (ψ B̄ + (1 − ψ)Bh + f (l))
≥ (1 − Bl ) log(w 1 ) + Bl log(w 2 ) − l + z vB (ψ B̄ + (1 − ψ)Bl + f (l)) = T vB (Bl ),

39

which is the desired result. Here the first inequality follows because the choices l, {w 1 , w 2 } may
not be maximizing at Bh , and the second inequality follows because vB is assumed to be increasing, and we have that (1 − Bh ) log(w 1 ) + Bh log(w 2 ) ≥ (1 − Bl ) log(w 1 ) + Bl log(w 2 ) since
w2 ≥ w1.
To establish that the value function is convex, let vB be a (weakly) convex bounded continuous
function. We need to establish that T vB is also a convex function. To show this, choose a number
θ such that 0 < θ < 1, let Bh > Bl , and let B = θBh + (1 − θ)Bl . We now need to show that
θT vB (Bh ) + (1 − θ)T vB (Bl ) ≥ T vB (B). Let l and {w1 w2 } be choices attaining the maximum for
B. Since these are feasible, but not necessarily optimal choices at Bh and Bl , we have:
T vB (Bh ) ≥ (1 − Bh ) log(w1 ) + Bh log(w2 ) − l + z vB (ψ B̄ + (1 − ψ)Bh + f (l)),
T vB (Bl ) ≥ (1 − Bl ) log(w1 ) + Bl log(w2 ) − l + z vB (ψ B̄ + (1 − ψ)Bl + f (l)).
Using these results, we have:
θ T vB (Bh ) + (1 − θ) T vB (Bl )


≥ θ (1 − Bh ) log(w1 ) + Bh log(w2 ) − l + z vB (ψ B̄ + (1 − ψ)Bh + f (l))


+ (1 − θ) (1 − Bl ) log(w1 ) + Bl log(w2 ) − l + z vB (ψ B̄ + (1 − ψ)Bl + f (l))
= (1 − B) log(w1 ) + B log(w2 ) − l


+ z θvB ((1 − ψ)Bh + f (l)) + (1 − θ)vB (ψ B̄ + (1 − ψ)Bl + f (l))
≥ (1 − B) log(w1 ) + B log(w2 ) − l + z vB (ψ B̄ + (1 − ψ)B + f (l)) = T vB (B),
which is the desired condition. Here, the last inequality follows from the assumed convexity of
vB . The operator T therefore preserves convexity, and thus the fixed point must also be convex.
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 3: Choose two patience levels Bh > Bl , and let the corresponding optimal
choices be l, w 1 , w 2 and l, w 1 , w 2 . We want to prove that l ≥ l and w 2 /w 1 ≥ w 2 /w 1 . We proceed
in two steps. (a) We show, by deriving a contradiction, that we cannot have simultaneously
w 2 /w 1 < w2 /w 1 and l < l. (b) We show that the solution must feature either (i) l ≥ l and
w 2 /w 1 ≥ w2 /w 1 or (ii) l < l and w2 /w 1 < w 2 /w 1 . Hence, (a) and (b) establish the desired result.
(a):

Since the choices are optimal given Bl and Bh , the following inequalities must be satisfied:

(1 − Bh ) log(w 1 ) + Bh log(w 2 ) − ¯l + z vB (ψ B̄ + (1 − ψ)Bh + f (l))
≥ (1 − Bh ) log(w 1 ) + Bh log(w2 ) − l + z vB (ψ B̄ + (1 − ψ)Bh + f (l)), (23)
(1 − Bl ) log(w 1 ) + Bl log(w 2 ) − ¯l + z vB (ψ B̄ + (1 − ψ)Bl + f (l))
≤ (1 − Bl ) log(w 1 ) + Bl log(w 2 ) − l + z vB (ψ B̄ + (1 − ψ)Bl + f (l)), (24)
where the first inequality follows from optimization at Bh and the second from optimization at
Bl . Subtracting (24) from (23) on both sides, we obtain the following condition:
  
 


w2
w2
(25)
− log
≥ Φ Bh , Bl , ¯l, l
(Bh − Bl ) log
w1
w1

40

where:




Φ Bh , Bl , ¯l, l ≡ z vB (ψ B̄ + (1 − ψ)Bh + f (l)) − vB (ψ B̄ + (1 − ψ)Bl + f (l))


− z vB (ψ B̄ + (1 − ψ)Bh + f (¯l)) − vB (ψ B̄ + (1 − ψ)Bl + f (¯l)) .


Due to the convexity of vB and the fact that f is increasing, Φ Bh , Bl , ¯l, l ≥ 0 if l ≤ l, and


Φ Bh , Bl , ¯l, l ≤ 0 if l ≥ l. The sign of the left-hand side is equal to the sign of w 2 /w 1 − w2 /w 1 .
Suppose, now, to derive a contradiction, that w 2 /w 1 < w2 /w 1 and l < l. Then, the left hand-side
of (25) would be negative and the right-hand side of (25) would be non-negative, violating the
inequality. Thus, it is impossible that both w 2 /w 1 < w2 /w 1 and l < l.
(b):

Optimization in the choice of the income profile implies the following inequalities:
(1 − Bh ) log(w 1 ) + Bh log(w2 ) − ¯l ≥ (1 − Bl ) log(y 1 ) + Bh log(y 2 ) − ¯l,

(26)

(1 − Bl ) log(w 1 ) + Bl log(w2 ) − l ≤ (1 − Bl ) log(y 1 ) + Bh log(y 2 ) − l.
Subtracting the two equations as before, we get:
  
w2
− log
(Bh − Bl ) log
w1

y2

y1


≥ l − l,

(27)

which implies that either (i) l ≥ l and w 2 /w 1 ≥ w2 /w 1 or (ii) l < l and w 2 /w 1 < w 2 /w 1 . However,
the possibility that l < l and w2 /w 1 < w 2 /w 1 has already been ruled out in (a). Therefore, we
Q.E.D.
must conclude that l ≥ l and w 2 /w 1 ≥ w2 /w 1 .
Proof of Proposition 4: In Proposition 3, we established that the steepness of the optimal income
profile w2 /w1 is increasing in B, and that the optimal choice of investment in patience lB (B) is
also increasing in B. It then follows that the patience as well as the steepness of the income
profiles of all future members of a dynasty (child, grandchild etc.) are increasing in the patience
of the current member of a dynasty.
Since there are only finitely many occupations, we can subdivide the state space [0, Bmax ] into
finitely many closed intervals (they are closed because of our continuity assumptions in Assumption 1), where each interval corresponds to the choice of a given occupation i. The agent is just
indifferent between two occupations at the boundary of two such intervals, and strictly prefers
a given occupation in the interior of such an interval. The intervals can be further subdivided
according to the occupational choice of the child. Since lB (B) may not be singled valued, there
may be multiple optimal B  corresponding to a given B today. Nevertheless, since the B  are
strictly increasing in B (because of Proposition 3 and ψ < 1) and given that there are only finitely many occupations, we can once again subdivide today’s state space in finitely many close
intervals, each one corresponding to a specific occupational choice of the child, such that the
intervals overlap only at their boundary points. Continuing this way, the state space [B̄, Bmax ]
can be divided into a countable number of closed intervals (there is a finite number of possible
occupations in each of the countably many future generations), where each interval corresponds
to a specific occupational choice of each generation. Let [Bk , Bk+1 ] be such an interval. We want
to establish that the value function is linear over this interval, and that the optimal choice of
patience l(B) is single-valued and constant over the interior of this interval.

41

It is useful to consider the sequential formulation (21) of the decision problem. Taking the present
and future occupational choices it as given, we can substitute for Bt and write the remaining
decision problem over the lBt on the interval [Bk , Bk+1 ] as:

vB (B) = max
+

∞

t=1


log(w1,i0 ) + B log


z

t

log(w1,it ) +

w2,i0
w1,i0


− l0



t

w2,it
t−s−1
ψ B̄ + (1 − ψ) B +
(1 − ψ)
f (ls ) log
− lt
w
1,i
t
s=0
t



t

. (28)

For given current and future income profiles, (28) is concave in lt for all t, since f is concave.
Moreover, patience B and all expressions involving lBt appear in separate terms in the sum.
If f is strictly concave, it follows that, given the optimal income profiles, for all t the optimal
lt is unique, and independent of B. Since on the interior of [Bk , Bk+1 ] the current and future
optimal income profiles are unique, the optimal policy correspondence lB (B) is single-valued.
At the boundary between two intervals there are (by construction of the intervals) at least two
different optimal income profiles for at least one generation, hence lB (B) may take on more than
one optimal value, one corresponding to each optimal set of income profiles. If f (or a segment
of f ) is linear, lB (B) is still generically single-valued on the interior of each interval, as exact
indifference only occurs on a zero-measure subset of the parameter space.
The optimal value function vB over the interval [Bk , Bk+1 ] is given by (28) with income profiles
it and investment in patience lt fixed at their optimal (and constant) values. (28) is linear in B;
it therefore follows that the value function is piece-wise linear, with each kink corresponding to
Q.E.D.
the boundary between two of our intervals.
Proof of Proposition 5: The law of motion for B, f : [B̄, Bmax ] → [B̄, Bmax ], is given by:
Θ(B) = ψ B̄ + (1 − ψ) B + f (lB (B)) ,
where lB (B) is generically a non-decreasing step function (as described in Proposition 4). Since f
is an increasing function and we assume that ψ < 1, the law of motion Θ(B) is strictly increasing
in B. Notice that Θ(B) may fail to be single-valued for some B. Strictly increasing here means
that Bh < Bl implies Bh < Bl for all Bh ∈ Θ(Bh ) and Bl ∈ Θ(Bl ), even if Θ(Bh ) or Θ(Bl ) is a set.
For a given B0 , the law of motion Θ defines (potentially multiple) optimal sequences of patience
{Bt }∞
t=0 . Any such sequence is a monotone sequence on the compact set [B̄, Bmax ], and must
therefore converge. Notice, however, that since l(B) is not single-valued everywhere, different
steady states can be reached even from the same initial B0 . If f (or a segment of f ) is linear, the
same results still apply generically, i.e., outside a zero-measure subset of the parameter space.
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 6: The strategy is analogous to the proof of Proposition 2. The Bellman
equation (5) defines a mapping T on the space of bounded continuous functions on the interval
[Ā, Amax ], endowed with the sup norm, where the mapping is given by:


(29)
T vA (A) = sup log(n) + A(1 − n) − lA + z vA (A ) ,
lA ,n

where A = ψ Ā + (1 − ψ)A + g(lA ). Since we assume 0 < z < 1, this mapping is a contraction

42

by Blackwell’s sufficient conditions, and it therefore has a unique fixed point by the Contraction
Mapping Theorem.
To establish that the value function is increasing, let vA be a non-decreasing bounded continuous
function. We need to show that T h is a non-decreasing function. Choose Ah > Al . We want to
establish that T vB (Ah ) > T vB (Al ). Since the right-hand side of (29) is the maximization of a
continuous function over a compact set, the maximum is attained. Let l and n be the choices
attaining the maximum for Al . We have:
T vA (Ah ) ≥ log(n) + Ah (1 − n) − l + z vA (ψ Ā + (1 − ψ)Ah + g(l))
≥ log(n) + Al (1 − n) − l + z vA (ψ Ā + (1 − ψ)Al + g(l)) = T vA (Al ),
which is the desired result. Here the first inequality follows because the choice l may not be
maximizing at Ah , and the second inequality follows because Ah > Al and vA is assumed to be
non-decreasing.
To prove that the value function is (weakly) convex, we establish that the operator T preserves
convexity. Let vA be a convex bounded continuous function. We need to establish that T h is also
convex. Choose a number θ such that 0 < θ < 1, let Ah > Al , and let A = θAh + (1 − θ)Al . We
want to show that θT vA (Ah ) + (1 − θ)T vA (Al ) ≥ T vA (A). Let l and n be choices attaining the
maximum for A. Since these are feasible, but not necessarily optimal choices at Ah and Al , we
have:
T vA (Ah ) ≥ log(n) + Ah (1 − n) − l + z vA (ψ Ā + (1 − ψ)Ah + g(l)),
T vA (Al ) ≥ log(n) + Al (1 − n) − l + z vA (ψ Ā + (1 − ψ)Al + g(l)).
Using these inequalities, we have:
θT vA (Ah ) + (1 − θ)T vA (Al )


≥ θ log(n) + Ah (1 − n) − l + z vA (ψ Ā + (1 − ψ)Ah + g(l))


+ (1 − θ) log(n) + Al (1 − n) − l + z vA (ψ Ā + (1 − ψ)Al + g(l))
= log(n) + A(1 − n) − l


+ z θvA (ψ Ā + (1 − ψ)Ah + g(l)) + (1 − θ)vA (ψ Ā + (1 − ψ)Al + g(l))


≥ log(n) + A(1 − n) − l + z vA (Ā + (1 − ψ) A − Ā + g(l)) = T vA (A),
which is the required condition. The last inequality follows from the assumed convexity of vA .
The operator T therefore preserves convexity, and thus the fixed point must also be convex.
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 7: To prove that lA (A) is a non-decreasing function of A, write first the
program as




vA (A) = sup − log(A) + A − 1 − lA + z vA (Ā + (1 − ψ) A − Ā + g(lA )) .
lA

Next, let l0 = lA (A0 ) and l1 = lA (A1 ), where A1 > A0 . We want to prove that l1 ≥ l0 . To this

43

aim, observe that




−l0 + z vA (Ā + (1 − ψ) A0 − Ā + g(l0 )) ≥ −l0 + z vA (Ā + (1 − ψ) A0 − Ā + g(l1 ))




−l1 + z vA (Ā + (1 − ψ) A1 − Ā + g(l0 )) ≤ −l1 + z vA (Ā + (1 − ψ) A1 − Ā + g(l1 ))
Subtracting the two equations as before, we get:






l1 − l0 ≥ z vA (Ā + (1 − ψ) A0 − Ā + g(l1 )) − z vA (Ā + (1 − ψ) A0 − Ā + g(l0 )) (30)






− z vA (Ā + (1 − ψ) A1 − Ā + g(l1 )) − z vA (Ā + (1 − ψ) A1 − Ā + g(l0 ))
(30) implies that l1 ≥ l0 . To see why, suppose, to derive a contradiction, that l1 < l0 . Then, the left
hand-side would be negative, while the right hand-side would be positive, since vA is increasing
and convex. This would contradict the inequality in (30). Therefore, we must have that l1 ≥ l0 .
Hence, lA (A) must be non-decreasing in A.
The proof of convergence to the steady state is analogous to the proof of Proposition 5. Consider
the equilibrium law of motion A = Γ (A) where
Γ (A) = ψ Ā + (1 − ψ) A + g (lA (A)) .
Since g is increasing and lA is non-decreasing, Γ (A) is strictly increasing in A. For a given A0 , the
law of motion Γ defines (potentially multiple) optimal sequences of patience {At }∞
t=0 . Any such
sequence is a monotone sequence on the compact set [Ā, Amax ], and must therefore converge.
Q.E.D.
The steady-state expression follows immediately from setting A = Γ (A).
Proof of Proposition 8: The proposed equilibrium satisfies the following conditions: A positive
fraction of the young adults at time t = 0 invest in patience (at the level lB = ¯lB ) in expectation of
their children becoming artisans (at time t = 2); the remaining young adults do not invest and set
lB = 0; the agricultural wage is constant from time t = 2 onwards and adjusts so as to equalize
the ex-ante utility of all young adults at time zero; from period t = 2 onwards, preferences
diverge, and the members of the dynasties that did not invest in the first period prefer to be
workers and not to invest in patience, while the members of dynasties that did invest in the first
period prefer to be artisans and to invest in patience at the maximum level lB = ¯lB .
We construct the equilibrium in two steps. (i) We derive the equilibrium labor supply μ in agriculture from t = 2 onwards (and the corresponding wage) that makes the initial generation just
indifferent between investing and not investing, provided that the equilibrium takes the prescribed form. (ii) We show that condition (16) implies that the prescribed occupational choices
from period t = 2 onwards are indeed optimal.
(i) First notice that since f is linear, conditional on lB > 0 it is (at least weakly) optimal to invest
lB . When comparing the utility derived from investing and not
the maximum amount lB = ¯
investing, we can disregard the utility that the initial generation derives from consumption and
leisure because of the separable utility function (this component of utility is the same for all firstgeneration families). Then, the value of not investing in patience (under the expectation that all
future members of the dynasty will choose to be workers) is given by:
 
ṽB,F B̄ =



z
log αμα−1 .
1−z

44

(31)

This is simply the discounted utility derived from receiving the worker’s wage wF = αμα−1 from
the next generation on. In contrast, the value of investing in patience (under the expectation that
all future members of the dynasty will choose to be artisans) is:
 


(32)
ṽB,M B̄ = −¯lB + z vB,M B̄ + ξ ¯lB ,
where:



vB,M (B) = log(q) + B log(γ) − ¯lB + z vB,M ψ B̄ + (1 − ψ)B + ξ ¯lB .

Notice that the artisan’s utility depends not just on consumption, but also on the cost of investing
¯lB . Solving for vB,M (B) yields:


ψ B̄ + ξ ¯lB log(γ)
z
log (γ)
log(q) − ¯
lB
vB,M (B) =
+
+
B.
1−z
1 − z (1 − z (1 − ψ))
1 − z (1 − ψ)
Hence,
vB,M



B̄ + ξ ¯lB =

1
1−z



log(q) − ¯lB +


ξ ¯lB log(γ)
+ log (γ) B̄ ,
1 − z (1 − ψ)

which can be substituted into (32) to yield:


 
1
ξ ¯lB log(γ)
log(q) − ¯lB +
+ log (γ) B .
ṽB,M B̄ = −¯lB +
1−z
1 − z (1 − ψ)
For the
to be indifferent between investing and not investing, we must have
 first generation
 
v˜B A B̄ = ṽB,M B̄ , which in turn implies (after standard algebra) condition (17) as stated in
the proposition:
¯lB


ξ ¯lB log(γ)
+
.
log(wF ) = log αμα−1 = log(q) + B̄ log(γ) −
z
1 − z (1 − ψ)
In addition, the corresponding μ has to satisfy μ < n (where n is equilibrium labor supply),
so that there is a positive fraction of artisans. This condition can always be met by choosing q
sufficiently large.
(ii) We need to ensure that a young adult in period two who is endowed with patience B̄ + ξ ¯lB
prefers being an artisan to working in agriculture at the flat wage wF , while the opposite is true
for an adult with patience B̄. More formally,
¯lB


ξ ¯lB log(γ)
+
≤ log(q) + B̄ + ξ ¯lB log(γ),
z
1 − z (1 − ψ)
¯lB
ξ ¯lB log(γ)
+
≥ log(q) + B̄ log(γ).
log(q) + B̄ log (γ) −
z
1 − z (1 − ψ)
log(q) + B̄ log (γ) −

These inequalities holds if and only if assumption (16) is satisfied. If these inequalities are satisfied, they hold a fortiori for all subsequent generations, because patience increases over time in
Q.E.D.
artisan dynasties.

45

References
Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, and John Leahy. 2002. “Wealth Accumulation and the Propensity to Plan.” NBER Working Paper No. 8920.
Artige, Lionel, Carmen Camacho, and David de la Croix. 2004. “Wealth Breeds Decline: Reversals of Leadership and Consumption Habits.” Journal of Economic Growth 9 (4): 423–49.
Bailey, Peter. 1989. “Leisure, Culture and the Historian: Reviewing the First Generation of
Leisure Historiography in Britain.” Leisure Studies 8 (2): 107–27.
Banerjee, Abhijit V. and Andrew F. Newman. 1993. “Occupational Choice and the Process of
Development.” Journal of Political Economy 101 (2): 274–98.
Barro, Robert J. and Rachel M. McCleary. 2003. “Religion and Economic Growth.” NBER
Working Paper 9682.
Becker, Gary S. and Casey B. Mulligan. 1997. “The Endogenous Determination of Time Preference.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (3): 729–58.
Beckett, John V. 1986. The Aristocracy in England: 1660–1914. New York: Blackwell.
Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier. 2000. “Beyond the Melting Pot: Cultural Transmission,
Marriage, and the Evolution of Ethnic and Religious Traits.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
115 (3): 955–88.
. 2001. “The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the Dynamics of Preferences.”
Journal of Economic Theory 97 (2): 298–319.
Botticini, Maristella and Zvi Eckstein. 2005. “Jewish Occupational Selection: Education, Restrictions, or Minorities?” Journal of Economic History 65 (4): 922–48.
. 2006a. “From Farmers to Merchants, Voluntary Conversions and Diaspora: A Human
Capital Interpretation of Jewish History.” Forthcoming, Journal of the European Economic
Association.
. 2006b. “Path Dependence and Occupations.” Forthcoming in New Palgrave Dictionary
of Economics, edited by Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence Blume.
Bowen, H.V. 1989. “Investment and Empire in the Later Eighteenth Century: East India Stockholding, 1756–1791.” Economic History Review 42 (2): 186–206.
Browning, Martin, Lars P. Hansen, and James J. Heckman. 1999. “Micro Data and General
Equilibrium Models.” Chapter 8 of Handbook of Macroeconomics Volume 1A, edited by John B.
Taylor and Michael Woodford. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Burnette, Joyce. 2002. “How Skilled Were English Agricultural Laborers? Wage Profiles from
the 1830s and 1840s.” Unpublished Manuscript, Wabash College.
Cain, Peter J. and Anthony G. Hopkins. 1993. British Imperialism: Innovation and Expansion
1688–1914. London: Longman.
Cannadine, David. 1990. Decline and Fall of the British Aristocracy. New Haven: Yale University
Press.
. 1994. Beyond the Country House: Aspects of Aristocracy in Modern Britain. New Haven:
Yale University Press.

46

Carneiro, Pedro and James J. Heckman. 2003. “Human Capital Policy.” In Inequality in America:
What Role for Human Capital Policies, edited by James J. Heckman and Alan B. Krueger, 77–
240. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Carroll, Christopher D. 2001. “Portfolios of the Rich.” In Household Portfolios: Theory and
Evidence, edited by Luigi Guiso, Michael Haliassos, and Tullio Jappelli. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Carroll, Christopher D. and Lawrence H. Summers. 1991. “Consumption Growth Parallels
Income Growth: Some New Evidence.” In National Saving and Economic Performance, edited
by B. Douglas Bernheim and John B. Shaven, 305–43. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Caselli, Franceso and Nicola Gennaioli. 2003. “Dynastic Management.” NBER Working Paper
No. 9442.
Cavalcanti, Tiago V., Stephen L. Parente, and Rui Zhao. 2003. “Religion in Macroeconomics: A
Quantitative Analysis of Weber’s Thesis.” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Illinois.
Clark, Gregory and Gillian Hamilton. 2004. “Can Institutions Shape Preferences? The Long
Run Implications of Property Rights in the Malthusian Era.” Unpublished Manuscript,
University of California, Davis.
Coleman, James and Thomas Hoffer. 1983. Public and Private High Schools. New York: Basic
Books.
Crouzet, François. 1985. The First Industrialists. Cambridge University Press.
Cunningham, Hugh. 1980. Leisure in the Industrial Revolution c. 1780–c.1880. London: Croom
Helm.
Davis, Lance E. and Robert E. Gallman. 2001. Evolving Financial Markets and International Capital
Flows: Britain, the Americas, and Australia, 1865-1914. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
de la Croix, David and Philippe Michel. 1999. “Optimal Growth when Tastes are Inherited.”
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 23 (4): 519–37.
. 2001. “Altruism and Self-Restraint.” Annales d’Économie et de Statistique 63–64:233–59.
De Nardi, Mariacristina. 2004. “Wealth Inequality and Intergenerational Links.” Review of
Economic Studies 71 (3): 743–68.
Devine, T. M. 1971. “Glasgow Colonial Merchants and Land, 1770–1815.” Chapter 6 of Land
and Industry: The Landed Estate and the Industrial Revolution, edited by J. T. Ward and R. G.
Wilson. Newton Abbot: David & Charles.
Dickson, Peter G.M. 1967. The Financial Revolution in England: A Study in the Development of
Public Credit, 1688–1756. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Doepke, Matthias. 2004. “Accounting for Fertility Decline During the Transition to Growth.”
Journal of Economic Growth 9 (3): 347–83.
Doepke, Matthias and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2005. “Patience Capital and the Demise of the Aristocracy.” CEPR Discussion Paper 5106.
Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde. 2006. “The Intergenerational
Transmission of Risk and Trust Attitudes.” IZA Discussion Paper No. 2380.

47

Epstein, Steven A. 1991. Wage Labor and Guilds in Medieval Europe. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press.
Farr, James R. 2000. Artisans in Europe, 1300-1914. Cambridge University Press.
Fernández, Raquel, Alessandra Fogli, and Claudia Olivetti. 2004. “Mothers and Sons: Preference Formation and Female Labor Force Dynamics.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (4):
1249–99.
Friedrichs, Christopher R. 1995. The Early Modern City 1450-1750. New York: Longman.
Galor, Oded and Stelios Michalopoulos. 2006. “Darwinian Evolution of Entrepreneurial Spirit
and the Process of Development.” Working Paper 2006-12, Brown University.
Galor, Oded and Omer Moav. 2002. “Natural Selection and the Origin of Economic Growth.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (4): 1133–91.
Galor, Oded and David N. Weil. 2000. “Population, Technology, and Growth: From Malthusian
Stagnation to the Demographic Transition and Beyond.” American Economic Review 90 (4):
806–28.
Galor, Oded and Joseph Zeira. 1993. “Income Distribution and Macroeconomics.” Review of
Economic Studies 60 (1): 35–52.
Goleman, Daniel. 1995. Emotional Intelligence: Why It Can Matter More Than IQ. New York:
Bantam Books.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Jonathan A. Parker. 2002. “Consumption Over the Life Cycle.”
Econometrica 70 (1): 47–89.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2003. “People’s Opium? Religion and Economic Attitudes.” Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (1): 225–82.
Haaparanta, Pertti and Mikko Puhakka. 2003. “Endogenous Time Preference with Investment
and Development Traps.” Unpublished Manuscript, Helsinki School of Economics.
Hansen, Gary D. and Edward C. Prescott. 2002. “Malthus to Solow.” American Economic Review
92 (4): 1205–17.
Harrison, Glenn W., Morten I. Lau, and Melonie B. Williams. 2002. “Estimating Individual
Discount Rates in Denmark: A Field Experiment.” American Economic Review 92 (5): 1606–
17.
Hauk, Esther and Maria Saez-Marti. 2002. “On the Cultural Transmission of Corruption.”
Journal of Economic Theory 107 (2): 311–35.
Heckman, James J. 2000. “Policies to Foster Human Capital.” Research in Economics 54 (1): 3–56.
Heckman, James J. and Yona Rubinstein. 2001. “The Importance of Noncognitive Skills: Lessons
from the GED Testing Program.” American Economic Review 91 (2): 145–9.
Heckman, James J., Jingjing Hsee, and Yona Rubinstein. 2003. “The GED is a Mixed Signal:
The Effect of Cognitive Skills and Personality Skills on Human Capital and Labor Market
Outcomes.” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Chicago.
Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua. 2006. “The Effects of Cognitive and Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior.” Journal of Labor Economics
24 (3): 411–82.

48

Jenkins, Hester and D. Caradog Jones. 1950. “Social Class of Cambridge University Graduates
of the 18th and 19th Centuries.” British Journal of Sociology 1 (2): 93–116.
Jeremy, David J. 1990. “Anatomy of the British Elite, 1860–1980.” In Capital, Entrepreneurs and
Profits, edited by Richard P. T. Davenport-Hines, 341–61. London: Frank Cass.
Kindleberger, Charles P. 1993. A Financial History of Western Europe. 2d ed. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Knowles, John A. and Andrew Postlewaite. 2004. “Do Children Learn to Save from their
Parents?” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.
Krusell, Per and Anthony A. Smith, Jr. 1998. “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroeconomy.” Journal of Political Economy 106 (5): 867–896.
Lindbeck, Assar and Sten Nyberg. 2006. “Raising Children to Work Hard: Altruism, Work
Norms, and Social Insurance.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (4): 1473–503.
Lindert, Peter H. 1981. “Unequal Living Standards.” In The Economic History of Britain Since
1700, edited by Roderick Floud and Donald McCloskey, Volume 1, 356–86. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
1986. “Unequal English Wealth Since 1670.” Journal of Political Economy 94 (6): 1127–62.
Marshall, Alfred. 1890. Principles of Economics. 8th Edition. London: MacMillan, 1920, Reprinted
1946.
Matsuyama, Kiminori. 2006. “The 2005 Lawrence R. Klein Lecture: Emergent Class Structure.”
International Economic Review 47 (2): 327–60.
Mischel, Walter, Yuichi Shoda, and Monica L. Rodriguez. 1992. “Delay of Gratification in
Children.” Chapter 6 of Choice Over Time, edited by George Loewenstein and Jon Elster.
New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Mulligan, Casey B. 1997. Parental Priorities and Economic Inequality. University of Chicago Press.
Munro, John H. 2004. “Builders Wages in Southern England and the Southern Low Countries,
1346-1500: A Comparative Study of Trends in and Levels of Human Capital.” University of
Toronto Department of Economics and Institute for Policy Analysis Working Paper No. 21.
Nicholas, Tom. 1999a. “Businessmen and Land Ownership in the Late Nineteenth Century.”
Economic History Review 52 (1): 27–44.
. 1999b. “Clogs to Clogs in Three Generations? Explaining Entrepreneurial Performance
in Britain Since 1850.” Journal of Economic History 59 (3): 688–713.
Phelps Brown, E.H. and Sheila V. Hopkins. 1957. “Wage Rates and Prices: Evidence for Population Pressure in the Sixteenth Century.” Economica 24 (96): 289–306.
Porter, Roy. 1982. English Society in the Eighteenth Century. New York: Penguin Books.
Rubinstein, William D. 1981. Men of Property: The Very Wealthy in Britain Since the Industrial
Revolution. London: Croom Helm.
1993. Capitalism, Culture, and Decline in Britain 1750–1990. London: Routledge.
1996. “Businessmen into Landowners: The Question Revisted.” In Land and Society in
Britain 1700-1914: Essays in Honor of F. M. L. Thompson, edited by Negley Harte and Roland
Quinault, 90–118. Manchester: Manchester University Press.

49

Saez-Marti, Maria and Yves Zenou. 2006. “Cultural Transmission and Discrimination.” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Zurich.
Samwick, Andrew A. 1998. “Discount Rate Heterogeneity and Social Security Reform.” Journal
of Development Economics 57:117–46.
Segal, Carmit. 2004. “Misbehavior, Education, and Labor Market Outcomes.” Unpublished
Manuscript, Stanford University.
Shonkoff, Jack and Deborah Philips, eds. 2000. From Neurons to Neighborhoods: The Science of
Early Childhood Development. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Smith, Adam. 1776. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. Edited by
Edwin Cannan. The University of Chicago Press, 1976.
Stokey, Nancy L. and Robert E. Lucas, Jr. 1989. Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Taylor, J., M. McGue, and W. G. Iacono. 2000. “Sex Differences, Assortative Mating, and Cultural Transmission Effects on Adolescent Delinquency: A Twin Family Study.” Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry 41 (4): 433–40.
Temin, Peter and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2004. “The Speed of the Financial Revolution: Evidence
from Hoare’s Bank.” MIT Department of Economics Working Paper 04-12.
Thompson, F. M. L., ed. 1994. Landowners, Capitalists, and Entrepreneurs: Essays for Sir John
Habakkuk. Clarendon Press: Oxford.
Veblen, Thorstein. 1899. The Theory of the Leisure Class. New York: Dover, 1994.
von Mises, Ludwig. 1963. Human Action: A Treatise on Economics. 2d ed. New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Voth, Hans-Joachim. 2000. Time and Work in England 1750-1830. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

50

Parameter

Interpretation

Value

z

Intergenerational Altruism

0.5

A

Natural Leisure Appreciation

1.0

φA

Level Parameter for Leisure Appreciation

1.5

ξA

Curvature Parameter for Leisure Appreciation

0.5

B

Natural Patience

0.4

φB

Level Parameter for Patience

0.66

ξB

Curvature Parameter for Patience

0.5

ψ

Depreciation of Preferences

0.5

γ

Steepness of Artisan Income Profile

2.0

R

Minimum Return of Capitalist Technology

0.35

R

Maximum Return of Capitalist Technology

0.42

η

Elasticity of Entrepreneurial Return

0.5

δ

Depreciation of Capital

0.2

Table 1: Parameter Values for Simulated Economy

1752–1799

1800–1849

1850–1899

Church

60

62

38

Land-Owning

14

14

7

Teaching

9

9

12

Law

6

9

14

Administration

3

1

6

Medicine

1

2

7

Banking

0

0

2

Business

0

0

5

Other

7

3

9

Source: Jenkins and Jones (1950), Table 1

Table 2: Professional Choices of Cambridge Graduates, in Percent

51

Accrue Tastes Accrue Tastes

6

Accrue Tastes Accrue Tastes

Instill Tastes
Work

Instill Tastes
Work

6

Instill Tastes
Work

Figure 1: The Timing of Preference Formation and Labor Supply

Utility 6
......
.
.
.
.
.
....
......
.
.
.
.
.
...
......
.
.
.
.
.
....
......
.
.
.
.
.
...
......
.
.
.
.
.
...
......
.
.
.
.
.
....
......
.
.
.
.
.
...
......

lB (B) 6

-

B̄

B1

B2

Patience

B̄

B1

B2

Patience

-

Figure 2: The Value Function for Patience vB (B) and Policy Function lB (B) for Investing
in Patience

6

Artisan
Worker/Landowner

K

4
2
0
0

1

2

3

4
Time

5

6

7

8

0.8

B

0.7
Artisan
Worker/Landowner

0.6
0.5
0.4
0

1

2

3

4
Time

5

6

7

8

Figure 3: Capital Accumulation and the Evolution of Patience After the Introduction of
a Capitalist Technology

A

2

1.5
Landowner
Artisan
Worker
0

1

2

3

4
Time

5

6

7

8

Figure 4: The Evolution of the Taste for Leisure After the Introduction of a Capitalist
Technology

