                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         E-ZTAX: TAX SALIENCE AND TAX RATES

                                         Amy Finkelstein

                                       Working Paper 12924
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12924


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2007




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Amy Finkelstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
E-ZTax: Tax Salience and Tax Rates
Amy Finkelstein
NBER Working Paper No. 12924
February 2007
JEL No. H11,H71,R48

                                                ABSTRACT

This paper tests the hypothesis that the salience of a tax system affects equilibrium tax rates. To do
this, I analyze how toll rates change after toll facilities adopt electronic toll collection. Unlike manual
toll collection, in which the driver must hand over cash at the toll collection plaza, electronic toll collection
automatically debits the toll amount as the car drives through the toll plaza, thereby plausibly decreasing
the salience of the toll. I find robust evidence that toll rates increase following the adoption of electronic
toll collection. My estimates suggest that, in steady state, toll rates are 20 to 40 percent higher than
they would have been without electronic toll collection. Consistent with the hypothesis that decreased
tax salience is responsible for the increase in toll rates, I also find evidence that the short run elasticity
of driving with respect to the actual toll declines (in absolute value) following the adoption of electronic
toll collection. I consider a variety of alternative explanations for these results and conclude that these
are unlikely to be able to explain the findings.


Amy Finkelstein
Department of Economics
MIT E52-350
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge MA 02142
and NBER
afink@mit.edu
1. Introduction

    For every dollar of revenue raised by the US income tax system, taxpayers incur about 10 cents in

private compliance costs associated with record keeping and tax filing (Slemrod 1996). These compliance

costs impose a dead-weight burden on society. Yet policies that would reduce these costs are frequently

opposed by policy-makers and economists who believe that compliance costs play an important role in

keeping taxes visible and salient to the electorate, who then serve as an important check on attempts to

raise the scale of government activity beyond what an informed citizenry would want.

    For example, Milton Friedman has publicly lamented his inadvertent contribution to the growth of

government by encouraging the introduction of the visibility-reducing Federal income tax withholding

system during the Second World War (Friedman and Friedman, 1998 p.123). More recently, in 2005,

The President’s Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform failed to reach consensus on whether to replace

part of the existing income tax system with a value-added tax (VAT) in part because of concerns about

how the lower visibility of a VAT would affect the size of government. As the Advisory Panel noted in its

report:

     “[Some] Panel Members were unwilling to support the [VAT] proposal given the lack of
    conclusive empirical evidence on the impact of a VAT on the growth of government. Others were
    more confident that voters could be relied on to understand the amount of tax being paid through a
    VAT, in part because the proposal studied by the Panel would require the VAT to be separately
    stated on each sales receipt provided to consumers. These members of the Panel envisioned that
    voters would appropriately control growth in the size of the federal government through the
    electoral process.” (The President’s Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform 2005, p.203-204).

    The idea that a less visible tax system may fuel the growth of government can be traced back at least

to John Stuart Mill’s 1848 Principles of Political Economy. It has its modern roots in the public choice

tradition of “fiscal illusion”. In a series of influential books and articles, James Buchanan and co-authors

have argued that citizens systematically under-estimate the tax price of public sector activities, and that

government in turn exploits this misperception to allow it to reach a size that is larger than an informed

citizenry would want. The extent of the tax misperception – and thus the size of government – is in turn

affected by the choice of tax instruments, with more complicated and less visible taxes exacerbating the




                                                                                                               1
extent of fiscal illusion and thereby increasing the size of the government (e.g. Buchanan 1967, Buchanan

and Wagner 1977, Brennan and Buchanan, 1980).

    Empirical evidence of the impact of tax salience on tax rates, however, has proved extremely elusive.

Most of the evidence comes from cross sectional studies of the relationship between the size of

government and the visibility of the tax system, where the direction of causality is far from clear (Oates

1988, Dollery and Worthington, 1996). Moreover, the sign of any effect of tax salience on tax rates is

theoretically ambiguous. The link between tax salience and tax rates is therefore an open empirical

question.

    In this paper, I examine the relationship between tax salience and tax rates empirically by studying

the impact of the adoption of electronic toll collection (hereafter, “ETC”) on toll rates. Electronic toll

collection systems – such as the eponymous E-ZPass in the Northeastern United States, I-Pass in Illinois,

or Fast-Trak in California – allow automatic deduction of the toll as the car drives through a toll plaza.

Because the driver need no longer actively count out and hand over cash for the toll, the toll rate is

arguably less visible under an electronic collection system. Different toll facilities in the United States

have adopted ETC at different points in time over the last several decades, and some have not yet adopted

it. As a result, I am able to examine within toll-facility changes in toll rates associated with the

introduction of ETC. To do so, I collected a new data set on the history of toll rates and the date (if any)

of installation of ETC for 123 toll facilities in the United States. Where available, I also collected annual,

facility-level data on toll traffic, toll revenue, and the share of each that is paid by electronic toll

collection.

    I find robust evidence that toll rates increase after the adoption of electronic toll collection. My

estimates suggest that when the proportion of tolls paid using ETC has diffused to its steady state level of

about 60 percent, toll rates are 20 to 40 percent higher than they would have been under a fully manual

toll collection system. I also find evidence that the short run elasticity of driving with respect to the actual

toll declines (in absolute value) with the adoption of electronic toll collection. This is consistent with the

conjecture that ETC increases the equilibrium toll rate by decreasing its salience.


                                                                                                                 2
    Of course, ETC affects more than just the visibility of tolls. In the final section of the paper, I

consider a wide range of alternative explanations for the rise in tolls under ETC. Perhaps the most a priori

compelling alternative explanation is that ETC reduces the compliance (i.e. time) costs to drivers of

paying tolls, which can increase drivers’ willingness to pay the monetary toll costs. In practice, however,

the evidence is not consistent with this alternative explanation for the increase in toll rates under ETC. In

particular, two distinct experiments in the data show no detectable increase in toll rates associated with

reductions in compliance costs. First, I find no evidence that ETC is associated with larger toll increases

on roads where, prior to ETC, compliance costs were a larger share of the total toll (i.e. compliance cost +

monetary toll). Second, I find no detectable increase in toll rates when bridges and tunnels switch from

charging tolls in both directions to charging tolls in only one direction, which produces a comparable

reduction in compliance costs to that expected under steady state ETC penetration.

    I also present evidence that other aspects of ETC are unlikely to be able to explain my findings. For

example, the rise in tolls associated with ETC is difficult to explain by the reduction in operating costs

associated with toll collection, or by the capital outlay required to install ETC. The evidence also suggests

that the timing of ETC adoption is not spuriously correlated with increased toll rates.

    The analysis in this paper is perhaps most similar in spirit to Becker and Mulligan (2003). They

formalize the closely related theoretical idea that a more efficient tax system can raise the equilibrium size

of government. Consistent with this theory, they present cross-country evidence that countries with more

efficient tax systems have larger government sectors, and within-country evidence that exogenous

increases in government spending needs decrease discretionary spending while exogenous increases in

government revenue increase government spending.1




1
  As another empirical test of the relation between tax efficiency and the size of government, Dusek (2003)
examines the introduction of state income tax withholding. He finds that withholding is associated with a
mechanical increase in revenue due to less tax evasion, but not with any change in statutory income tax rates.
However, his analysis also suggests that the decision to adopt state income tax withholding may be correlated with
increased demand for bigger government, making the results hard to interpret. In Section 5.2 below I discuss several
pieces of evidence that suggest that the adoption of ETC is not correlated with increased demand for revenue.


                                                                                                                   3
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides a conceptual framework for the likely

effects of a decline in tax salience. Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 presents the main empirical

results. Section 5 considers a range of alternative explanations for the empirical findings. The last section

concludes.

2. Effects of Tax Salience: Conceptual framework.

    In a fully salient tax system, individuals are aware of actual tax rates as they make economic

decisions. In a less salient tax system, some individuals do not directly observe the actual tax when

making economic decisions. Instead, they form a belief about the tax, which I refer to as the perceived

tax. A natural way to model a decrease in the salience of the tax system is as an increase in the fraction of

consumers who do not directly observe the actual tax when making economic decisions. Thus, for

example, an increase in the proportion of tolls paid electronically might correspond to a decrease in the

salience of the tax system. In this section, I discuss why the theoretical effect of a decline in tax salience

on the equilibrium tax rate is ambiguous.

    Consider first a model in which individuals have rational expectations but government lacks the

ability to commit on policy. In a less than fully salient tax system, some portion of individuals will not

directly observe the tax, and will instead form an (unbiased) expectation about its level. Conditional on

this expectation, any change in the tax will act as a non-distortionary, lump-sum tax on these individuals.

Under many standard assumptions about the government’s objective in setting taxes – including a profit

maximizing (Leviathan) government, a government solving the Ramsey (1927) optimal commodity tax

problem, and a government solving the Mirrlees (1971) optimal income tax problem – the government

will therefore have an incentive to raise the tax above the full salience equilibrium tax rate. Rational

consumers will, of course, take this government reaction into account in forming expectations. The

equilibrium tax rate will therefore be higher under a less salient system, but so will the equilibrium

distortions from the expected tax, since consumers have accurate expectations about the tax rate. This is

just a specific example of the well-known result that a lack of commitment power by the government can

result in sub-optimal policy (e.g. Kydland and Prescott, 1977, Barro and Gordon 1983). This result


                                                                                                                 4
depends critically of course, on the inability of the government to commit on policy; in the same setting

but with commitment, the decline in salience would not affect the equilibrium tax rate.

    The preceding discussion assumes rational expectations. However, in keeping with the public choice

tradition of “fiscal illusion”, people may have systematically biased perceptions about taxes. Recent

empirical evidence is consistent with this view. For example, Liebman and Zeckhauser (2004) and

Feldman and Katuscak (2005) show that individual responses to the non-linear income tax schedule are

consistent with confusion about marginal tax rates, an idea that Liebman and Zeckhauser (2004) term

“schmeduling.” A decline in the salience of the tax system may increase the extent of tax misperception.

Consistent with this hypothesis, Chetty et al. (2006) find that when the sales tax is included in the posted

price – and presumably therefore more salient – consumer purchases are more likely to respond to the

after-tax price than to the pre-tax price.

    If the government lacks commitment power, what matters for the effect of tax salience on tax rates is

how tax salience affects perceptions – or misperceptions – of tax changes. If, as in the previous discussion

with rational expectations, a decline in tax salience reduces the proportion of individuals who directly

observe tax changes, then it will be associated with an increase in tax rates, since individuals will be less

responsive to any given tax increase. Whether or not individuals’ expectations of tax levels are unbiased,

or systematically over- or under-estimates will be important for the long-run distortionary effect of the

tax, but not for government behavior.

    However, it may be that individuals always observe whether a tax change occurs, but that a decline in

tax salience reduces the proportion of individuals who directly observe the magnitude of the tax change.

Then a decline in tax salience may have an ambiguous effect on the tax rate, depending on whether it

causes more individuals to over-estimate the magnitude of the tax change, or to under-estimate it.

Suppose the government uses the revenue from the taxed good to finance a public good (and continues to

lack commitment power). The efficiency cost of raising taxes to increase the level of the public good is




                                                                                                                5
likely increasing in the perceived tax increase.2 The government will therefore have an incentive to raise

taxes (relative to the full salience case) if individuals under-estimate tax changes, and lower taxes if

individuals over-estimate tax changes; with rational expectations about the tax change, the government

will not change taxes.

    The preceding discussion highlights another empirical prediction which I will investigate below: at

least in the simple models described above, if a decline in tax salience is associated with an increase in tax

rates, it should also be associated with a decline (in absolute value) in the short run elasticity of demand

with respect to the actual tax. For a government lacking commitment power has an incentive to raise taxes

if a decline in salience causes individuals to under-estimate (or in the extreme, to not observe at all) tax

changes. Conversely, if individuals over-estimate the tax change, the short run elasticity of demand would

increase (in absolute value), and taxes would be expected to fall. Note that this is a prediction about the

short run elasticity of demand with respect to the actual tax change; the elasticity of demand with respect

to the expected tax will remain unchanged in a rational expectations model, and will increase or decrease

(in absolute value) if individuals over- or under-estimate the tax level, respectively.3

    Finally, it is worth noting that the normative implications of an increase in tax rates associated with a

decline in tax salience are ambiguous. In the rational expectations model with time inconsistency, the

higher tax rate under a less salient system is sub-optimal. However, a government that maximizes social

welfare might choose to adopt a less than fully salient tax system if the negative consequences of the


2
  This statement requires some additional assumptions, which further highlights the ambiguous sign of an effect of
decreased tax salience on tax rates. A specific set of assumptions that would rationalize the statement would be if
individuals choose the level of consumption of two goods, a taxed good and an untaxed good, and we assume that
the individual first makes a consumption decision about the taxed good, based on the perceived tax, and then
allocates his actual remaining income to the untaxed good. Misperception of a change in the tax rate has two effects:
a price effect which affects relative demand for the taxed good, and an income effect via the budget constraint. If we
also assume utility is quasi-linear in the untaxed good and that there is an interior solution, the effects of
misperception via the budget constraint are fully born by the untaxed good. These assumptions are likely to be
reasonable when the taxed good is small relative to the total budget, as in the case of tolls. In more general settings,
the change in the tax rate associated with decreased salience will also depend on how the individual satisfies the true
budget constraint in a world with misperception, which in this simple example we have assumed is fully born by the
untaxed good, as well as the other tax instruments at the government’s disposal (e.g. tax rates on other goods).
3
  Note too that the change in the short run elasticity is the partial equilibrium effect of a decline in tax salience. Since
the government will respond to the change in elasticity by changing taxes, the effect of tax salience on the
equilibrium elasticity is not obvious. I discuss this issue in the context of the empirical work in Section 4.2 below.


                                                                                                                          6
decline in salience are outweighed by the improved efficiency of tax collection that often occur in less

salient tax systems (such as federal income tax withholding or electronic toll collection). Moreover, if

individuals systematically under-estimate tax levels in a less salient tax system, this may reduce the

efficiency costs of taxation and therefore the increase in taxes may be socially optimal in its own right,

regardless of other efficiency gains from the less salient tax system. Finally, the choice of a less salient

tax system may reflect government failure – as in, for example, the political competition models of

Wilson (1990) and Becker and Mulligan (2003) – and the choice of a less salient tax system may well

reduce social welfare.4

3. Data and Descriptive Statistics

3.1 Sample construction

    My target sample is all publicly-owned toll facilities in the United States (excluding ferries) that were

charging tolls in 1985. I chose the year 1985 to ensure at least 20 years of toll rate history on each facility,

as well as data on all roads prior to the first facility’s adoption of ETC in the United States (which

occurred in 1987). As a result, my analysis is limited to the impact of tax salience on the level of existing

taxes, and will not pick up any effect that decreased salience has on the decision to introduce a new tax on

a previously untaxed good.

    At the start of my sample period in 1985, tolls on roads, bridges, or tunnels raised about $2.5 billion

dollars in revenue for state and local governments, or about 0.8 percent of total state and local tax revenue

in the 31 states that levied such tolls (US Department of Transportation 1985 and 1986, and U.S. Census

Bureau 1985.) Toll revenues are therefore on a par with lottery profits in terms of contribution to public

coffers (Kearney, 2005). Operating authorities generally have the statutory authority to change tolls (at

least within certain bounds). In practice, however, they are likely limited in how free they are to operate

independently of the state government and its political concerns.



4
  In a similar vein, Acemoglu and Robinson (2002) show that groups may prefer inefficient forms of redistribution
toward them as more inefficient form of redistribution increases their group size and hence their ability to secure
future redistribution.


                                                                                                                      7
    In general, local laws require that toll revenues be spent on the toll facility itself (e.g. maintenance

and operating expenses, or expansion). The increases in toll rates and toll revenues which I estimate are

associated with ETC are likely used for some combination of financing improvements or expansions in

the facility, and/or in increasing employment (or salaries) at the toll authority; unfortunately, the available

data do not exist to allow a careful examination of the uses of the increased revenue. However, as I

discuss in Section 5.2, it does not appear that the increase in toll revenue associated with ETC is offset by

reductions in other highway taxes such as motor vehicle user fees or gasoline taxes.

    To construct the necessary data, I contacted each toll operating authority and requested toll rate

histories for each of their toll facilities from 1950 or its opening (whichever was later) through 2005. I

also requested the date (if any) that ETC was adopted, annual traffic and revenue data, and the annual

fraction of traffic and revenue accounted for by ETC. The data collection effort took place mainly in the

first six months of 2006. I consider the data usable if it contains the date of ETC adoption and toll rate

histories back to at least 1985.

    The target sample consisted of 183 toll facilities run by 88 operating authorities in 31 states.5 I was

able to collect usable data for 123 facilities run by 49 different operating authorities in 22 different states.

I assigned each facility to one of 24 different state-like entities to reflect the fact that certain operating

authorities – specifically, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, the Delaware River Joint Toll

Bridge Commission, and the Delaware River Port Authority – are under the purview of two states, which

I code as a separate state (either “NYNJ” or “NJPA” as relevant). Appendix A provides more detail on

characteristics of the target facilities and the acquired facilities, as well as the data for the acquired

facilities. For the remainder of the paper, all statistics refer to the acquired facilities.

    On average, the data contain 50 years of toll data per facility. About sixty percent of the facilities are

bridges or tunnels; the remainder consists of roads (and a few causeways which I classify as roads).

3.2 Key variables


5
 I use the term toll “facility” to denote a particular road, bridge, tunnel or causeway; a complete list of facilities is
given in the Appendix.


                                                                                                                            8
    This section gives a brief overview of the definitions and summary statistics for the key variables.

Appendix A provides more detail.

3.2.1 ETC Adoption and Diffusion

    With ETC, the toll amount is automatically deducted from a pre-paid toll account as the car drives

through a toll plaza. When the balance in the driver’s account follows below some replenishment

threshold (often $10), the replenishment amount is automatically charged to the driver’s credit card, or

debited from his bank account. The driver’s credit card or bank statement will indicate that a charge has

occurred, but does not provide itemized expenses.

    About 70 percent of the facilities (87 out of 123) adopted ETC by 2005. Figure 1 shows a histogram

of adoption dates. They range from 1987 through 2005. The median adoption date is 1999. Almost all the

variation in whether ETC is adopted – and in adoption dates conditional on adopting – is between rather

than within operating authorities; this is not surprising, given that the operating authority is the primary

decision maker regarding tolls. By contrast, there is substantial variation across operating authorities

within a state in whether ETC is adopted and in the adoption date, conditional on adopting ETC.

Appendix A provides more detail.

    Table 1 shows that relationship between facility characteristics and ETC adoption. ETC adoption

rates are highest in the Northeast (70 percent) and lowest in the West (30 percent). The high adoption

rates in the Northeast may reflect higher labor costs (since ETC reduces labor costs of toll collection) as

well as greater urbanicity (since ETC may help reduce congestion). ETC adoption rates are higher and

adoption dates are earlier on roads than on bridges and tunnels. There does not appear to be any

relationship between the age of the facility and whether ETC is adopted; however, conditional on

adoption, older facilities tend to adopt earlier (not shown).

    Once a facility adopts ETC, use of the technology diffuses gradually across drivers. To characterize

the extent of ETC diffusion on a facility, I define the ETC penetration rate as the fraction of toll

transactions or the fraction of toll revenue collected by ETC. The definition varies across (but not within)

facilities depending on which measure I could obtain for more years; all of the analysis will look at


                                                                                                               9
within-facility changes. I was able to collect data on ETC penetration rates for about two-thirds of the

facility-years in which ETC is in place. Figure 2 shows the within-facility diffusion rate of ETC. It takes

about 14 years for ETC to reach its steady state penetration rate of 60 percent.6

3.2.2 Toll histories

    I define the toll as the nominal toll rate for passenger cars. High frequency (i.e. commuter) discounts

are not coded. None of the facilities offer time-of-day varying prices. I collected data on both the

“manual” (i.e. cash) toll rate and any discount offered for the electronic toll.

    Over half (53 out of 88) of facilities that have ETC offered discounted tolls to ETC users at least at

some point in time; the electronic toll is never more than the cash toll. ETC discounts are presumably

designed to encourage use of the technology; consistent with this, they are more common on facilities that

adopted ETC earlier. The discounts may also be rationalized as a Pigouvian subsidy if ETC has positive

externalities on congestion reduction. The average ETC discount – when offered – is about 15 percent off

of the manual toll. I use the short-hand “minimum toll” to refer to the lower envelope of the manual and

electronic toll. The change in the log minimum toll will be the primary toll measure used in the analysis

of the impact of ETC on toll rates. I also present results for the sample of facilities that never offer ETC

discounts, and for which the minimum and manual toll are therefore always the same.

    I define the toll rate on a road as the cost of a full length trip on the road, and I define the toll rate on

bridges, tunnels, or causeways as the round-trip cost on that facility. In 2005, the average (manual) toll

was $5.41 for a full length trip on a road (implying an average per-mile toll of $0.063)7 and $3.03 for a

round-trip on a bridge or tunnel.

    On average, the minimum toll increased by 2.0 percent per year over my sample. This is substantially

below the weighted average annual rate of inflation of 4.2 percent in facility-years between 1950 and

2005 in my sample (based on the CPI-U). Toll changes are lumpy; in a given year, on average only 7.7

6
  Note that the percentage of tolls or revenue collected by ETC is likely an over-estimate of the percentage of drivers
who use ETC, as drivers who adopt ETC tend to drive more than those who do not adopt ETC (Amromin et al.,
2005).
7
  Mileage data for a full length trip were taken from U.S. Department of Transportation (2003) or information from
the operating authority’s web site.


                                                                                                                    10
percent of facilities increase their minimum toll and only 1 percent of facilities decrease it. These

statistics are all very similar for manual tolls.

    Although by construction all facilities are charging a toll at the start of the sample, 15 of the 123

facilities reduce the toll to zero later in the sample. Since the main dependent variable in the analysis of

the effect of ETC on toll rates is log(minimum toll)it, the occurrence of zero toll rates raises a potential

concern about selection on the dependent variable. However, I show below that this selection biases

against finding an effect of ETC on toll increases; not surprisingly, tolls are less likely to be set to zero

after ETC has been introduced.

3.2.3 Revenue and traffic data

    I considered data on toll revenue or toll traffic usable if I was able to get at least 10 years of facility-

level data. I was able to collect usable traffic data for about 60 percent (76 out of 123) of facilities, and

usable revenue data for over one third (45 out of 123) of facilities. For a facility with usable data, on

average I collected 34 years of data. Over the sample, traffic on a facility grew on average by 4.9 percent

per year and (nominal) facility revenue by 7.7 percent.

4. The impact of ETC

4.1 The Impact of ETC on toll rates

4.1.1. Main results

    A basic estimating equation to examine the effect of ETC on toll rates would be:

log(minimum toll)it = J t  D i  E1 ETC it  E 2 ETC _ Yearit  H it                           (1)

The dependent variable is the log of the minimum toll, where the minimum toll is defined as the lower

envelope of the manual and electronic toll. The J t ’s represent a full set of year dummies which control for

any common secular changes in toll rates across facilities. The D i ’s represent a full set of facility fixed

effects that control for any fixed differences across facilities in the toll rate. I specify the dependent

variable in logs rather than levels because a specification in levels would constrain toll rates in different




                                                                                                                11
facilities to grow by the same absolute amount each year. This would be inappropriate, given the

considerable variation in toll rates across facilities.

    The key coefficients of interest are those on ETCit and ETC _ Yearit . The variable ETCit is a

dummy variable for whether facility i has ETC in year t. The coefficient on ETCit measures any level

shift in tolls associated with having ETC on a facility. Since ETC use among drivers diffuses gradually

across a facility, it is likely that any impact of ETC on toll rates will be phased in gradually. To capture

this, I include the variable ETC _ Yearit which measures the number of years the facility has had ETC; it

is zero in the years prior to ETC adoption, 1 in the year the facility adopts ETC, 2 in the next year and so

forth. The coefficient on ETC _ Yearit measures how the toll rate changes over time after the facility

adopts ETC. Finally, H it is a random disturbance term capturing all omitted influences.

    A practical problem with estimating equation (1) is that toll rates are highly auto-correlated. A

regression of the residuals from estimating equation (1) on their lag produces a coefficient of 0.92. This

suggests estimating the first-differenced version of equation (1) (Wooldridge 2002, p.274 – 281):

' log(min toll) it    J t  E1 'ETC it   E 2 'ETC _ Yearit  'H it                          (2)

The resultant residuals are much less serially correlated; a regression of the residuals from equation (2) on

their lag produces a coefficient of -0.045. Note that in the first-differenced equation, 'ETCit is an

indicator variable for whether facility i adopted ETC in year t, and 'ETC _ Yearit is an indicator variable

for whether the facility has ETC. The coefficient on 'ETCYearit thus measures the average annual

growth in facilities’ tolls once they have ETC. On average for a facility with ETC, I observe about 6

years of ETC on that facility.

    I estimate equation (2) allowing for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix within each of the 24

“states”; this error structure allows for both auto-correlation in toll changes within a facility and

contemporaneous correlation in toll changes among facilities in the same state; the standard errors are

quite similar if I instead cluster on the operating authority or facility. I give equal weight in the regression


                                                                                                               12
to each of the 49 operating authorities, so as to give equal weight to each toll-setting (and ETC adopting)

decision body; in practice, I show below that the results are not sensitive to alternative weighting

schemes.

    The first column of Table 2 shows the results from estimating equation (2). The coefficient on

'ETCYearit is 0.015 (s.e. = 0.006). This indicates that once a facility has ETC, its toll increases each

year by 1.5 percent more than it otherwise would have. This effect is both statistically significant and

economically large. Relative to the average annual 2 percent increase in tolls, it implies that after

installing ETC, the facility’s toll rate rises by 75 percent more per year than it did prior to ETC.

    The toll change in the first year of ETC is given by the sum of the coefficients on 'ETCit and

'ETCYearit in column 1. Interestingly, these coefficients suggest that there is a (statistically

insignificant) decline in tolls the year that ETC is adopted of 3.6 percent ( = 0.015 – 0.051). The results

in the next two columns suggest that any decline in the toll the year that ETC is adopted reflects the effect

of ETC discounts. In column 2, I re-estimate equation (2) but with the change in the log manual toll

(rather than the change in the log minimum toll) as the dependent variable. In column 3 I re-estimate

equation (2) for the 60 percent facilities that never offered an ETC discount and for whom therefore the

manual and minimum toll are always the same; this sub-sample includes facilities that never adopted ETC

(approximately 30 percent) and facilities that adopted ETC but never offered a discount (approximately

30 percent). In these alternative specifications, the sum of the coefficients on 'ETCit and

'ETCYearit now indicate either a statistically insignificant 3.6 percent increase in the toll in the year

ETC is adopted (column 2), or an economically and statistically insignificant decline of -0.9 percent

(column 3). Moreover, both of the alternative specifications indicate a growth in tolls once a facility has

ETC; the coefficient on 'ETCYearit is statistically significant and, indeed, slightly larger than in the




                                                                                                            13
baseline specification in column 1.8 The results from the “no discount” sample (column 3) indicate that

the estimated growth in tolls after ETC is installed does not merely reflect a recouping of first-year losses

caused by the ETC discount.

    The preceding analysis constrains the effect of ETC on tolls to be the same across facilities and to be

constant over time after the adoption of ETC. However, if the mechanism for ETC’s effect on tolls is

through reduced salience, we would expect the effect to be increasing in the ETC penetration rate. The

growth in ETC penetration is not constant over time (see Figure 2) or across facilities (not shown). As a

stronger test of the salience hypothesis, I therefore re-estimate equation (2) using the percentage point

change in the ETC penetration rate ( 'ETC _ Penetrationit ) instead of the change in ETC year on the

right hand side. However, I can only estimate this alternative specification for the 60 percent of facilities

that never offer an ETC discount; for facilities that offer an ETC discount, changes in the discount will

affect both the diffusion of ETC ( 'ETC _ Penetrationit ) as well as the dependent variable

log(minimum toll)it, raising the potential for biased estimates. Column 4 shows the results. The

coefficient on 'ETC _ Penetrationit is 0.623 (s.e. = 0.285). The coefficient indicates that every 10

percentage point increase in ETC penetration is associated with a (statistically significant) increase in the

toll of about 6.2 percent.

    For the full sample of facilities, I can estimate an instrumental variables version of equation (2) in

which I instrument for 'ETC _ Penetrationit with 'ETCYearit . Column 5 shows these results. The

coefficient on 'ETC _ Penetrationit is 0.557 (s.e. = 0.262), indicating that every 10 percentage point

increase in ETC penetration is associated with a (statistically significant) 5.6 percent increase in the toll.

To allow the increase in toll rates associated with ETC to vary over time after the year of ETC adoption,

in column 6 I instead instrument for the change in ETC penetration with a cubic polynomial in ETC year.



8
  Although it might at first appear puzzling in column 2 that the cash toll – which has become no less salient – also
increases once ETC is installed, this is easily understood by the necessary linkage between cash and electronic toll
rates; were the electronic rate to increase while the cash rate did not, this would presumably discourage use of ETC.


                                                                                                                   14
The coefficient on 'ETC _ Penetrationit is now 0.501 (standard error = 0.261). This is quite similar to

the results from the constant annual effects specification in column 5. Results using a series of grouped

dummies for the number of years under ETC to instrument for 'ETC _ Penetrationit also produce

similar results (not shown). Relatedly, if I replace the single indicator variable for whether a facility has

ETC ( 'ETCYearit ) with a series of grouped dummies for various numbers of years the facility has had

ETC (e.g 1- 6, 7-11, or 12+), I find that ETC is associated with increased toll rates of similar magnitude

in each of these sub-periods (not shown); this suggests that the effect of ETC persists over the time period

under ETC that I can observe in my data.

    The magnitude of the toll increase associated with ETC is similar across the various specifications

shown in Table 4. In the full sample, the results from the baseline specification (column 1) suggest that

after 14 years, by which point ETC has diffused to its steady state level (see Figure 2), ETC is associated

with an increase in the toll rate of 17 percent, or about one-fifth (~ exp(ETC + 14*ETCYear)). The IV

estimates in columns 5 and 6 are similar, suggesting that once ETC has diffused to its steady state level of

60%, ETC is associated with an increase in tolls of 26 and 23 percent respectively (~ exp(ETC +

0.6*ETC_Penetration)). When the sample is limited to facilities without ETC discounts, the implied steady

state increase in tolls is 36 percent in the baseline specification (column 3), and 38 percent when

ETC_Penetrationit is included on the right hand side (column 4). All of these implied steady state toll

increases associated with ETC are statistically significant at at least the 10 percent level. Taken together,

these estimates suggest that the diffusion of ETC to its steady state level is associated with a 20 to 40

percent increase in toll rates.

    Finally, to explore the mechanics behind the increase in tolls associated with ETC, I re-estimate

equation (2) with a binary dependent variable for whether the minimum toll increased over the last year.

Column 7 shows the results. Given the baseline probability of a toll increase of 7.7, the coefficient of

0.073 (s.e. = 0.024) on 'ETCYearit suggests that the probability of a toll increase almost doubles on a

facility once it has ETC. Together with the results in the preceding columns, this suggests that the


                                                                                                              15
increase in tolls associated with ETC comes about through more frequent toll increases, but not changes

in the magnitude of a toll increase when it occurs.

4.1.2 Alternative specifications

    The identifying assumption behind all of the estimates in Table 2 is that absent the introduction of

ETC on facility i in year t, toll rates would not have changed differentially for that facility. The fact that,

as discussed in Section 3, observable characteristics of the facility are correlated with whether and when a

facility adopts ETC raises concern about the validity of this assumption. Table 3 therefore investigates a

variety of alternative specifications that shed some light on this issue. The first column replicates the

baseline specification (column 1 from Table 2). The next 6 columns stratify the sample on various

observable characteristics that are correlated with whether and when a facility adopts ETC. Columns 2

and 3 examine the effect of ETC separately by region (Northeast and Midwest vs. South and West),

columns 4 and 5 examine the effect separately by facility type (roads vs. bridges and tunnels), and

columns 6 and 7 examine the effect separately for facilities of different ages (opened after 1960 vs.

opened 1960 or before). Not only does statistical significance tend to persist in the (sometimes much

smaller) sub-samples, but the point estimates remain remarkably similar across the different samples.

This helps alleviate concerns that the estimated effect of ETC is spuriously picking up differences across

facilities in their underlying rate of toll growth that are correlated with ETC adoption. To more directly

control for this possibility of spurious findings, column 8 shows that the results in the baseline

specification are robust in both magnitude and statistical significance to the addition of facility fixed

effects, which (given the first-differences specification) control for any facility-specific linear trend in toll

rates. As perhaps the most direct partial test of the identifying assumption, in section 5.2 below I show

that there is no substantive of statistically significant change in the pattern of changes of toll rates, traffic

or revenue in the years prior to a facility’s adoption of ETC.

    The last four columns of Table 3 show the robustness of the baseline finding along several other

dimensions. Column 9 shows that the results are unaffected by restricting the analysis to years 1985 and

later. The results are not sensitive to weighting each state equally (column 10) or weighting each facility


                                                                                                               16
equally (column 11), rather than weighting each operating authority equally as in the baseline

specification.9 Finally, the last column shows that the estimated impact of ETC also appears in the sub-

sample of facility-years for which I have traffic data, which I will analyze in the next sub-section;

although the coefficient on 'ETCYearit is only significant at the 15 percent level in this more limited

sample, the point estimate of 0.012 (s.e. = 0.008) is quite similar to the baseline estimate in column 1 of

0.015 (s.e. = 0.006).

    To address potential concerns that might arise from the censoring of observations with a zero toll rate

in the current or previous year, I re-estimate equation (2) by OLS using as the dependent variable an

indicator variable for whether the toll rate on facility i in year t became zero from a non-zero rate. This

occurs in 0.3 percent of the sample. I estimate a negative, and marginally statistically significant

coefficient on both 'ETCit and 'ETCYearit (not shown). This suggests that, not surprisingly, facilities

may be less likely to set tolls to zero when they have ETC; indeed, only 1 of the 15 facilities that set the

toll to zero after 1985 adopted ETC (compared to 86 of the 108 facilities that never set their toll to zero

after 1985). This suggests that, if anything, the censoring of zero toll observations biases downward the

estimated effect of ETC on toll rates. I am reluctant, however, to include the lower likelihood of setting

toll rates to zero as part of the estimated effect of ETC, as operating authorities that are planning to set a

toll to zero in a few years may be less inclined to introduce ETC on the facility.

    Finally, one might be concerned that increases in the minimum toll in the years after ETC is adopted

may reflect increases in the electronic toll as it is raised to be closer to the manual toll, rather than a shift

in the entire toll schedule. Such a concern does not arise when the sample is limited to facilities that do

not offer ETC discounts (columns 3 and 4 of Table 2). Moreover, for facilities that do offer ETC

discounts, there does not appear to be any systematic change in the magnitude of the discount with respect


9
 Another natural alternative might be to weight each facility by its size (i.e. traffic or revenue). Unfortunately, I was
only able to collect traffic data at the same point in time for at most 92 of the 123 facilities. For these three-quarters
of facilities, it does not appear that the effect of ETC varies with facility size. The coefficient on ETCYear is
0.017 (s.e. = 0.011) in an unweighted regression and 0.018 (s.e. = 0.013) when each facility is weighted by the
average number of toll transactions in 2003 - 2005 (not shown).


                                                                                                                       17
to the number of years the facility has had ETC (not shown). This suggests that in practice increases in the

minimum toll reflect a shift of the entire toll schedule; this is consistent with the finding that the manual

toll also increases after ETC is introduced (column 2 of Table 2). The preservation of ETC discounts may

reflect continued attempts to induce more drivers to switch to ETC; the maximum ETC penetration rate in

my sample is only 78 percent. It may also arise if drivers using ETC are aware of the existence of the

electronic discount, even if they are not full aware of toll changes.

4.2 The Impact of ETC on the elasticity of driving with respect to a toll change

    The preceding results suggest that the diffusion of ETC is associated with higher toll rates. As

discussed in Section 2, if this effect is due to the lower salience of tolls under ETC, it is likely that ETC

will also be associated with a decline (in absolute value) in the short run elasticity of demand with respect

to the actual toll. In this section, therefore, I investigate how the short run elasticity of demand with

respect to a toll change changes as ETC diffuses within a facility. An important caveat to the analysis is

that, as the previous section demonstrated, tolls are also higher under ETC, and the higher toll rates may

have a direct effect on the elasticity. Nonetheless, the results may be viewed as suggestive.

    I estimate:

' log( traffic ) it   J t  E 1 ' log( minimum toll it )  E 2 ' log( minimum toll it ) * Never_ETC i
                         E 3 ' log( minimum toll it ) * ETC_year it                                  (3)
                         E 4 Never_ETC i  E 5 ETC_year it  P it

Equation (3) examines the relationship between the annual percent change in a facility’s traffic

(log(traffic)it) and its annual percent change in its toll (log(minimum toll)it). It allows this relationship

to vary across facilities based on whether the facility ever adopted ETC (Never_ETCi is 1 if the facility

never adopts ETC and zero other wise), and by the number of years the facility has had ETC (ETC_Year),

which is a reduced form proxy for the ETC penetration rate on the facility. Once again, J t represents a

full set of year fixed effects; these control for any secular changes in traffic over time. The key coefficient

of interest in 3; this indicates how the elasticity changes on a facility under ETC. Once again, I allow for

an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix within each of the 24 “states” and give equal weight in the


                                                                                                                18
regression to each of the 50 operating authorities. Note that equation (3) estimates the short-run (i.e.

within a year) elasticity of demand with respect to actual toll changes which, as discussed in Section 2, is

likely to fall (in absolute value) under a less salient tax system.

    Estimation of equation (3) is based on the assumption that changes in tolls are not affected by

contemporary changes in demand. This is probably a reasonable assumption. Traffic – and presumably

underlying demand for driving – changes continuously each year, while a facility’s toll is only raised on

average every 8 to 9 years. The infrequency of toll adjustment likely reflects both general lags in price

setting by government enterprises as well as political constraints; for example, I find that tolls are less

likely to be raised in the year the governor is up for re-election (not shown). Although tolls may be

adjusted in part based on past demand shocks (i.e. lagged values of changes in traffic), changes in traffic

within a facility show very little serial correlation; a regression of the residuals from equation (3) on their

lag produces a coefficient of only 0.045. Any adjustment of tolls to past changes in demand may therefore

not pose much of a practical problem for estimation of equation (3). However, in light of the potential

concern that past changes in traffic may be correlated with both current changes in tolls and current

changes in traffic, I also report results from estimation of equation (3) in which I limit the sample to the

years in which a toll changes or the 2 years before or after a toll change; I refer to this as the “ +2/-2

sample”. The assumption in this more limited sample is that the timing of the toll change is random with

respect to short-run traffic changes, although it may reflect longer run demand changes.

    As discussed in Section 2, the prediction that the short run elasticity of demand will decline (in

absolute value) with a decline in tax salience is a partial equilibrium prediction; the government is

expected to respond to this decline in elasticity by raising taxes, so that, in equilibrium, the elasticity need

not decline. However, as long as the toll authorities do not immediately and fully adjust the toll in

response to the change in elasticity associated with ETC – an assumption implied by the econometric

assumptions needed for equation (3) to be identified that I discussed in the previous paragraph –we expect

to find a decline (in absolute) value in the elasticity associated with ETC.




                                                                                                               19
    Table 4 reports the results of estimating variants of equation (3). Column 1 shows the results when

the only regressor (besides the year fixed effects) is log(minimum toll)it. The coefficient on

log(minimum toll)it of -0.049 (s.e. = 0.015) indicates that a 10 percent increase in tolls is associated with

a statistically significant but economically small 0.5% reduction in traffic. This suggests that tolls are set

below the profit maximizing rate. This is consistent with Peltzman’s (1971) observation that there will be

a downward bias in the prices set by government-owned enterprises.

    Column 2 estimates the complete equation specified by equation (3). The coefficient on

' log(minimum toll it ) * ETC_Yearit is 0.002 (s.e. = 0.002). The positive coefficient suggests that

drivers’ elasticity declines (in absolute value) per year the facility had ETC; however the estimate is not

statistically significant at conventional levels (p = 0.21).

    However, ETC discounts introduce measurement error in the minimum toll (or equivalently, the

manual toll) once a facility has ETC, as the average toll rate depends on the fraction of tolls paid

electronically. Measurement error in the toll rate that occurs once ETC is adopted may bias the estimated

change in the elasticity associated with an additional year of ETC toward zero. In column 3 I therefore

repeat the analysis in column 2, limiting the sample to the 60% of facilities that never offer an ETC

discount. In this sample, there is only one toll rate, and therefore introduction of ETC does not introduce

measurement error in the toll rate regressor. The results are consistent with the hypothesis that

measurement error biases the estimated change in elasticity associated with an additional year of ETC

toward zero in the full sample in column 2. In column 3, the coefficient on the key interaction term

' log(minimum toll it ) * ETC_Yearit increases to 0.006 (s.e. = 0.001), and is now statistically

significant at the 1 percent level. This suggests that the elasticity of driving with respect to the toll

declines (in absolute value) by 0.006 per year that the facility has ETC, or by about 10 percent relative to

the average estimated elasticity prior to ETC of -0.057. Reassuringly, the coefficient on log(minimum

toll)it changes only slightly with the restriction of the sample to facilities that never offer ETC discounts

(compare columns 3 and 2). Since this coefficient measures the elasticity when a facility does not have



                                                                                                                20
ETC, it is not subject to the same measurement error concerns in column 2 and therefore would not be

expected to change. The negative coefficient on log(minimum toll)it*(Never_ETC)i suggests that

driving may be more elastic on facilities that never adopt ETC; however this effect is never close to

statistically significant in any specification.

    As previously discussed, in the sub-sample of facilities that never offer ETC discounts I can include

the ETC_Penetration rate directly on the right hand side in place of its proxy ETC_Year. Column 4 shows

the results. The coefficient on ' log(minimum toll it ) * ETC_penetration it is 0.134 (s.e. = 0.038); this

indicates that a 5 percentage point increase in the ETC penetration rate (which is the average increase per

year of ETC) is associated with a (statistically significant) 0.0067 decline in the elasticity of driving with

respect to the toll; this is quite similar to the estimated decline of 0.006 per year of ETC in column 3.

    The last two columns repeat the analysis in columns 3 and 4 on the +2/-2 sample. The point estimates

on both the elasticity of driving under manual toll collection and the change in the elasticity associated

with ETC_Year (or ETC_Penetration) remain virtually unchanged. Moreover, the change in the elasticity

associated with ETC_Year (or ETC_Penetration) remains statistically significant, although at the 10

percent level in the +2/-2 sample (columns 5 and 6) rather than at the 1 percent level as in the larger

samples (columns 3 and 4).

4.3 Cross checking the estimated magnitudes

    An interesting exercise is to compare the estimated change in the toll rate associated with ETC to the

change in price that we would expect based on the estimated change in elasticity under ETC. This section

does such a back-of-the-envelope calculation and shows that, in fact, the predicted and actual changes in

the toll rate are quite similar.

    The estimated elasticity of demand under ETC (which I denote ETC) measures the change in demand

– which is a function of the perceived toll change – as a function of the actual toll change; in other words,

              wq (W~ ) W
it measures              , where W denotes the actual toll, and W~ denotes the perceived toll. We can
               wW q(W~ )

decompose ETC as follows:


                                                                                                             21
wq (W~ ) W        ª wq (W~ ) W~ º       ª wW~ W º
                  « wW~ q (W~ ) »       «¬ GW W~ »¼                                                              (4)
 wW q (W~ )       ¬             ¼
     K ETC               K           Elasticity of W~ wrt W



Equation (4) indicates that the ratio of the estimated elasticity of demand under electronic toll collection

(ETC) to the underlying elasticity of demand () gives the elasticity of the perceived toll ( W~ ) with respect

to the actual toll ( W ), or in other words, the extent of misperception of toll changes associated with ETC.

     I use the estimated elasticity of demand under manual toll collection as a proxy for . This is based on

the assumption of a constant elasticity of demand curve, or at least an approximately constant elasticity

within the range of the estimated toll increase so that the equilibrium change in tolls associated with ETC

does not directly affect the elasticity. This also ignores any direct effect that ETC may have on the

underlying demand for driving, an issue I investigate in more detail in Section 5.1. For this back of the

envelope calculation, I use the results from column 4 of Table 4. For facilities that eventually adopt ETC,

these results indicate a short run elasticity of driving under manual toll collection of -0.061 and of -0.007

at the average ETC penetration rate in my sample of 0.4 ( = -0.061 + 0.4 * 0.134).10 The ratio of the

elasticities is therefore 0.11.

     These results imply that a given increase in the actual toll causes the perceived toll at the average

ETC penetration rate to rise by only 11 percent as much as it would have under manual toll collection.

Note that these results are not informative about whether in equilibrium the toll level is misperceived. As

emphasized previously, the elasticity that I estimate is the short run elasticity, which is likely to decline in

absolute value if a decline in tax salience reduces the fraction of individuals who observe the toll change,

or increases the fraction of individuals who underestimate the magnitude of toll changes that are

observed. It is possible, however, that even if individuals do not observe toll changes, they have unbiased

expectations about the toll level so that the elasticity as a function of the expected tax does not change. I




10
  While it might be preferable to evaluate the elasticity under the steady state penetration rate of 0.6, in practice this
results in a positive (although statistically insignificant) elasticity of 0.019, which creates conceptual problems for
this exercise.


                                                                                                                       22
present some suggestive evidence for this possibility in Section 5.2 below, where I examine the impact of

the diffusion of ETC on traffic.

     As discussed in Section 2, if the government lacks the ability to commit on policy, it will have an

incentive to change taxes in response to even short run changes in the elasticity of demand. In simple

models of tax setting such as the Ramsey model or the decisions of a profit maximizing government

owned enterprise, the equilibrium tax rate should rise in proportion to the decline in the effective

elasticity. Since I estimate the elasticity under ETC to be about 11 percent of that under manual toll

collection, this suggests that the equilibrium toll should rise by about 9 fold. However, a government

owned enterprise – such as a toll facility –may also place some weight on consumer surplus (Peltzman

1971, Baron and Myerson 1982, Timmins 2002). The enterprise’s manager(s) want to maintain

employment, which requires the satisfaction of its citizens. Citizens are shareholders in the government

owned enterprise, and therefore benefit from profit maximizing prices. However, some or all of the

citizens are also consumers of the publicly produced good, and therefore desire lower prices, which would

place downward pressure on the profit maximizing price.

     The objective of a government-owned enterprise may therefore be expressed (as in e.g. Timmins,

2002) as a weighted average of (net of payments) consumer surplus and profits:

            f
     max X ³ D( x)dx  (1  X )( p  c) D( p )                                                                (5)
       p
            p


where X  [0,1] denotes the relative weight placed on consumer surplus. The government as a pure profit

maximizer corresponds to X         0, X    1 / 2 implies that the government maximizes net social surplus (i.e.

sets price equal to marginal cost) and X       1 implies that the government maximizes consumer welfare

(i.e. sets price to zero).11 This objective function yields a modified inverse elasticity rule for price setting

by a government owned enterprise:



11
  The qualitative insights are similar if the profit component of the objective function in equation (5) is replaced
with some other standard government objective function such as raising a fixed amount of revenue subject to
minimal distortion as in Ramsey (1927), correcting a Pigouvian externality, or maximizing revenue (i.e. leviathan


                                                                                                                       23
 pc      1 § 1  2X ·
            ¨        ¸                                                                                 (6)
  p       H © 1X ¹

where H is the absolute value of the elasticity of demand. The markup is decreasing in X , the relative

weight that the enterprise places on consumer surplus. The magnitude of the tax increase in response to a

decline in the short run elasticity is also declining in X .

    We can use the estimated elasticity of demand under manual toll collection to make a back of the

envelope calculation of the implied relative weight X that toll operating authorities place on

consumer surplus. Under the assumption of a zero marginal cost of toll collection equation (6) indicates

that the estimated elasticity of -0.049 under manual toll collection (Table 4, column 1) implies a relative

weight on consumer surplus of 0.49. This suggests that the toll authority’s objective function comes very

close to a net social surplus maximizer (i.e. Q = ½).

    With a relative weight on consumer surplus of 0.49, the first order condition for price setting of a

government owned enterprise (equation 6) suggests that a decline in the short run elasticity to 11 percent

of its previous level should be associated with an increase in the price of about 35 percent. This predicted

increase is similar to the 36 to 38 percent increase in tolls estimated in the sample of facilities with no

ETC discounts (see Table 2), which is the sample from which the change in elasticity was computed.

While there is naturally a quite large implicit confidence interval around the predicted price increase, it is

reassuring that the price increase implied by the estimated change in elasticity and the estimated weight

the government places on consumer surplus is similar to the price increase estimated directly from the

data.

5. Alternative Explanations

    I have interpreted the evidence that the introduction of ETC is associated with an increase in the toll

rate as the consequence of the decline in the visibility of tolls to consumers who pay for them

electronically. In this section, I consider a number of alternative explanations for the increase in the toll


government); Sappington and Sidak (2003) provide a formal analysis of price setting by a government owned
enterprise in this last case.


                                                                                                                24
rate associated with ETC. In particular, I consider the lower personal compliance costs of paying tolls

under ETC (Section 5.1), the potential endogeneity of the timing of ETC adoption (Section 5.2), the

lower operating costs of toll collection under ETC (Section 5.3), the capital outlays required for ETC

installation (Section 5.4), and the potential change in menu costs associated with ETC (Section 5.5). I

conclude that none of these alternative interpretations is likely to be able to explain the empirical findings.

5.1 ETC lowers personal compliance costs of toll payment

    ETC reduces the compliance costs for drivers associated with paying tolls (Levinson 2002, p.52-53,

Hau 1992). These compliance costs consist of both the queuing time caused by congestion at toll plazas

and the time spent paying the toll in the toll plaza. Friedman and Waldfogel (1995) estimate that, under

manual toll collection, compliance costs are about 15 percent of toll revenue. Under the generous

assumption that ETC reduces compliance costs to zero, ETC would reduce average compliance costs in

steady state (i.e. with 60 percent ETC penetration) from 15% of the monetary toll costs to 6% of the

monetary toll costs, and would therefore reduce the total toll (monetary toll plus monetized compliance

costs) by 8 percent. Of course, the compliance costs of manual toll collection are likely to be larger for

drivers who choose to adopt ETC. Drivers who adopt ETC tend to be disproportionately higher income

and likely to travel frequently on the facility (Amromin et al., 2005, Pietrzyk and Mierzejewsli 1993). An

upper bound on the reduction in compliance costs would be to assume that drivers who do not adopt ETC

face no compliance costs (e.g. they have a zero opportunity cost of time) and that adoption of ETC

reduces compliance costs to zero. The reduction in compliance costs associated with ETC would then

reduce the total toll by 15 percent. This suggests that the increase in the total toll associated with ETC is

about 8-15 percentage points less than the estimated 20 – 40 percent increase in the monetary toll

associated with ETC.

    Reductions in compliance costs may be part of the way that ETC reduces the visibility of tolls; less

time spent queuing or paying tolls may reduce the salience of the toll. Indeed, as noted in the

Introduction, reductions in the compliance costs of paying taxes – such as federal income tax withholding

– are often opposed on the grounds that the reduced compliance costs make taxes less visible, and


                                                                                                             25
therefore encourage an increase in these taxes. However, reductions in the compliance costs of paying

tolls may also directly affect demand for driving and hence the equilibrium toll rate.12 Three independent

pieces of evidence, however, suggest that any reduction in compliance costs associated with ETC is

unlikely to be the primary factor behind the estimated increase in toll rates associated with ETC.

5.1.1 Back of the envelope calculation of effect of lower compliance costs on toll rates

       First, a rough back of the envelope calculations suggests that estimated increase in monetary tolls

associated with ETC is probably several orders of magnitude too large to be explained solely by ETC’s

reduction in compliance costs. I assume that the monetary toll and the compliance costs are perfect

substitutes from the drivers’ perspective – so that the demand for driving is a function only of the total toll

– and use a local linear approximation to the demand curve for driving. Under these assumptions, a profit

maximizing toll authority would increase the toll rate by $0.50 for every $1 reduction in compliance

costs. Once we take account of our estimate that toll authorities in fact maximize a weighted sum of

profits and consumer surplus, with a relative weight on consumer surplus of 0.49, the toll authority would

be expected to raise the toll by $0.04 for every $1 reduction in compliance costs.13 The estimated

reduction in compliance costs associated with ETC of about 8 to 15 cents per dollar of toll therefore

suggests that the average toll authority in our sample would raise the toll by about 0.3 - 0.6 percent. The

expected increase in the monetary toll associated with ETC’s reduction in compliance costs is therefore

about two orders of magnitude smaller than the estimated 20 to 40 percent increase in the monetary toll

associated with ETC.


12
  Relatedly, it is possible that the increase in demand for driving associated with ETC raises congestion and hence
raises the optimal congestion tax. As a crude test of this I examined whether the analysis of the impact of ETC on
the change in toll rates in equation (2) was sensitive to including the change in traffic as a control variable, and
found that it was not.
                                                                      f
13
     The operating authority chooses the toll rate  to solve   max X ³ D(t  w)dx  (1  X )(W  c) D(t  w) where
                                                                 W
                                                                      W
w denotes the wait time (i.e. compliance) cost, and X denotes the relative weight that the operating authority places
on consumer surplus. The change in the equilibrium toll rate with respect to the compliance cost is therefore:
wW         ª            (1  2Q ) D c(W  w)  (1  Q )( p  c) D cc(W  w)             º
          «                                                                            »
ww         ¬ (1  2Q ) D c(W  w)  (1  Q )( p  c) D cc(W  w)  (1  Q ) D c( p  w) ¼


                                                                                                                   26
     Consistent with this back of the envelope calculation, two distinct pieces of empirical evidence

suggest that there is no detectable increase in tolls in response to reductions in compliance costs.14

5.1.2 Variation across roads in the reduction in compliance costs associated with ETC

     One piece of evidence comes from variation across roads in my sample in the compliance costs

savings from ETC. This arises from variation in the number of times an individual must make a toll

transaction (i.e. pay a toll or take a ticket) while driving the full length of a road, and hence variation in

the toll compliance costs from a full length trip. For example, in 1985 an individual made 11 toll

transactions while driving the length of the Garden State Parkway, compared to only two on the New

Jersey Turnpike. If tolls are increased under ETC in response to the reductions in compliance costs, we

might therefore expect these tolls increases to be higher on roads with a greater number of toll

transactions, or a greater number of toll transactions per dollar of toll paid or per mile of road driven. In

fact, there is weak evidence of the opposite.

     Table 5 shows the results. Column 1 shows the baseline results when I re-estimate equation (2) on the

sub-sample of facilities that are roads; it shows that the effect of ETC persists in the roads sub-sample. In

columns 2 through 4 I repeat this baseline analysis but include interactions of both 'ETCYear and

'ETC with a variable that measures of the compliance costs associated with toll collection on a full

length trip in 1985;15 I also include the main effect for the measure of compliance costs. Columns 2

through 4 show results for three different measures of the compliance costs associated with toll collection

on a full length trip. In column 2 I measure compliance costs by the number of separate toll transactions

involved in a full length trip on the road; on average it is 2.3. In column 3 I measure compliance costs as



14
   These two separate pieces of evidence come from distinct sources of variation in compliance costs in the sub-
sample of facilities that are roads and in the sub-sample of facilities that are bridges and tunnels, respectively.
Unfortunately, I do not have enough power in either subset of facilities to examine whether there is a relationship
between changes in compliance costs and changes in the short run elasticity of demand for driving with respect to
the toll. The analysis therefore focuses on the impact of changes in compliance costs on toll rates.
15
   I define this variable in 1985, since the number of transactions is potentially affected by whether a facility has
ETC. In practice, as discussed in Section 5.3, there is no evidence of an effect of ETC on the number of toll
transactions. Not surprisingly, therefore, the analysis in Table 5 is not affected if I allow the number of transactions
variable to be time varying (not shown). Data on the number of toll transactions come from toll operating authority
websites, which include not only current information but histories of additions or removals of toll plazas.


                                                                                                                      27
the number of transactions per dollar of toll; on average, someone driving a one way, full length trip on a

road in my sample in 1985 made 1.5 transactions per dollar of toll paid. Finally, in column 4 I measure

compliance costs by the number of transactions per mile in 1985; on average, there is a toll transaction

every 22 miles for roads in my sample. For all three measures of compliance costs, the results suggest that

the increase in tolls associated with ETC is in fact lower on roads with higher compliance costs; the

coefficient on 'ETCYear *ComplianceCost is always negatively and, sometimes, statistically

significant. This negative relationship is somewhat puzzling; it may reflect the higher menu costs

associated with toll changes when there are more separate toll transactions to be changed per dollar of

toll. Importantly, however, I am able to reject the prediction of the compliance cost story that the increase

in tolls associated with ETC should be higher on roads where compliance costs are a greater share of the

total toll.

5.1.3 Reductions in compliance costs on bridges and tunnels from a change to one-way tolling

    Finally, a separate experiment in the data provides some independent evidence on the effect of

compliance cost reductions on the equilibrium toll rate. During my sample, just over half of the bridges

and tunnels (40 out of 79) switched from collecting tolls on both ends of the facility to collecting tolls

only at one end; Figure 3 shows the distribution of change dates for these facilities. A change from both-

way to one-way tolling should cut compliance costs – as well as administrative costs – of toll collection in

half. This reduction in compliance costs is of similar magnitude to a the reductions in compliance costs

associated with steady state ETC penetration; it therefore provides an opportunity to gauge the impact of

such reductions in compliance costs on toll rates. Of course, it is possible that the change to one-way

tolling also affects the salience of tolls; it is not clear, for example, if paying 50 cents twice is more or less

salient than paying $1 once. Therefore, a priori, evidence of an impact on toll rates is not necessarily a

problem for a salience story. However, the absence of an effect would help assuage concerns that the

estimated impact of ETC on toll rates stems from its effect on reducing compliance costs of driving.




                                                                                                               28
     I limit the sample to bridges and tunnels, since these are the facilities “at risk” for changing from two-

way to one way tolling.16 Table 6 shows the results. They suggest little – if any – increase in tolls

associated with a switch from two-way to one-way tolling, and the associated reductions in compliance

costs of toll paying. Recall that the tolls on bridges and tunnels are defined as the tolls on a round trip, so

that there is no mechanical effect on tolls from changing from two-way to one-way tolling. Column 1

replicates the basic analysis of the increase in tolls associated with ETC from estimation of equation (2);

it shows that the effect of ETC persists in the bridges and tunnels sub-sample. In column 2, I add an

additional right hand side indicator variable for whether it is the year in which the facility switched from

two-way to one-way tolling ( 'ToOneWay it ). Unlike ETC whose use diffuses over time and whose

effects on toll rates is therefore expected to occur incrementally over time, the switch to one-way tolling

is instantaneous, and therefore any effect on toll rates might also be expected to be instantaneous. The

coefficient on 'ToOneWay it is 0.041 (s.e. = 0.035) which suggests that the change from both-way to

one-way tolling is associated with a statistically insignificant 4.1 percent increase in tolls. Under the same

assumptions as in the previous back of the envelope calculation, a reduction in compliance costs by 50%

(i.e. from 15% of tolls to 7.5% of tolls) would be expected to increase the toll rate of a profit maximizing

monopolist by about 3.8 percent, and by a toll authority with a relative weight on consumer surplus of

0.49 by about 0.3 percent; neither response can be rejected by my estimates, nor can my estimates reject

the hypothesis of no increase in tolls in response to this reduction in compliance costs. By contrast, the

coefficients on 'ETC and 'ETCYear in column 2 together imply that after ETC has diffused to its

steady state level, it is associated with a statistically significant increase in toll rates of 36 percent

(~exp(ETC + 14*ETCYEAR)). I can reject that the implied steady state effect of ETC is the same as that

from the switch to one-way tolling at the 90% confidence level.




16
  There are actually two roads that switched to one way tolling, although I ignore them for purposes of this analysis.
The Hampton Toll Plaza on the Blue Star Turnpike in NH had brief experiments with one way tolling in Sept-Oct
2003 and July October 2004; The John F. Kennedy Memorial Highway in MD switched to one-way tolling in 1991.


                                                                                                                   29
    Of course, it is possible that there is a lag before the change to one-way tolling has its full effect on

toll rates. For example, politicians might find it easier to phase in a toll increase gradually. In column 3,

therefore, I add an indicator variable for whether the facility had previously switched from two-way to

one way tolling ( 'ToOneWayYearit ), so that the specification is now symmetric to that used to gauge

the effects of ETC. The coefficient on 'ToOneWay it attenuates in magnitude and remains statistically

insignificant, and the coefficient on 'ToOneWayYearit is statistically insignificant; by contrast, there

continuous to be a statistically significant coefficient on 'ETCYear ; I do not, however, have enough

power to reject that the coefficients on 'ETCYear and 'ToOneWayYearit are statistically

distinguishable.

5.2 Endogeneity of the timing of ETC adoption

    The timing of a facility’s ETC adoption may be spuriously correlated with the need to raise tolls. For

example, facilities may respond to increased congestion by both adopting ETC and raising tolls as

complementary congestion-reducing strategies. This suggests we should observe increases in congestion

on a facility (or a proxy for it such as traffic) prior to ETC adoption. Alternatively, facilities might

respond to a negative revenue shock by both raising tolls and adopting ETC, with the latter a way to lower

revenue losses from the administrative costs of toll collection. This suggests we should observe declining

revenue (or declining traffic) on a facility in the years prior to ETC adoption. More generally, we can look

for changes in toll rates in the years prior to ETC adoption as a partial test of the identifying assumption

that absent the adoption of ETC a facility would not have experienced differential changes in its toll rate.

Of course, if the lower salience of ETC makes it easier to raise tolls, ETC might be adopted precisely by

facilities that are encountering difficulties in making needed toll adjustments, suggesting that facilities

might experience declines in traffic, revenue or toll increases prior to ETC adoption. While evidence of

such effects is therefore not necessarily inconsistent with the salience story, the lack of any such evidence

reduces concerns about omitted variable bias and spurious findings.




                                                                                                                30
    The results in Table 7 help alleviate these endogeneity concerns. I re-estimate equation (2) for three

different dependent variables: log(traffic)it (columns 1 and 2), log(revenue)it (columns 3 and 4), and

log(minimum toll)it (columns 5 and 6). All regressions include 'ETC and 'ETCYear , as well as year

fixed effects. I also include an indicator variable for whether it is 1 to 2 years prior to ETC Adoption (odd

columns) or whether it is 1 to 5 years prior to ETC adoption (even columns).       The coefficients on these

indicator variables for years just prior to ETC adoption show no statistically or substantively significant

evidence of systematic changes in traffic, revenue or tolls in the years prior to a facility’s adopting ETC.

One reason why these endogeneity concerns may not in practice be a problem is that, as noted above, the

different facilities run by a given operating authority tend to all adopt ETC at the same time, and yet may

be experiencing different patterns of traffic and tolls.

    The results in Table 7 also suggest that revenue increases by about 3 percent each year after ETC is

installed. This is consistent with my findings that ETC is associated with an increase in toll rates, and that

demand for driving is very inelastic with respect to the toll. For the sample for which I have revenue data,

I estimate that ETC is associated with a 2.2 percent increase in tolls each year (not shown).

    The results in Table 7 also suggest that traffic declines in the years after ETC is installed, although

these estimates are not statistically significant and are substantively quite small. A decline in traffic

would be consistent with the rational expectations model discussed in Section 2 in which individuals

using ETC do not directly observe toll changes but form unbiased expectations about toll levels. Since

tolls rise under ETC, if individuals have unbiased expectations about the toll rate this should cause traffic

to decline in equilibrium. If ETC also increases the demand for driving, this could cause traffic to rise; the

fact that traffic does not appear to rise however suggests that any such direct demand effect of ETC is not

enough to offset the effect of the higher perceived toll rates.

    As a separate test of whether the decision to adopt ETC is correlated with (unobserved) shocks to

revenue needs, I also examined whether ETC is associated with changes in other highway user taxes. In

the mid-1980s, revenue for tolls make up only about 10% of total state and local highway user fees;

gasoline taxes and motor vehicle registration fees are other important sources of revenue from highway


                                                                                                              31
users (US Department of Transportation 1985, 1986). I find no evidence that ETC is correlated with

changes in state gas tax rates, tax revenues from all motor fuels, or state tax revenues from motor vehicle

registration and drivers’ licenses (results not shown).17 The fact that ETC is not associated with increases

in these other highway user taxes helps alleviate concerns that ETC adoption is correlated with

unobserved increases in revenue demand. The fact that ETC is not associated with decreases in these

other highway user taxes suggests that ETC is associated with an increase in total highway revenue (of

about the same magnitude as the increase in toll rates, given how inelastic demand is).

5.3 ETC lowers the operating cost of toll collection

     ETC is associated with substantial reductions in the annual costs of operating and maintaining toll

facilities (Pietrzyk and Mierzejewski 1993, Hau 1992, Levinson 2002 and cites therein). For example,

Pietrzyk and Mierzejewski (1993, p.23) estimate that operating and maintenance costs per lane are at least

90 percent lower under electronic toll collection than under manual toll collection. The cost savings arise

primarily from reductions in the labor costs associated with toll collection.

     Although Becker and Mulligan (2003) show that increases in the efficiency of tax collection can

increase the equilibrium tax rate, this requires an improvement in the marginal efficiency of tax

collection. By contrast, ETC improves the fixed component of the efficiency cost of taxation, since the

ETC administrative cost savings are independent of the toll rate charged. This decline in fixed

administrative costs of tax collection should therefore not prompt an increase in the rate of existing

taxes.18

     A decline in the fixed administrative costs of tax collection could, however, encourage the

introduction of new taxes. For example, lower fixed administrative costs of toll collection might

encourage the introduction of tolls on roads that had not been previously been tolled or the construction of

17
   These results come from estimation of equation (2) at the state level, using changes in log tax revenue or log tax
rate for various state taxes as the dependent variable. To measure ETC_Year at the state level, I use how many years
it has been since any facility in the state has ETC. This state-level specification yields similar estimates of the
increase in toll revenue associated with ETC as the facility-level analysis shown in Table 7. I am grateful to John
Rork for providing the data on state tax rates and tax revenues.
18
   Note moreover that if operating authorities set tolls to meet an exogenous revenue requirement, the reduction in
administrative costs would lower the equilibrium toll needed to raise a fixed amount of (net) revenue.


                                                                                                                  32
new (tolled) roads where no road existed before. Any such effects of ETC, however, would not show up

in my analysis, which limits the sample to facilities with pre-existing tolls. Lower fixed administrative

costs of toll collection could also encourage the installation of more toll collection points on an existing

toll facility; however, I find no evidence that ETC had such an effect.19 The increase in tolls associated

with ETC therefore reflects increases in existing tax rates, which cannot be explained by declines in the

fixed administrative costs of tax collection. Of course, as previously mentioned, there is some suggestive

evidence that ETC is associated with a decline in the probability of the toll being set to zero; while this

could potentially be explained by lower fixed administrative costs, this does not contribute to my

estimated increase in tolls associated with ETC since such cases are censored.

5.4 ETC installation requires capital outlay

     Although ETC lowers the costs of operating and maintaining toll facilities, installation of ETC

requires a capital outlay, which could require an increase in tolls. This seems unlikely, since operating

authorities can borrow to cover these capital costs and since capital costs are recouped within a few years

by the savings in operating and maintenance costs, and by revenue from the sale or lease of the

transponders and interest on prepayments and deposits (Pietrzyk and Mierzejewski 1993, Hau 1992). Of

course, it is possible that operating authorities might use the installation costs of ETC as an excuse to

raise tolls, even though ETC is self-financing. Any such excuse might be used for a one-time increase in

tolls when ETC comes in; it seems less natural that this excuse could be used for subsequent increases in

tolls as ETC use diffuses among drivers.

5.5 Changes in menu costs associated with ETC

     Finally, it is possible that ETC might lower the administrative cost of toll changes (i.e. menu costs).

For example, there might be literal menu cost savings if signs listing the toll rate do not have to be

changed as they do for manual tolls. Alternatively, ETC might allow flexibility for smaller increases of


19
  I re-estimate equation (2) using as a dependent variable a binary measure for whether there is an increase in the
number of toll transactions someone driving a one-way, full-length trip on the facility would have to make. I
perform this analysis both for the full sample of facilities and separately for the roads sub-sample and for the bridges
and tunnels sub-sample.


                                                                                                                     33
non “round” amounts; unlike manual tolls, this would not impose on drivers that they carry small coins.

In practice, however, ETC tolls are not less “round” than manual tolls, except when they are specified as a

fixed percent discount off of the manual toll. In addition, the effect of ETC on toll rates persists for the

sub-sample of facilities that do not offer an ETC discount. For these facilities, there can be no menu cost

savings as changing the electronic toll requires changing the manual toll, and all facilities continue to

have at least some manual payers. Finally, even if ETC did reduce menu costs, this should suggest that

ETC would be associated with more frequent toll adjustments but it is not clear why this would produce a

higher equilibrium toll rate.

6. Conclusion

    This paper has examined the hypothesis that a less salient tax system can produce a higher

equilibrium tax rate. Belief in this possibility has contributed to opposition to tax reforms that are

believed to reduce tax salience, such as Federal income tax withholding or a partial replacement of the

income tax with a value-added tax. Yet the sign of the effect of tax salience on tax rates is theoretically

ambiguous, and empirical evidence has been lacking.

    I examine the relationship between tax salience and tax rates empirically by looking at the impact of

the adoption of electronic toll collection (ETC) on toll rates. Because the driver no longer plays an active,

physical role in each toll payment, toll rates may be less salient under electronic toll collection than under

manual toll collection. To analyze the impact of ETC, I collected a new data set on toll rates over the last

half century on 123 toll facilities in the United States. Since different tolls facilities adopted electronic toll

collection in different years, and some have not yet adopted it, I am able to examine the within-toll

facility change in tolls associated with the introduction of electronic toll collection.

    I find robust evidence that toll rates increase following the adoption of electronic toll collection.

These estimates suggest that after ETC use among drivers has diffused to its steady state level, toll rates

are 20 to 40 percent higher than they would have been under manual toll collection. Consistent with the

hypothesis that ETC increases toll rates because it reduces the salience of the tax system, I also find that

the short run elasticity of driving with respect to the actual toll declines (in absolute value) under ETC. I


                                                                                                               34
consider a variety of alternative explanations for this finding – such as the effect that electronic toll

collection may have on toll collection administrative costs or on drivers’ willingness to pay for access to

the facility – and conclude that these alternatives are unlikely to be able to explain the increase in toll

rates associated with electronic toll collection.

    Given the theoretical ambiguity of the sign of the effect of tax salience on tax rates, my findings leave

open the question of how changes in the visibility of other tax systems – such as income tax withholding

or requirements to post VAT-inclusive prices – affect these equilibrium tax rates. In light of the findings

of this paper, I consider such questions an interesting and important direction for future work.




                                                                                                              35
References

Acemoglu, Daron and James Robinson. 2002. “Inefficient Redistribution”. American Political Science
Review 95: 649-61.

Amromin, Gene, Carrie Jankowski, and Richard Porter. 2005. “Transforming Payment Choices by
Doubling Fees on the Illinois Tollway.” Unpublished mimeo.

Baron, David and Roger Myerson. 1982. “Regulating a Monopolist with Unknown Costs.” Econometrica
50: 911 – 930.

Barro, Robert and David Gordon. 1983. “A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural Rate
Model.” Journal of Political Economy 91(4): 589-610.

Becker, Gary and Casey Mulligan. 2003. “Deadweight costs and the size of government.” Journal of Law
and Economics, XLVI: 293 – 340.

Brennan, Geoffrey and James Buchanan. 1980. “The power to tax: Analytical foundations of a fiscal
constitution.” Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Buchanan , James and Richard E. Wagner. 1977. Democracy in Deficit. NY: Academic Press.

Buchanan, James. 1967. “Public Finance in Democratic Process.”

Chetty, Raj, Kory Kroft and Adam Looney. 2006 “Bounded Rationality, Salience, and Taxation: Theory
and Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Unpublished mimeo.

Dollery, Brian and Andrew Worthington. 1996 “The empirical analysis of fiscal illusion”, Journal of
Economic Surveys, 10, pp. 261–298.

Dusek, Libor. 2003. “Do Governments Grow When they Become More Efficient? Evidence from Tax
Withholding.” Unpublished PhD Dissertation, University of Chicago.

Feldman, Naomi and Peter Katuscak. 2005. “Should the Average Tax Rate by Marginalized?” Mimeo.
http://econ.bgu.ac.il/facultym/nfeldman/WPapers/Should_the_Average_Tax_Rate_Be_Marginalized.pdf

Friedman, David and Joel Waldfogel. 1995. “The Administrative and Compliance Cost of Manual
Highway Toll Collection: Evidence from Massachusetts and New Jersey.” National Tax Journal, June.

Friedman, Milton and Rose Friedman. 1998. “Two Lucky People.” University of Chicago Press.

Hau. Timothy. 1992. “Congestion Charging Mechanisms for Roads: An Evaluation of Current Practice”
World Bank Research Paper 1071. Washington: The World Bank, December.

Kearney, Melissa. 2005. “The Economic Winners and Losers of Legalized Gambling”. National Tax
Journal. June.

Kydland, Finn and Edward Prescott. 1977. “Rules rather than direction: The inconsistency of optimal
plans.” Journal of Political Economy, 85, 473-490.

Levinson, David. 2002. “Financing Transportation Networks.”


                                                                                                      36
Liebman, Jeffrey and Richard Zeckhauser. 2004. “Schmeduling”. Unpublished mimeo. Available at
http://www.ksg.harvard.edu/jeffreyliebman/schmeduling.pdf

Mirrlees, James. 1971. “An exploration in the theory of optimum income taxation.” Review of Economic
Studies 38(2): 175-208.

Pietrzyk, Michael and Edward Mierzejewski. 1993. “Electronic Toll and Traffic Management Systems.”
Washington DC, National Academy Press.

Oates, Wallace. 1988. “On the nature and measurement of fiscal illusion: a survey.” In Geoffrey Brennan
et al (eds) “Taxation and Fiscal Federalism: Essays in Honour of Russell Mathews”, pp. 65–82. Sydney:
Australian National University Press

Peltzman, Sam. 1971. “Pricing in Public and Private Enterprises: Electric Utilities in the United States.”
Journal of Law and Economics 14(1): 109-147.

Ramsey, Frank. 1927. “A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation.” Economic Journal 37: 47-612.

Sappington, David E.M. and J. Gregory Sidak. 2003. “Incentives for Anticompetitive Behavior by Public
Enterprises.” Review of Industrial Organization 22: 183 – 206.

Slemrod, Joel. 1996. “Which is the Simplest Tax System of Them All?” in Hank Aaron and William Gale
(eds.) “The Economics of Fundamental Tax Reform” The Brookings Institution, pp. 355 – 391.

Timmins, Christopher. 2002. “Measuring the dynamic efficiency costs of regulators’ preferences:
Municipal water utilities in the arid west.” Econometrica 70(2): 603 – 629.

The President’s Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform. 2005. “Simple, Fair, and Pro-Growth: Proposals
to Fix America’s Tax System.” U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington D.C.

U.S. Census Bureau. 1985. “Annual Survey of State and Local Government Finances and Census of
Governments.”

U.S. Department of Transportation, various years. “Highway Statistics, YEAR.”

Wilson, John. 1990. “Are efficiency improvements in government transfer policies self-defeating in
political equilibrium?” Economics and Politics 2 (3): 241 – 258.




                                                                                                         37
Appendix A: Construction of toll data set

A.1 Sample

The target sample is all publicly owned toll facilities in the United States (excluding ferries) that were
charging a toll in 1985. I identified the target sample as the universe of toll facilities from the 1985 and
1986 volumes of “Highway Statistics” published by the U.S. Department of Transportation. In a few
instances, I added facilities to the data that did not appear independently in the “Highway Statistics”
volumes but that were disaggregated for us by the operating authority when we contacted them (such as
the “Bee Line East Expressway” which is part of the “Florida Turnpike System” in “Highway
Statistics”).

The target sample consists of 183 toll facilities run by 88 operating authorities in 31 states. Of these, I was
able to collect the requisite data for 123 facilities run by 49 operating authorities in 22 states. For the
acquired facilities, opening dates range from 1924 to 1985, with a median opening date of 1955. All of
the facilities in the sample started charging tolls on the opening date.

Appendix Table A1 provides some summary statistics on the 123 facilities in the sample. Specifically, it
lists for each state and operating authority, the facilities for which I collected data, the date the facility
started charging tolls, the date my toll data start (if later than the toll start date), the date (if any) at which
the facility adopted Electronic Toll Collection (ETC), and whether the facility ever offered a discounted
toll rate to ETC users. For purposes of the analysis, I defined two additional “states” (“New Jersey –
Pennsylvania and New York – New Jersey”) to reflect the few cases of operating authorities that were
jointly under the purview of the two states. The sample for analysis therefore consists of 24 state-like
entities, as reflected in Table A1.

Appendix Table A2 provides a list of the 60 facilities in the target sample for which we were unable to
find data. Not surprisingly, a factor that is strongly predictive of a lack of success in getting toll data is
that the facility is no longer charging a toll toward the end of our sample period. Only half of the facilities
that we were unable to collect data for were still charging tolls in 2003, compared to over 90 percent of
the facilities for which I was able to collect data. Of the 9 states in which I was unable to collect data on
any target facilities, 4 (CT, IA, MN, and WA) were no longer charging tolls in 2003. For facilities that
were no longer charging tolls by the end of out sample period, I was usually unable to find any contact
information, particularly if the operating authority that managed that facility no longer had any toll
charging facilities. (Indeed, 8 out of the 13 facilities that were not charging a toll in 2003 that I was able
to collect data for were managed by operating authorities that still had other facilities charging tolls). For
the vast majority of facilities for which I am missing data that were still charging tolls at the end of our
sample period, I contacted the relevant operating authority repeatedly but was unable to obtain the
necessary data; in a very few of these cases, I was unable to find the relevant contact information.20
Another noticeable pattern in success in data collection is that we are missing data on all 12 target
facilities in TX (even though all but 1 of the 10 operating authorities were still running facilities charging
tolls by the end of the sample period). The TX operating authorities either did not respond to inquiries or
did not provide sufficient data (despite multiple requests) to be included in the analysis.

The missing facilities raise questions about the validity of analyzing the impact of ETC on only a sub-
sample of toll facilities. To the extent that the missing data is related to systematic geographic
characteristics – such as the lack of any data on TX – we may wish to interpret the results as applicable
only in certain states. A potentially more major concern is the selection on the dependent variable. As

20
  These were: the White County Bridge Commission, the Indiana Transportation Finance Authority, the Bellevue
Bridge Commission, and the Roma International Toll Bridge.


                                                                                                                 38
noted, facilities that are no longer charging tolls are much less likely to be in the sample. However, this
likely biases my analysis against finding an effect of ETC on toll increases as facilities that are no longer
charging tolls (and are therefore not experiencing any toll increases by definition) are much less likely to
have adopted ETC. Indeed, only 1 of the 15 facilities in the acquired sample that had stopped charging a
toll by 2005 had ever adopted ETC.

A.2 Variable definitions

ETC Penetration: I define the ETC Penetration rate as the fraction of toll transactions or the fraction of
toll revenue collected by ETC. The definition of ETC penetration varies across (but not within) facilities
depending on whether I could obtain more years of data for the fraction of toll transactions or the fraction
of toll revenue paid for by ETC. These measures may differ because of ETC discounts. Where I observe
both, the correlation is 0.90. For over 95 percent of facilities, ETC penetration is defined based on all toll
revenue (or transactions); in a few cases it refers to just passenger car revenue (or transactions). For about
two-thirds of facilities ETC penetration was reported separately for each facility. For the others, it was
reported for the entire operating authority; for these, I impute to each facility-year the operating authority
- year average. Since, as discussed, adoption of ETC is almost always simultaneous on facilities within an
operating authority, this should be a reasonable approximation.

Tolls: Tolls are defined as the nominal toll rate for passenger cars; high frequency discounts (i.e.
commuter discounts) are not coded. I collected data on both the “manual” (i.e. cash) toll rate and the
discounted electronic toll rate, if offered. I define the toll on bridges, tunnels, or causeways as the round-
trip cost on that facility; I use the round-trip rate because 40 of the 79 bridges and tunnels changed from
collecting a toll on both ends of the bridge to only collecting it on one end during the sample period. I
define the toll rate on a road as the cost of a full length trip on this road. Where the road has several
potential branches (such as the PA turnpike), I code a full length trip as the length on the mainline; where
a road forks at one end (such as the New Jersey Turnpike), I code the full length trip as the longer fork.
One potential concern with this definition is that it may fail to capture some toll changes on a road.
Specifically, toll changes will be missed if they occur on uncoded branches (such as branches of the PA
turnpike other than the mainline), on exit or entrance ramps along the road, or on non full-length routes
within a ticket system (such as the New Jersey turnpike). In practice, I determined that this is unlikely to
have any effect on my analysis. I constructed an indicator variable “any toll increase” that is coded if the
road has a toll change on the coded toll or an unrecorded toll change for any of the reasons just discussed.
I find that the analysis of the impact of ETC on the probability of a toll increase yields literally the same
point estimates and standard errors when this variable is used instead of the standard binary variable for a
coded toll increase; this is not surprising, given that the correlation between “any toll increase” and the
standard binary variable for a recorded toll increase is 0.98 on roads.

As noted in the text, 15 of the 123 toll facilities that are charging a toll in 1985 subsequently set the toll to
zero. These facilities (and the date that the toll is set to zero) are as follows: Astoria-Pt. Ellice Bridge
(1993), Bluegrass Parkway (1991), Coronado Bridge (2002), Cumberland Bridge (2003), Daniel Boone
Parkway (2003), Jackson Purchase Parkway (1992), Mt. Hope Bridge (1998), Murray Road Toll Bridge
(2000), Navarre Bridge (2004), Norfolk-Virginia Beach Toll Road (1995), Pennyrile Parkway (1992),
Rock Island Centennial Bridge (2003), Torras Causeway (2004), Vincent Thomas Bridge (2001), and
Western Kentucky Parkway (1986). All of these facilities keep the toll at zero through 2005. However, it
does not appear that a toll set to zero is always an absorbing state. Two facilities that set tolls to zero prior
to 1985 subsequently reintroduced positive tolls: Antioch Bridge (reintroduced a toll in 1978) and
Carquinez Bridge (reintroduced a toll in 1957). I treat all facility-years with zero tolls as censored in the
analysis. As noted in the text, this may bias the estimated effect of ETC downward, as facilities are less
likely to set tolls to zero when they have ETC; indeed of the 15 facilities that set their tolls to zero, only
the Navarre Bridge adopted ETC and subsequently set the toll rate to zero.


                                                                                                              39
Traffic and revenue: For over 95 percent of facilities, the data pertain to all toll revenue or toll traffic; in a
few cases they pertain only to passenger cars. Traffic and revenue data are all reported at the facility level,
except for the three facilities in the New Hampshire Department of Transportation and for the three
facilities in the Illinois State Toll Highway Authority for which they are reported at the level of the
operating authority. For these, I assign the operating authority value to each facility within it.




                                                                                                               40
                              15
                              10                  Figure 1: Distribution of ETC Start Dates
                  Frequency
                              5
                              0




                                   1985                    1990                     1995                          2000                         2005
                                                                                 etcstartdate




                                                             Figure 2: Within-Facility ETC Diffusion

                       0.7



                       0.6



                       0.5
ETC Penetration Rate


                       0.4



                       0.3



                       0.2



                       0.1



                              0
                                   1      2   3    4   5     6     7      8      9         10   11     12   13   14     15    16    17    18       19
                                                                                     ETC Year


                    Note: Figure 2 reports the coefficient on indicator variables for the number of years a facility has had ETC from
                                                                                     19
                    the following regression: ETC_Penetr ation it             D i  ¦ E k 1( ETCyear        k ) where the D i are facility fixed
                                                                                     k 1
                    effects, 1(ETCyear=k) are indicator variables for whether it is the kth year of ETC, and ETC_Penetration is
                    defined either as percent of transactions paid by ETC or percent of revenue paid by ETC, depending on the
                    facility.



                                                                                                                                               41
    10       Figure 3: Switching from TwoWay to OneWay Tolling
Frequency
  5 0




            1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005
                                        year




                                                                           42
Table 1: Which facilities adopt ETC?
                                         Probability adopt ETC by 2005           Average adoption date
                                                                                 conditional on adoption
Facility type
    Roads                                0.76                                    1996.5
    Bridges or Tunnels                   0.52                                    2000

Region of Country
   Northeast                             0.70                                    1999.1
   Midwest                               0.58                                    1998.5
   South                                 0.65                                    1996.4
   West                                  0.30                                    2000.4
Note: Based on ETC adoption dates from 88 facilities. See text for more details.

Table 2: Impact of ETC on Toll Rates.
                    Log          Log              Log           Log          log         log         Does Min. Toll
                   Min. Toll     Manual Toll       Toll           Toll          Min. Toll    Min. Toll     Increase? (Binary)
                   (1)           (2)               (3)            (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)
ETCYearit         0.015         0.020             0.024                                                   0.073
                   (0.006)       (0.006)           (0.012)                                                 (0.024)
                   [0.018]       [0.004]           [0.061]                                                 [0.006]
ETC_                                                             0.623         0.557        0.501
Penetrationit                                                     (0.285)       (0.262)      (0.261)
                                                                  [0.044]       [0.045]      [0.067]

ETCit             -0.051        0.016             -0.033         -0.051        -0.105       -0.097        -0.070
                   (0.035)       (0.032)           (0.019)        [0.035]       (0.109)      (0.108)       (0.068)
                   [0.158]       [0.622]           [0.097]        [0.166]       [0.348]      [0.380]       [0.315]
Mean dep. var      0.020         0.022             0.017          0.017         0.020        0.020         0.077
# of states        24            24                17             17            24           24            24
# op. author       49            49                31             31            49           49            49
# facilities       123           123               70             70            123          123           123
N                  5,079         5,079             2,875          2,751         4,815        4,815         5,079
Estimation         OLS           OLS               OLS            OLS           IV           IV            OLS
Sample                                             No ETC         No ETC
restriction                                        discount       discount
Note: Table reports the results of estimating variants of equation (2). All regressions include year fixed effects (not
shown). All other regressors are indicated in the table; column headings define the dependent variable; the bottom
two rows provide additional information on the estimation technique and sample restriction. For the IV estimation in
column (5), ETCYearit is used as an instrument for ETC_Penetrationit. For the IV estimation in column (6), a
cubic in ETCYear is used as an instrument for ETC_Penetrationit..Each operating authority receives equal weight.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by state. P-values are reported [in square brackets]. ETCit is an
indicator variable for whether facility i adopted ETC in year t. ETCYearit is an indicator variable for whether the
number of years the facility has had ETC increases by 1; it is zero in any year the facility does not have ETC, 1 the
year the facility adopts ETC, 2 the second year the facility has ETC and so forth. ETC_Penetrationit measures the
change in the proportion of tolls on the facility paid by ETC; it is zero if the facility does not have ETC, and has an
average value of 0.05 in years in which the facility has ETC. “No ETC discounts” limits facilities to those that never
off an ETC discount. Declines in sample size in column 4 (compared to column 3) and in column 5 or 6 (compared
to column 1) reflects missing data on ETC penetration rates (see Section 3.2.1).




                                                                                                                     43
Table 3: Impact of ETC on Toll Rates: Robustness Analysis
                   Baseline      Northeast     South      Roads       Bridges      Facilities    Facilities    Facility   1985ff      Each       Each        Have
                                 &             & West                 &            opened        opened        FEs                    state      facility    traffic
                                 Midwest                              Tunnels      after         1960 or                              same       same        data
                                                                                   1960          before                               wt         weight

                   (1)           (2)           (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)        (9)         (10)       (11)        (12)
ETCYearit         0.015         0.016         0.014      0.015       0.028        0.021         0.013         0.013      0.015       0.024      0.016       0.012
                   (0.006)       (0.010)       (0.005)    (0.008)     (0.010)      (0.010)       (0.007)       (0.007)    (0.006)     (0.009)    (0.008)     (0.008)
                   [0.019]       [0.141]       [0.030]    [0.067]     [0.015]      [0.065]       [0.079]       [0.075]    [0.018]     [0.016]    [0.062]     [0.146]

ETCit             -0.051        -0.048        -0.044     -0.023      -0.086       0.051         -0.084        -0.053     -0.051      -0.073     -0.065      -0.032
                   (0.035)       (0.054)       (0.027)    (0.063)     (0.017)      (0.079)       (0.025)       (0.036)    (0.035)     (0.032)    (0.029)     (0.045)
                   [0.158]       [0.399]       [0.137]    [0.719]     [0.000]      [0.534]       [0.003]       [0.152]    [0.158]     [0.032]    [0.032]     [0.480]

Mean dep. var      0.020         0.022         0.017      0.021       0.020        0.019         0.021         0.020      0.027       0.019      0.023       0.029
# of states        24            14            10         18          16           13            21            24         24          24         24          21
# op authors       49            28            21         24          31           20            39            49         49          49         49          32
# of facilities    123           68            55         44          79           43            77            123        123         123        123         76
N                  5079          3008          2071       1,692       3,387        1,389         3,690         5,079      2,450       5079       5079        2200
Note: Table reports results from estimating variants of equation (2) by OLS. The dependent variable is always the change in the log minimum toll rate. All
regressions include year fixed effects (not shown). Each operating authority receives equal weight except as noted in columns 10 and 11. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are clustered by state. P-values are reported [in square brackets]. ]. ETCit is an indicator variable for whether facility i adopted ETC in year t.
ETCYearit is an indicator variable for whether the number of years the facility has had ETC increases by 1; it is zero in any year the facility does not have ETC.
Columns 2 and 3 limit the sample to, respectively, facilities in the Northeast and MidWest, and facilities in the South and West. Columns 4 and 5 limit the
sample to, respectively, roads (or causeways) and bridges or tunnels. Columns 6 and 7 limit the sample to, respectively, facilities that opened after 1960 and
facilities that opened in 1960 or earlier. Column 8 adds facility fixed effects to the right hand side of equation (2). Column 9 limits the sample to years 1985 and
later. Column 12 limits the sample to facility-years for which I have traffic data.




                                                                                                                                                                 44
Table 4: The elasticity of traffic with respect to tolls
                     (1)          (2)           (3)                   (4)           (5)           (6)
 log min. toll it   -0.049       -0.050        -0.057                -0.061        -0.060        -0.062
                     (0.015)      (0.018)       (0.017)               (0.019)       (0.037)       (0.039)
                     [0.004]      [0.012]       [0.006]               [0.009]       [0.135]       [0.145]

 log min. toll it *                  0.002           0.006                         0.006
ETCYearit                             (0.002)         (0.001)                       (0.003)
                                      [0.207]         [0.002]                       [0.062]

 log min. toll it *                                                  0.134                       0.141
ETC_Penetrationit                                                     (0.038)                     (0.076)
                                                                      [0.005]                     [0.091]

 log min. toll it *                  -0.069          -0.073          -0.071        -0.006        -0.009
Never_ETCi                            (0.114)         (0.131)         (0.136)       (0.205)       (0.209)
                                      [0.556]         [0.588]         [0.611]       [0.976]       [0.966]

Mean dep. Var           0.049         0.050           0.042           0.043         0.039         0.040
# of states             21            21              12              12            12            12
# op authors            32            32              16              16            16            16
# of facilities         76            76              33              33            33            33
N                       2,200         2,200           727             671           305           292

Sample                                                No ETC          No ETC        No ETC        No ETC
restriction(s)                                        discounts       discounts     discounts     discounts
                                                                                    +2/-2         +2/-2
                                                                                    sample        sample
Note: Table reports results from estimating variants of equation (3) by OLS. The dependent variable is the change
in log traffic. All regressions include year fixed effects as well as a main effect for any variable interactions with
log(min. toll). The bottom row indicates any sample restrictions. “No ETC discounts” limits facilities to those that
never off an ETC discount. “+2/-2 sample” limits sample to facility-years in which there is a toll change or the 2
years before or after a facility’s toll change. Never_ETCi is an indicator variable for whether facility i never has
ETC. ETCYearit is the number of years the facility has had ETC; it is zero in any year in which the facility does not
have ETC. ETC_Penetrationit is the share of tolls paid by ETC on facility i in year t; it is zero in years in which the
facility does not have ETC. Each operating authority receives equal weight. Standard errors (in parentheses) are
clustered by state. P-values are reported [in square brackets].




                                                                                                                     45
Table 5: The impact of ETC-induced reductions in compliance costs on toll rates
                                 (1)             (2)              (3)                                (4)
ETCYearit                       0.015           0.023            0.024                              0.029
                                 [0.008]         (0.011)          (0.011)                            (0.013)
                                 (0.067]         [0.043]          [0.048]                            [0.046]

ETCYearit                                                  -0.004              -0.008               -0.132
*(Measure_of_compliance_costs)                              (0.002)             (0.004)              [0.047]
                                                            [0.122]             [0.057]              [0.013]

ETCit                                    -0.023            -0.047              0.016                0.009
                                          (0.063)           (0.083)             (0.044)              (0.078)
                                          [0.719]           [0.575]             [0.716]              [0.905]

ETCit                                                      0.010               -0.024               -0.360
*( Measure_of_compliance_costs)                             (0.010)             (0.025)              (0.153)
                                                            [0.323]             [0.340]              [0.033]

Measure_of_compliance_costs                                 -0.002              -0.001                    0.053
                                                            (0.001)             (0.003)                  (0.029)
                                                            [0.017]             [0.806]                  [0.086]

Mean dep. var                                                                0.021
# of states                                                                    18
# op authors                                                                  24
# of facilities                                                                44
N                                                                            1,692
Definition of                                                  Number of           Number of           Number of
Measure_of_compliance_costs                                   transactions        transactions        transactions
                                                                                    per $ toll          per mile
Note: Sample limited to roads. Table reports results from estimating variants of equation (2) by OLS. The
dependent variable is the change in the log minimum toll rate. All regressions include year fixed effects in addition
to the regressors shown in the table. ETCit is an indicator variable for whether facility i adopted ETC in year t.
ETCYearit is an indicator variable for whether the number of years the facility has had ETC increases by 1; it is
zero in any year the facility does not have ETC. The “Measure_of_compliance_costs” variable is defined differently
across the columns. In column 2 is denotes the number of separate toll transactions that someone driving a full
length trip on the road must make; it is defined in 1985. In column 3 it is defined as the number of separate toll
transactions divided by the monetary toll paid for a full length trip; both numerator and denominator are defined in
1985. In column 4 it denotes the number of separate toll transactions divided by the mileage for a full length trip;
both numerator and denominate or defined in 1985. Each operating authority receives equal weight. Standard errors
(in parentheses) are clustered by state. P-values are reported [in square brackets].




                                                                                                                   46
Table 6: Impact of Changing from Two-Way to One-Way Tolling on Tolls
                     (1)                    (2)                    (3)
ETCYearit           0.028                  0.028                  0.025
                     (0.010)                (0.010)                (0.011)
                     [0.015]                [0.012]                [0.039]

ToOneWayit                                             0.041                         0.032
                                                        (0.035)                       (0.042)
                                                        [0.258]                       [0.454]

ToOneWayYearit                                                                       0.010
                                                                                      (0.009)
                                                                                      [0.291]

ETCit                    -0.086                        -0.086                        -0.086
                          (0.017)                       (0.017)                       (0.017)
                          [0.000]                       [0.000]                       [0.000]

Mean dep var                                                       0.020
# states                                                             16
# op authors                                                        31
# facilities                                                         79
N                                                                  3387
Notes: Table reports results from estimating variants of equation (2) by OLS. The dependent variable is always the
change in the log minimum toll rate. Sample is limited to bridges and tunnels. All regressions include year fixed
effects. Each operating authority receives equal weight. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by state. P-
values are reported [in square brackets]. ETCit is a dummy variable for whether ETC is installed in that facility in
that year. ETCYearit is a dummy variable for whether the facility installed ETC in a previous year. ToOneWayit
and ToOneWayYearit are dummy variables for, respectively, whether the facility switched to one-way tolling in
that year and whether the facility switched to one-way tolling in a previous year.




                                                                                                                  47
Table 7: Changes in traffic, revenue and tolls prior to ETC adoption.
                         Dep Var:                  Dep Var:                                Dep Var:
                           ' log(traffic)               ' log(revenue)            ' log(minimum toll)
                      (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
1-2 years before      -0.000                       -0.009                        0.004
ETCAdopted            (0.007)                      (0.016)                       (0.013)
                      [0.955]                      [0.599]                       [0.777]
1-5 years before                    0.013                         0.006                         0.009
ETCAdopted                          (0.010)                       (0.012)                       (0.007)
                                    [0.198]                       [0.601]                       [0.242]

ETCit                -0.000        0.000          0.002          0.002          -0.051         -0.051
                      (0.010)       (0.010)        (0.025)        (0.025)        (0.035)        (0.035)
                      [0.996]       [0.978]        [0.922]        [0.930]        [0.158]        [0.162]

ETCYearit            -0.006        -0.001         0.028          0.031          0.016          0.017
                      (0.010)       (0.010)        (0.015)        (0.015)        (0.006)        (0.006)
                      [0.551]       [0.959]        [0.090]        [0.058]        [0.018]        [0.008]
Mean dep. Var                   0.049                         0.077                         0.020
# of states                       21                            13                            24
# op authors                      32                            19                           49
# of facilities                   76                            45                           123
N                               2,200                         1,411                         5,079
Note: Table reports results from estimating variants of equation (2) by OLS. Dependent variables are defined in the
column headings. All regressions include year fixed effects. Each operating authority receives equal weight.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by state. P-values are reported [in square brackets]. “1-2 years before
ETCAdoptedt” is an indicator variable for whether it is one to two years before the facility adopts ETC. “1-5 years
before ETCAdopted” is an indicator variable for whether it is one to five years before the facility adopts ETC.
ETCit is a dummy variable for whether ETC is installed in that facility in that year. ETCYearit is a dummy
variable for whether the facility installed ETC in a previous year.




                                                                                                                    48
Appendix Table A1: Facilities in Sample and the Data Available for them
 State   Operating Authority         Facility                               Year    Toll data   Traffic Data   Revenue     ETC        ETC
                                                                            First   start                       Data       start   Penetration
                                                                            Toll    date                                   date       Data
 CA      California Transportation   Antioch Bridge                         1926    1950         1993-2004     1993-2004   2001     2002-2005
         Commission                  Bay Bridge                             1936    1950         1993-2004     1993-2004   2001     2002-2005
                                     Benicia-Martinez Bridge                1962    1962         1993-2004     1993-2004   2001     2002-2005
                                     Carquinez Bridge                       1927    1950         1993-2004     1993-2004   2001     2002-2005
                                     Coronado Bridge                        1969    1969                                   --           --
                                     Dumbarton Bridge                       1927    1959         1993-2004     1993-2004   2001     2002-2005
                                     Richmond San Rafael Bridge             1956    1956         1993-2004     1993-2004   2001     2002-2005
                                     San Mateo Bridge                       1929    1959         1993-2004     1993-2004   2001     2002-2005
                                     Vincent Thomas Bridge                  1963    1963                                   --           --
         City of Oceanside           Murray Road Toll Bridge                1984    1984                                   --           --
         Golden Gate Bridge and      Golden Gate Bridge                     1937    1950         1974-2004                 2000     2001-2005
         Highway District
 DE      Delaware Transportation     John F. Kennedy Memorial Highway (I-   1963    1963         1963-2005     1963-2005   1998    1999-2005
         Authority                   95) -- Delaware
         Delaware River and Bay      Delaware Memorial Bridge                       1970                                   2001    2002 - 2005
         Authority
 FL      City of Treasure Island     Treasure Island Causeway                       1950         1971-2005     1996-2005   --           --
         Florida Department of       Bee Line East Expressway               1974    1974         1994-2005                 2001    2004 - 2005
         Transportation              Everglades Parkway (Alligator Alley)   1969    1969         1994-2005                 1999    2003 – 2005
                                     Navarre Bridge                         1961    1961         1994-2005                 2000
                                     Pinellas Bayway System                 1962    1962         1994-2005                 2000    2003 – 2005
                                     Selmon Crosstown Expressway            1976    1976         1994-2005                 2000    2003 – 2005
                                     Sunshine Skyway Bridge                 1954    1954         1994-2005                 2000    2003 – 2005
         Lee County                  Lee County Toll Bridges -- Sanibel     1963    1963         1965-1978                 1987     2001-2005
                                     Bridge and Causeway                                         1980-1998
                                                                                                 2000-2005
         Monroe County               Card Sound Toll Bridge                 1965    1965                       1991-2005   --          --
         Town of Bay Harbor          Broad Causeway                         1951    1951         1952-2004     1952-2004   1989    2001-2005
         Islands
 GA      Georgia State Tollway       Torras Causeway                        1981    1981                                   --          --
         Authority
 IL      City of Chicago             Calumet Skyway Toll Bridge (Chicago    1959    1959         1983-2003     1983-2003   2005        --
                                     Skyway)

                                                                                                                                         49
     City of Rock Island       Rock Island Centennial Bridge      1940   1950   1971, 1973,               --        --
                                                                                1975, 1977,
                                                                                1979, 1981,
                                                                                1983, 1985
                                                                                1987-1995
                                                                                1999, 2001,
                                                                                2003, 2005
     Illinois State Toll       Northwest Tollway                  1958   1959                             1993   1998-2005
     Highway Authority         Ronald Reagan Memorial Tollway     1958   1959                             1993   1998-2005
                               Tri-State Tollway                  1958   1959                             1993   1998-2005
IN   Indiana Toll Finance      Indiana Toll Road                  1956   1956   1957-2004     1957-2004   --         --
     Authority                 Wabash Memorial Toll Bridge        1956   1956   1977-1981     1957-2004   --         --
                                                                                1983-2004
KS   Kansas Turnpike           Kansas Turnpike System             1956   1956   1956-2005     1956-2005   1995   1995-2005
     Authority
KY   The Turnpike Authority    Audubon Parkway                    1970   1970                 1972-2005   --         --
     of Kentucky               Bluegrass Parkway                  1965   1965                             --         --
                               Cumberland Parkway                 1973   1973                 1974-2004   --         --
                               Daniel Boone Parkway               1971   1971                 1973-2004   --         --
                               Jackson Purchase Parkway           1968   1968                             --         --
                               Pennyrile Parkway                  1969   1969                             --         --
                               Western Kentucky Parkway           1963   1963                             --         --
                               William H Natcher Parkway          1972   1972                 1974-2005   --         --
MA   Massachusetts Turnpike    Massachusetts Turnpike             1957   1980                             1998   1998-2005
     Authority                 Sumner Tunnel                      1934   1934   1966-1998                 1998   1998-2005
MD   Maryland Transportation   Chesapeake Bay Bridge              1952   1952   1969-1992                 2001   2002-2005
     Authority                                                                  2000-2005
                               Fort McHenry Tunnel                1985   1985   1986-1992                 1999   2000-2005
                                                                                2000-2005
                               John F. Kennedy Memorial Highway   1963   1963   1969-1992                 2001   2002-2005
                                                                                2000-2005
                               Key Bridge                         1977   1977     1978                    1999   2001-2005
                                                                                1980-1992
                                                                                2000-2005
                               Patapsco Tunnel                    1957   1957   1969-1978                 1999   2000-2005
                                                                                1980-1992
                                                                                2001-2005

                                                                                                                     50
                                   Potamac River Bridge               1940   1950   1969-1978                 2001   2002-2005
                                                                                    1980-1992
                                                                                    2000-2005
                                   Susquehanna River Bridge           1940   1950   1969-1978                 2002   2002-2005
                                                                                    1980-1992
                                                                                    2000-2005
ME     Maine Turnpike              Maine Turnpike                     1947   1950   1980-2000                 1997   2000, 2002,
       Authority                                                                                                        2005
MI     Mackinac Bridge             Mackinac Bridge                    1957   1957   1957-2005                 2001   2001-2005
       Authority
NH     New Hampshire               Blue Star Turnpike                 1950   1950   1950-2004     1950-2004   2005     2005
       Department of Public        Central Turnpike                   1955   1955   1955-2004     1955-2004   2005     2005
       Works and Highways          Spaulding Turnpike                 1956   1956   1956-2004     1956-2004   2005     2005
NJ     Burlington County           Burlington-Bristol Bridge          1929   1950                             2003   2004-2005
       Bridge Commission           Tacony-Palmyra Bridge              1929   1950                             2003   2004-2005
       Cape May Bridge             Corsons Inlet Bridge               1948   1950                             NA         --
       Commission                  Grassy Sound Bridge                1940   1950                             NA         --
                                   Middle Thorofare Bridge            1940   1950                             NA         --
                                   Ocean City Longport Bridge         1946   1950                             NA         --
                                   Townsends Inlet Bridge             1941   1950                             NA         --
       New Jersey Highway          Garden State Parkway               1954   1954   1955 - 2004               1999   2001-2005
       Authority
       New Jersey Turnpike         New Jersey Turnpike^               1951   1967   1967-2003                 2000   2001-2005
       Authority
       New Jersey Expressway       Atlantic City Expressway           1965   1965   1965-2004     1965-2004   1998   1998-2004
       Authority
NJPA   Delaware River Joint Toll   Easton-Phillipsburg Bridge                1983                             2002   2003-2005
       Bridge Commission           Interstate 80 Delaware Water Gap          1983                             2002   2003-2005
                                   Milford-Montague Bridge                   1983                             2002   2003-2005
                                   New Hope-Lambertville Bridge              1983                             2002   2003-2005
                                   Portland-Columbia Bridge                  1983                             2002   2003-2005
                                   Trenton-Morrisville Bridge                1983                             2002   2003-2005
       Delaware River Port         Ben Franklin Bridge                1926   1950   1993 – 2005               1999   2000-2005
       Authority                   Betsy Ross Bridge                  1976   1976    1993-2005                1999   2000-2005
                                   Commodore Barry Bridge             1974   1974    1993-2005                1999   2000-2005
                                   Walt Whitman Bridge                1957   1957    1993-2005                1999   2000-2005


                                                                                                                           51
NY     Buffalo and Ft. Erie      Peace Bridge                         1927   1956   1995-2004   1995-2004   2002   2002-2004
       Public Bridge Authority
       Nassau County Bridge      Atlantic Beach Bridge                       1967                           --          --
       Authority
       New York State Bridge     Bear Mountain Bridge                 1940   1950                           1998   ’98, ’02, ’05
       Authority                 Kingston-Rhinecliff Bridge           1957   1957                           1998   ’98, ’02, ’05
                                 Mid-Hudson Bridge                    1933   1950                           1998   ’98, ’02, ’05
                                 Newburgh-Beacon Bridge               1963   1963                           1998   ’98, ’02, ’05
                                 Rip Van Winkle Bridge                1935   1950                           1998   ’98, ’02, ’05
       New York State Thruway    New York State Thruway^              1954   1954   1970-2004   1970-2004   1993    1993-2005
       Authority                 Tappan Zee Bridge                    1955   1955   1956-1961   1956-2004   1993    1999-2005
                                                                                    1963-1964
                                                                                    1969-1970
                                                                                    1972-2004
       Niagara Falls Bridge      Lewiston-Queenston Bridge            1962   1969                           --          --
       Commission                Rainbow Bridge                       1941   1969                           --          --
                                 Whirlpool Bridge                     1959   1969                           --          --
       Ogdensburg Bridge and     Ogdensburg-Prescott Bridge           1960   1960                           --          --
       Port Authority
       Thousand Islands Bridge   Thousand Island Bridges              1938   1950   1950-2005   1950-2005   --          --
       Authority
       Triborough Bridge and     Bronx-Whitestone Bridge              1939   1969   1969-2004   1969-2004   1996   1996-2004
       Tunnel Authority          Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel              1950   1969   1969-2004   1969-2004   1996   1996-2004
                                 Cross Bay Veterans Memorial Bridge   1939   1969   1969-2004   1969-2004   1996   1996-2004
                                 Henry Hudson Bridge                  1936   1969   1969-2004   1969-2004   1996   1996-2004
                                 Marine Parkway-Gil Hodges Memorial   1937   1969   1969-2004   1969-2004   1996   1996-2004
                                 Bridge
                                 Queens Midtown Tunnel                1940   1969   1969-2004   1969-2004   1996   1996-2004
                                 Throgs Neck Bridge                   1961   1969   1969-2004   1969-2004   1996   1996-2004
                                 Triborough Bridge                    1936   1969   1969-2004   1969-2004   1996   1996-2004
                                 Verrazano Narrows Bridge             1964   1969   1969-2004   1969-2004   1995   1995-2004
NYNJ   Port Authority of New     Bayonne Bridge                       1931   1950   1950-2004               1997     2005
       York and New Jersey       George Washington Bridge             1931   1950   1950-2004               1997     2005
                                 Goethals Bridge                      1928   1950   1950-2004               1997     2005
                                 Holland Tunnel                       1927   1950   1950-2004               1997     2005
                                 Lincoln Tunnel                       1937   1950   1950-2004               1997     2005


                                                                                                                          52
                                            Outerbridge Crossing                              1928        1950           1950-2004                        1997          2005
 OH         Ohio Turnpike                   Ohio Turnpike                                     1955        1955           1961-2004        1961-2004       --             --
            Commission
 OK         Oklahoma Transportation         Cimarron Turnpike                                 1975        1975           1982-2005        1975-2005       1991       1991-2005
            Authority                       H.E. Bailey Turnpike                              1964        1964           1982-2005        1964-2005       1991       1991-2005
                                            Indian Nation Turnpike                            1966        1966           1982-2005        1966-2005       1991       1991-2005
                                            Muskogee Turnpike                                 1969        1969           1982-2005        1969-2005       1991       1991-2005
                                            Turner Turnpike                                   1953        1953           1982-2005        1982-2005       1991       1991-2005
                                            Will Rogers Turnpike                              1957        1957           1982-2005        1957-2005       1991       1991-2005
 OR         Oregon State Highway            Astoria-Pt. Ellice Bridge                         1966        1966                                            --             --
            Div.
            Port of Cascade Locks           Cascade Locks Bridge                              1926        1950                                            --              --
            Commission
            Port of Hood River              Hood River-White Salmon Bridge                     1924       1950           1994-2005        1994-2005       --              --
            Commission
 PA         Pennsylvania Turnpike           Pennsylvania Turnpike^                            1940        1950           1950-2005                        2000
            Commission
 RI         RI Turnpike & Bridge            Jamestown-Newport Bridge                          1969        1969                                            --             --
            Authority                       Mt. Hope Bridge                                   1955        1955                                            --             --
 VA         Richmond Metropolitan           Boulevard Bridge                                  1969        1969           1972-2004                        1999       2000-2005
            Authority                       Downtown Expressway                               1976        1976           1976-2004                        1999       2000-2005
                                            Powhite Parkway                                   1973        1973           1973-2004                        1999       2000-2005
            VA Department of                Norfolk-Virginia Beach Toll Road                  1967        1967                                            --             --
            Highways                        Dulles Toll Road                                  1984        1984           1985-2005                        1996       2000-2005
 WV         City of Parkersburg             Parkersburg Bridge                                1955        1974                                            --             --
            WV Turnpike                     West Virginia Turnpike                            1954        1954           1991-2005                        2000
            Commission
Notes: Blank cells indicate missing data. All toll data go through 2005. “ETC start date” is coded “--” to indicate “not applicable” if facility never instated ETC and is
bolded if the facility ever offered a discounted rate to ETC users. Toll, Traffic and Revenue data denote the years after 1950 for which we have these data. “ETC
Penetration” records years in which a facility has ETC for which we have ETC Penetration data; it is coded “--” to indicate “not applicable” for facilities that did not adopt
ETC by 2005. “Year first toll” is missing for the few facilities for which I was not able to obtain this information. ^ denotes that this road has multiple branches; for the
purposes of this study, we defined the road as the mainline branch (where relevant) or the longest possible path from the end of one branch to the end of another. Operating
Authority names are based on the Operating Authority that controlled the facility in 1985, according to the U.S. Department of Transportation (1985, 1986).




                                                                                                                                                                           53
Table A2: Target facilities lacking requisite data for analysis
 State   Operating Authority                          Facility                                   Toll in
                                                                                                 2003?
 CO      City of Colorado Springs                     Pikes Peak Toll Highway                      1
 CT      Connecticut Department of Transportation     Charter Oak Bridge                           0
                                                      Connecticut Turnpike                         0
                                                      John Bissell Bridge                          0
                                                      Merritt Parkway                              0
                                                      Thames River Bridge                          0
                                                      Wilbur Cross Parkway                         0
                                                      William H. Putnam Bridge                     0
 FL      City of Clearwater                           Clearwater Toll Bridge                       0
         Dade County Port Authority                   Biscayne Key (Rickenbacker) Causeway         1
                                                      Venetian Causeway                            1
         Escambia County                              Pensacola Beach Bridge                       1
         Florida Department of Transportation         Central Florida Expressway                   1
                                                      Florida Turnpike System*                     1
                                                      Miami-Dade County Expressways                1
                                                      St. George Island (Bryant Patton) Bridge     0
                                                      Tampa-Hillsborough County (South             1
                                                      Crosstown) Expressway
         Jacksonville Transportation Authority        Jacksonville Expressway System                  0
         Ocean Highway and Port Authority             Buccaneer Trail Road                            0
 IA      City of Burlington                           MacArthur (Burlington) Bridge                   0
         City of Keokuk                               Keokuk Municipal Bridge                         0
         Iowa Department of Transportation            Clinton Toll Bridge                             0
                                                      Dubuque Toll Bridge                             0
                                                      Muscatine Bridge                                0
                                                      Savanna-Sabula Toll Bridge                      0
 IL      City of Chester                              Chester (Mississippi River) Bridge              0
         City of East St. Louis                       Martin Luther King (Veterans Memorial)          0
                                                      Bridge
         City of Venice                               McKinley Bridge                                 0
         White County Bridge Commission               New Harmony Bridge                              1
 IN      Indiana Toll Finance Authority               Hawesville-Cannelton Bridge                     0
         Indiana Transportation Finance Authority     Brandenburg-Maukport Bridge                     1
 LA      Greater New Orleans Expressway Commission    Greater New Orleans Expressway                  1
 MA      Massachusetts Port Authority                 Maurice J. Tobin (Mystic River) Bridge          1
 MI      International Bridge Authority of MI         Sault Sainte Marie Bridge                       1
         Michigan Department of Transportation        Blue Water Bridge                               1
 MN      Village of Baudette                          Baudette-Rainy River International              0
                                                      Bridge
 MO      City of Kansas City                          Broadway Bridge                                 0
         Platte County                                Platte Purchase Bridge                          0
         Wayland Special Road District                St. Francisville Bridge                         1
 NE      Bellevue Bridge Commission                   Bellevue Bridge                                 1
         Burt County Bridge Commission                Burt County Missouri River (Decatur)            1
                                                      Bridge
 NY      Lake Champlain Bridge Commission             Crown Point Bridge                              0


                                                                                                 54
                                                                  Rouses Point Bridge                                      0
 TX       Cameron County                                          Cameron County International Toll                        1
                                                                  Bridge
          City of Del Rio                                         Del Rio International Bridge                             1
          City of Eagle Pass                                      Eagle Pass-Piedras Negras International                  1
                                                                  Bridge
          City of El Paso                                         El Paso International Bridge                             0
          City of Laredo                                          Laredo-Nuevo Laredo International                        1
                                                                  Bridge
          City of McAllen                                         McAllen International Toll Bridge                        1
          Galveston County                                        San Luis Pass-Vacek Bridge                               1
          Harris County Toll Road Authority                       Harris County Toll Road                                  1
          Starr County                                            Roma International Toll Bridge                           1
          Texas Turnpike Authority                                Dallas North Tollway                                     1
                                                                  Houston Ship Channel Bridge                              0
                                                                  Mountain Creek Lake Bridge                               0
 VA       Chesapeake Bay Bridge and Tunnel District               Chesapeake Bay Bridge and Tunnel                         1
                                                                  System
          City of Chesapeake                                      Jordan Bridge                                            1
          Virginia Department of Highways                         Elizabeth River Bridge and Tunnels                       0
                                                                  Richmond-Petersburg Turnpike                             0
 WA       Washington Toll Bridge Authority                        Maple Street Bridge                                      0
Note: Last column indicates whether or not facility is still charging toll in 2003; this is based on data from U.S.
Department of Transportation (2003, 2004). These were the latest available data as of August 2006. * Denotes that
facility provided dates of toll changes, but not actual toll rates.




                                                                                                                      55
