                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      POLITICAL CAREERS OR CAREER POLITICIANS?

                                             Andrea Mattozzi
                                              Antonio Merlo

                                          Working Paper 12921
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12921


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2007




We are particularly indebted to Steve Coate whose detailed suggestions on a previous version of
this paper inspired this revision. We also thank seminar and conference participants at several institutions,
Federico Echenique, Leonardo Felli, and Preston McAfee for their useful comments. Financial support
from National Science Foundation grant SES-0617901 is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2007 by Andrea Mattozzi and Antonio Merlo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Political Careers or Career Politicians?
Andrea Mattozzi and Antonio Merlo
NBER Working Paper No. 12921
February 2007
JEL No. D72,J44,J45

                                              ABSTRACT

Two main career paths are prevalent among politicians in modern democracies: there are career politicians
(i.e., politicians who work in the political sector until retirement), and political careers (i.e., there are
politicians who leave politics before retirement and work in the private sector). In this paper, we propose
a dynamic equilibrium model of the careers of politicians in an environment with a private sector and
a political sector, where individuals are heterogeneous with respect to their market ability and political
skills. Our analysis provides an explanation for the existence of career politicians and individuals with
political careers, and their motivations. We also investigate the effects of monetary incentives and
other features of the political-economic environment on the quality of politicians and their careers.
We show that an increase in the salary a politician receives while in office decreases the average quality
of individuals who become politicians, decreases turnover in office, and may either decrease or increase
the average quality of career politicians.

Andrea Mattozzi
California Institute of Technology
Division of Humanities and Social Sciences, MC 228
Pasadena, CA 91125
andrea@hss.caltech.edu

Antonio Merlo
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER
merloa@econ.upenn.edu
1            Introduction
The very existence and functioning of representative democracy, where citizens delegate
policy-making to elected representatives, hinge on the presence of politicians. In his famous
1918 lecture entitled Politics as a Vocation, Max Weber writes:

              “Politics, just as economic pursuits, may be a man’s avocation or his vocation.
          [...] There are two ways of making politics one’s vocation: Either one lives ‘for’
          politics or one lives ‘oﬀ’ politics. [...] He who lives ‘for’ politics makes politics
          his life [...] He who strives to make politics a permanent source of income lives
          ‘oﬀ’ politics as a vocation.” [from Gerth and Mills (1946; pp. 83-84)]

The view expressed by Weber highlights the importance of analyzing the motivations of
politicians in the context of their career decisions over the life-cycle.
        A recent article by Diermeier, Keane and Merlo (2005) studies the career decisions of
politicians who served in the U.S. Congress in the post-war period. Several interesting
observations emerge from the data. A significant fraction of the members of the U.S. Congress
leave oﬃce voluntarily and become employed in the private sector. At the same time, many of
them remain in Congress until retirement. Out of all the politicians who entered the House of
Representatives after 1945 and left (alive) by 1994, 46% left voluntarily. Of those, 39% took
a job in the private sector, while the remaining 61% either moved to a diﬀerent political oﬃce
(36%), or retired (25%).1 Furthermore, the politicians who exit Congress voluntarily and
leave politics altogether for another occupation tend to have successful careers in the private
sector. For example, the average annual earnings of former representatives who choose to
leave Congress to work in the private sector are equal to $258,418 (in 1995 constant dollars).2
In fact, one of the key findings of Diermeier, Keane and Merlo (2005) is that congressional
experience significantly increases post-congressional wages in the private sector.3
    1
        Of the 54% who left Congress because of electoral defeat, 61% took a job in the private sector, 36% took
another political job, and 3% retired.
    2
        The corresponding figure for former representatives who left Congress because of electoral defeat is equal
to $247,198.
    3
        They find that, holding everything else constant, winning reelection in the House for the first time



                                                          1
       These observations are not unique to Congress or the United States. While data on the
wages of former politicians who work in the private sector are in general not available, by
and large, there are two main career paths that are prevalent among politicians in modern
democracies. There are career politicians (i.e., politicians who work in the political sector
until retirement), and political careers (i.e., there are politicians who leave politics before
retirement and work in the private sector).4 Obviously, political careers can be either volun-
tary (i.e., when a politician deliberately opts out of oﬃce undefeated), or involuntary (i.e.,
when exit from oﬃce follows an electoral defeat).
       These considerations raise the following important questions: Who wants to be a politi-
cian and why? How do monetary incentives and other features of the political-economic
environment aﬀect the quality of politicians and their career paths?
       To address these issues, we propose a dynamic equilibrium model of the careers of politi-
cians in an overlapping-generations environment with two sectors: the private (or market)
sector, and the political sector. In our model, individuals are heterogeneous with respect to
their market ability as well as their political skills, and individual skill-endowments, which
are private information, are positively correlated (e.g., better politicians may be more likely
to be better managers). Each individual lives for two periods, and in each period can either
work in the perfectly competitive market sector or be a politician. To become a politician,
an individual must win an election, and to be a career politician he must then be confirmed
in oﬃce for a second term.
       While in oﬃce politicians perform a public service which benefits the voters, with rel-
atively more skilled politicians generating higher benefits, and they receive a salary. In
addition to their salary, politicians who remain in oﬃce for a second term also receive an
additional payoﬀ, which can be interpreted as ego-rents from being confirmed in oﬃce by
increases post-congressional wages in the private sector by 4.4%. However, the marginal eﬀect of congressional
experience on post-congressional wages diminishes quite rapidly with additional experience.
   4
       For a description of the careers of politicians in several countries, see, e.g., Best and Cotta (2000), Cotta
(1979), Jones et al. (2002), and Samuels (1999). A third possible career path is to achieve success in the
private sector and then move into politics. While there are several recent examples of this phenomenon (e.g.,
Silvio Berlusconi in Italy or Michael Bloomberg in the United States), this is still a relatively rare occurrence.




                                                          2
the voters, or other non-pecuniary rewards associated with seniority in the political sector.5
       Politicians are typically “under the spotlight,” receiving the attention of the media and
a variety of citizens’ organizations. Hence, they may have relatively better chances to reveal
their sector-specific skills than people working in other sectors. For this reason, we model
politics as a “showcase,” where politicians in oﬃce display their political skills, while the
market ability of an individual working in the market sector may not be revealed.6
       The main results of our analysis can be summarized as follows. In equilibrium, there are
both career politicians and individuals with political careers. Some politicians would like
to remain in oﬃce for a second term, but are not confirmed by the voters. Whether some
politicians leave oﬃce voluntarily to work in the private sector, or all political careers are
involuntary, depends on the environment. When there are individuals who serve in oﬃce for
one term and then deliberately choose to work in the market sector in the second period,
they have relatively better political skills than career politicians, although career politicians
are still better than average.
       Career politicians enter the political sector because of the non-pecuniary rewards they
derive from being in oﬃce. Individuals with political careers, on the other hand, enter the
political sector in order to increase their market wages. Since political skills are positively
correlated with market ability, and politics is a showcase, incumbent politicians have in fact
the opportunity to leave the political sector and work in the market sector at a higher wage
than the one they would anticipate receiving had they not become politicians.
       An increase in the salary a politician receives while in oﬃce decreases the average quality
of individuals who become politicians, decreases turnover in oﬃce (i.e., the proportion of
politicians who have political careers), and may either decrease or increase the average quality
of career politicians. Conversely, an increase in the market wage rate increases the average
   5
       In the U.S. Congress, for example, seniority is an important determinant of committee appointments
as well as the likelihood of achieving important legislative accomplishments. Both of these events represent
substantial components of the non-pecuniary benefits politicians derive from being in oﬃce (Diermeier, Keane
and Merlo (2005)).
   6
       For example, many young lawyers join a law-firm, and competition for emerging within the firm, and
then more broadly the legal profession, is fierce. Typically, it takes a relatively long time before a lawyer has
a chance of displaying his talent, as many of them have to simultaneously share the same spotlight.


                                                       3
quality of individuals who become politicians, increases turnover in oﬃce, and may either
increase or decrease the average quality of career politicians.
        The intuition behind these results is as follows. An increase in the salary in the political
sector makes politics a relatively more attractive option for all levels of political skills, thus
lowering the quality of the worst politician. At the same time, however, relatively better
incumbent politicians are willing to remain in politics, since the wages in politics are now
better relative to the market wages. An increase in the market wage rate also has two
eﬀects. It makes employment in the market sector relatively more appealing for all levels
of political skills. At the same time, it makes it more valuable for individuals with higher
levels of political skills to reveal them by becoming politicians, but also more desirable
for these individuals to leave oﬃce after one period. Hence, an increase in the salary in
the political sector or a decrease in the market wage rate decreases the average quality of
entering politicians as well as turnover in oﬃce. The overall impact on the average quality of
career politicians, however, depends on which of the two eﬀects (the entry or the retention
eﬀect) dominates.
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we discuss the relation-
ship of our work to the existing literature. In Section 3, we describe the model. Section 4
contains the results of the analysis. In Section 5, we consider an alternative specification of
the model, and in Section 6 an extension that incorporates political parties. We conclude
with Section 7. In Sections 5 and 7, we also relate some of the implications of our model to
the empirical evidence.

2            Related Literature
        Early research in political economy approached the study of politicians by taking their
existence as given.7 A major turning point in the literature occurred when researchers started
to challenge the basic assumption that the set of political candidates competing for public
oﬃce is exogenous. This challenge defines most of the current political economy research
on this topic and has generated a useful approach to the study of politicians known as the
“citizen-candidate” framework (e.g., Besley and Coate (1997) and Osborne and Slivinski
    7
        For an overview of this literature see, e.g., chapters 3 and 5 in Persson and Tabellini (2000).



                                                          4
(1996)). This framework removes the artificial distinction between citizens and politicians,
by recognizing that public oﬃcials are selected by the voters from those citizens who choose
to become politicians and stand as candidates in an election in the first place. Our paper
continues in this tradition.
       By treating electoral candidates as endogenous equilibrium objects, the citizen-candidate
approach provides important foundations for addressing the question of who becomes a
politician. In particular, the “type” of citizens who choose to run for public oﬃce in equilib-
rium, and hence the characteristics of elected representatives, are a function of the relative
costs and benefits of becoming a politician, as well as the preferences and characteristics of
the citizenry. While in the original specification proposed by Besley and Coate (1997) and
Osborne and Slivinski (1996) citizens only diﬀer with respect to their policy preferences, the
basic structure has also been extended to richer environments which encompass additional
dimensions of heterogeneity.8
       Our analysis abstracts from heterogeneity in policy preferences. However, our results on
the selection of politicians and the eﬀects of market wages and political salaries on their career
decisions are related to this literature. In particular, Caselli and Morelli (2004) and Messner
and Polborn (2004) consider citizen-candidate models where individuals diﬀer with respect to
their quality as politicians, and evaluate the eﬀect of the relative wage of elected oﬃcials on
their average quality. In the model of Caselli and Morelli (2004), individuals with relatively
low quality have a comparative advantage in running for public oﬃce. This constrains the
options that are available to the voters and generates the possibility of equilibria where
only bad politicians are elected. In their framework, increasing the salary of elected oﬃcials
relative to the market wage increases the average quality of politicians.9 Similarly, in the
model of Messner and Polborn (2004), it is also the case that in equilibrium bad candidates
   8
       Another literature that addresses the issue of endogenous selection of politicians focuses on the extent
to which voters can discipline elected representatives with career concerns. Important contributions to this
literature, which builds on agency-theoretic frameworks with moral hazard and/or adverse selection, include
Banks and Sundaram (1993, 1998), Barro (1973), Besley (2006), Ferejohn (1986) and Persson, Roland and
Tabellini (1997). For a survey of the literature on political selection see Besley (2005).
   9
       Besley (2004) obtains a similar result in the context of a political agency model with moral hazard and
adverse selection.


                                                        5
are more likely to run than good ones. The equilibrium mechanism is, however, diﬀerent, and
relies on the fact that as long as the salary of elected oﬃcials is relatively low, high-quality
individuals free-ride on low-quality ones by not running and letting them run instead. This
implies a non-monotonic, U-shaped relationship between the salary of elected oﬃcials and
their average quality. In contrast to our analysis, these papers are not interested in explaining
the career paths of politicians, and hence do not distinguish between career politicians and
political careers.
         Our paper is also related to the work by Diermeier, Keane and Merlo (2005). They specify
a dynamic model of career decisions of a member of the U.S. Congress, and estimate it using
a newly collected data set that contains information on post-congressional employment of
the members of Congress in the post-war period. Their analysis, however, focuses on the
estimation of the private returns to political experience of elected politicians, and abstracts
from the selection of individuals who become politicians in the first place as well as from
equilibrium considerations.10

3             The Model
         We consider an environment where there are two sectors: the market sector and the
political sector. In every period t = 0, 1, ..., a large, finite number of individuals is born,
which, for convenience of exposition, can be approximated by a continuum of measure one.
Each individual lives for two periods and we let a ∈ {1, 2} denote an individual’s age, which
is publicly observable.11
         Individuals are heterogeneous with respect to their market ability m and their political
skills p. We let m ∈ {l, h}, where m = l (m = h) denotes an individual with low (high)
market ability. A measure 1 − φ of the population has high market ability with probability
α ∈ (0, 1) and has no political skills, that is p = 0. A measure φ ∈ (0, 1) of the population is
heterogeneous with respect to their political skills p ∈ [0, 1], which are distributed according
to a uniform distribution. The probability of having high market ability π (p) is positively
correlated with political skills and we let π (p) = α + λp, where λ ∈ (0, 1 − α) implies that
    10
         Dal Bo, Dal Bo and Snyder (2006) provide an empirical study of the self-perpetuation of political elites
in the U.S.
    11
         At time t = 0 there is an initial generation of individuals with age a = 2.


                                                           6
π (p) ∈ [α, 1) for all p ∈ [0, 1].12 We assume that each individual only knows his own political
skills, and does not know his market ability.13 Also, φ, α, and λ are common knowledge.
       In this environment, the parameters φ and α measure the relative scarcity (or abundance)
of political skills and market ability in the population, respectively, and λ measures the extent
to which political skills and market ability are correlated.
       In the first period of life, an individual can either work in the market sector or be a politi-
cian. If an individual becomes a politician, his political skills become publicly observable.
Politicians may also remain in the political sector during their second and last period of life,
or work in the market sector. If an individual works in the market sector, after his first
period of employment his market ability is revealed with probability θ ∈ (0, 1), while with
probability 1 − θ it remains unknown. Individuals make their career decisions to maximize
their earnings.
       The market sector is perfectly competitive, and wm , m ∈ {l, h}, denotes the competitive
wage rate associated with each market ability level. We normalize wl = 0, and let wh =
w > 0. In every period an individual works in the market sector, he is paid according to his
expected (or revealed) market ability.
       The political sector is characterized by a single political oﬃce that pays a politician a
per-period salary s, where wl ≤ s < wh (that is, 0 ≤ s < w).14 In addition, if a politician
remains in oﬃce for two periods, in the second period he also receives a payoﬀ r > 0. This
payoﬀ represents the monetary value of the non-pecuniary benefit associated with achieving
seniority status in the political sector.
       At the beginning of every period t = 0, 1, ..., an election determines the identity of the
oﬃce holder, and all individuals with age a = 1 decide whether or not to run as candidates
  12
       Hence, the fraction of individuals with high market ability conditional on having political skills is equal
to α + λ/2, while the fraction of individuals with high market ability in the overall population is α + φλ/2.
  13
       We may think of political skills as “people skills,” which are detectable by an individual fairly early in
his life. On the other hand, it may take some work experience for an individual to realize how productive
he is in the market sector. This simplifying assumption is made here to avoid the additional complications
that arise in a two-dimensional signalling problem.
  14
       The analysis easily extends to the case where there are multiple independent political oﬃces.




                                                         7
for public oﬃce.15 If an incumbent is in oﬃce, the politician also decides whether to rerun for
a second (and last) term. Running for election is costless, and the winner is determined by
plurality rule. Note that since political skills are private information, all individuals running
for oﬃce are ex ante identical from the point of view of the voters, unless they are incumbent
politicians, in which case their political skills are publicly known. The winning candidate
is then in oﬃce for that period, while all other individuals work in the market sector. If
nobody runs for election, the political oﬃce remains vacant for that period, and everybody
works in the market sector.
       While in oﬃce, a politician performs a public service. We let b(p) = p denote the public
benefit generated by a politician with political skills p, to indicate that politicians with higher
political skills generate higher benefits, and are thus more desirable from the point of view
of the voters.16 If in a period the political oﬃce remains vacant, then no benefit is generated
that period. We assume that the public benefit generated by a politician in oﬃce does not
aﬀect the career decisions of individuals, but only aﬀects the behavior of voters.17
  15
       The assumption that individuals can enter the political sector only in their first period of life is without
loss of generality, and is made here to simplify the exposition. In particular, it rules out a situation where
individuals work in the market sector for one period, realize their market ability, and then try to enter the
political sector. While this situation does not aﬀect the equilibrium (since the only individuals who would
want to do so are those with low realized market ability, and voters would never elect such individuals),
dealing with it introduces additional notation without adding anything to the analysis. In particular, in our
model it would never be the case that in equilibrium individuals work in the market sector, realize that they
have high market ability, and then run for election to public oﬃce.
  16
       The assumption that the benefit function b (p) is linear is inconsequential. Since it simplifies notation,
it is made here for expositional convenience.
  17
       In other words, we assume that the public benefit generated by a politician is of second order when
compared with an individual’s earnings. The main role of this assumption is to rule out situations where
individuals may choose not to become politicians simply because they may compromise the chances of better
politicians, or politicians may choose to remain in oﬃce simply because they worry that if they were to leave
they may be replaced by worse politicians. While potentially interesting, we believe these considerations
are of secondary importance for the career choices of politicians. For models where individuals take into
account the “external” eﬀects of their decisions to run for public oﬃce, see, e.g., Caselli and Morelli (2004)
and Messner and Polborn (2004).




                                                          8
4            Results
         The model described in Section 3 defines a game of incomplete information. The players
are the individuals, who in their first period of life have to decide whether to run as candidates
for public oﬃce, and, in the event they are elected to oﬃce, in the second period must then
decide whether to rerun for a second term. In addition, in each of their two periods of life
individuals have to decide how to vote. We restrict attention to equilibria where the players
use weakly undominated strategies, and their beliefs are consistent with equilibrium play.18
         The following restrictions on the model parameters α, λ, θ, s, r and w are necessary and
suﬃcient for existence and uniqueness of an equilibrium with both career politicians and
political careers.
                           ¡      ¢                              2α+(2−θ)φλ−2λ(1−θ)
         Assumption A1: s ∈ kw, kw , where k ≡                            2
                                                                                      and k ≡ k + λ (1 − θ) ;
               (2−θ)((2α+φλ)w−2s)
and r >               2(1−θ)
                                  .

         The equilibrium has the following properties: In every period t = 0, 1, ..., all individuals
with a = 1 and political skills p ≥ p∗ run for oﬃce, where

                                             2αw + (2 − θ) φλw − 2s
                                      p∗ =                          ∈ (0, 1) .                            (1)
                                                  2λ (1 − θ) w

One of these individuals is elected to oﬃce whenever no incumbent is running in the election,
or the incumbent running has political skills p < (1 + p∗ ) /2. Only incumbent politicians
with political skills p ∈ [(1 + p∗ ) /2, min {p∗∗ , 1}] are successful in their reelection bid, where

                                                     s + r − wα   1 + p∗
                                             p∗∗ =              >        ,                                (2)
                                                         wλ         2

and p∗∗ < 1 if and only if the potential market wage of the best incumbent politician (i.e.,
a politician with skills p = 1) exceeds its total return from a second term in oﬃce (i.e.,
s + r < (α + λ) w). If p∗∗ < 1, incumbents with political skills p > p∗∗ do not rerun for a
second term in oﬃce.
         In equilibrium, politicians with skills p ∈ [(1 + p∗ ) /2, min {p∗∗ , 1}] remain in oﬃce for
two periods (i.e., they are career politicians); politicians with skills p ∈ [p∗ , (1 + p∗ ) /2)
    18
         Throughout the analysis, we also assume that if an individual is indiﬀerent between running and not
running for oﬃce, he chooses to run. This assumption is without loss of generality.



                                                           9
only remain in oﬃce for one period in spite of the fact that they would prefer to be career
politicians, since the voters do not confirm them for a second term (i.e., they have involuntary
political careers); and if p∗∗ < 1, politicians with skills p ∈ (p∗∗ , 1] deliberately choose to
work in the market sector in the second period in spite of the fact that the voters would
retain them in oﬃce for two periods (i.e., they have voluntary political careers). Note that,
when in equilibrium there are both voluntary and involuntary political careers, individuals
with voluntary political careers have relatively better political skills than career politicians,
although the political skills of career politicians are still better than average. An illustration
of the equilibrium in the two possible situations where p∗∗ < 1 and p∗∗ ≥ 1 is depicted
in Figures 1 and 2, respectively, where CP denotes career politicians and V P C and IP C
voluntary and involuntary political careers, respectively.
   The formal definition of the game and of the equilibrium is contained in the Appendix.
Here, we provide a more informal characterization of the equilibrium outcome. If an individ-
ual works in the market sector, his first-period wage is based on the expected market ability
in the population, since neither his market ability nor his political skills are observable. In
the second period of employment, on the other hand, an individual’s expected wage depends
on his own expected market ability, since his market ability, which is correlated with his
(privately known) political skills, is revealed with some probability. If, instead, an individual
is a politician in his first period of life, his potential second-period wage in the market sector
depends on his expected market ability conditional on his political skills (which, because
of his experience in the political sector, are publicly known). Since a politician can always
decide not to seek reelection and instead work in the market sector in his second period of
life, his potential second-period wage in the market sector determines his reservation wage
in the second period.
   It follows that the cost for an individual of becoming a politician is equal to the diﬀerence
between the first-period market wage that is forgone by not working in the market sector
and the political salary, (α + φλ/2) w − s. The return is not smaller than the (possibly)
higher market earnings in the second period after political skills are revealed, (α + λp) w −
((1 − θ) (α + φλ/2) + θ (α + λp)) w.
   Consider first the scenario where a politician works in the market sector after having


                                               10
been in oﬃce for one period. While the cost of becoming a politician does not depend on an
individual’s political skills, the return is increasing in his political skills. Hence, individuals
with relatively high political skills would certainly find it worthwhile to become politicians.
In particular, for an individual with political skills p, his expected lifetime earnings if he
chooses to work in the market sector are
    µµ         ¶           µ        ¶             ¶   µ                     ¶
            φλ                   φλ                                 φλ
        α+        + (1 − θ) α +       + θ (α + λp) w = 2α + (2 − θ)    + θλp w,
             2                    2                                  2

while his expected lifetime earnings if he is elected to oﬃce and then works in the market
sector in the second period are s + (α + λp) w. Hence, the individual would for sure like to
become a politician regardless of whether he would then remain in oﬃce for two periods or
work in the market sector after serving in oﬃce for one period if and only if
                      µ                       ¶
                                      φλ
                        2α + (2 − θ)     + θλp w ≤ s + (α + λp) w,
                                       2

that is,
                                  2αw + (2 − θ) φλw − 2s
                                p≥                       = p∗ .
                                        2λ (1 − θ) w
                                        ¡       ¢
Note that p∗ ∈ (0, 1) if and only if s ∈ kw, kw .
   If confirmed in oﬃce by the voters, however, the second-period earnings of an incumbent
politician who remains in oﬃce for two periods are equal to s + r. Hence, a politician would
prefer to remain in oﬃce for two periods rather than work in the market sector in his second
period of life if and only if
                                       s + r ≤ (α + λp) w,

that is,
                                          s + r − wα
                                     p≤              = p∗∗ .
                                              wλ
Note that p∗∗ > (1 + p∗ ) /2 if and only if

                                     (2 − θ) ((2α + φλ) w − 2s)
                                r>                              .
                                               2 (1 − θ)

   Since p∗∗ > p∗ , it follows that all individuals with political skills p ∈ [0, p∗ ) would like
to become politicians only if they would then be confirmed by the voters to a second term
in oﬃce. But, if an individual with political skills p = 0 were to serve in oﬃce for one

                                                11
period, he would not be confirmed by the voters. In fact, suppose that all individuals run
for oﬃce in their first period of life regardless of their political skills. Since political skills are
private information, the voters would then form expectations about the quality of the pool
of candidates. In particular, from the point of view of the voters all candidates are ex-ante
identical, and the expected political skills of a generic candidate would be equal to φ/2 (i.e.,
the average political skills in the overall population). It follows that all incumbents with
political skills p < φ/2 would not be confirmed in oﬃce by the voters (since the voters would
be better oﬀ by replacing the incumbent with a random draw from the new generation of
potential politicians), and hence these individuals would be better oﬀ by not running for
oﬃce to begin with, and instead enter the market sector in their first period of life. In fact,
this argument implies that given the expected quality of the pool of candidates, the voters
would never confirm in oﬃce an incumbent with political skills lower than the average in the
pool. Therefore, in equilibrium, the only individuals who run for oﬃce in their first period
of life are those with political skills p ∈ [p∗ , 1].
   Since p∗ represents the equilibrium lower bound on the political skills of individuals
who would want to become politicians, it pins down the “outside option” available to the
voters if they choose not to confirm an incumbent politician to a second term in oﬃce.
In particular, it implies that in equilibrium the voters confirm an incumbent only if his
political skills are greater than or equal to (1 + p∗ ) /2. Hence, individuals with political
skills p ∈ [p∗ , (1 + p∗ ) /2) ∪ (p∗∗ , 1] want to become politicians so that they can reveal their
political skills and increase their earnings in the market sector. Individuals with political
skills p ∈ [(1 + p∗ ) /2, p∗∗ ], on the other hand, want to enter the political sector because of
the non-pecuniary rewards from being career politicians.
   Turning attention to the equilibrium comparative statics, we assess the eﬀects of the
parameters of the model on the average skills of politicians and their careers. Let

                              1 + p∗                    1 + p∗ + 2 min {p∗∗ , 1}
                       pb =            and     pbCP =
                                2                                  4

denote the equilibrium average skills of first-term politicians and of career politicians, re-
spectively. Also, for the case where both voluntary and involuntary political careers occur



                                                   12
in equilibrium (i.e., p∗∗ < 1), let
                                            1 + 3p∗                        1 + p∗∗
                                 pbIP C   =            and     pbV P C   =
                                               4                              2
denote the average skills of individuals with involuntary and voluntary political careers,
respectively (where pbIP C < pbCP < pbV P C ), and
                                           p − p∗ ) + (1 − p∗∗ )
                                          (b                       1 1 − p∗∗
                                  τ=                             =   +
                                                 1 − p∗            2   1 − p∗
denote the fraction of politicians who leave the political sector after one period in oﬃce
(either voluntarily or involuntarily), which measures turnover in the political sector.19
       The Appendix contains all of our comparative statics results. Here, we focus on the
eﬀects of (monetary as well as non-pecuniary) incentives on the quality of politicians and
their career paths. In equilibrium, we have that
                                            ∂b
                                             p      ∂b
                                                     p      ∂b
                                                             p
                                               > 0,    < 0,    = 0,
                                            ∂w      ∂s      ∂r
and
                                    ∂b
                                     pIP C      ∂b
                                                 pIP C      ∂b
                                                             pIP C
                                           > 0,        < 0,        = 0.
                                     ∂w          ∂s          ∂r
If p∗∗ ≥ 1, the same comparative statics results also hold for pbCP . If p∗∗ < 1,
                                   ∂b
                                    pV P C      ∂b
                                                 pV P C      ∂b
                                                              pV P C
                                           < 0,         > 0,         > 0,
                                    ∂w            ∂s           ∂r
         ∂b
          pCP                         s + 2r ∂b pCP                       1 ∂b
                                                                             pCP
              > 0 if and only if θ >          ,     > 0 if and only if θ < ,     > 0,
          ∂w                         2 (s + r) ∂s                         2 ∂r
and
                                            ∂τ      ∂τ      ∂τ
                                               > 0,    < 0,    < 0.
                                            ∂w      ∂s      ∂r
       The intuition for these results is as follows. An increase in s (or a decrease in w) increases
the return to becoming a politician relative to the cost for all levels of political skills, thus
increasing p∗ and hence pb. In particular, it makes politics a more attractive option relative
to employment in the market sector for all individuals, thus lowering the average quality of
entering politicians. In addition, a decrease in w (or an increase in s) decreases the second-
period market wage relative to the political earnings for all levels of political skills, thus
  19
       Note that if p∗∗ ≥ 1, turnover is constant and is equal to 1/2.



                                                        13
making it more desirable for politicians to remain in oﬃce for two periods. In our model, the
possibility of voluntary political careers is generated by the fact that, after serving for one
period in the political oﬃce, individuals with relatively high political skills may work in the
market sector in the second period at a wage that exceeds the total compensation they can
receive by remaining in the political sector. When p∗∗ < 1, an increase in s or a decrease in
w induces an increase in p∗∗ , and hence an increase in the average quality of politicians who
serve in oﬃce for one period and then voluntarily leave politics to work in the market sector,
pbV P C . Overall, the combination of the eﬀect of an increase in s or a decrease in w on p∗
(entry eﬀect), and the eﬀect on p∗∗ (retention eﬀect), results in a reduction in the amount of
turnover in the political sector, τ , and either an increase or a decrease of the average quality
of career politicians, pbCP .
       The eﬀect on turnover is due to the fact that the pool of potential politicians expands
and fewer politicians leave the political sector (either voluntarily or because of electoral de-
feat). The eﬀect on the average quality of career politicians depends on the “transparency”
of the market sector θ (i.e., the likelihood that market ability is revealed after one period
of employment in the market sector). If the transparency is low, pbCP increases. While if it
is high, pbCP decreases. The reason for these results is that the return to an individual of
becoming a politician is decreasing in θ. In other words, the more likely it is that employ-
ment in the market sector directly reveals market ability, the lower the “signalling” value of
political experience. Hence, when θ is small (i.e., θ < 1/2), the entry eﬀect of an increase in
s or a decrease in w induced by a relative increase in the first-period payoﬀ of a politician
is weaker than the retention eﬀect in the second period, while the opposite is true when θ is
large (i.e., θ > (s + 2r) /2 (s + r)).20
       Another interesting result that emerges from our equilibrium comparative statics is that
an increase in the non-pecuniary benefits from remaining in oﬃce for two periods, r, does
not aﬀect the set of people who run for oﬃce and hence the average quality of entering
politicians, but increases the average quality of career politicians and decreases turnover in
oﬃce.
  20
       Note that for an intermediate range of values for θ (i.e., θ ∈ (1/2, (s + 2r) /2 (s + r))), pbCP decreases
with both s and w.



                                                        14
5       An Alternative Model
    In the model described in Section 3, political experience has an indirect eﬀect on market
wages induced by the positive correlation between political skills and market ability. How-
ever, political experience may also be directly productive in the market sector, for example
because of the connections politicians establish during their tenure in oﬃce. These connec-
tions (and more generally a direct knowledge of the political system or “political human
capital”), may be valuable to potential employers, like for example lobbying firms (see, e.g.,
Mattozzi and Merlo (2007)), and may also induce politicians to have political careers.
    To explore this issue we consider here an alternative specification of our model where
individuals are heterogeneous only with respect to their political skills, and experience in the
political sector makes these skills productive in the market sector. In particular, suppose
that all individuals have the same market ability, and can work in the market sector at
a per-period wage q, regardless of their age. In addition, an experienced politician with
political skills p (i.e., an individual who serves in the political oﬃce for one term during
which his political skills become publicly observable), can work in the market sector in his
second period of life and earn vp, where v is the rental price of political skills in the market
sector for individuals with politician experience. All other features of the model remain the
same as in Section 3, except that the only relevant parameters are now s, r, v, and q, and
suppose the following restrictions hold:
                                                       v+2q−3s
    Assumption A2: s ∈ (2q − v, 2q) and r >               2
                                                               .

    Give Assumption A2, the alternative model described here has a unique equilibrium with
both career politicians and political careers. The equilibrium has the following properties:
In every period t = 0, 1, ..., all individuals with a = 1 and political skills p ≥ p0 run for oﬃce,
where
                                          2q − s
                                       p0 =      ∈ (0, 1) .                               (3)
                                             v
One of these individuals is elected to oﬃce whenever no incumbent is running in the election,
or the incumbent running has political skills p < (1 + p0 ) /2. Only incumbent politicians with
political skills p ∈ [(1 + p0 ) /2, min {p00 , 1}] are successful in their reelection bid, where
                                               s+r   1 + p0
                                       p00 =       >        ,                                      (4)
                                                v      2
                                                  15
and p00 < 1 if and only if s + r < v. If p00 < 1, incumbents with political skills p > p00 do not
rerun for a second term in oﬃce.
       In equilibrium, politicians with skills p ∈ [(1 + p0 ) /2, min {p00 , 1}] remain in oﬃce for
two periods (i.e., they are career politicians); politicians with skills p ∈ [p0 , (1 + p0 ) /2) only
remain in oﬃce for one period in spite of the fact that they would prefer to be career
politicians, since the voters do not confirm them for a second term (i.e., they have involuntary
political careers); and if p00 < 1, politicians with skills p ∈ (p00 , 1] deliberately choose to work
in the market sector in the second period in spite of the fact that the voters would retain
them in oﬃce for two periods (i.e., they have voluntary political careers).21
       Many of the comparative statics results are also similar to the ones presented in Section
4 above, although there are also important diﬀerences. In particular, when in equilibrium
there are career politicians as well as voluntary and involuntary political careers, an increase
in s decreases the average quality of individuals who become politicians, decreases turnover
in oﬃce, but always increases the average quality of career politicians. Moreover, an increase
in the general market wage rate q increases the average quality of individuals who become
politicians, increases turnover in oﬃce, and always increases the average quality of career
politicians. An increase in the rental price of political skills in the market sector, v, decreases
the average quality of individuals who become politicians, increases turnover in oﬃce, and
decreases the average quality of career politicians.
       Whether experience in the political sector has mainly a direct eﬀect on wages in the
market sector (via the accumulation of political human capital), or an indirect eﬀect (via
signalling), is clearly an empirical question. In the context of the simple environment consid-
ered here, where individuals only live for two periods, both models have similar implications
with respect to the careers of politicians. The equilibrium mechanisms, however, are quite
diﬀerent, and would generate diﬀerent predictions in more general environments where indi-
viduals can work for more than two periods. In particular, the model with political human
capital implies that the wages of politicians in the market sector should gradually increase
with political experience (given by the number of periods a politician remains in oﬃce),
  21
       The derivation of these results and their intuition entail simple extensions of the arguments illustrated
above and are therefore omitted.


                                                        16
while the signalling model implies that we should observe a jump in wages after entry in the
political oﬃce with no further wage growth as political experience increases. The empirical
findings of Diermeier, Keane and Merlo (2005) provide evidence in support of the signalling
interpretation. In fact, they find that while the first term in Congress significantly increases
post-congressional wages in the private sector, the marginal eﬀect of additional congressional
experience is negligible.22

6             A Model with Political Parties
         An interesting extension of our framework consists of modeling the role of political parties
in the selection of candidates for public oﬃce. Consider a situation where, whenever the
public oﬃce is vacant, an infinitely-lived party may nominate a candidate subject to the
voters’ approval, and information about political skills is asymmetric. In particular, suppose
that the party can observe the political skills of potential politicians, while voters can only
observe the political skills of politicians after they are in oﬃce.23 Suppose further that
in addition to performing a public service, while in oﬃce partisan career politicians also
engage in activities that generate private benefits to their party, with relatively more skilled
politicians generating higher benefits. The party may therefore oﬀer rewards to its politicians
in order to induce them to stay in politics, provided they are confirmed in oﬃce by the
voters. For example, experienced politicians engage in fund-raising activities on behalf of
their party, which may reward them with a variety of valuable posts within its organization as
their seniority increases (e.g., committee membership, group leadership, etc.). The diﬀerence
between the private benefit a politician generates to the party and the transfer paid by the
party to the politician represents the rent that is appropriated by the party.
         Introducing these additional features into our model generates the following results. In
    22
         Note that their estimation accounts for the selection induced by the endogeneity of the career decisions
of politicians, and allows for unobserved heterogeneity in the quality of politicians.
    23
         People with political aspirations typically begin their involvement in politics by engaging in a variety
of voluntary, unpaid political activities that are organized and monitored by political parties (e.g., student
political organizations, campaign teams, party internships). These activities thus provide opportunities for
a political party to observe the political skills of individuals it may be potentially interested in nominating
as candidates for public oﬃce.



                                                         17
equilibrium, there are only partisan politicians, and they are either career politicians or have
voluntary political careers. Only individuals with political skills p ∈ [(1 + p∗ ) /2, 1] become
partisan politicians, and the party always nominates a candidate for the political oﬃce.
Partisan nominees are always approved by the voters to a first term in oﬃce and confirmed
to a second term if they choose to run. In environments where some politicians have political
careers, there exists a pe < 1 such that individuals with relatively better political skills (i.e.,
p ∈ (e
     p, 1]) have political careers and career politicians are relatively worse (i.e., they have
political skills p ∈ [(1 + p∗ ) /2, pe]).
       The main diﬀerence with respect to the model without parties is that, when a political
party can nominate candidates for the political oﬃce, in equilibrium not everybody who
would want to become a politician does so. In particular, the party prevents individuals
with low political skills (i.e., p < (1 + p∗ ) /2) from becoming politicians. This result arises
from an equilibrium compromise between the voters and the party. Voters want politicians
in oﬃce who are as skilled as possible. The party wants politicians who generate rents. Since
politicians with better political skills have better employment prospects in the market sector,
they are relatively expensive for the party to keep in the political sector. In equilibrium,
the party discards individuals with low political skills who would want to become politicians
and could generate rents for the party, and supports the nomination of politicians with high
political skills who may not generate any rents. In exchange, the voters always approve
the party’s nominees and confirm in oﬃce incumbent politicians who, although relatively
mediocre, generate rents for the party. By preventing individuals with low political skills
from becoming politicians, the party fulfills a screening function that is valuable to the voters.
Hence, the voters are willing to trust the party in selecting politicians.
       Note that, although politicians who leave politics to work in the market sector may not
generate rents for the party, they serve a valuable purpose for maintaining the reputation of
the party. When they voluntarily leave politics, given the party’s track record, the voters are
willing to replace them with other partisan nominees, thus allowing the party to maintain
control of the public oﬃce, which generates expected rents in the future. This provides a
possible rationale for the existence of political parties and their survival through time.24
  24
       The details of the model with political parties and the proofs of all the results that obtain in that model


                                                        18
7        Concluding Remarks
    In this paper, we have proposed a dynamic equilibrium model of the careers of politicians
in an environment with a market sector and a political sector, where individuals are het-
erogeneous with respect to their market ability as well as their political skills. Our analysis
has provided a possible explanation for the existence of career politicians and individuals
with political careers, and their motivations. Furthermore, we have analyzed the eﬀects of a
variety of features of the political-economic environment on the relative occurrence of these
two career paths that are prevalent among politicians in modern democracies. For example,
we have shown that an increase in the salary a politician receives while in oﬃce decreases the
average quality of individuals who become politicians, decreases turnover in oﬃce, and may
either decrease or increase the average quality of career politicians. Conversely, an increase
in the market wage rate increases the average quality of individuals who become politicians,
increases turnover in oﬃce, and may either increase or decrease the average quality of career
politicians.
    Although our model abstracts from many details of actual democratic institutions, it is
a rather rich framework that captures some important aspects of the careers of politicians
in modern democracies, and generates sharp implications. It may therefore oﬀer important
insights for analyzing data on the career paths of politicians. For example, an immediate
implication of our model is that politicians with voluntary political careers should earn
more than politicians who work in the market sector following an electoral defeat. This
implication is consistent with the evidence provided by Diermeier, Keane and Merlo (2005)
on the post-congressional wages of members of the U.S. Congress. In particular, the mean of
the distribution of annual earnings of former representatives who choose to leave Congress
to work in the private sector is equal to $258,418, with a standard deviation of $71,954 and
a minimum of $122,662 (in 1995 constant dollars). The corresponding figures for former
representatives who left Congress because of electoral defeat are equal to $247,198, $65,726
and $104,805, respectively. Note that to the extent that some representatives may choose to
are contained in an earlier version of this paper (Mattozzi and Merlo (2005)). For other recent models of the
role of political parties see, e.g., Caillaud and Tirole (2002), Levy (2004) and Mattozzi and Merlo (2007).




                                                     19
leave oﬃce in anticipation of an electoral defeat, the wage diﬀerence observed in the data may
understate the actual diﬀerence between the wages of representatives with truly voluntary
and involuntary political careers.
   Another implication of our model is that an increase in the political salary or a decrease
in the market wage should increase turnover in oﬃce, and induce relatively more skilled
politicians to leave oﬃce to work in the market sector. Using the empirical framework of
Diermeier, Keane and Merlo (2005), Keane and Merlo (2007) assess the eﬀects of a 20% de-
crease in the congressional wage and a 20% increase in wages outside Congress, respectively.
They find that the overall impact of a 20% reduction in the congressional wage or a 20%
increase in non-congressional wages is a 14% and 17% decrease in the average duration of
congressional careers, respectively. The probability representatives exit Congress voluntarily
prior to an election increases on average from about 7% to 10% in both cases. Interestingly,
the group of politicians who are most aﬀected by changes in the relative wages across oc-
cupations are the skilled politicians. They experience the largest reduction in the average
duration of their congressional careers, which decreases by 18% and 22% in response to a 20%
decrease in the congressional wage or a 20% increase in wages outside Congress, respectively.
Also, the fraction of skilled politicians who leave Congress to work in the private sector
following a wage increase in that sector increases by 15 percentage points. Furthermore, the
percentage decrease in the average duration of the congressional careers of relatively younger
politicians is noticeably larger than for their older counterparts.
   Our model may also help to interpret diﬀerences in the types and durations of careers
that are observed across countries and through time. For example, voluntary political careers
are relatively more prevalent in the U.S. than in several Western European countries (e.g.,
France, Italy, and the U.K.). Our results suggest that diﬀerences in the labor market, the
relative compensation of politicians, or the size of the lobbying sector in these countries may
contribute to explain this observation. We intend to pursue these issues in future work.




                                              20
Appendix
   The model described in Section 3 defines a game of incomplete information, where the
players are the individuals. Let N = {1, ..., n} denote the set of individuals alive in every
period t = 0, 1, .... Let i ∈ N a generic individual, ai ∈ {1, 2} his age, and pi ∈ [0, 1] his
political skills. In the first period of life, each individual has to decide whether or not to run
as a candidate for public oﬃce. Let σ iR (pi ) ∈ {0, 1} be the running strategy of an individual
i with ai = 1, where σ iR (pi ) = 1 denotes the decision to run for oﬃce. If an individual is
elected to oﬃce, he becomes an incumbent politician, and in the second period of life he
must then decide whether or not to rerun for a second term. Let σ iRR (pi ) ∈ {0, 1} be the
rerunning strategy of an individual i with ai = 2, where σ iRR (pi ) = 1 denotes the decision
to rerun for a second term in oﬃce.
   In addition, in each of their two periods of life, individuals face an election, and have to
decide whom to vote for given the set of candidates running for election in each period. Since
political skills are private information, all individuals running for oﬃce are ex ante identical
from the point of view of the voters, unless they are incumbent politicians, in which case
their political skills are publicly known. Furthermore, since while in oﬃce a politician with
political skills p generates a public benefit b(p) = p, the interests of the voters are aligned,
in that they all want as skilled a politician in oﬃce as possible, regardless of their age.
Obviously, the only exception is represented by the candidates themselves, who know their
own political skills and want to be elected. Our assumption that the public benefit generated
by a politician in oﬃce does not aﬀect the career decisions of individuals, imply that each
candidate will always vote for himself, and since the winning candidate is determined by
plurality rule, the votes of the candidates oﬀset each others, and are therefore irrelevant for
the outcome of the election. Recall that we restrict attention to equilibria where the players
use weakly undominated strategies.
   Hence, for all practical purposes, we can simply specify the voting strategy of a repre-
sentative individual who is not a candidate in an election where an incumbent is rerunning
for oﬃce, and assume that if the individual does not vote for the incumbent or there is no
incumbent running, a random draw from the set of candidates with age a = 1 determines
the winner of the election. If, on the other hand, the individual votes for the incumbent, the

                                               21
politician is confirmed in oﬃce for a second term. Let σ V (p) ∈ {0, 1} denote such voting
strategy, where p denotes the political skills of the incumbent, and σ V (p) = 1 denotes the
decision to vote for the incumbent.
     Given Assumption A1, an equilibrium exists and is unique (up to the identity of the
politicians in oﬃce), and is characterized by the following set of strategies:
                                            ⎧
                                    ¡ ¢ ⎨ 1 if pi ≥ p∗
                                 σiR pi =
                                            ⎩ 0 otherwise
                                                           ⎧
                                                     ¡ ¢ ⎨ 1 if pi ≤ min {p∗∗ , 1}
                                                σ iRR pi =
                                                           ⎩ 0     otherwise
and                                                                  ⎧
                                                                     ⎨ 1 if p ≥ 1+p∗
                                                                                  2
                                                           σ V (p) =
                                                                     ⎩ 0 otherwise

where p∗ and p∗∗ are defined in (1) and (2), respectively. The proof follows from the argu-
ments presented in Section 4.
                                                                 ∂ pe                                                      ∂ pe
     In equilibrium, we have that                                ∂λ
                                                                         > 0 if and only if s > αw,                        ∂θ
                                                                                                                                  > 0 if and only if
         2αw+φλw ∂ pe                 ∂ pe                ∂ pe              ∂ pe                  ∂ pe
s<          2
                , ∂α        > 0,      ∂φ
                                              > 0,        ∂w
                                                                  > 0,      ∂s
                                                                                   < 0 and        ∂r
                                                                                                         = 0. The same comparative statics
results hold for pbIP C , and, if p∗∗ ≥ 1, they also hold for pbCP .
                                             ∂ peV P C                ∂ peV P C           ∂ peV P C
     Moreover, if p∗∗ < 1:                       ∂λ
                                                         < 0,             ∂θ
                                                                                   = 0,       ∂α
                                                                                                      < 0, ∂ pe∂φ
                                                                                                               V PC
                                                                                                                    = 0,    ∂ peV P C
                                                                                                                                ∂w
                                                                                                                                        < 0,   ∂ peV P C
                                                                                                                                                   ∂s
                                                                                                                                                           > 0,
         ∂ peV P C
and          ∂r
                     > 0; ∂ pe∂λ
                               CP
                                  > 0 if and only if θ >                             s+2r−αw
                                                                                    2(s+r−αw)
                                                                                              , ∂ pe∂θCP    > 0 if and only if s <                2αw+φλw
                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                          ,
∂ peCP                                                   ∂ peCP               ∂ peCP
   ∂α
         > 0 if and only if θ > 12 ,                        ∂φ
                                                                   > 0,         ∂w
                                                                                       > 0 if and only if θ >               s+2r
                                                                                                                           2(s+r)
                                                                                                                                  , ∂ pe∂sCP > 0       if and
                             ∂ peCP                                                                          2(1−φ)           2(s−wα)
only if θ < 12 , and            ∂r
                                        > 0; and                 ∂τ
                                                                 ∂λ
                                                                        > 0 if and only if θ >                2−φ
                                                                                                                      +   (s−wα+r)(2−φ) ∂θ
                                                                                                                                             , ∂τ     > 0 if
                          2αw+φλw ∂τ                         ∂τ               ∂τ             ∂τ                ∂τ
and only if s <              2
                                 , ∂α             > 0,       ∂φ
                                                                      > 0,    ∂w
                                                                                    > 0,     ∂s
                                                                                                  < 0, and     ∂r
                                                                                                                    < 0.
     These results follow from equations (1) and (2) and the definitions of pb, pbIP C , pbV P C , pbCP ,
and τ .




                                                                                    22
                                       References

 [1] Banks, Jeﬀrey S., and Rangarajan K. Sundaram, 1993. “Adverse Selection and Moral
    Hazard in a Repeated Elections Model,” ch. 12, pp. 295-311, in Barnett, W. A., Inich,
    M. J., Schofield, N. J. (eds.), Political Economy: Institutions, Competition and Repre-
    sentation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 [2] Banks, Jeﬀrey S., and Rangarajan K. Sundaram, 1998. “Optimal Retention in Agency
    Problems,” Journal of Economic Theory, 82, 293-323.

 [3] Barro, Robert J., 1973. “The Control of Politicians: An Economic Model,” Public
    Choice, 14, 19-42.

 [4] Besley, Timothy, 2004. “Paying Politicians: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of the Eu-
    ropean Economic Association, 2, 193-215.

 [5] Besley, Timothy, 2005. “Political Selection,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19, 43-
    60.

 [6] Besley, Timothy, 2006. Principled Agents? The Political Economy of Good Government.
    Oxford: Oxford University Press.

 [7] Besley, Timothy, and Stephen Coate, 1997. “An Economic Model of Representative
    Democracy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 85-114.

 [8] Best, Heinrich, and Maurizio Cotta, 2000. Parliamentary Representatives in Europe
    1848-2000: Legislative Recruitment and Careers in Eleven European Countries. Oxford:
    Oxford University Press.

 [9] Caillaud, Bernard, and Jean Tirole, 2002. “Parties as Political Intermediaries,” Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics, 117, 1453-1489.

[10] Caselli, Francesco, and Massimo Morelli, 2004. “Bad Politicians,” Journal of Public
    Economics, 88, 759-782.

[11] Cotta, Maurizio, 1979. Classe Politica e Parlamento in Italia. Bologna: Il Mulino.

                                            23
[12] Dal Bo, Ernesto, Dal Bo, Pedro and Jason Snyder, 2006. “Political Dynasties,” Working
    Paper, Haas School of Business, University of California, Berkeley.

[13] Diermeier, Daniel, Keane, Michael, and Antonio Merlo, 2005. “A Political Economy
    Model of Congressional Careers,” American Economic Review, 95, 347-373.

[14] Ferejohn, John A., 1986. “Incumbent Performance and Electoral Control,” Public
    Choice, 50, 5-25.

[15] Gerth, H. H., and C. Wright Mills, 1946. From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology. New
    York: Oxford University Press.

[16] Jones, Mark, P., Saiegh, Sebastian, Spiller, Pablo, and Mariano Tommasi, 2002. “Profes-
    sional Politicians - Amateur Legislators: The Argentine Congress in the 20th Century,”
    American Journal of Political Science, 46, 656-669.

[17] Keane, Michael and Antonio Merlo, 2007. “Money, Political Ambition, and the Career
    Decisions of Politicians,” mimeo.

[18] Levy, Gilat, 2004. “A Model of Political Parties,” Journal of Economic Theory, 115,
    250-277.

[19] Mattozzi, Andrea, and Antonio Merlo, 2005. “Political Careers or Career Politicians?”
    PIER Working Paper 05-032, Department of Economics, University of Pennsylvania.

[20] Mattozzi, Andrea, and Antonio Merlo, 2007. “Mediocracy” PIER Working Paper 07-
    007, Department of Economics, University of Pennsylvania.

[21] Messner, Matthias, and Mattias Polborn, 2004. “Paying Politicians,” Journal of Public
    Economics, 88, 2423-2445.

[22] Morelli, Massimo, 2004. “Party Formation and Policy Outcomes under Diﬀerent Elec-
    toral Systems,” Review of Economic Studies, 71, 829—853.

[23] Osborne, Martin J., and Al Slivinski, 1996. “A Model of Political Competition with
    Citizen-Candidates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 65-96.

                                            24
[24] Persson, Torsten, Roland, Gerard, and Guido Tabellini, 1997. “Separation of Powers
    and Political Accountability,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 1163-1202.

[25] Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini, 2000. Political Economics: Explaining Economic
    Policy. Cambridge: MIT Press.

[26] Samuels, David J., 1999. “Political Ambition in Brazil, 1945-95: Theory and Evidence,”
    Working Paper.




                                            25
                                                                       s+π(p)w
2s+r



                                                                       Expected
                                                                       lifetime
                                                                       market
                                                                       earnings


                              IPC                 CP         VPC




       0             p*               (1+p*)/2         p**         1              p




            Figure 1: Equilibrium with voluntary political careers



2s+r                                                                   s+π(p)w




                                                                       Expected
                                                                       lifetime
                                                                       market
                                                                       earnings

                               IPC                     CP



       0              p*               (1+p*)/2                    1              p




           Figure 2: Equilibrium without voluntary political careers
