                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                DO VOTERS VOTE SINCERELY?

                                           Arianna Degan
                                           Antonio Merlo

                                        Working Paper 12922
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12922


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2007




We would like to thank Steve Coate, Aureo de Paula, George Mailath, Nolan McCarty, Robin Pemantle,
Wolfgang Pesendorfer, Alvaro Sandroni, and Ken Wolpin for helpful suggestions. Conference and
seminar participants at several institutions provided useful comments. Merlo acknowledges financial
support from the National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Arianna Degan and Antonio Merlo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Do Voters Vote Sincerely?
Arianna Degan and Antonio Merlo
NBER Working Paper No. 12922
February 2007
JEL No. C12,C63,D72

                                             ABSTRACT

In this paper we address the following question: To what extent is the hypothesis that voters vote
sincerely testable or falsifiable? We show that using data only on how individuals vote in a single
election, the hypothesis that voters vote sincerely is irrefutable, regardless of the number of candidates
competing in the election. On the other hand, using data on how the same individuals vote in multiple
elections, the hypothesis that voters vote sincerely is potentially falsifiable, and we provide general
conditions under which the hypothesis can be tested. We then consider an application of our theoretical
framework and assess whether the behavior of voters is consistent with sincere voting in U.S. national
elections in the post-war period. We find that by and large sincere voting can explain virtually all of
the individual-level observations on voting behavior in presidential and congressional U.S. elections
in the data.

Arianna Degan
Department of Economics
Case postale 8888, Succursale Centre-ville
Montréal (Québec),H3C 3P8, Canada
degan.arianna@uqam.ca

Antonio Merlo
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER
merloa@econ.upenn.edu
1        Introduction
Voting is a cornerstone of democracy and voters’ decisions in elections and referenda are
fundamental inputs in the political process that shapes the policies adopted by democratic
societies. Hence, understanding observed patterns of voting represents an important step
in the understanding of democratic institutions. Moreover, from a theoretical standpoint,
voters are a fundamental primitive of political economy models. Diﬀerent assumptions about
their behavior have important consequences on the implications of these models and, more
generally, on the equilibrium interpretation of the behavior of politicians, parties and gov-
ernments they may induce.1
        An important question is whether voters vote “sincerely” based on their ideological views,
or whether other factors (like for example strategic considerations, or their assessment of
candidates’ personal characteristics), determine the way individuals vote. Clearly, this is an
empirical question and in order to address it we must first define what we mean by sincere
voting.
        Consider a situation where a group of voters is facing some contested elections (i.e., there
is at least one election and two or more candidates in each election). Suppose that each
voter and each candidate has political views that can be represented by a position in some
common ideological (metric) space. We say that a voter votes sincerely in an election based
on ideological considerations if she casts her vote in favor of the candidate whose ideological
position is closest to her own (given the ideological positions of all the candidates in the
election).2
        Given this definition, it follows immediately that if the ideological positions of all voters
and candidates as well as the voting decisions of all voters were observable, we could then
directly assess whether or not the behavior of each voter in any election is consistent with
sincere voting. However, this is generally not the case. While there exist surveys containing
    1
        In the citizen-candidate framework, for example, equilibrium policies diﬀer depending on how citizens
vote (see, e.g., Besley and Coate (1997) and Osborne and Slivinski (1996)). The recent survey by Merlo
(2006) presents a general overview of the implications of alternative theories of voting in political economy.
    2
        In this paper, we ignore the issue of abstention. For recent surveys of alternative theories of voter turnout
see, e.g., Dhillon and Peralta (2002) and Merlo (2006).



                                                           1
information on how individuals vote in a number of elections (e.g., the American National
Election Study, the Canadian National Election Study and the British Election Survey),
and data sets containing measures of the ideological positions of politicians based on their
observed behavior in a variety of public oﬃces (e.g., Poole and Rosenthal (1997) and Hix,
Nouri and Roland (2006)), the ideological positions of voters are not directly observable.3
       The relevant empirical question thus becomes: To what extent is the hypothesis that
voters vote sincerely testable or falsifiable (in a Popperian sense)?4 This is the question we
address in this paper.5
       The first result of our analysis is that using data only on how individuals vote in a
single isolated election, the hypothesis that voters vote sincerely is irrefutable, regardless
of the number of candidates competing in the election. Given any configuration of distinct
candidates’ positions, any observed vote can be rationalized by a voter voting sincerely based
on some voter’s ideological positions. This result holds for any number of dimensions of the
ideological space.
       Another result of our analysis is that using data on how the same individuals vote in
multiple elections it is possible to construct a meaningful test of whether the behavior of
voters is consistent with sincere voting. In other words, the hypothesis that voters vote
sincerely in multiple elections is potentially falsifiable, and we provide conditions under
which the hypothesis can be tested. We show that in general environments where individual
voting decisions and candidates’ ideological positions are observable, but voters’ ideological
positions are not, the hypothesis that individuals vote sincerely in multiple elections with any
number of candidates is falsifiable if the number of elections is greater than the number of
   3
       Note that in order to directly assess whether the behavior of voters is consistent with sincere voting one
would need a consistent set of observations on the ideological positions of all voters and candidates in the
same metric space. Hence, measures of citizens’ self-reported ideological placements that are contained in
some surveys (like, for example, the variable contained in the American National Election Studies, where
voters are asked to place themselves on a 7-point liberal-conservative scale), cannot be used for this purpose,
since, for instance, diﬀerent people may interpret the scale diﬀerently.
   4
       See, e.g., Popper (1935).
   5
       Chiappori and Donni (2005) address similar issues in the context of bargaining models, where they
investigate the extent to which Nash bargaining theory is testable.



                                                         2
dimensions of the ideological space. Given any configuration of distinct candidates’ positions
in two or more simultaneous elections, there always exists at least a voting profile (that is,
a vector of votes in all elections) that cannot be rationalized by a voter voting sincerely in
these elections based on some voter’s ideological positions.
    Finally, we characterize the maximum number of voting profiles that are consistent with
sincere voting as a function of the number of elections, the number of candidates in each
election, and the number of dimensions of the ideological space. All our results are formally
stated in Section 2, and are proved in the Appendix.
    In Section 3, we then consider an application where the hypothesis that voters vote sin-
cerely is falsifiable, and assess whether the observed behavior of voters is consistent with
sincere voting in U.S. national elections in the post-war period. In order to address this
issue, we use individual-level data on how individuals voted in presidential and congressional
elections in seven presidential election years between 1970 and 2000, as well as data on
the positions of candidates in these elections. The two data sources we use are the Amer-
ican National Election Studies, and the Poole and Rosenthal NOMINATE Common Space
Scores, respectively. We find that by and large sincere voting can explain virtually all of the
individual-level observations on voting behavior in presidential and congressional elections
in the data. We also explore the robustness of these findings with respect to the choice of the
number of elections and the number of dimensions of the ideological space. We conclude in
Section 4 with some general remarks about the critical role played by auxiliary assumptions
in testing voting theories.

2    Theoretical Analysis
    Consider a situation where a group of voters N is facing m ≥ 1 simultaneous elections.
There is a common ideological space Y = Rk , k ≥ 1, and let d (x, z) denote the Euclidean
                                                           p
distance between any two points x, z ∈ Rk (i.e., d (x, z) = (x1 − z1 )2 + · · · + (xk − zk )2 ).
Each voter i ∈ N is characterized by an ideological position y i ∈ Y . For any election
e ∈ {1, ..., m}, let qe = |J e | ∈ {2, ..., q}, denote the number of candidates competing in the
election, where J e is the set of candidates. Each candidate j ∈ {∪m    e
                                                                   e=1 J } is characterized by

a distinct ideological position y j ∈ Y , which is known to the voters.


                                               3
         For each voter i ∈ N, let v i = (v1i , ..., vm
                                                      i
                                                        ) ∈ V m denote i’s voting profile, where vei ∈ J e
denotes voter i’s vote in election e = 1, ..., m, and V m is the set of all possible distinct voting
profiles in the m elections. Note that |V m | = Πm
                                                 e=1 qe , and let v ∈ V
                                                                        m
                                                                          denote a generic voting
profile.6

Definition 1: Voter i votes sincerely in election e if d (y i , y je ) < d(y i , y e ) for all       e   ∈ J e,
 e   6= je ∈ J e , implies that vei = je . Voter i votes sincerely if she votes sincerely in all elections
e = 1, ..., m.

         Clearly, given the voting profiles of voters, if a researcher could observe the ideological
positions of electoral candidates and of voters, it would be possible to directly establish
whether or not each voter votes sincerely in each election. Suppose instead that a researcher
has access only to limited information, and consider a situation where the researcher observes
the voting profiles of voters and the ideological positions of electoral candidates, but does
not observe the voters’ ideological positions. We are interested in determining the conditions
under which the hypothesis that voters vote sincerely could be potentially falsified, and is
therefore testable.
         Let
                                          D                            © jª                  E
                                       P = k, m, {qe }m
                                                      e=1 , {J e m
                                                                }e=1 ,  y j∈{∪m      e
                                                                                         }                 (1)
                                                                             e=1 J


denote the primitives of the environment.

Definition 2: Given P , a voting profile v ∈ V m is consistent with sincere voting if there
exists some Y v ⊆ Y = Rk such that if a voter i’s ideological position is y i ∈ Y v and i votes
sincerely, then v i = v. If it exists, then Y v is the sincere support of v.

         We can now define the notion of falsifiability.

Definition 3: Given P , the hypothesis that voters vote sincerely is falsifiable if there exists
at least a voting profile v ∈ V m that is not consistent with sincere voting.

         In the analysis that follows, we first consider the case of two-candidate elections, and
then investigate the general case of elections with any number of candidates.
     6
         For example, if there are two elections, 1 and 2, with candidates a1 and b1 competing in election 1,
and candidates a2 and b2 competing in election 2, the set of the four possible voting profiles is V 2 =
{(a1 , a2 ) , (a1 , b2 ) , (b1 , a1 ) , (b1 , b2 )}.



                                                             4
2.1       Two-candidate elections
      We begin our analysis by considering the case of two-candidate elections (i.e., qe = 2
for all e = 1, ..., m). For each election e ∈ {1, ..., m}, let y je , y             e
                                                                                        ∈ Y = Rk , y je 6= y e ,
denote the ideological positions of the two candidates je , e ∈ J e in the election, and let
     ©                                 ª
H e = y ∈ Y : d (y, y je ) = d(y, y e ) be the set of points in the ideological space Y that are
equidistant from the candidates’ positions.
      Since d (·) is the Euclidean distance, it follows that for each election e there exists a
non-zero vector λe = (λe1 , ..., λek ) ∈ Rk and a µe ∈ R such that

                                    H e = {y ∈ Y : λe y 0 = µe } , e = 1, ..., m,                           (2)

where y 0 denotes the transpose of y = (y1 , ..., yk ). Hence, each election e = 1, ..., m implies
an hyperplane H e in Rk which partitions the ideological space Y into two regions (or half
spaces),
                                           Y je = {y ∈ Y : λe y 0 < µe }

and
                                           Y   e
                                                   = {y ∈ Y : λe y 0 > µe } ,

where Y je (Y e ) is the set of ideological positions that are closer to the position of candidate
je ( e ) than to the position of the other candidate, or equivalently, is the sincere support of
voting for candidate je ( e ) in election e.7
      It follows that the collection of the m hyperplanes, {H 1 , ..., H m }, partitions the ideological
space Y into rm ≤ 2m convex regions, where each region is the sincere support of a distinct
voting profile v ∈ V m . Since in the case of two-candidate elections the number of possible
voting profiles is |V m | = 2m , it follows that the hypothesis that voters vote sincerely in
two-candidate elections is falsifiable if and only if rm < 2m .
      We can now state our first set of results.

Proposition 1: Given P , if qe = 2 for all e = 1, ..., m, the hypothesis that voters vote
sincerely is falsifiable if m > k. If m ≤ k, the hypothesis is generically not falsifiable.
  7
      Note that Y je ∩ Y   e
                               = ∅ and Y je ∪ Y    e
                                                       ∪ He = Y .




                                                              5
Corollary 1: Given P , the hypothesis that voters vote sincerely in a single election with two
candidates is not falsifiable for all k ≥ 1.

       All proofs are contained in the Appendix.8 In order to illustrate the result that in two-
candidate elections the hypothesis that voters vote sincerely is falsifiable only if the number
of elections is larger than the number of dimensions of the ideological space, consider an
example in the two-dimensional space, Y = R2 . In this case, each election implies a line that
partitions the plane into two regions, and generically the lines implied by any two elections
must intersect.9
       Figure 1 depicts a situation where there are three elections e = 1, 2, 3, the set of candidates
in each election is J e = {ae , be }, and the candidates’ ideological positions y ae and y be are
such that the region to the left of each line H e is closer to the position of ae than to that of
be for each election e. Several observations emerge from this figure. If we consider any single
election e ∈ {1, 2, 3} in isolation (i.e., m = 1), then it is obvious that each voting profile
v ∈ {ae , be } is consistent with sincere voting (since the two half planes determined by H e
are the sincere supports of ae and be , respectively). This is also true if we consider any pair
of elections e, f ∈ {1, 2, 3}, e 6= f , (i.e., m = 2), since H e and H f partition the ideological
space in four regions that represent the sincere supports of each of the four possible voting
profiles (ae , af ), (ae , bf ), (be , af ), and (be , bf ). However, when we consider all three elections
together (i.e., m = 3), we see that H 1 , H 2 and H 3 partition the ideological space in only
seven regions, while there are eight possible voting profiles. In this example, there do not
exist ideological positions such that the voting profile (a1 , b2 , a3 ) is consistent with sincere
voting (that is, there does not exist a sincere support for (a1 , b2 , a3 )).
       It is should also be clear from the example that increasing the number of elections would
increase the number of voting profiles that are inconsistent with sincere voting. In fact, the
following proposition characterizes the upper bound on the number of voting profiles that are
consistent with sincere voting (i.e., the number of regions rm ), as a function of the number
   8
       The proof of Corollary 1 follows directly from the proof of Proposition 1 and is therefore omitted.
   9
       While there exist configurations of candidates’ positions such that these lines would be parallel (a case
that would occur, for example, if the pair of candidates’ positions in one election is a linear transformation
of the pair of candidates’ positions in another election), this case is non generic.



                                                        6
of elections m and the number of dimensions of the ideological space k.10

Proposition 2: Given P , if qe = 2 for all e = 1, ..., m, then rm ≤ ρ(m, k), where

                                                        Xk µ ¶
                                                            m
                                              ρ(m, k) =       .                                              (3)
                                                        t=0
                                                            t



          Note that if m ≤ k, Proposition 2 implies that
                                                 X m µ ¶
                                                       m
                                       ρ(m, k) =         = 2m
                                                  t=0
                                                       t

and this bound is generically attained (Proposition 1). If, on the other hand, m > k, then
for example in a two-dimensional ideological space with three, four, and five elections, we
have that ρ(3, 2) = 7, ρ(4, 2) = 11, and ρ(5, 2) = 16, respectively. This implies that when
there are three elections at most 7 out of the 8 possible voting profiles are consistent with
sincere voting; when there are four elections at most 11 out of the 16 possible voting profiles
are consistent with sincere voting; and when there are five elections the maximum number
of voting profiles that are consistent with sincere voting is 16 out of 32 possible profiles.

2.2              Multi-candidate elections
          Consider now the general case where the number of candidates may vary across elections
and any election may have more than two candidates (i.e., qe ∈ {2, ..., q}, e = 1, ..., m). For
each election e ∈ {1, ..., m}, let y je ∈ Y = Rk , denote the distinct ideological position of a
generic candidate je ∈ J e in the election, and Y je = {y ∈ Y : d (y, y je ) < d(y, y e ), ∀           e   ∈ J e,
 e    6= je } be the set of points in the ideological space Y that are closer to y je than to the
position of any other candidate in the election.
          Since d (·) is the Euclidean distance, it follows that for each pair of candidates in election
e, je ,      e   ∈ J e , the set of points in the ideological space Y that are equidistant from y je and
y e is an hyperplane H je , e , which partitions the ideological space Y into two regions (or half
     10
          The issue we are considering corresponds to the problem of counting the number of regions in arrange-
ments of hyperplanes in k-dimensional Euclidean space. This problem has been extensively studied in
computational and combinatorial geometry (see, e.g., Orlik and Terao (1992)), and Proposition 2 follows
from a general result that was first proved by Buck (1943).



                                                         7
spaces), Y jee and Yjee = Y \{Y jee ∪ H je , e }, where Y jee (Yjee ) is the set of ideological positions
that are closer to the position of candidate je ( e ) than to the position of candidate                                           e   (je ).
Hence, for each candidate je ∈ J e , Y je is an intersection of the half spaces determined by
the qe − 1 hyperplanes {H je , e } e ∈J e \je (i.e., Y je = ∩ e ∈J e \je Y jee ). Note that for all candidates
je ∈ J e and all elections e ∈ {1, ..., m}, Y je is non empty and convex. Hence, each election
e ∈ {1, ..., m} implies a partition T e of the ideological space Y into qe convex regions,
{Y je }je ∈J e , where each region Y je is the sincere support of voting for candidate j e in election
e.11 For each election e ∈ {1, ..., m}, the set T e = {Y je }je ∈J e defines a Voronoi tessellation
of Rk and each region Y je , je ∈ J e , is a k-dimensional Voronoi polyhedron.12 Figure 2
illustrates an example of the Voronoi tessellation that corresponds to an election with 5
candidates, {a, b, c, d, e}, with positions {ya , yb , yc , yd , ye } in the two-dimensional ideological
space Y = R2 , and introduces some useful terms.
       It follows that the collection of the m tessellations, {T 1 , ..., T m }, partitions the ideological
space Y into rm ≤ Πm
                   e=1 qe convex regions, where each region is the sincere support of a distinct

voting profile v ∈ V m . Since in the general case where the number of candidates may vary
across elections the number of possible voting profiles is |V m | = Πm
                                                                     e=1 qe , it follows that the

hypothesis that voters vote sincerely is falsifiable if and only if rm < Πm
                                                                          e=1 qe .

       We can now state our second set of results.

Proposition 3: Given P , the hypothesis that voters vote sincerely in a single election with
any number of candidates is not falsifiable for all k ≥ 1.

       Proposition 3 generalizes Corollary 1. In order to illustrate the result consider the follow-
ing example in the two-dimensional space, Y = R2 . Figure 3 depicts a situation where there
is a single election e = 1, and the set of candidates in the election is J 1 = {a1 , b1 , c1 }. Given
the candidates’ ideological positions, y a1 , y b1 , and y c1 , for each j1 ∈ J 1 , Y j1 is the sincere
support of voting for candidate j1 in the election. Hence, it follows immediately that each
voting profile v ∈ V 1 = {a1 , b1 , c1 } is consistent with sincere voting. In fact, it should be
clear that this result holds for any number of candidates, any distinct candidates’ positions,
  11
       Note that Y je ∩ Y   e
                                = ∅ for all je ,   e   ∈ J e , je 6=   e,   and ∪je ∈J e {Y je ∪   e ∈J
                                                                                                          e \j
                                                                                                              e
                                                                                                                  H jee } = Y .
  12
       For a comprehensive treatment of Voronoi tessellations and their properties, see, e.g., Okabe et al. (2000).




                                                                       8
and any number of dimensions of the ideological space.

Proposition 4: Given P , if qe ∈ {2, ..., q}, e = 1, ..., m, the hypothesis that voters vote
sincerely is falsifiable if m > k.

    When the number of elections is greater than the number of dimensions of the ideological
space, the hypothesis that voters vote sincerely is always falsifiable regardless of the number
of candidates in each election. Hence, Proposition 4 extends the result of the first part of
Proposition 1. However, for the case where 1 < m ≤ k, while the hypothesis is generically not
falsifiable when each election has two candidates, when there are more than two candidates
in at least one election, this is no longer the case. In fact, there exist configurations of
candidates’ positions, {y j }j∈{∪m   } , such that the hypothesis that voters vote sincerely is
                                               e
                                       e=1 J

falsifiable, and configurations such that the hypothesis is not falsifiable.
    In order to illustrate this result consider the following example in the two-dimensional
space, Y = R2 . Suppose that in addition to election 1 depicted in Figure 3, there is a second
election with two candidates (i.e., e ∈ {1, 2}, q1 = 3 and q2 = 2). The set of candidates in
election 2 is J 2 = {a2 , b2 }, and the candidates’ ideological positions are such that for each
j2 ∈ J 2 , Y j2 is the sincere support of voting for candidate j2 in election 2. Figures 4 and
5 depict two possible situations that correspond to diﬀerent configurations of the positions
of the two candidates in election 2. As we can see from Figure 4, of the six possible voting
profiles in elections 1 and 2, (a1 , a2 ), (a1 , b2 ), (b1 , a2 ), (b1 , b2 ), (c1 , a2 ), and (c1 , b2 ), only five
have a sincere support in Y . In this example, there do not exist ideological positions such
that the voting profile (a1 , b2 ) is consistent with sincere voting (that is, there does not exist
a sincere support for (a1 , b2 )). However, this is not the case in Figure 5, where there exists a
sincere support for each of the six possible voting profiles in the two elections. Each one of
the two cases illustrated in Figures 4 and 5 is robust to small perturbations of the candidates’
positions, and is therefore generic. Similar examples can be constructed for any combination
of the number of candidates in m > 1 elections, q1 , ..., qm , where qe > 2 for at least one
e ∈ {1, ..., m}.
    When the ideological space is either one- or two-dimensional (i.e., k ≤ 2), we can also
characterize the upper bound on the number of voting profiles that are consistent with sincere
voting (i.e., the number of regions rm ), as a function of the number of elections m and the

                                                         9
number of candidates in each election, q1 , ..., qm .13

Proposition 5: Given P , if k ≤ 2, then rm ≤ τ k (m, q1 , ..., qm ), where
                                                                      X
                                                                      m
                                       τ 1 (m, q1 , ..., qm ) = 1 +         (qe − 1)                       (4)
                                                                      e=1

and                                                         "         Ã                       !#
                                                      X
                                                      m                        X
                                                                               m
                       τ 2 (m, q1 , ..., qm ) = 1 +         (qe − 1) 1 +               (qf − 1)    .       (5)
                                                      e=1                     f =e+1



         Note that if m = 1, τ 1 (1, q1 ) = τ 2 (1, q1 ) = q1 , and if m = 2, τ 1 (2, q1 , q2 ) = q1 + q2 − 1 <
τ 2 (2, q1 , q2 ) = q1 q2 . Furthermore, when k ≤ 2 < m, τ 1 (m, q1 , ..., qm ) < τ 2 (m, q1 , ..., qm ) <
Πm
 e=1 qe , and the number of voting profiles that are not consistent with sincere voting increases

both with the number of elections and with the number of candidates in an election. For
example, if the ideological space is two-dimensional, then if m = 3 and q1 = q2 = q3 = 3,
τ 2 (3, 3, 3, 3) = 19 (i.e., at most 19 out of the 27 possible voting profiles are consistent with
sincere voting); if m = 4 and q1 = q2 = q3 = q4 = 3, τ 2 (4, 3, 3, 3, 3) = 33 (i.e., at most
33 out of the 81 possible voting profiles are consistent with sincere voting); and if m = 3,
q1 = q2 = 3, and q3 = 4, τ 2 (3, 3, 3, 4) = 24 (i.e., at most 24 out of 36 possible voting profiles
are consistent with sincere voting).

3         Evidence from U.S. National Elections
         In the previous section, we have characterized general conditions under which the hy-
pothesis that voters vote sincerely is falsifiable. We now turn our attention to assessing
empirically the extent to which, in environments where the hypothesis is falsifiable, the ob-
served behavior of voters is consistent with sincere voting. Our empirical analysis is simply
meant as an illustration of the theoretical framework presented above, and focuses on na-
tional elections in the United States between 1970 and 2000. The same analysis, however,
can also be replicated for other countries, or other types of elections, or other time periods
for which there are available data.
    13
         The issue we are considering corresponds to the problem of counting the number of regions in arrange-
ments of Voronoi tessellations in k-dimensional Euclidean space. This problem has not yet been studied in
computational and combinatorial geometry, and there are no known results in the literature.



                                                                10
       Since, as shown in Section 2, this empirical analysis is meaningful only if we have access
to data on how individuals vote in multiple elections, we consider the situation faced by U.S.
voters in a presidential election year (henceforth, an election year), where presidential and
congressional elections occur simultaneously.14 In any election year, U.S. voters elect the
President and, at the same time, each voter faces an election that determines the represen-
tative of his or her district in the House of Representatives.15 Some voters also face a Senate
election in their state.16 Each election is typically contested by two candidates belonging to
the Democratic and the Republican party, respectively.17
       Since the set of candidates competing for a seat in the House of Representatives is diﬀerent
in each congressional district, our unit of analysis is the district. In a generic election year t,
a voter i residing in district h ∈ {1, ..., 435} and state s ∈ {1, ..., 50} faces a House election.
Let Jth denote the set of candidates competing in the House election in congressional district
h at time t. Like all other voters in the nation, voter i also faces a presidential election, and
let Jtp denote the set of presidential candidates at time t. If a Senate seat is up for election
in state s at time t, then voter i also faces a Senate election, where the set of candidates is
Jts . Hence, in any given district h = 1, ..., 435 in state s = 1, ..., 50, a voter i is facing either
                                                    ¡     ¢           ¡         ¢
two or three simultaneous elections, and v i = vpi , vhi or vi = vpi , vhi , vsi denotes i’s voting
profile, where vei ∈ Jte indicates how voter i votes in election e = p, h, s.18 For example, a
  14
       In the United States, citizens are called to participate in national elections to elect the President and
the members of Congress. While congressional elections occur every two years, the time between presidential
elections is four years. We refer to an election year where both presidential and congressional elections occur
simultaneously as a presidential election year.
  15
       Citizens who reside in the District of Columbia do not elect a House representative but only a congres-
sional delegate.
  16
       Senate elections are staggered, and in any given election year, there are elections to the U.S. Senate in
approximately one third of the states. In addition, many voters also face other local elections and referenda.
Since data on how individuals vote in these elections is typically not available, we do not consider them here.
  17
       In some elections a single candidate runs uncontested. Occasionally, a third, independent candidate also
runs. Since data on the positions of independent candidates is not available, in our analysis, we restrict
attention to two-candidate presidential and congressional elections.
  18
       Recall that here we are ignoring abstention, and only consider the way in which voters vote. For a recent
study of the empirical implications of alternative models of voter turnout, see, e.g., Coate and Conlin (2004).


                                                        11
voter facing three elections may vote for the Democratic candidate in each of the elections, or
vote for the Democratic presidential candidate and the Republican candidates in the House
and Senate elections, and so on.
       The data we use for our empirical analysis come from two sources. The first source is the
American National Election Studies (NES), which for each election year contains individual
voting decisions in presidential and congressional elections of a nationally representative
sample of the voting age population. In addition, the NES contains information on the
congressional district where each individual resides, the identity of the Democratic and the
Republican candidate competing for election in his or her congressional district, and, in the
event that a Senate election is also occurring in his or her state, the identity of the candidates
competing in the Senate race.19
       The second source of data is the Poole and Rosenthal NOMINATE Common Space
Scores. Using data on roll call voting by each member of Congress and support to roll
call votes by each President, Poole and Rosenthal developed a methodology to estimate the
positions of all politicians who ever served either as Presidents or members of Congress, in a
common two-dimensional ideological space (see, e.g., Poole (1998) and Poole and Rosenthal
(1997, 2001)). These estimates, which are comparable across politicians and across time, are
contained in their NOMINATE Common Space Scores data set.20
       We restrict attention to the period 1970-2000, and consider seven election years: 1972,
1976, 1980, 1984, 1988, 1996, and 2000.21 For each year, Table 1 contains the number of
In Degan and Merlo (2006), we structurally estimate a model of participation and voting in U.S. national
elections.
  19
       The NES is available on-line at http://www.umich.edu/~nes. For thorough discussions of potential
limitations of the survey data in the NES see, e.g., Anderson and Silver (1986) and Wright (1993). Note,
however, that the NES represents the best and most widely used source of individual-level data on electoral
participation and voting in the U.S.
  20
       This data set is also available on-line at http://voteview.com. For a discussion of potential limitations of
the methodology proposed by Poole and Rosenthal see, e.g., Heckman and Snyder (1997). For a comparison
of alternative estimation procedures see Clinton, Jackman and Rivers (2004). Note, however, that none of
the other procedures has been used to generate a comprehensive data set similar to the one by Poole and
Rosenthal.
  21
       The NES data for the election year 1992 contains a mistake in the variable that identifies the con-

                                                         12
observations in the NES sample of individuals who reported how they voted in the presi-
dential and House elections, as well as in the sub-sample of individuals who were also facing
a senatorial election in their state, and reported how they voted in the presidential, House,
and Senate elections.22
       For each of the seven years we consider, we match each voter in the NES sample with
the positions of the presidential candidates, as well as the positions of the House candidates
running in his or her congressional district, and the positions of the Senate candidates running
in his or her state, if applicable. Consistent with the general environment described in Section
2, we assume that the voters know the positions of all candidates in all the elections they
face. These positions, however, may or may not be observable to the econometrician.
       In order to measure the candidates’ positions in each election year, we adopt the following
procedure. For all presidential candidates, and all congressional candidates who have an
entry in the Poole and Rosenthal data set, we assume that their position is given by their
NOMINATE score.23 For all other congressional candidates, we assume that their positions
are drawn from the empirical distributions of the NOMINATE scores for Democratic and
Republican members of the House or the Senate in the same election year, and we allow
these distributions to diﬀer across regions in the U.S.24
       For all the cases where we observe the positions of all the candidates competing in the
elections faced by the voters residing in a district, following the analysis in Section 2, we
gressional district of residence of the individuals in the sample (see ftp://ftp.nes.isr.umich.edu/ftp/nes/
studypages/1992prepost/int1992.txt). Hence, it cannot be used for the purpose of our analysis.
  22
       Obviously, we only consider congressional elections that are contested, and observations for which the
voters’ district and state of residence are not missing.
  23
       Note that Michael Dukakis, the Democratic presidential candidate in 1988, who at the time was the
governor of Massachusetts, is the only presidential candidate during the period we consider for whom there
is no entry in the Poole and Rosenthal data set. Following Gaines and Segal (1988), we approximate Dukakis’
position in the ideological space with that of the Democratic Massachusetts senator in 1988 (Ted Kennedy).
  24
       We consider four diﬀerent regions: Northeast, South, Midwest and West. Alternative ways of construct-
ing the empirical distributions are also possible. Note, however, that it would be unfeasible to characterize a
separate empirical distribution for each party in each state (let alone district) in each year, since the number
of representatives or senators of either party in each state in any given year is too small.




                                                      13
then directly assess whether or not each observed individual voting profile in those districts
is consistent with sincere voting. For each case where we do not observe the position(s)
of some candidate(s) competing in the elections faced by the voters residing in a district,
we consider instead all possible realizations of these candidates’ positions (that is, all the
points in the support of the relevant empirical distributions of candidates’ positions), and
determine whether for any of these positions each observed individual voting profile in that
district is consistent with sincere voting.25 The outcome of our calculations is the fraction of
the observed individual voting profiles that are consistent with sincere voting in each election
year.
       In order to perform these calculations, we need to specify the number of elections m
we consider, and the number of dimensions of the ideological space k (where it has to be
the case that m > k). We begin by ignoring Senate elections,26 and evaluate the extent to
which the observed voting behavior of all individuals in the NES samples who voted in the
presidential and House elections is consistent with sincere voting when we restrict attention
to a unidimensional liberal-conservative ideological space.27 We then take into consideration
that while some voters only face the presidential and a House election, some voters also
face a Senate election, and evaluate the extent to which the observed behavior of voters
in presidential and congressional (House or House and Senate) elections is consistent with
sincere voting, while still maintaining the assumption of a unidimensional ideological space.
Finally, we restrict attention to the sub-samples of individuals in the NES who voted in three
elections (presidential, House, and Senate), and perform our calculations for the case where
  25
       Note that since we are assuming that voters know the true position of each candidate, for all voters in
the same district (state) we assess whether their observed voting profiles are consistent with sincere voting
using the same realizations of candidates’ positions in their district (state).
  26
       Most empirical studies of voting in national U.S. elections that use NES data restrict attention to
presidential and House elections (e.g., Alvarez and Schousen (1993), Burden and Kimball (1998), and Mebane
(2000)).
  27
       In particular, we only consider the first dimension of the Poole and Rosenthal NOMINATE scores. Note
that according to Poole and Rosenthal (1997; p.5), “from the late 1970s onward, roll call voting became
largely a matter of positioning on a single, liberal-conservative dimension.”




                                                       14
the ideological space is two-dimensional.28 Table 2 contains our results, where each column
corresponds to one of the three scenarios.
       As we can see from the first column in Table 2, sincere voting can explain virtually all of
the individual-level observations on voting behavior in presidential and House elections in the
data. Its worst “failure” amounts to the inability of accounting for 5.1% of the observations
in 1980. Overall, by combining all the samples in the seven election years we consider, we
have that only 3.3% of the observed individual voting profiles are not consistent with sincere
voting. Note that “errors” of this magnitude are within the margin of tolerance when one
allows for sampling (or measurement) error.29
       Columns 2 and 3 in Table 2 help us to assess the robustness of these findings with re-
spect to the choice of the number of elections and the number of dimensions of the ideological
space. From the analysis in Section 2, we know that given the number of dimensions of the
ideological space, an increase in the number of elections increases the number of voting pro-
files that cannot be rationalized by a voter voting sincerely in these elections. This increases
the extent to which the hypothesis that voters vote sincerely may fail to explain the data.
Consistent with this result, we find that increasing the number of elections while maintaining
the dimensionality of the ideological space fixed, worsens the empirical performance of the
sincere-voting hypothesis (Column 2). Nevertheless, under the maintained assumption that
the ideological space is unidimensional, over 92% of the observed individual voting profiles in
presidential and congressional (House or House and Senate) elections between 1970 and 2000
are still consistent with sincere voting. Moreover, in a two-dimensional ideological space, the
hypothesis that voters vote sincerely in presidential and congressional (House and Senate)
elections only fails to account for less than 1% of the observations in each of the seven elec-
tion years we consider (Column 3). We conclude that a compelling case cannot be made on
empirical grounds to dismiss a sincere-voting interpretation of the behavior of voters in U.S.
  28
       Recall that the hypothesis that voters vote sincerely in presidential and House elections only is not
falsifiable if k = 2.
  29
       One potential source of measurement error in the data, for example, is that individuals in the NES
samples may be assigned to the wrong congressional district (a possibility that arises whenever the location
where an individual is interviewed does not correspond to his or her permanent residence).



                                                      15
national elections.
         A prominent feature that emerges from the data is that often people vote a “split ticket”
(that is, they vote for candidates of diﬀerent parties for President and for Congress).30 The
sizeable presence of split-ticket voting in the data has been interpreted by many as direct
evidence of strategic voting, and has lead to the development of strategic-voting models that
can explain some of the aggregate stylized facts.31 Our findings indicate that by and large
split-ticket voting is also consistent with sincere voting.32

4             Concluding Remarks
         Do voters vote sincerely based on ideological considerations? In this paper, we have
provided general conditions under which the hypothesis that voters vote sincerely can be
tested. We have also considered a concrete application of our framework, and analyzed
empirically the extent to which the behavior of voters in U.S. national elections is consistent
with sincere voting.
         A key result of our analysis is that, when voters’ ideological positions are not observed,
falsifiability of the sincere-voting hypothesis hinges on the availability of data on how indi-
viduals vote in multiple elections. Furthermore, the number of elections has to be greater
than the number of dimensions of the ideological space. Given the dimensionality of the
ideological space, the larger the number of elections, the larger the number of voting profiles
that cannot be rationalized by a voter voting sincerely in these elections. Hence, the larger
the number of elections for which there are data on how individuals vote in each election,
the higher the possibility of “rejecting” the sincere-voting hypothesis.
         These results raise the following important considerations. The choices of the number of
elections and the number of dimensions of the ideological space are auxiliary assumptions
that are typically dictated by data availability. The conclusions of any empirical analysis
    30
         On average, over the period 1972-2000, the fraction of voters in the NES samples who report splitting
their vote is equal to 24%.
    31
         See, e.g., Alesina and Rosenthal (1996) and Chari, Jones and Marimon (1997).
    32
         Note that our analysis is not a test of “sincere vs. strategic” voting. The objective of the quantitative
exercise is simply to assess the extent to which observed voting behavior is consistent with individuals voting
sincerely, given our definition of sincere voting provided in Section 2.



                                                          16
that tries to assess the performance of the sincere-voting hypothesis are therefore conditional
on these maintained assumptions. In particular, a “statistically significant failure” to explain
the data may lead to a rejection of the hypothesis. This failure, however, may simply be
due to limitations of the auxiliary assumptions, and could also be interpreted as grounds
for rejecting these assumptions instead. It is therefore important to consider alternative
specifications of the environment that correspond to diﬀerent sets of auxiliary assumptions
surrounding the main hypothesis that is being tested. The same considerations apply to
testing any alternative theory of voting using the same data.


Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1: Let qe = 2 for all e ∈ {1, ..., m}. We first show that for all k ≥ 1
and m ≥ 1, if Y = Rk and m ≤ k, then generically rm = 2m . The reason why the result
is true is that if m ≤ k then the intersection of the m hyperplanes H 1 , ..., H m defined in
(2) is generically non-empty. Hence, each hyperplane H e , e ∈ {1, ..., m}, partitions each of
the 2m−1 regions in Rk given by the intersections of the half spaces determined by the other
m − 1 hyperplanes in two.
   Formally, the hyperplanes H 1 , ..., H m in Rk define a system of m linear equations in k
variables
                                               Λy 0 = µ,                                           (6)

where                                      ⎡                     ⎤
                                               λ11
                                             ···           λ1k
                                        ⎢                        ⎥
                                        ⎢ ..        ..           ⎥
                                      Λ=⎢ .          .           ⎥,
                                        ⎣                        ⎦
                                          λm
                                           1 · · · λmk

and                                              ⎡        ⎤
                                                 µ
                                               ⎢ 1 ⎥
                                               ⎢ . ⎥
                                           µ = ⎢ .. ⎥ .
                                               ⎣    ⎦
                                                 µm
Since generically the vectors λe = (λe1 , ..., λek ), e = 1, ..., m, are linearly independent, the rank
of Λ is equal to m. Hence, for m ≤ k a solution to the system of linear equations (6) exists
and the dimension of the space of solutions is k − m. In particular, when m = k the unique


                                                     17
solution to (6) is a point in Rk where all the hyperplanes H 1 , ..., H k intersect.
   Next, we show that for all k ≥ 1, if Y = Rk and m > k, then rm < 2m . Given the m
hyperplanes H 1 , ..., H m defined in (2), consider an arbitrary collection containing k of these
hyperplanes. From the previous part of the proof we know that generically a collection of
k hyperplanes partitions Rk into 2k regions. Since each hyperplane can at most partition
each region in two, in order to prove that rm < 2m it is enough to show that adding another
hyperplane to the collection can never partition Rk into 2k+1 regions. In other words, an
additional hyperplane can not partition all of the 2k regions given by the intersections of the
half spaces determined by k other hyperplanes.
   Without loss of generality, consider the collection of k hyperplanes, H 1 , ..., H k . Let
y ∗ ∈ Rk denote the intersection of H 1 , ..., H k , that is

                                             y ∗ = Λ−1
                                                    k µ
                                                       k



is the unique solution to
                                              Λk y 0 = µk ,

where                                        ⎡                      ⎤
                                                 λ11
                                                 ···          λ1k
                                           ⎢                        ⎥
                                           ⎢  .         ..          ⎥
                                      Λk = ⎢ ..          .          ⎥,
                                           ⎣                        ⎦
                                             λk1 · · · λkk
and                                                ⎡  ⎤
                                                   µ1
                                                 ⎢    ⎥
                                                 ⎢ . ⎥
                                            µk = ⎢ .. ⎥ .
                                                 ⎣    ⎦
                                                   µk
Consider the linear transformation

                                           x0 = Λk y 0 − µk                                  (7)

that maps Y into X (where Y = Rk and X = Rk ). This transformation maps each hy-
perplane H j in Y , j = 1, ..., k, into the j th coordinate of X, and y ∗ into the origin of X.
Furthermore, it maps each hyperplane H h in Y , h = k + 1, ..., m, into a hyperplane Z h in
        ©                    ª
X, Z h = x ∈ X : β h x0 = γ h , where β h = λh Λ−1                   h −1
                                                k and γ h = µh − λ Λk µk . Without loss



                                                       18
of generality, suppose that β k+1 > 0 and γ k+1 > 0. Then, for all x < 0, β k+1 x0 < γ k+1 ,
which implies that the hyperplane Z k+1 does not partition the negative orthant of X. This
implies that the hyperplane H k+1 does not partition the region in Y that corresponds to the
negative orthant of X under the linear transformation (7). It follows that for any collection
of k < m hyperplanes, there always exists at least a region in Y given by some intersection
of the half spaces determined by these hyperplanes that is not partitioned by some other
hyperplane. ¥
Proof of Proposition 2: Proposition 2 follows from a general result in combinatorial geom-
etry on the maximum number of regions in arrangements of hyperplanes in k-dimensional
Euclidean space. The proof we report here is an adaptation of a proof by Edelsbrunner
(1987; pp. 8-10).
   Let H = {H 1 , ..., H m } denote the collection of the m hyperplanes defined in (2), which
defines a partition of Rk into connected objects of dimensions 0 through k, called an arrange-
ment A (H) of H. We use the term vertex to denote a 0-dimensional object in A (H) (that
is, a point generated by the intersection of k hyperplanes), and refer to an l-dimensional
object in A (H), 1 ≤ l ≤ k, as an l-region. We are interested in characterizing the maximum
number of k-regions in an arrangement A (H), ρ(m, k).
   For m ≤ k the first part of the proof of Proposition 1 implies that
                                           X m µ ¶     X k µ ¶
                                      m         m           m
                          ρ(m, k) = 2 =              =           .
                                            t=0
                                                t       t=0
                                                             t
Hence, we only need to prove the case m > k. The proof is by induction on the number of
dimensions of the ideological space, k. The assertion is trivial in one dimension, where m
points–that is, 0-dimensional hyperplanes–partition R into at most m + 1 intervals–that
is, 1-regions (where the “at most” qualifier follows from the fact that although the positions
of all candidates are distinct, the mid-points between any pairs of candidates, one pair in
each election, may coincide). Thus, assume that the assertion holds for all dimensions less
than k.
   Any k hyperplanes intersect in at most one point in Rk (and generically in exactly one
                                  ¡ ¢
point). Hence, A (H) contains d ≤ mk
                                      vertices. Consider a new hyperplane
                                        ©               ª
                                 h (s) = y ∈ Rk : y1 = s

                                             19
that sweeps through A (H) as the parameter s varies from −∞ to +∞. Without loss of
generality assume that no hyperplane in H is vertical and that no two vertices in A (H)
share the same y1 -coordinate. Let s1 < s2 < · · · < sd be the y1 -coordinates of the d vertices
in A (H). We say that vertex i, i = 1, ..., d, lies behind h (s) if si < s, and that a k-region
lies behind h (s) if the y1 -coordinates of all the points in the region are less than s.
   Let As (H) denote the intersection of A (H) with h (s). Hence, As (H) is an arrangement
of m hyperplanes in Rk−1 , which by induction hypothesis contains at most ρ(m, k − 1)
(k − 1)-regions, where
                                                  k−1 µ ¶
                                                  X    m
                                    ρ(m, k − 1) =        .
                                                  t=0
                                                       t
Furthermore, each (k − 1)-region in As (H) is contained in a unique k-region of A (H).
   To complete the proof we count the number of k-regions in A (H) that either lie behind
or intersect the hyperplane h (s) as it sweeps through A (H) (that is, as s varies from −∞
to +∞). Clearly, when s = −∞, no k-region lies behind h (s), when s1 < s < s2 one
k-region lies behind h (s), and as h (s) passes each other vertex in A (H), one more k-region
lies behind h (s). During the entire sweep, h (s) passes d vertices, which implies that at most
¡m¢
  k
      k-regions lie behind h (s), and for s > sd the remaining k-regions in A (H) intersect
h (s). It follows that
                                   µ ¶ Xk−1 µ ¶   Xk µ ¶
                                    m        m        m
                         ρ(m, k) =    +         =       . ¥
                                    k   t=0
                                             t    t=0
                                                      t
Proof of Proposition 3: The proof follows directly from the observation that for a generic
election e, the set Y je for each candidate je ∈ J e is a Voronoi polyhedron, which is always
non empty. Hence, an election partitions Y into qe convex regions, where each region is the
sincere support of the vote for a diﬀerent candidate in the election. ¥
Proof of Proposition 4: Since qe ≥ 2 for all e = 1, ..., m, consider an arbitrary pair of
candidates in each election. Given this subset of 2m candidates, Proposition 1 implies that
if m > k, there must exist at least one combination of m candidates, one for each election,
such that the voting profile corresponding to that combination of candidates is not consistent
with sincere voting. This establishes the result. ¥
Proof of Proposition 5: For the case where k = 1, the derivation of τ 1 (m, q1 , ..., qm ) is
straightforward and follows directly from the observation that each election e = 1, ..., m,

                                               20
with qe ∈ {2, ..., q} candidates implies (qe − 1) points that partition the line into qe regions.
Hence, starting from the case of no elections, where the number of regions in R is 1, adding
each election e = 1, ..., m one at the time increases the number of regions by at most (qe − 1).
   Now consider the case where k = 2. Then each election e ∈ {1, ..., m} defines a Voronoi
diagram in the plane with qe regions. Note that, given any collection of Voronoi diagrams
that partitions the plane into Q regions, if we superimpose an additional diagram with qj
regions, the total number of regions becomes Q + (qj − 1) + n, where n is the number of
intersection points of the edges of the additional Voronoi diagram with the edges of the other
diagrams.
   Let the union of the edges of the Voronoi diagram defined by election e be denoted by Ue ,
e = 1, ..., m. Then for each pair of elections, e, f ∈ {1, ..., m}, e 6= f , the cardinality n of the
intersection of Ue and Uf is at most (qe − 1)(qf − 1). To see that this is the case, note that
the number of regions in the superimposition of the two Voronoi diagrams is at most qe qf .
But, as noted above, it is also equal to qe + (qf − 1) + n. It follows that n ≤ (qe − 1)(qf − 1).
   Starting with the Voronoi diagram defined by election e = 1, superimposing the remaining
m − 1 Voronoi diagrams defined by elections 2, ..., m one at the time, we obtain a number of
regions rm that is at most

              q1 + (q2 − 1) + (q2 − 1) (q1 − 1) + (q3 − 1) + (q3 − 1) (q1 − 1 + q2 − 1)

              + · · · + (qm − 1) + (qm − 1) (q1 − 1 + · · · + qm−1 − 1)

or, equivalently,                    "       Ã                        !#
                               X
                               m                       X
                                                       m
                          1+         (qe − 1) 1 +              (qf − 1)    .¥
                               e=1                    f =e+1




                                                 21
                                      References

 [1] Alesina, Alberto, and Howard Rosenthal (1996): “A Theory of Divided Government,”
    Econometrica, 64, 1331-1341.

 [2] Alvarez, Michael, and Matthews M. Schousen (1993): “Policy Moderation or Conflicting
    Expectations? Testing the Intentional Model of Split-Ticket Voting,” American Politics
    Quarterly, 21, 410-38.

 [3] Anderson, Barbara A., and Brian D. Silver (1986): “Measurement and Mismeasurement
    of the Validity of the Self-Reported Vote,” American Journal of Political Science, 30,
    771-785.

 [4] Besley, Timothy, and Stephen Coate (1997): “An Economic Model of Representative
    Democracy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 85-114.

 [5] Buck, R. C. (1943): “Partition of Space,” American Mathematical Monthly, 50, 541-544.

 [6] Burden Barry C., and David C. Kimball (1998): “A New Approach to the Study of
    Ticket Splitting.” American Political Science Review, 92, 533-544.

 [7] Chari, V. V., Larry E. Jones, and Ramon Marimon (1997). “The Economics of Split-
    Ticket Voting in Representative Democracies,” American Economic Review, 87, 957-976.

 [8] Chiappori, Pierre-Andre, and Olivier Donni (2005): “Learning from a Piece of Pie: The
    Empirical Content of Nash Bargaining,” Working Paper, Department of Economics,
    Columbia University.

 [9] Clinton, Joshua, Simon Jackman, and Douglas Rivers (2004): “The Statistical Analysis
    of Roll Call Data: A Unified Approach,” American Political Science Review, 98, 355-370.

[10] Coate, Steven, and Michael Conlin (2004): “A Group Rule-Utilitarian Approach to
    Voter Turnout: Theory and Evidence,” American Economic Review, 94, 1476—1504.

[11] Degan, Arianna, and Antonio Merlo (2006): “A Structural Model of Turnout and Vot-
    ing in Multiple Elections,” Working Paper, Department of Economics, University of
    Pennsylvania.

                                           22
[12] Dhillon, Amrita, and Susana Peralta (2002): “Economic Theories of Voter Turnout,”
    Economic Journal, 112, F332-F352.

[13] Edelsbrunner, Herbert (1987):     Algorithms in Combinatorial Geometry, Berlin:
    Springer-Verlag.

[14] Gaines, Richard, and Michael Segal (1988): Dukakis: The Man Who Would Be Presi-
    dent, Boston: Avon.

[15] Heckman, James J., and James M. Jr. Snyder (1997): “ Linear Probability Models of
    the Demand for Attributes with an Empirical Application to Estimating the Preferences
    of Legislators,” Rand Journal of Economics, 28, 142-189.

[16] Hix, Simon, Abdul Noury and Gerard Roland (2006): “Dimensions of Politics in the
    European Parliament.” American Journal of Political Science, forthcoming.

[17] Mebane, Walter (2000): “Coordination, Moderation, and Institutional Balancing in
    American Presidential and House Elections,” American Political Science Review, 94,
    37-57.

[18] Merlo, Antonio (2006): “Whither Political Economy? Theories, Facts and Issues,” in
    Richard Blundell, Whitney Newey and Torsten Persson (eds.), Advances in Economics
    and Econometrics, Theory and Applications: Ninth World Congress of the Econometric
    Society, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming.

[19] Okabe, Atsuyuki, Barry Boots, Kokichi Sugihara and Sung Nok Chiu (2000): Spatial
    Tessellations: Concepts and Applications of Voronoi Diagrams, 2nd Edition, Chichester:
    John Wiley & Sons.

[20] Orlik, Peter, and Hiroaki Terao (1992): Arrangements of Hyperplanes, Berlin: Springer-
    Verlag.

[21] Osborne, Martin J., and Al Slivinski (1996): “A Model of Political Competition with
    Citizen-Candidates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 65-96.



                                            23
[22] Poole, Keith T. (1998): “ Recovering the Basic Space from a Set of Issue Scales,” Amer-
    ican Journal of Political Science, 42, 954-993.

[23] Poole, Keith T., and Howard Rosenthal (1997): Congress: A Political Economic History
    of Roll Call Voting, New York: Oxford University Press.

[24] Poole, Keith T., and Howard Rosenthal (2001): “ D-Nominate after 10-years: An Up-
    date to Congress: A Political Economic History of Roll Call Voting,” Legislative Studies
    Quarterly, 26, 5-29.

[25] Popper, Karl (1935): The Logic of Scientific Discovery, 2002 reprint, London: Rout-
    ledge.

[26] Wright, Gerald C. (1993): “ Errors in Measuring Vote Choice in the National Election
    Studies 1952-88,” American Journal of Political Science, 37, 291-316.




                                            24
         H1                                                                      H2
                          ●y
                               b1           Vote for
                                            b1, a2 and a3      ●y
                                                                    a3

                                                                         Vote for
                                                                         b1, b2 and a3
     ●   y a1                          a2
                                  ●y
                                                                                 H3
          Vote for
          a1, a2 and a3
                                  Vote for                                 b3
                                  b1, a2 and b3                      ●y


                  Vote for                                               b2
                                               Vote for         ●y
                  a1, a2 and b3
                                               b1, b2 and b3


                              Vote for
                              a1, b2 and b3




FIGURE 1: Three 2-candidate elections in a two-dimensional ideological space
                                  Yb
                                     ●   yb
                               Vote for b
            Edge

                                                                c
                   Vertex                               ●y                   Yc

        a      ●y
                    a              Ye                           Vote for c
    Y                                         e
                                         ●y
    Vote for a                 Vote for e



                                                            d
                                                       ●y
     Region
                                     Vote for d

                                                  Yd

FIGURE 2: The Voronoi tessellation corresponding to a 5-candidate election
in a two-dimensional ideological space.
                                          b1         Vote for b1
                                     ●y




                                           Y b1

                  a1
             ●y
                          Y a1

       Vote for a1                                Y c1


                                                          c1
                                                     ●y

                                                  Vote for c1




FIGURE 3: A 3-candidate election in a two-dimensional ideological space
                          Vote for
                          b1 and a2
                                                       Vote for
                                                       b1 and b2
                          Y b1 ∩ Y a2
                                                       Y b1 ∩ Y b2

           Y a1 ∩ Y a 2

            Vote for
            a1 and a2
                                                           Y c1 ∩ Y b2

                                                            Vote for
                                      Y ∩Y
                                        c1        a2
                                                            c1 and b2


                                      Vote for
                                      c1 and a2




FIGURE 4: An example of a 3-candidate election and a 2-candidate election
in a two-dimensional ideological space where the hypothesis that voters vote
sincerely is falsifiable
      Vote for
      b1 and a2

       Y b1 ∩ Y a2

                                           Vote for
                                           b1 and b2


                                           Y b1 ∩ Y b2

                           Vote for
                           a1 and b2
        Y a1 ∩ Y a 2
                             Y a1 ∩ Y b2
         Vote for
         a1 and a2
                                           Y c1 ∩ Y b2

                                            Vote for
                                            c1 and b2
                       Y c1 ∩ Y a2

                       Vote for
                       c1 and a2


FIGURE 5: An example of a 3-candidate election and a 2-candidate election
in a two-dimensional ideological space where the hypothesis that voters vote
sincerely is not falsifiable
                            TABLE 1: Number of observations

                              Number of voters in     Number of voters in
                   Year        presidential and       presidential, House
                                House elections       and Senate elections
                   1972              1221                     515
                   1976               968                     561
                   1980               641                     440
                   1984              1046                     538
                   1988               797                     590
                   1996               885                     490
                   2000               781                     565
                  Overall            6239                    3699




          TABLE 2: Percentage of observations consistent with sincere voting

             Voters in presidential  Voters in presidential and    Voters in presidential,
              and House elections   House, or presidential, House    House and Senate
 Year
            (unidimensional space)     and Senate elections              elections
                                      (unidimensional space)      (two-dimensional space)
 1972                96.5%                     91.4%                        99.2%
 1976                96.2%                     91.1%                        99.6%
 1980                94.9%                     91.5%                        99.5%
 1984                96.5%                     92.4%                        99.8%
 1988                98.4%                     91.8%                        99.7%
 1996                96.2%                     92.1%                      100.0%
 2000                98.1%                     95.6%                        99.8%
Overall              96.7%                     92.2%                        99.7%
