                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   CURRENT ACCOUNT DEFICITS IN RICH COUNTRIES

                                          Olivier Blanchard

                                        Working Paper 12925
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12925


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2007




MIT and NBER. Mundell-Fleming lecture given, at the IMF in November 2006. I thank Ricardo Caballero,
Francesco Giavazzi, Guido Lorenzoni, Andrei Shleifer, Roberto Rigobon, and Jose Tessada for comments
and discussions. I thank Tatiana Didier for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2007 by Olivier Blanchard. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Current Account Deficits in Rich Countries
Olivier Blanchard
NBER Working Paper No. 12925
February 2007
JEL No. E62,F41

                                             ABSTRACT

Current account imbalances have steadily increased in rich countries over the last 20 years. While
the U.S. current account deficit dominates the numbers and the news, other countries, especially within
the Euro area, are also running large deficits. These deficits are different from the Latin American
deficits of the early 1980s, or the Mexican deficit of the early 1990s. They involve rich countries;
they reflect mostly private saving and investment decisions, and fiscal deficits often play a marginal
role; and the deficits are financed mostly through equity, FDI, and own-currency bonds rather than
through bank lending. Yet, there appears a widely shared worry that these deficits are too large, and
government intervention is required. My purpose, in this lecture, is to examine the logic of this argument.
I ask the following question: Assume that deficits reflect private saving and investment decisions.
Assume also that people and firms have rational expectations. Should the government intervene,
and, if so, how? To answer the question, I construct a simple benchmark. In the benchmark, the outcome
is first best and there is no need nor justification for government intervention. I then introduce simple
distortions in either goods, labor, or financial markets, and characterize the equilibrium in each case.
I derive optimal policy and the implications for the current account. I show that optimal policy may
or may not lead to smaller current account deficits. I see the model and the extensions very much as
a first pass. Sharper conclusions require a better understanding of the exact nature and the extent of
distortions, and we do not have it. Such understanding is needed however to improve the quality of
the current debate.

Olivier Blanchard
Department of Economics
E52-357
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
blanchar@mit.edu
Introduction
The last twenty years have been characterized by steadily larger current ac-
count imbalances in rich countries. This is shown in Figure 1, which shows the
evolution of the cross-country standard deviation of ratios of current account
balances to GDP, since 1988, for three sets of countries. The first line gives the
evolution of the standard deviation for the countries which are members of the
OECD today; this however is an unbalanced panel, and new members such as
Mexico or Central European countries are quite different from earlier members.
For this reason, the second line gives the evolution of the standard deviation
for the countries that were already members of the OECD in 1988. The line is
very similar to the first: The increase is not driven by the addition of the new
members. The third line gives the evolution of the standard deviation for the
set of countries which are today in the Euro area. The evolution is again quite
similar.

                     Figure 1. Standard deviation of CA deficits/GDP
              7
              6
           Percent
              4
              3
              2 5




                      1990          1995           2000            2005

                                 All OECD         Balanced OECD
                                 Euro area




Source: OECD database.


Behind these trends are two major stories. The first is an increase in deficits
within the Euro area. Countries such as Portugal and Spain are running deficits
close to 10% of their GDP. The other is the increase in U.S. deficits, which now
stand at around 7% of GDP.


                                                                                3
From the Latin American deficits of the early 1980s to the Mexican deficit of
the mid 1990s, current account deficits have regularly made the news.1 Today’s
current account deficits are however quite different from their predecessors.
The countries in deficit are rich countries. The deficits are not primarily driven
by fiscal deficits, but rather by private saving and investment decisions. The
deficits are typically financed through equity flows, FDI flows, and own-currency
government bonds, rather than through bank lending.

Thus, many of the concerns associated with, say, the Latin American deficits of
the 1980s, seem much less relevant here. Yet, policy makers and many econo-
mists worry that the deficits are too large. To caricature, there are roughly two
views:

The first is known as the “Lawson doctrine”, named after Nigel Lawson, the
Chancellor of the Exchequer who articulated it in the 1980s. This “doctrine” is
basically a restatement of the first welfare theorem: To the extent that current
account deficits reflect private saving and investment decisions, that there are
no distortions, and that expectations are rational, then there are no reasons for
the government to intervene.

The second—and more prevalent view—could be called the “prudential” or the
“IMF” view. It is that, even if deficits reflected private saving and investment
decisions, distortions are present and lead to deficits that are too large. Govern-
ment intervention to reduce these deficits is desirable. This view is reflected in
the frequent use of such terms as “global imbalances” and “fragility” to char-
acterize current evolutions. What exact distortions, and whether these indeed
justify policies aimed at reducing deficits, has not however been worked out.

The purpose of my lecture is to explore this issue. Moving away from particulars,
I take up a narrow question, namely: Assume that a current account deficit
reflects private saving and investment decisions. Assume rational expectations.
Is there any reason for the government to intervene, and what is the optimal
form of that intervention?

It is clear that the answer depends on the existence and the specific form of dis-
tortions present in the economy. Thus, I start from a benchmark in which such
distortions are absent, the equilibrium is the first-best outcome, and there is
no role for government intervention. I then introduce various distortions, which

1.   For a review of both facts and discussions, see Edwards (2002).


                                                                                 4
are often thought to be important in this context. In each case, I characterize
the effect of the distortion on the equilibrium, and discuss the role of policy.
Clearly the role of policy is to increase welfare, not reduce the deficit per se. As
we shall see, optimal policy may or may not imply a reduction in the deficit.

I see the model and its extensions very much as a first pass. Sharper conclusions
require a better understanding of the exact nature and the extent of distortions,
and we do not have it. Such understanding is needed however to improve the
quality of the current debate.

The lecture is organized as follows.

Section 1 looks at current account deficits within the Euro area, with a par-
ticular focus on Portugal, which is, in many ways, a poster child for the issues
raised in this lecture. Section 2 briefly reviews the evidence on the U.S. current
account deficit, and on “global imbalances”.

Section 3 develops the benchmark. My focus being on distortions, I develop the
simplest benchmark needed for the purposes, namely a two-period economy,
with tradables, non-tradables and leisure, log-log preferences and Cobb-Douglas
production. I focus on the effects of a shift in preferences, namely a decrease
in the discount factor. As is well understood, two mechanisms are at work:
intertemporal reallocation of consumption (and leisure) across periods, and in-
tratemporal reallocation of production between tradables and non-tradables.
Distortions may affect either or both mechanisms, and by implication, affect
current account deficits. Sections 4 to 6 look at the implications of different
distortions.

The first-best equilibrium is associated with increases in the relative price of
non-tradables and in the wage in the first period, and corresponding decreases
in the second period. Section 4 looks at the implications of price or wage rigidi-
ties, and characterizes optimal policy. The optimal policy is to eliminate the
boom/slump in non-tradables generated by price or wage rigidities; this may or
may not imply a decrease in the current account deficit.

The first-best equilibrium is also associated with a decrease in the production
of tradables in the first period, and an increase in the production of tradables
in the second period. One may think of distortions which may make it difficult
to recover and expand production in the second period. Financial constraints
may make it difficult for firms to survive in the first period, or to accumulate

                                                                                  5
the funds needed for production in the second period. Section 5 looks at the
implications of such a distortion, and characterizes optimal policy. The purpose
of optimal policy in this case is clearly to limit the decrease in tradables pro-
duction in the first period. This may or may not imply a decrease the current
account deficit.

One of the current worries of policy makers, even in the United States, is the
possibility of a “sudden stop”, a sharp increase in the rate of return required
by foreign investors. By itself and absent domestic distortions, the possibility of
a sudden stop does not change the first-best nature of the equilibrium: Private
agents will take this possibility into account when making plans. The question
is whether sudden stops can interact with distortions in a way that justifies
government intervention. Many potential mechanisms have been identified, but
most seem largely irrelevant in rich countries. Section 6 discusses these issues
by extending the benchmark to a three-period model. This allows us to look at
the effects of a positive probability of a sudden stop in the second period on
the equilibrium, and the potential role of policy in that context.

There is a long leap from these simple exercises to actual deficits. Section 7
nevertheless takes the leap, and draws tentative policy implications, both for
countries within the Euro, and for “global imbalances”.



1        Current account deficits within the Euro area
Today, two member countries of the Euro area, Spain and Portugal, have current
account deficits close to 10% of GDP. In the context of this paper, the experience
of Portugal is particularly interesting, so let me start there.2

The basic macroeconomic evolutions are shown in Figure 2, which gives the
evolution of the unemployment rate, and of the ratio of the current account
deficit to GDP in Portugal, since 1995. The figure points to two very different
periods:

The first is an economic boom, from 1995 to 2000. There is general agreement
that the sources of the boom were twofold, both associated with the prospect
of joining the Euro. The first was a steady decrease in real interest rates, due
in large part to the disappearance of the currency premium. The second was

2.   I have looked at it in more detail in Blanchard (2006a).


                                                                                 6
the expectation that joining the Euro would accelerate convergence, and lead to
higher productivity growth. Both had the effect of increasing private spending,
leading both to higher output growth and to a steady increase in the current
account deficit. By 2000, the unemployment rate was below 4%, and the current
account deficit slightly above 10% of GDP.

                       Figure 2. Unemployment rate and current account deficit
                                                            Portugal, 1995−2007
                    8




                                                                                                         10
                                                                                                         Current account deficit to GDP
        Unemployment rate (percent)




                                                                                                                                    8
                              7




                                                                                                                          6
                   6




                                                                                                                   4
           5




                                                                                                           2
                    4




                                                                                                         0
                                      1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

                                                  Unemployment rate           Current account deficit




Note, as this goes to the theme of the lecture, that expectations may not have
been rational, but were surely not crazy. Note also that the boom was driven
by private spending, not public spending. From 1995 to 2000, the ratio of
the budget deficit to GDP decreased from 5% to 3%; the OECD measure of
the cyclically-adjusted deficit remained roughly constant. Note finally that the
boom was associated with steady real appreciation: From 1995 to 2000, unit
labor costs increased by 12% relative to the Euro area average.

Expectations of faster convergence may have been reasonable. But they turned
out not to be borne out by the facts: Productivity growth has remained very
low, indeed lower than it was in the 1990s. Starting in 2001, private spend-
ing growth sharply decreased, leading to low growth and a steady increase in
unemployment. Attempts by the government to sustain growth have led to an
increase in fiscal deficits, which are now around 5% of GDP. The unemployment
rate is back around 8%.

Despite the decrease in spending and the domestic slump, the current account

                                                                                                                                          7
deficit remains close to 10%. The main reason is the continuing appreciation of
Portuguese goods. Looking forward, return to higher growth and lower deficits
requires a real depreciation. Given that Portugal is a member of the Euro, any
such real depreciation must be achieved through lower nominal wage growth
relative to productivity growth—at least vis-à-vis its Euro partners. The prob-
lem Portugal faces here is shown in Figure 3, which gives the rate of growth
of wages (more precisely, compensation per employee in the business sector,
in euros) and the rate of growth of labor productivity (more precisely, labor
productivity per employee in the business sector) since 1996. Figure 3a gives
the absolute numbers for Portugal; Figure 3b gives the numbers for Portugal as
deviations from the corresponding numbers for the Euro area. Figure 3a shows
that, as one might expect, high unemployment has led to a decrease in nominal
wage growth; but this has come with a parallel decrease in labor productivity,
so the difference between the two has remained roughly constant. Figure 3b
shows that, indeed, Portuguese relative wage growth has continued to exceed
relative productivity growth. In other words, Portugal has continued to lose
competitiveness vis-à-vis its competitors in the Euro area. The relative depre-
ciation required to achieve both higher growth and a smaller deficit has not yet
materialized.


                         Figure 3. Wage and labor productivity growth
                                               Portugal 1996−2006
                                a. Absolute                                          b. Relative to Euro area
                                                                         8
           8




                                                                         6
           6




                                                                         4
        Percent




                                                               Percent
           4




                                                                         2
           2




                                                                         0
           0




                                                                         −2




                  1996   1998   2000   2002    2004     2006                  1996   1998   2000   2002    2004     2006

                            Wage              Productivity                              Wage              Productivity




Source: OECD database.


                                                                                                                           8
Should Portuguese macroeconomic policy have been different in the second half
of the 1990s? Given what we now know, namely that expectations were too
optimistic, the answer is obviously yes. The relevant question is however what
should have been done given what was known then? Should government poli-
cies have reduced the boom, limited the appreciation, and limited the current
account deficit?

The question of what should have been done during the boom in Portugal is
now academic. But the question is very relevant for Spain today. Since the
mid-1990s, steady growth has led to a large decrease in the unemployment rate,
down from 20% to under 9% today—a decrease often referred to as the “Spanish
miracle.” This growth has been sustained by growth in private spending rather
than public spending: The fiscal position has turned from a large deficit in the
mid 1990s to a surplus of 1% of GDP today.

At the same time, growth has come with a steady real appreciation. Since 1995,
unit labor costs have increased by 21% relative to the Euro area. The current
account deficit has increased from rough balance in the mid 1990s to 9% of GDP
today. This raises a set of obvious questions. Will Spain go through the same
adjustment process as Portugal? Should government policies have been different
over the last decade? Should they have limited output growth, appreciation, and
the current account deficit? What should the Spanish government do today?



2       The U.S. current account deficit
The U.S. current account deficit has dominated both the news and much of the
research in international macroeconomics in the recent past.3 My purpose here
is only to point to the aspects directly relevant to the theme of the lecture, the
role of private saving and investment versus fiscal policy, the way the deficit
has been financed, and the rationality of expectations underlying decisions and
investors’s choices:

The U.S. deficit is very large, and reflected in current account surpluses vis-
à-vis the United States in most regions of the world. The composition of the

3. A good survey of theories and facts is provided by Cline (2005). An insightful analysis of
the relative roles of saving, investment, and porfolio flows, in the United States and creditor
countries is given by Brender and Pisani (2007).


                                                                                             9
corresponding current account surpluses for the third quarter of 2006 is given
in Table 1. Roughly half is accounted by Asia, primarily China and Japan.
Roughly one fourth is accounted for by Europe. Of the rest, an increasing but
still small proportion is accounted for by the Middle East, reflecting the increase
in oil prices.


Table 1. The U.S. current account deficit and its counterparts. 2006-
3, in billions of dollars, at annual rates.


                                     Total 902
                      of which
                   Europe            175    Asia           480
                   Canada             51           China            288
                   Latin America     120           Japan            108
                   Middle East        56

Source: BEA International Transactions. Table 11, January 2007


The U.S. deficit and the corresponding foreign surpluses have many causes.
I believe that there is now a broad consensus about the following proximate
causes. First, low U.S. saving, reflecting primarily low private saving, but also
budget deficits. Second, high foreign saving, particularly from Asia—what Ben
Bernanke (2005) has referred to as the “saving glut.” Third, low foreign invest-
ment, in both Europe and Asia. Fourth, a strong preference by investors for
U.S. over foreign assets. All four factors are needed to explain the combination
of current account balances, the strong dollar, low world real interest rates, and
apparently low expected returns on U.S. assets.4 The important point for my
purposes is that fiscal policies, whether in the United States or abroad, while
not irrelevant, are clearly not the main cause of the U.S. current account deficit.
Private saving and investment decisions—sometimes mediated through policy,
such as the combination of capital controls on capital outflows and reserve ac-
cumulation in China—around the world are.


Bank lending, which was central to the Latin American deficits, is nearly ir-
relevant in the case of the U.S. deficit. The composition of foreign holdings of

4. For more discussion, see in particular Bernanke (2005), Blanchard, Giavazzi, and Sa
(2005), and Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2006).


                                                                                   10
financial assets, for both stocks and flows, is given in Table 2. The composition
of flows has changed over time, but the picture given by the stock numbers is
very clear: In the third quarter of 2006, gross foreign holdings of U.S. assets
were roughly equal to 11 trillion dollars. Of those, roughly 40% took the form
of holdings of corporate equities and direct investment—a very different picture
from the financing of Latin American deficits.


Table 2. Composition of foreign holdings of U.S. assets (billions of
dollars). 2006


                                              Flows        Stocks
                 Total                        1,406        11,946
                   T-bills                      101         2,069
                       Official holdings        111         1,371
                       Private holdings          -10          698
                   Corporate equities           112         2,601
                   Corporate bonds              377         2,596
                   Direct investment            185          2018

Source: Flow of Funds, Federal Reserve Board. Tables F.107, and L.107. Stocks:
“Total U.S. financial assets held by the rest of the world”, as of 2006:3. Flows:
“Net acquisition of financial assets by the rest of the world”, over the first three
quarters of 2006.


There has been much discussion as to whether investors behind these capital
flows have rational expectations. There is no question that, sooner or later,
current account deficits will have to decrease, and this will most likely require
a substantial real depreciation of U.S. goods. For this reason, and given the low
U.S. interest rates, a number of economists have argued that foreign investors
were too optimistic about expected returns on U.S. assets. If investors have
a strong preference for U.S. assets however, and if they anticipate the rate
of depreciation to be positive but small, then the evidence against rational
expectations is much weaker. Indeed, over the past few years, financial investors
rather than these economists appear to have been right about the strength of
the dollar.

In short: Current “global imbalances” appear to come primarily from shifts
in private saving and investment. In the absence of strong evidence to the

                                                                                 11
contrary, the assumption that expectations are rational does not appear un-
reasonable. This takes us back to the question raised in this lecture. Beyond
reducing the U.S. budget deficit—a reduction which indeed appears justified on
its own, but, by most estimates, would only make a dent in the current account
deficit—should the U.S. (and other) governments aim at reducing the remaining
imbalances further? Why, and if so, how?




3       A benchmark
For this and the next three sections, I shall focus on the following narrow
question: Assume current account deficits are the result of private saving and
investment decisions. Assume expectations are rational. Should the government
intervene, and if so how? To do so, I start with the following benchmark:


The model


The economy goes on—and people live for—two periods. In each period, people
derive utility from the consumption of two goods, tradables and non tradables,
and from leisure.5

Utility is given by:
                                    max V ≡ U + β U 0

where
                                  U ≡ log(C) + φ log(L)

and
                                       1           1
                            log(C) ≡     log(CT ) + log(CN )
                                       2           2
where primes denote second period variables, CT and CN denote the consump-
tion of tradables and non-tradables respectively, and L denotes leisure. β is the
discount factor.

As is well known, the log-log assumptions, and the implication of equal in-
tratemporal and intertemporal elasticities of substitution eliminate a number

5. I introduce a labor-leisure choice because, when, later, I introduce distortions which imply
that employment is potentially off the labor supply, I want to be able to assess the welfare
cost of such a deviation and derive the optimal policy.


                                                                                            12
of interesting issues, in particular with respect to the path of tradables con-
sumption.6 ; but they are fine for the points I want to make in this lecture.

Taking tradables as the numeraire, and assuming for simplicity that the world
interest rate, the interest rate in terms of tradables, is equal to zero, the budget
constraint of consumer-workers is given by:

      qCN + CT + q 0 CN
                      0
                        + CT0 = A ≡ w(NT + NN ) + w0 (NT0 + NN
                                                             0
                                                               ) + π + π0

with
                   NT + NN = L̄ − L,              NT0 + NN
                                                         0
                                                           = L̄ − L0

where A is total wealth, NT and NN denote employment in the tradables and
non-tradables sector respectively, q and w denote the relative price of non-
tradables and the wage in terms in tradables respectively. π is profit. For the
moment, there is no government; I shall introduce it later.

On the production side, competitive firms in the tradables and non-tradables
sectors maximize profit subject to the following production functions:

                              YT = NTa ,                a
                                                  YN = NN

with similar equations holding for the second period. Capital is implicitly as-
sumed to be fixed, so there is no investment decision in the model. I shall focus
on current account deficits coming from variations in saving.

The equilibrium

Equilibrium requires that, in each period, the non-tradables and the labor mar-
ket clear. This gives us four equations:

                                       1 1 1      w a/(a−1)
                      CN = YN ⇒                A=( )
                                       2 1+β q    aq

                      0               1 β     1        w0 a/(a−1)
                     CN = YN0 ⇒                  A = (      )
                                      2 1 + β q0       aq 0
and

                           w 1/(a−1)   w 1/(a−1)         1  φ
       NT + NN = L̄ − L ⇒ ( )        +( )        = L̄ −       A
                           a           aq               1+β w

6.   See for example Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996), 4-4, equation (34), and Dornbusch (1983).

                                                                                        13
                                w0 1/(a−1)    w0 1/(a−1)          β   φ
     NT0 + NN
            0
              = L̄ − L0 ⇒ (       )        + ( 0)        = L̄ −          A
                                a             aq                1 + β w0
where
                          A = YT + YT0 + qYN + q 0 YN0

The four equilibrium conditions are straightforward: Wealth is equal to the
present discounted value of output in terms of tradables. Spending on tradables,
on non-tradables, and on leisure are all proportional to wealth. The supply
of non-tradables—equivalently the demand for labor from the non-tradables
sector—is a decreasing function of the wage in terms of non-tradables; the
demand for labor from the tradables sector is a decreasing function of the real
wage in terms of tradables.

If β = 1, (so the discount rate is equal to the world interest rate, namely zero),
then the equilibrium is the same in both periods and the current account is
balanced. It will be notationally convenient to assume that, in this equilibrium,
all quantities are equal to one, i.e. that Ci = Yi = Ni = L = Ci0 = Yi0 =
Ni0 = L0 = 1, for i = T, N . This in turn requires that L̄ = 3 and φ = a/2. For
our purposes, these restrictions are innocuous. Under this normalization also,
q = q 0 = 1, and w = w0 = a. It is also convenient to introduce w̃ ≡ w/a, so in
the initial equilibrium w̃ = w̃0 = 1.


Increased impatience and current account deficits

I shall consider throughout the effects of an increase in impatience, dβ < 0,
starting from β = 1. Exactly the same analytical results would obtain—with a
minor difference which I shall point out below—if I looked instead at a decrease
in the rate of interest at which the country can borrow, dr < 0, starting from r =
0—an experiment which would capture for example part of what happened in
Portugal in the 1990s. Other shocks, for example the anticipation of increases in
productivity in either the production of tradables or non-tradables next period,
would lead to different analytical results, but the same general conclusions about
distortions, and the role for policy.

The decrease in β leads to two reallocations, intertemporal, and intratemporal:

•       Being more impatient, people want to spend more and work less in the
        first period.


                                                                               14
•       Consumption of non-tradables and tradables increase. The consumption
        of tradables increases more than the consumption of non-tradables. Tak-
        ing a linear approximation and solving the equations above gives:

                             1 a                               1
                    dCN =             (−dβ) > 0;          dCT = (−dβ) > 0
                             2 3 − 2a                          2
•       Employment decreases (leisure increases). Employment in non-tradables
        increases, but employment in tradables decreases by more:

                                           1    1
                                 dN = −             (−dβ) < 0
                                           2 3 − 2a
                           1 1                                     1
                dNN =               (−dβ) > 0;         dNT =           (−dβ) < 0
                           2 3 − 2a                             3 − 2a
•       The price of non-tradables, q, increases. So does the tradables product
        wage, w̃. The non-tradables product wage, w̃/q decreases:

                            3 1−a                   1−a
                    dq =             (−dβ) > dw̃ =        (−dβ) > 0
                            2 3 − 2a               3 − 2a
                                      √
        The real consumption wage, w̃/ q increases.
•       Increased demand for, and decreased supply of tradables lead to a current
        account deficit:

                                                        1    3
                     d (current account deficit) =               (−dβ) > 0
                                                        2 3 − 2a

•       All changes hold with opposite signs in the second period.
•       As a, the degree of returns to labor, increases, the production frontier
        becomes less concave, and it becomes easier to shift production between
        tradables and non-tradables. Thus, the price of non-tradables and the
        wage increase by less. The production of non-tradables increases by more,
        the production of tradables decreases by more, leading to a larger current
        account deficit.
Thus, the equilibrium response exhibits an appreciation followed by a deprecia-
tion, and, correspondingly, a decrease in the production of tradables followed by
an increase later on. The current account deficit in the first period, due to both
higher consumption and lower production of tradables, is offset by a current
account surplus in the second period.7

7. Under the alternative assumption of a decrease in the interest rate, dr < 0, all the equa-
tions above would hold, with dr replacing dβ. The only difference is that, while the decrease

                                                                                          15
Clearly, under the assumptions made so far, the outcome is the first-best out-
come, and there is no need nor justification for government intervention. The
questions are then: What may be the relevant distortions in this context? How
do they affect the equilibrium? And what is the optimal policy? In the next
three sections, I explore three general directions: The potential role of wage
or price rigidities in distorting the adjustment; the potential role of financial
constraints in distorting adjustment in the tradables sector; the implications, if
any, of the possibility of sudden stops, in which the country is either cut from
world financial markets, or has to pay a much higher rate of return.



4      Wage and price rigidities, and current account deficits
During the 1990s, the increase in spending in Portugal came not only with
a current account deficit, but also an output boom and a large increase in
employment. This is in clear contrast to the outcome in our benchmark, where
the current account deficit comes with a decrease in employment.8

The result in the benchmark is more general than it may first appear: The same
would be true of an increase in expected productivity, leading to an increase
in wealth, and thus to an increase in both consumption and leisure in the first
period. This points to the potential role of wage and price rigidities in distorting
the adjustment: The price of non-tradables and the real wage may not have
increased enough to achieve the desired intratemporal reallocation between the
two sectors.

The slump since 2000 points to another type of potential wage and price rigidity.
In the first best, shifting from a current account deficit in the first period to a
current account surplus in the second requires a decrease in the relative price of
non-tradables and in the real wage. Such a real depreciation has proven difficult
to achieve in Portugal. This points to something like downward wage rigidity.

There are many ways of formalizing wage and price distortions, and, in the end,
the details matter. In this section, I take a first pass by simply assuming that
both q and w̃ do not adjust at all, and thus remain equal to one throughout.

in β has no effect on wealth A, the decrease in r increases wealth by dA = −2dr.
8. One of the many problems in mapping any model to the data: The initial unemployment
rate in Portugal (7% in 1995) was probably higher than the natural rate at the time. Thus,
some of the employment increase in the 1990s was probably justified.


                                                                                       16
I assume that employment is determined by labor demand. That is, I assume
that, in the tradables sector, demand is determined by profit maximization, and
that, in the non-tradables sector, labor demand is determined by the demand
for non-tradables.9 I leave the discussion of downward wage rigidity to later; it
turns out that its effects are quite different from those in this section, and closely
related to the effects of financial constraints, discussed in the next section.


The equilibrium


In addition to the assumptions that q = q 0 = 1 and w̃ = w̃0 = 1, the equilibrium
is given by the condition that the non-tradables market clears each period:

                                                             1
                       YN = CN          ⇒        YN =             A
                                                         2(1 + β)

                                                            β
                       YN0 = CN
                              0
                                        ⇒        YN0 =            A
                                                         2(1 + β)
where
                                   A = 2 + YN + YN0

Output of non-tradables is given by the demand for non-tradables, which is
proportional to wealth. Wealth is in turn equal to the sum of outputs in the
tradables and non-tradables sectors over the two periods. Given w̃ = w̃0 = 1,
profit maximization in the tradables sector implies constant production YT =
YT0 = 1.

Together, these two equations determine output of non-tradables in both pe-
riods, and thus total output, and wealth. Wealth in turn determines the con-
sumption of tradables in both periods, and by implication the current account
balance.


Increased impatience

Consider again an increase in impatience, a decrease in β. Given wage and price

9. The usual rationalization would be to assume monopolistic competitive price-setting firms
in the non-tradable sector, willing to satisfy demand so long as price exceeds marginal cost.
An explicit formalization would then have an additional distortion, namely the presence of
the monopolistic markup. This distortion, so long as the markup is constant, is irrelevant for
my purposes.


                                                                                           17
rigidities, only one mechanism is now at work, namely intertemporal realloca-
tion:
•       People again want to spend more and work less in the current period.
•       Consumption of non-tradables and tradables increase, and now increase
        by the same amount. Denote first-best changes by a star. Then:

                     1           ∗                                 1
          dCN =        (−dβ) > dCN > 0;                dCT =         (−dβ) = dCT∗ > 0
                     2                                             2

        The increase in the consumption of tradables is the same as in the first
        best. But, because the price of non-tradables does not increase, the in-
        crease in the consumption on non-tradables is higher than in the first
        best.
•       Employment in non-tradables increases. Employment in tradables re-
        mains unchanged. So, in contrast to the first best, employment increases:

                                1           ∗
                   dNN =          (−dβ) > dNN > 0;               dNT = 0 > dNT∗
                               2a
                                                 1
                                    dN = −         (−dβ) > 0
                                                2a
•       Increased demand for tradables, together with an unchanged supply, lead
        to a current account deficit:

                                                               1
                         d (current account deficit) =           (−dβ) > 0
                                                               2

        Because the increase in demand for tradables is the same as in the first
        best, and supply does not decrease whereas it does in the first best, the
        current account deficit is actually smaller than in the first best.10
•       All changes hold with opposite signs in the second period.
Thus, the economy goes through a boom cum current account deficit in the
first period, a slump cum current account surplus in the second period. Both
the boom and slump are inefficient. Workers would rather work less than they
do in the first period, and more than they do in the second period.


A role for policy?

10. This result is not robust to more general preferences, and may not hold if the intertemporal
and intratemporal elasticities of substitution are different. But the point that the current
account deficit need not be larger under such rigidities, is general.


                                                                                             18
Can policy improve the outcome and, if so, how? A full answer would require a
full other lecture. Let me briefly talk about monetary and tax policy, and then
deal more formally with the potential role of government spending.

Depending on the exact nature of rigidities, monetary policy can get the alloca-
tion close to or even back to first best. Take for example the case where wages
are flexible and only nominal non-tradable prices are rigid (w̃ is flexible and q
is fixed in terms of domestic currency). Then, the appropriate nominal depreci-
ation can achieve the first-best q, and by implication, replicate the benchmark
allocation—eliminating both the boom and the slump, while allowing for a cur-
rent account deficit and intertemporal reallocation. In the presence of both wage
and price rigidities, monetary policy cannot in general simultaneously replicate
the first-best values of q and w̃. But it can still improve the outcome.11

For the countries within the Euro such as Portugal, monetary policy is not
available however—at least with respect to country-specific shocks. This shifts
the focus towards fiscal policy. Here again, given the nature of the distortions, a
sufficient rich set of taxes, say taxes on non-tradables and on labor, can achieve
first best. Let me however focus on the potential role of government spending.

Let’s extend the benchmark to allow utility to depend on government spending,
according to:
                          U ≡ log(C) + φ log(L) + α log(G)

where
                                     1           1
                           log G ≡     log(GT ) + log(GN )
                                     2           2
Assume also that all government spending is financed through lump sum taxa-
tion. To maintain the simple property that, if β = 1, all steady state productions
are equal to one, φ must now satisfy φ = (1 + α)a/2; I make this assumption
in what follows.

Given the symmetry in treatment between private consumption and government
spending, it is clear that, in the absence of distortions, optimal fiscal policy
would simply be given by:

                 Gi = α Ci , i = T, N ;            G0i = α Ci0 , i = T, N

11. This is well traveled ground in the research on optimal monetary policy in an open econ-
omy. See for example Devereux and Engel (2006).



                                                                                         19
so, that for β = 1,
                                   1                      α
                            C=        ,            G=
                                  1+α                    1+α
I shall call this the “neutral” component of fiscal policy, and focus on deviations
from this neutral component, denoted dgi , i = T, N and dgi0 , i = T, N for the
first and second period respectively.

Now turn to the role of government spending in the case of price and wage
rigidities. Given the symmetry of first-period and second-period effects of the
                                                              0 = −dg
decrease in β, it follows that the optimal policy satisfies dgN      N and
dgT0 = −dgT . Thus, we can focus on the determination of just dgN and dgT .

Going through the characterization of the equilibrium, now in the presence of
the government, gives:

      1                    1 1               1 α
 dYN = (−dβ) + dgN , dCN =      (−dβ), dGN =      (−dβ) + dgN
      2                    21+α              21+α

An increase in government spending on non-tradables increases output of non-
tradables one-for-one. It has no effect on the consumption of non-tradables.
The reason why consumption is unaffected is the absence of a wealth effect:
                                                                       0 ; any
Any increase in dgN is expected to be offset by an equal decrease in dgN
increase in dYN induced by higher dgN is also expected to be offset by an equal
decrease in dYN0 :

                             1 1                1 α
       dYT = 0, dCT =              (−dβ), dGT =       (−dβ) + dgT
                             2 1+α              2 1+α

An increase in government spending on tradables has an effect neither on pro-
duction nor on consumption of tradables. Thus, it affects the current account
deficit one-for-one. The reason why consumption is unaffected is again the ab-
sence of a wealth effect. Any increase in dgT is expected to be offset by an equal
decrease in dgT0 .12

Thus, the right tool to reduce the inefficiency is clearly dgN . A negative dgN
                                                  0 in the second period allows
in the first period, associated with a positive dgN
the government to eliminate the boom and the slump. A negative dgT , followed
by a positive dgT0 would reduce the current account, but have no effect on the
                                                                             0 .
inefficiency. This suggests that the optimal policy is to use only dgN and dgN

12. The extreme form of some of these results depends again on the log-log restrictions. But
the message about the relative effects of dgN and dgT is general.

                                                                                         20
Indeed, under a quadratic approximation to the utility function and a linear
approximation to the equilibrium conditions, the optimal policy is given by:

                                    α(1 + a)
                       dgN = −                  (−dβ) < 0
                                  2(α + a + aα)

This policy leaves the current account deficit unaffected, but reduces the boom
and the slump.

The message from this first extension is that price and wage rigidities may well
distort the allocation. The optimal policy may not however be to reduce the
current account deficit. Indeed, in the simple case worked out here, the current
account deficit is unaffected. One question is whether more asymmetric forms
of rigidity, such as downward wage rigidity, would lead to different conclusions.
The answer is yes, and I shall return to this below.




5      Financial constraints, and current account deficits
Adjustment in the first best implies first a decrease, then an increase (equal to
twice the initial decrease) in tradables output. One worry is that it may indeed
be difficult for the tradables sector to expand after a long period of appreciation
and low production.

One may think of a number of reasons why this might be. Internal costs of
adjustment are not the issue: These will indeed affect the adjustment, and
thus affect in turn first-period decisions and the current account deficit; but,
absent other considerations, the outcome will still be the first-best outcome,
and there is no role for government policy. Other distortions may however be
relevant. Krugman (1987) emphasized for example external learning by doing,
and the fact that a long period of low production may lead to permanently
lower productivity. Others have emphasized financial constraints, the fact that
the tradables sector may not, after a long period of low profits, have the funds
needed to invest and increase production later on.

I explore this idea by making a simple, if highly reduced form, assumption. I
assume that production of tradables in the second period is given by:
                                                    a
                                              w̃0 a−1
                           YT0   = min( YT , ( ) )
                                               a

                                                                                21
Production of tradables is equal to the minimum of the profit maximizing level
of output in the second period, and the level of production of tradables in the
first period. For the shock we shall look at, namely an increase in impatience, the
constraint is binding, and second-period tradables output is thus constrained
to be no larger than first-period output.

Some generality would be obtained by allowing the parameter in front of first
period output to be different from one; but this is inessential. A rough justifica-
tion for this assumption may be the following: Tradables firms can borrow up
to some multiple of first period earnings—which are proportional to output—to
pay the second-period wage bill, which is itself proportional to second-period
output. A more explicit and richer micro-grounding is given by Caballero and
Lorenzoni (2006): During the appreciation period, firms incur losses. Because
of financial constraints, these losses may force them to decrease their capital
stock beyond what would be efficient, putting constraints on the recovery in
the second period.

Another issue is whether firms in the tradables sector internalize this constraint
when taking output decisions in the first period (and so choose a higher level
of production in the first period in order to relax the constraint on production
in the second period). This depends on whether the constraint holds at the
level of the firm or for the tradables sector as a whole. I assume that the
constraint holds for the sector as a whole (that there is, for example, a segmented
financial market where only tradables firms can participate), and so firms do
not internalize it in taking decisions in the first period.


The equilibrium

Equilibrium requires that the tradables market and the labor market each clear
in each period, yielding four equilibrium conditions. Let me introduce the gov-
ernment from the start, so as to prepare for the discussion of policy later on:




                                                                                22
                                   1 1 1                                     a/(a−1)
 CN + GN      =     YN      ⇒      2 1+β q    A + dgN           =    ( w̃q )

                                  1 β   1                                0     a/(a−1)
  0 + G0
 CN    N      =     YN0     ⇒     2 1+β q 0
                                                    0
                                              A + dgN           =    ( w̃q0 )

                                                     a/(a−1)
 NT + NN      =    L̄ − L   ⇒   w̃1/(a−1) + ( w̃q )             =   L̄ −      1  1
                                                                             1+β w̃    A

                                                 0    a/(a−1)                 β
        0
 NT0 + NN     = L̄ − L0 ⇒ w̃1/(a−1) + ( w̃q0 )                  = L̄ −            1
                                                                             1+β w̃0   A
where

        A = (YT + YT0 + q YN + q 0 YN0 ) − (q dgN + q 0 dgN
                                                          0
                                                            + dgT + dgT0 )


Leaving aside the additional terms coming from the presence of fiscal policy,
the only difference between these equations and those of the benchmark are in
the specification of the second-period demand for labor in the tradables sector
in the fourth equation: Assuming the constraint is binding, labor demand in
the second period is equal to labor demand in the first period, and so depends
on the first-period rather than the second-period real wage.
                                                                0 directly affect
The way fiscal policy enters is also straightforward. dgN and dgN
the demand for non-tradables, both directly and through their effect on wealth.
dgT and dgT0 affect spending and labor supply only to the extent that they affect
wealth. This is what is shown in the last equation.


Increased impatience


Consider now the effects of an increase in impatience, dβ < 0, assuming first
that there is no fiscal policy response, so all dg’s are equal to zero. Then:
•       Just as in the benchmark, people want to intertemporally substitute,
        enjoy more consumption and more leisure in the first period. But they
        now also take into account that lower tradables production in the first
        period implies lower tradables production in the second period, and thus
        lower income in the second period. This leads to a decrease in their
        wealth, and thus lower consumption and higher labor supply in both
        periods.
•       Thus, the demand for tradables and non-tradables increases, but, in both
        cases, by less than in the first best:

                                                                                           23
                           a                       0                  a
    dCN +dGN = dYN =         (−dβ) > 0           dCN +dG0N = dYN0 =     (−dβ) > 0
                           6                                          6



                     3 − 2a                                    3 + 2a
    dCT + dGT =             (−dβ) > 0        dCT0 + dG0T = −          (−dβ) < 0
                        6                                         6

•   Both because the increase in non-tradables output in the first period is
    smaller than in the first best, and because the decrease in labor supply
    is smaller than in the first best, the decrease in tradables output in the
    first period is also smaller than in the first best. As the financial market
    constraint is binding, the decrease in tradables output in the second
    period is the same as in the first period.

                      a                              a
               dYT = − (−dβ) < 0             dYT0 = − (−dβ) < 0
                      3                              3
•   Higher demand and lower supply of tradables lead to a current account
    deficit. The current account deficit is however smaller than in the first
    best:

                                                 1
                      d(current account deficit = (−dβ) > 0
                                                 2
•   Because the increase in the demand for non-tradables is smaller than in
    the first best, so are the initial appreciation and wage increase:

                   1−a                              1+a
              dq =     (−dβ) > 0            dq 0 = −     (−dβ) < 0
                    2                                 2
                   1−a                               a+2
             dw̃ =     (−dβ) > 0            dw̃0 = −      (−dβ) < 0
                    3                                  3
•   In contrast to the first distortion, adjustments in the second period are
    not mirror images of those in the first period. Output of tradables goes
    down in both periods, output of non-tradables goes up. The current
    account deficit comes with a slump in the tradables sector.
    The misallocation of labor between the two sectors in the second period
    leads to a decrease in wealth, and to a first-order loss in welfare:

                  4                                 a(1 + α)
            dA = − (−dβ) < 0;             dV = −             (−dβ) < 0
                  3                                     6


                                                                             24
Optimal fiscal policy

Given this outcome, is there a role for fiscal policy? Intuition suggests that
there is: A decrease in GN can decrease the demand and the production of
non-tradables, and thus increase the production of tradables in the first pe-
riod and, by implication, in the second period. Increases in either GT or G0T ,
while they have no direct effect on the production of tradables, decrease wealth
and thus private spending, including spending on non-tradables. This again in-
creases production of tradables in the first period, and by implication, in the
second period. This suggests that optimal policy includes decreases in GN , and
increases in GT and G0T .


Figure 4. Optimal fiscal policy

                   −3         Optimal dgn                         −3
                x 10                                          x 10 Optimal dgn prime
            0                                             0
           −2                                            −2
           −4                                            −4
           −6                                            −6
           −8                                            −8
          −10                                           −10
            0.5         0.6       0.7     0.8     0.9     0.5         0.6   0.7      0.8   0.9
                                   a                                          a
                   −3         Optimal dgt                        −3   Optimal dgt prime
                x 10                                          x 10
           10                                            10

            8                                             8

            6                                             6

            4                                             4

            2                                             2

            0.5         0.6       0.7       0.8   0.9     0.5         0.6    0.7    0.8    0.9
                                   a                                          a



This is indeed the case. Figure 4 gives the optimal values of the dgi ’s (the
deviation from neutral fiscal policy) obtained by maximization of a second-
order approximation to the utility function subject to a linear approximation
of the equilibrium conditions given above. The figure gives values for α = 0.5
and a ranging from 0.5 to 0.9. It shows that, indeed, optimal dgN is negative,
          0 is close to zero, and optimal dg and dg 0 are equal to each other
optimal dgN                                 T      T
and positive.

                                                                                                 25
Figure 5 shows the deviation of the current account deficit from its value absent
fiscal policy. Note that the current account deficit is actually larger under opti-
mal fiscal policy (for example, 0.004 higher if a = 0.9). The reason is that while
the decrease in government spending on nontradables increases the production
of tradables, the optimal policy also requires an increase in government spend-
ing on tradables, which directly increases the current account deficit. I see this
result not as a major implication, but, again, as a warning that the presence of
distortions does not necessarily require policies aimed at reducing the current
account deficit.


Figure 5. Current account deficit, with and without fiscal policy
                                −3   Deviation of current account deficit from no−policy outcome
                             x 10
                        4


                       3.5


                        3


                       2.5


                        2


                       1.5


                        1


                       0.5


                        0
                        0.5          0.55     0.6      0.65     0.7      0.75      0.8     0.85    0.9
                                                                 a




The message from this second extension is that, to the extent that financial
constraints matter in the tradables sector, there is indeed a role for policy to
limit reallocation in the first period. The optimal policy however may or may
not decrease the current account deficit.

How important are the relevant financial market imperfections, and how much
do they limit reallocation?13 One might guess that tradables firms in rich coun-
tries would be among those with the best access to financial markets, and thus
would be least likely to be financially constrained. But, as far as I can tell,
we do not know. Recent work by Calvo, Izquerdio, and Talvi (2006) suggests
that, even in Argentina after the collapse and the disorganization of credit mar-

13. The question has been explored, in a different but related context, by Caballero and
Hammour (2005), who have looked at whether recessions lead to the disappearance of low
productivity versus financially constrained firms.


                                                                                                         26
kets, tradables firms have been able to increase production in response to the
(admittedly very large) peso depreciation.

Let me return briefly to an issue I left aside in the previous section, namely
the implications of downward wage rigidity. Under the assumption that the
wage in terms of tradables can increase but cannot decrease, the equilibrium
looks very much like the equilibrium I have just characterized. In response to
an increase in impatience, downward rigidity prevents the first-best reallocation
of production: The real wage goes up in the first period, but cannot go down
in the second period, leading to lower production of both tradables and non-
tradables in the second period. Anticipations of lower future income, and thus
lower wealth (relative to first best), lead people to want to consume less and
work more in the first period (again, relative to first best). The result is a lower
current account deficit and boom in the first period, and an output slump cum
current account surplus in the second period.

Note that, under financial market constraints, the labor market clears in the sec-
ond period, but the allocation is distorted towards non-tradables; under down-
ward rigidity, the labor market does not clear, and both the production of
tradables and non-tradables are lower. In terms of policy however, the con-
clusions are roughly similar. Optimal policy requires measures which limit the
wage increase in the first period, either by decreasing demand for non-tradables
or the supply of labor.



6      Sudden stops, distortions, and policy
I suspect that, up to this point, I have not dealt with the main worry in the
mind of a number of economists and policy makers, namely “sudden stops.” This
is the worry that a country may find itself suddenly cut from world financial
markets, or more realistically for a country such as the United States, that
foreign investors may ask suddenly for a much higher rate of return.14

That sudden stops can happen is amply demonstrated by history, most recently
by the Asian crisis.15 That they can lead to sharp depreciations, and sometimes

14. This is for example a recurring theme in Nouriel Roubini’s blog commentary on the U.S.
current account deficit.
15. The Asian crisis indeed shows that sudden stops can happen even in the absence of large
current account deficits.


                                                                                        27
to sharp drops in output, is also well documented. What is less clear is what
role they imply for policy vis-à-vis current account deficits.

Put simply, the possibility of sudden stops, i.e. the willingness—or lack of—
foreign investors to lend to the country, are not a distortion per se, but just
a statement about the borrowing opportunities open to the domestic econ-
omy. Under the assumption of rational expectations, borrowers will take this
possibility into account, and be more careful in their borrowing. Absent other
distortions, the outcome will still be the first-best outcome, implying no role
for policy. Put another way, the argument for policy must rely on the interac-
tion of sudden stops and specific distortions—and in the context of this lecture,
distortions relevant for rich countries with well-developed financial markets.

Again, a treatment of the issues would require a full other paper. I shall limit
myself to a simple formalization of the arguments above, using it as a basis for
a more focused discussion.

It is obviously impossible to discuss sudden stops in our two-period model:
Repayment takes place in the second period in any case. Thus, the first step is
to extend the benchmark model to three periods, so:

                             V ≡ U + β 0 U 0 + β 00 U 00

where U is defined over tradables, non-tradables, and leisure in the same way
as before. Assume that initially, β 0 = β 00 = 1 and that the world interest rate is
equal to zero, so the equilibrium in each period is the same as in the benchmark.

We can now introduce the possibility of sudden stops by assuming that, in the
second period, the country is cut from world markets with some probability p.
It is clear that the possibility of sudden stops will affect borrowing decisions.
Take the extreme case where dβ 0 = 0, and dβ 00 < 0, and p = 1. In this case,
people want to shift consumption from the third to the first two periods, but
the world market is closed from the second period on. In this case, people will
not change their spending decisions, and the current account deficit in the first
period is equal to zero.


Increased impatience


Suppose that dβ 0 = dβ 00 < 0, so people want to shift utility from the second and

                                                                                 28
third period to the first. And suppose that, in the second period, the country
is cut from world markets with probability p—and thus functions in autarchy
in the third period, or, with probability (1 − p), can continue to borrow at the
world interest rate, r = 0. We can then solve for optimal consumption and labor
supply, and by implication for the current account deficit:
•      The current account deficit in period 1 is given by:

                                                    1   4
                   d (current account deficit) =           (−dβ 0 )
                                                   3+p 2−a

       The larger the probability of the sudden stop, the lower the initial in-
       crease in consumption, the lower the initial decrease in production, and
       the lower the initial current account deficit.
•      Denote by qc0 the relative price of non-tradables in period 2 if a sudden
       stop takes place (if the world market closes, so “c” stands for closed).
       Then:
                                    1 4(1 − a)
                            dq =               (−dβ) > 0
                                   3+p 2−a
                                    1 4(1 − a)
                 dqc0 = −dq = −                (−dβ) < 0, dqc00 = 0
                                   3+p 2−a
       The lower the probability of a sudden stop, the larger the initial appreci-
       ation, and so the larger the depreciation if a sudden stop actually takes
       place.

A positive probability of a sudden stop, and of a large associated depreciation,
are clearly the reason why some economists worry about the current account
deficits. Are they right?

First, it is clear that, in the case of the United States today, financial markets
do not give a high probability to such an event. A positive probability of a
sudden stop should be reflected in an upward sloping term structure—at least
relative to the “world term structure”. In the model, defining the short rate as
the interest rate in terms of tradables between period 1 and period 2, and the
long rate as the interest rate in terms of tradables between period 1 and period
3, the slope of the term structure is given by:

                                         p
                            rL − rS =       (−dβ) ≥ 0
                                        3+p

It is thus increasing in p. In contrast, one of the characteristics of the current

                                                                               29
U.S. term structure is that it is surprisingly flat (the so called “Greenspan
conundrum”).

Second, and more generally, in the absence of other distortions, the equilibrium
we have just characterized is the first-best outcome, and there is no reason for
the government to intervene. It must therefore be that these economists are
worried about the interaction between the sharp depreciation and distortions.

From the Latin American and Asian experiences, we have learned that such
distortions may indeed be present. Financial imperfections may lead to a con-
traction rather than an expansion of the tradables sector in response to the
depreciation.16 The relevant question for this lecture is whether the factors that
played a central role in Latin America and Asia are relevant for rich countries,
in particular for the United States, where the current account deficit has been
financed through direct investment, equity finance, and own-currency bonds
rather than bank loans. The first pass answer must be that they are much less
relevant, if relevant at all.

Financial market imperfections, along the lines of those explored in the previous
section, may however be relevant. In response to a sharp and partly unexpected
depreciation, the tradables sector may face financial constraints and be limited
in its ability to increase output. This leads to a formalization which combines
sudden stops with financial market distortions. I see no reason to expect dra-
matically different results from those obtained in the previous section. There is
now an argument for using policy, so as to limit the decline in tradables output
in the first period; it is still not clear however that the optimal policy implies a
reduction of current account deficits.

These are casual remarks, and it may well be that a stronger theoretical case for
deficit reduction can be made. The framework above provides perhaps a useful
starting point. I believe it is fair to say however that the case is less obvious,
on both theoretical and empirical grounds, than its proponents have made it
sound.

16. This is very well traveled ground. For a simple, but formal, discussion, see for example
Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2002).




                                                                                         30
7      Back to the Euro area, and to global imbalances
This lecture has taken a step back from current policy debates and looked at
the case for policy intervention in the face of large current account deficits
in rich countries. It has made a few simple methodological points: The case
for intervention must rely on the presence of distortions. Which distortions,
and thus what intervention is required, must be spelled out explicitly. For the
distortions I have looked at, optimal policy typically did not involve current
account deficit reduction.

It is a large leap from the examples I have worked out to an assessment of
optimal policy vis-à-vis deficits within the Euro area, or vis-à-vis current “global
imbalances”. The main purpose of my lecture was to stimulate research so as
to eventually get there. But it is too tempting not to try to jump now, and so
I shall not resist. The usual caveats apply.


Current account deficits in the Euro area


In the case of Euro-countries, the main distortions would appear to be wage
and price rigidities. These rigidities are clearly present, and together with the
fixed exchange rate, affect the adjustment of real wages and relative prices.

These rigidities in turn imply a role for fiscal policy, and for the use of govern-
ment spending. The specific form of fiscal policy depends on the specific form
of rigidities, whether or not, for example, wage rigidities are symmetric. In the
current low inflation environment, nominal wages may well be more downward
rigid. More work clearly needs to be done here, both on the exact nature of
the rigidities, and on their policy implications. But, as simple as it is, the an-
alytical exercise I have carried out points to two important issues, which are
insufficiently discussed in the current European policy debate:

The first is the potentially important role of active fiscal policy. It may well be
that the priority, for the time being, is to reduce budget deficits so as to recover
the margin of maneuver that fiscal policy needs to operate optimally. But we
should think harder about to use this margin when it becomes available.

The second is that, while fiscal policy can help, it is a poor instrument, and
the outcome may still be far away from first best. This strongly suggests that
governments should not take wage and price rigidities as given. Indeed, a better

                                                                                   31
way of thinking about country-specific macroeconomic policy in the context of
countries in a common currency area is to think of the joint use of wage and
fiscal policies.

This is not the usual call for lowering “labor market rigidities”, or for more
“wage flexibility”. It is a call for a better coordination of wage and fiscal adjust-
ments. It is based on the hindsight that it would have been better for Portugal
to combine fiscal contraction and wage increases in the 1990s, in exchange for
fiscal expansion and wage decreases in the 2000s.

How could this have been achieved in Portugal? Could it be achieved in Spain,
or in the next country to experience a country-specific demand boom? Nobody
can be sure, but governments should try. I believe that, in the European context,
this requires a centralized information and bargaining structure, in which social
partners regularly discuss and potentially agree on the macroeconomic situation
and the measures to be taken. The presence of such a bargaining structure
surely is only a necessary condition: There may not have been agreement about
what needed to be done in Portugal in the 1990s, any more than there may
be agreement about what needs to be done today. But it surely increases the
chances of success. Such a structure is clearly more difficult, if not impossible, to
put in place when the initial adjustment requires workers to accept a decrease
in wages—as is the case in Portugal today. This is why it has to be put in place
before the crises hit, and why I see it as a high priority in Euro area countries.

Absent such structures, the weight of the adjustment will fall on only one in-
strument, fiscal policy. This instrument is limited in what it can do. And it
is likely to be misused. For the first half of the 2000s, Portugal tried to limit
its slump through a fiscal expansion and an increase in fiscal deficits, clearly
not the right instrument when the problem is with external demand. The same
danger looms in Spain, where policy makers talk about using a fiscal expansion
if and when internal demand decreases. What will be needed then is a depre-
ciation and an increase in external demand. Using a fiscal expansion will only
delay the required adjustment.


Global imbalances


In the case of global imbalances, the major countries involved are not con-
strained by exchange rate regimes (China is free to peg or not), so wage and

                                                                                  32
price rigidities seem less relevant. It is also hard to think of financial imperfec-
tions which would prevent a large increase in US tradables output in response
to a depreciation. So, unless I have left out some central imperfections, the first-
pass answer must be that the case for government intervention, in the United
States or elsewhere, is weak.

This is however only a first-pass answer. The reason is that the shifts in private
saving and private investment which underlie current imbalances are themselves
due, in part, to distortions. For example, high saving in China reflects in part
the lack of retirement and health insurance, and thus precautionary saving on
the part of Chinese individuals.17 Low investment in parts of Asia reflects poor
financial intermediation. Low saving in the United States reflects in part public
dissaving; private saving itself maybe based on incorrect expectations about
retirement benefits and health care.

Reducing these distortions, or in the last case, reducing the budget deficit, is
clearly desirable: China should provide better retirement and health insurance
to its citizens; this would increase their welfare. The United States government
should reduce its budget deficit, and so on. Such policy changes are indeed likely
to reduce imbalances: To the extent that providing insurance decreases saving
and increases internal demand, China may find that it has to reduce external
demand through an appreciation of the RMB, which will reduce China’s current
account surplus. As it reduces its fiscal deficit, the United States may find that
maintaining output at its natural level requires a decrease in interest rates and a
depreciation of the dollar, resulting in a reduction in its current account deficit.
But the purpose of these reforms should be the reduction of distortions, not the
reduction of current account deficits per se.

This raises a last question, and a central question for the IMF. Is there a
strong case for coordination of these changes and reforms across countries? I
think the answer is no, with however a caveat to which I return below. It is
basically in the interest of each country to implement such reforms, whether
or not the others embark on their own reforms. It is in the interest of China
to provide better insurance and health care to its citizens, whether or not the
United States reduces its budget deficit. It is in the interest of the United
States to reduce its budget deficit, whether or not Asia improves its financial
intermediation system. These adjustments will require adjustments in exchange

17. See for example Blanchard and Giavazzi (2006).

                                                                                 33
rates and interest rates; but these can be achieved by domestic central banks
through monetary policy. The case for international coordination, at least on
economic grounds, seems weak. The caveat mentioned above is a methodogical
one, in line with the general argument of this lecture: The world we are looking
at is very much a second-best world, in which, at least in principle, the removal
of some distortions and not others could make things worse. I cannot think
of any realistic example in this context, but this is hardly proof that they do
not exist. Again, looking more closely at distortions, and working out their
implications, is needed to improve our understanding.




                                                                              34
References

Bernanke, Ben, 2005, “The global saving glut and the U.S. current account
deficit,” Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, Vir-
ginia (March)

Blanchard, Olivier, 2006a, “Adjustment within the Euro: The difficult case of
Portugal,” MIT Working Paper, forthcoming, Portuguese Economic Journal

Blanchard, Olivier, and Francesco Giavazzi, 2006, “Rebalancing growth in China.
A three-handed approach,” China and the world economy, 14(4):1–20 (July-
August)

Blanchard, Olivier, Francesco Giavazzi, and Filipa Sa, 2005, “International in-
vestors, the U.S. current account, and the dollar,” Brookings Papers on Eco-
nomic Activity (Spring)

Brender, Anton, and Florence Pisani, 2007, “Les déséquilibres financiers inter-
nationaux”, La Découverte, Paris

Caballero, Ricardo, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, 2006, “An
equilibrium model of “global imbalances” and low interest rates,” MIT working
paper 06-02 (January)

Caballero, Ricardo, and Mohamad Hammour, 2005, “The cost of recessions
revisited: A reverse-liquidationist view,” Review of Economic Studies, 72:313–
341 (April)

Caballero, Ricardo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2002, “A dual liquidity model
for emerging markets,” American Economic Review, 92(2):33-37 (May)

Caballero, Ricardo, and Guido Lorenzoni, 2006, “Persistent appreciations, over-
shooting, and optimal exchange rate interventions,” mimeo MIT (October)

Calvo, Guillermo, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Ernesto Talvi, 2006, “Phoenix mir-
acles in emerging markets: Recovering without credit from systemic financial
crises, ” NBER working paper 12101 (March)

Cline, William, 2005, The United States as a Debtor Nation, Institute for In-
ternational Economics, Washington DC.

Devereux, Michael, and Charles Engel, 2006, “Expenditure switching versus
real exchange rate stabilization: Competing objectives for exchange rate policy,”
NBER working paper 12215 (May)

                                                                              35
Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1983, “Real interest rates, home goods, and external bor-
rowing, ” Journal of Political Economy, 91-1:141–153

Edwards, Sebastian, 2002, “Does the current account matter?” in Preventing
currency crises in emerging markets Sebastian Edwards and Jeffrey Frankel eds,
University of Chicago Press, 21-75

Krugman, Paul, 1987, “The narrow moving band, the Dutch disease, and the
competitive consequences of Mrs Thatcher, ” Journal of Development Eco-
nomics, 27:41–55

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1996, Foundations of international
macroeconomics, MIT Press




                                                                           36
