NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DEFERRED TAX POSITIONS AND INCENTIVES FOR CORPORATE BEHAVIOR
AROUND CORPORATE TAX CHANGES
James Poterba
Nirupama Rao
Jeri Seidman
Working Paper 12923
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12923
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2007

We are grateful to many research assistants at MIT and the University of North Carolina for collecting
10-K data entries, to Erin Towery for outstanding research assistance standardizing the mountains
of data, to William Gentry (the editor), James Hines, Richard Larsen, Thomas Neubig, Richard Sansing,
Andrew Schmidt, Jake Thomas, two anonymous referees, and especially Lillian Mills for helpful comments
and discussion, and to the American Tax Policy Institute, the Bradley Foundation, and the National
Science Foundation for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by James Poterba, Nirupama Rao, and Jeri Seidman. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Deferred Tax Positions and Incentives for Corporate Behavior Around Corporate Tax Changes
James Poterba, Nirupama Rao, and Jeri Seidman
NBER Working Paper No. 12923
February 2007, Revised December 2010
JEL No. H25,M41
ABSTRACT
A firm's deferred tax position can influence how it is affected by a transition from one tax regime to
another. We compile disaggregated deferred tax position data for a sample of large U.S. firms between
1993 and 2004 to explore how these positions might affect firm behavior before and after a pre-announced
change in the statutory corporate tax rate. Our results suggest that the heterogeneous deferred tax positions
of large U.S. corporations create substantial variation in the short-run effect of tax rate changes on
reported earnings. Recognizing these divergent incentives is important for understanding the political
economy of corporate tax reform.
James Poterba
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Ave
Cambridge, MA 02138
poterba@mit.edu
Nirupama Rao
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
nirupama@MIT.EDU

Jeri Seidman
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712-0211
jeri.seidman@mccombs.utexas.edu

1. INTRODUCTION
Conventional wisdom holds that corporate executives support lower statutory corporate
tax rates because after-tax corporate earnings would be higher if tax rates were lower. While this
statement is an accurate long-run characterization for most firms, the short-run effects of a
corporate tax rate reduction can differ widely across firms. These disparities, the result of
differences in the tax circumstances of different firms, can potentially affect a firm’s support for
rate reduction.
When Congress debated corporate tax reform in 2004, survey evidence suggested that
executives at a majority of firms supported rate reduction and preferred it to other tax reform
options. Yet some large firms with substantial deferred tax assets that would have been revalued
if the statutory corporate rate were cut lobbied successfully against such a cut. Hanna (2010)
reports:
A corporate tax rate cut would cause a small group of manufacturing companies,
on behalf of which the representatives were lobbying, to take an immediate charge
or "hit" to earnings—thereby reporting lower quarterly net income and lower
earnings per share (EPS). So even though a rate cut would benefit these
manufacturing companies in future years, a current charge to earnings was
unacceptable…
In part as a result of this lobbying effort, the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 (AJCA)
included a complex domestic activities production deduction that had the approximate effect of a
rate cut but that did not reduce the statutory tax rate and therefore did not require write down
their deferred assets and liabilities. This episode illustrates how deferred tax positions, and the
incentives they create for some firms, can play an important role in the analysis of corporate tax
transitions.1

1

Variation in firm circumstances with respect to deferred tax assets and liabilities are just one factor that might lead
to variation across firms in support for a corporate rate reduction. A firm that had just completed an extensive
investment program and expensed many of its investment costs, but was about to begin receiving the earnings from

1

Several recent studies, including Shackelford, Slemrod, and Sallee (2009) and Edgerton
(2010), examine whether managers focus attention on accounting earnings as well as cash flow.
Robinson (2010) studies the market for low income housing tax credits and finds that, holding
the tax benefit of the credit constant, firms will incur additional costs to obtain preferred
accounting treatment. Managers appear willing to forego cash flow to raise pretax book income.
This paper aims to better understand the potential effect of deferred tax positions on
corporate behavior and the way these positions may affect managerial preferences regarding
corporate tax reform. Deferred tax asset or liability positions recognize the estimated future tax
effects attributable to one type of difference between book and tax income, past temporary
differences. The difference between reported pretax income and estimated taxable income is
comprised of temporary, permanent and other differences. Temporary differences result from
discrepancies in the timing of income and expense recognition for book and tax purposes. They
affect a firm’s cash flow for taxes both when they arise and when they reverse. The anticipation
of this future reversal gives rise to the recorded deferred tax position. How a corporate tax
reform will affect a firm's reported earnings in the year of its enactment, and how the firm may
choose to react to the tax reform, depend in part on the sign and magnitude of its net deferred tax
position. We collect data on the amounts and components of deferred tax assets and liabilities for
the largest public U.S. corporations between 1993 and 2004. Our sample firms account for nearly
forty percent of the aggregate market capitalization of the U.S. corporate sector in 2004.
The presence of deferred tax assets and liabilities not only matters for understanding the
transitional impact of statutory tax rate changes on different firms, but also complicates the task

these investments, might be particularly supportive of a rate reduction. A firm that had undertaken similar
investments but had been unable to fully expense the investments, because of tax loss carryforwards, would be
relatively less supportive since the value of its carryforward claims would be reduced, along with the tax liabilities
on its future earnings, by such a change.

2

of estimating the revenue impact of a corporate tax change. Deferred tax positions generate
additional incentives for firms to re-time their recognition of income around tax changes; this
may in turn affect tax revenue. When tax rates are scheduled to decline, firms with large deferred
tax assets have an incentive to accelerate the recognition of income to utilize deferred tax
benefits at the currently high tax rate. For firms that have neither deferred tax assets or liabilities,
and that are currently taxable, the prediction is reversed. These firms have an incentive to defer
income until the low-tax regime takes effect.2 For firms with large deferred tax liabilities, the
incentive is in the same direction as for currently taxable firms, but even stronger. These firms
have an incentive to defer income to the anticipated low-tax regime since by doing so they can
discharge their deferred liabilities at the lower statutory tax rate.
Scholes, Wilson, and Wolfson (1992) and Guenther (1994) study the Tax Reform Act of
1986 (TRA86), which reduced statutory corporate tax rates, and find that many taxable firms
delayed reporting of income to take advantage of the new, lower tax rate. Maydew (1997) finds
that firms generating Net Operating Losses in the years immediately following TRA86 delayed
income recognition or accelerated deduction recognition to increase their losses, thereby moving
the refunds from the carryback into a tax year with a high statutory rate. These results suggest
that firms engage in shifting income across time periods when there are pre-announced changes
in statutory corporate tax rates, and that the nature of these shifts depends on the firm’s particular
tax position.

2

To shift taxable income, firms must often shift cash flow and occasionally book income as well. For example,
firms may increase taxable income by accelerating the recognition of revenue, by accelerating the receipt of
prepayments, or by slowing payment of non-recurring expenses; the first method impacts book income while the
latter two affect cash flow. Financial reporting incentives—either to report higher income now, to smooth income
over time, or to report lower income in order to preserve cushion for the future—may conflict with or exacerbate
incentives to minimize tax liabilities. For example, the incentive to report higher current revenue for financial
purposes conflicts with the standard tax-minimizing incentive to delay recognition of taxable income around a tax
rate reduction.

3

When tax rates or other relevant features of the tax code change, firms must revalue their
deferred tax positions. This revaluation flows through current period accounting earnings (Net
Income). As the size of U.S. corporations’ deferred tax positions increases, the potential for
revaluation of these balances to materially affect Net Income. While we focus on the impact of
corporate tax changes, another recent example—the passage of the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act of 2010—illustrates the potential importance of these changes. Leone
(2010) explains that this legislation removed a tax benefit firms received by providing retiree
drug benefits and required restatements of deferred tax assets related to the benefit that has been
removed. For AT&T Inc, this restatement decreased book income by $1 billion and caused
analysts, such as Credit Suisse, to issue guidance for investors on how to interpret this noncash
charge. These anecdotes provide support for the suggestion by Mills (2006) and Neubig (2006),
among others, that concerns about how potential legislation bearing on taxes and other issues
will change reported income as a result of revaluations may be an important determinant of
whether corporate executives support such proposals.
This study explores the potential influence of deferred tax positions on the way firms
respond to tax changes and on the incentives managers may face when they lobby with regard to
tax policy. While we do not examine the political actions of firms, we suggest that a political
economy perspective on firm behavior might offer useful insights on corporate support for, and
opposition to, various corporate tax reforms.3 We construct and describe components of assets
and liabilities for large corporations. We identify all public firms that are in the Fortune 50
between 1995 and 2004 and carefully construct comparable entities for the period 1993 to 2004

3

We focus on temporary differences, rather than permanent differences, because permanent differences do not
accumulate over time in the form of deferred tax assets or liabilities. They do not create incentives with regard to tax
policy transitions in the way that temporary differences do. The full impact of a permanent difference is recognized
in the period when the underlying income-generating activity takes place.

4

by combining merged companies prior to the merger and divested companies after the
divestiture. For this set of 81 “super-firms,” we then catalog the components of their deferred tax
positions so we can investigate changes within category and in total for each firm.
Hand-collection is necessary because the available machine-readable balance sheet data
has historically encoded only the long-term deferred tax liability disclosed on the balance sheet,
rather than the net deferred tax position and the components disclosed in the tax footnote. While
the most recent Compustat data format includes net deferred tax positions, the process of
backfilling prior years that were not originally collected is not yet complete. This data field is
populated in the Compustat data file for only 50.9 percent of the firm-years in our sample. The
machine-readable data file therefore does not permit analysis of short-term deferred tax liabilities
or any deferred tax assets. This makes it impossible for researchers to measure the magnitude of
deferred tax assets that are likely to influence the amount of lobbying for or against prospective
tax rate changes, or the extent of income shifting that might take place as firms try to utilize
NOLs when faced with a statutory tax rate reduction.
The aim of our study is to calculate the size of net deferred tax asset and liability
positions in order to allow policy-makers to better understand the potential revaluation effects
facing large U.S. corporations. We also provide evidence on how changes in temporary
differences—both aggregate temporary differences and specific types of such differences—are
linked with the recent rise in the difference between reported pretax book income and estimated
taxable income (the book-tax gap).
Our analysis has three parts. First, we measure both the total book-tax gap and the portion
of the gap attributable to temporary differences. Our hand-collected firm-level data set enables us

5

to overcome missing-data problems that are common in the standard data source, Compustat.4
Our findings suggest that temporary differences account for a substantial share of the book-tax
gap. When we stratify our data by year, we find that in every year, more than half of the book-tax
gap for the median firm in our sample is attributable to temporary differences.5 Additionally,
both the fraction of firms in our sample with a net deferred tax liability and the size of the
average net deferred tax liability rise substantially during our sample. Thus, growth in temporary
differences appears to contribute to the widening of the book-tax gap. As a firm’s deferred tax
position rises relative to its non-tax assets and liabilities, the firm is likely to be more sensitive to
proposed changes in statutory corporate tax rates.
Second, we disaggregate deferred tax positions into categories in order to understand
whether the recent growth in the book-tax gap attributable to temporary differences is observed
over most of the components that contribute to temporary differences, or is driven by a few
specific types of temporary differences. This disaggregation provides the first detailed analysis
of the components of deferred tax positions for a significant and relatively constant sample of
firms over an extended period of time.6 Key contributors to the increase in the book-tax income
gap include mark-to-market adjustments; property, including leases and both tangible and
intangible property; and valuation allowances.
4

We use current tax expense to calculate the book-tax income gap and deferred tax expense to calculate temporary
differences. In our hand-collected data set, current tax expense (deferred tax expense) is non-missing and non-zero
for 92.4 percent (91.2 percent) of our firm-year observations. Compustat current tax expense, calculated as the sum
of federal, foreign, and state current tax expense—Compustat codes TXFED, TXFO and TXS, respectively—is nonmissing and non-zero for 74.8 percent of the firm-years in our sample; Compustat deferred tax expense, calculated
as the sum of federal, foreign, and state deferred tax expense—Compustat codes TXDFED, TXDFO and TXDS,
respectively—is non-missing and non-zero for 62.6 percent of the firm-years in our sample.
5
The residual (Book Income less [(Current plus Deferred Tax Expense)/0.35]) should be attributed to permanent
and other differences as well as to measurement error. Tax expense not clearly disclosed as current or deferred (for
example, tax expense due to Discontinued Operations or disclosed only by jurisdiction) will be included in this
residual measure.
6
Amir, Kirschenheiter, and Willard (1997) collect similar data on the size and components of deferred tax positions
but only study the period 1992-1994. Phillips, Pincus, Rego, and Wan (2004) study a longer period, 1994-2000, but
study a random sample of firm-years in this period. We collect data for a relatively constant set of firms over a long
period, which allows us to make across-time comparisons.

6

Finally, we interpret the data we collect on deferred tax assets and liabilities in the
context of the behavioral and political economy incentives surrounding a tax rate change. We
find that a pre-announced reduction in the corporate tax rate would give a third of the firms in
our sample a strong incentive to accelerate income to the high-tax period. Moreover, many of
these firms have taxable income in the current period, which suggests that they are likely to have
the capacity to make such a shift. While we are unable to estimate how much income would be
shifted in response to such incentives, and the incentive to make such a shift would depend on
the size of the rate change, the nontrivial share of firms with such an incentive and the rising
value of loss carryfowards, suggests that analysts should consider the revenue impact of ratechange-motivated income shifting when they estimate the short-run revenue effect of a change in
the statutory corporate tax rate.
We also estimate the impact of a change in the statutory corporate tax rate on Net Income
to demonstrate how such a change might influence the incentives firms have to lobby for or
against pending tax legislation. For the average firm in our sample, reducing the statutory federal
corporate income tax rate from 35 to 30 percent would result in a $328 million increase in
reported Net Income as a result of revaluation of deferred tax positions. There is, however,
substantial heterogeneity across firms. More sample firms would report an increase than a
decrease in Net Income from revaluations associated with a reduction in the statutory corporate
tax rate. Among those that would report an increase, the average impact of a rate reduction to 30
percent would be $677 million. For firms with a net deferred tax asset, however, the rate
reduction would induce an average reduction of $315 million in Net Income. Our results quantify
a potentially important transitional effect of corporate tax reform on Net Income—the
revaluation effect of deferred tax positions—that policy-makers may want to consider as they try

7

to target transition relief in prospective tax legislation to the various types of firms that may be
affected by policy changes.
We divide our analysis of temporary book-tax differences into five sections. The next
section—section two—explains how temporary differences generate deferred tax assets and
liabilities. This background is particularly important for non-accountants. Section three describes
the data set that we have assembled from a sample of SEC filings, identifies a number of
potential data limitations and presents summary statistics. Section four disaggregates the booktax gap, both to estimate the importance of temporary differences within our sample and to
provide details on the most significant components of temporary differences. Section five
examines how the sum of past temporary differences can affect book income when tax policy
changes induce revaluations. A brief conclusion explores implications of our findings for tax
policy and suggests future research.
II. TEMPORARY DIFFERENCES BETWEEN BOOK AND TAX EARNINGS
Statement of Financial Accounting Standards 109 (SFAS 109) provides guidance for the
calculation of tax expense. Following the “matching principle,” a central concept of accrual-basis
accounting which states that expenses should be matched to the period in which they give rise to
revenue rather than to the period in which they arise or are paid, SFAS 109 stipulates that the
total tax expense reported in a period should be the estimate of total income taxes due on the
pretax book earnings of that period. Generally, accounting earnings reported to investors in a 10K differ from taxable income reported to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) on Form 1120, so
the total tax expense reported in the 10-K will not equal taxes currently due to the IRS.
While book income and taxable income may differ for a number of reasons, they can be
separated into two broad categories: permanent differences and temporary differences.

8

Permanent differences arise when a component of income enters one earnings measure but is
never included in the other. For example, all forms of interest income are included in pretax book
income but interest on tax-exempt state government bonds is excluded from taxable income. This
exclusion is an example of a permanent difference. In contrast, temporary book-tax differences
are the result of disparities in the timing of when an income component is included in book and
taxable income. For example, bad debts are estimated and expensed for book purposes in the
period in which the associated revenue is recognized, but bad debts are not deducted for tax
purposes until specific receivables are written off.
SFAS 109 requires the calculation of two components of total tax expense, current tax
expense and deferred tax expense. Current tax expense measures income taxes due in the current
taxable year, while deferred tax expense measures income taxes due in all future taxable years.
Total tax expense equals the sum of current and deferred tax expense. Permanent differences
primarily affect the calculation of total tax expense by adding to or removing from book income
items that will never be a component of taxable income, such as interest on state government
bonds, non-deductible fines, and the domestic manufacturing deduction. This implies that total
tax expense equals the statutory corporate tax rate times taxable book income less tax credits and
other rate adjustments. Taxable book income equals pretax book income less permanent
differences.7
If a company had permanent differences but no temporary differences, then it would have
no deferred tax expense. Its total tax expense would equal its current tax expense. When a
company has temporary differences, a portion of its total income tax expense that would be

7

We refer to tax credits and other rate adjustments that affect current tax expense reported in the financial
statements but not taxable income reported on Form 1120 as “other differences”. These other differences confound
our measure of taxable income because we are forced to estimate taxable income from 10-K-reported current tax
expense.

9

currently due to the IRS based on current period taxable book income is deferred. Temporary
differences essentially reclassify a portion of tax expense from current tax expense to deferred
tax expense. For example, consider a firm with $100 of accelerated tax depreciation in excess of
straight-line book depreciation. Its current-period taxable income will be $100 lower than it
would have been absent this deduction. As a result of this temporary difference, a tax expense of
$100*τ that would have otherwise been due on current taxable book income will be due in some
future tax period. In one or more future years, the firm’s straight-line book depreciation will
exceed its tax depreciation, taxable income will exceed book income, and the $100*τ of
previously-deferred tax expense will become due. When the full amount of the deferred tax
related to a temporary difference has been paid or received, the temporary difference is said to
have ‘reversed’.
Because temporary differences create a reclassification of tax expense between current
tax expense and deferred tax expense, they do not affect the total dollars of tax that will be paid
over the life of the firm or the total tax expense that is recorded in the company’s financial
statements. Temporary differences only affect the timing of tax payments. Each temporary
difference affects the calculation of taxable income and tax due to the IRS in at least two years—
once in the year when it arises, and again in the year or years in which it reverses. In the
foregoing depreciation example, the $100 of accelerated tax depreciation in excess of book
depreciation created a current-year book-tax difference, as well as a future, opposite-signed
book-tax difference when it reverses. While temporary differences affect both taxable income
and cash flow for taxes in at least two years, in the absence of revaluation due to changes in tax
rates or laws, temporary differences do not affect total tax expense or book income.

10

Because temporary differences represent a future obligation to pay cash to or receive tax
relief from the IRS, they must be accounted for as financial assets or liabilities. Deferred tax
asset and liability positions accomplish this; deferred tax positions equal the current statutory
corporate tax rate times the sum of differences that will reverse in the future. Firms for which
pretax book income has exceeded taxable income have a net deferred tax liability (DTL): these
firms have an accumulation of ‘favorable’ temporary differences that have allowed them to defer
tax expense to a future period and this deferral has created a liability to the government. Firms
for which taxable income has exceeded pretax book income, in contrast, have a deferred tax asset
(DTA); they have an accumulation of ‘unfavorable’ temporary differences that have forced them
to accelerate tax payments and they are therefore entitled to future tax relief.
A firm’s end-of-period deferred tax position is equal to cumulated temporary differences
times the statutory corporate tax rate expected to be in effect, under currently enacted laws, when
the temporary differences reverse.8 When expected tax rates are constant through time, a firm’s
deferred tax expense equals the current statutory tax rate times temporary book-tax differences
that arise or reverse in the current period.9 When tax rates change, SFAS 109 requires firms to
revalue net deferred tax positions and to include these revaluations in book income through the
deferred tax expense or benefit.10
To illustrate the revaluation principle, consider a firm with one relatively new asset
subject to accelerated tax depreciation relative to book depreciation and no other temporary

8

Under SFAS 109, temporary differences are recorded without discounting to reflect the elapsed time until reversal.
This is a simplification of the balance sheet approach of SFAS 109 for expositional purposes. It does not hold
when the statutory rate changes, merger activity occurs, or in certain other settings. SFAS 109 actually requires the
deferred tax expense to be calculated as the change in the firm’s net deferred tax position, rather than as the current
period’s temporary differences times the statutory rate.
10
Revaluation of the deferred tax balance flows through Net Income regardless of whether or not the creation of the
deferred tax balance affected net income. For example, deferred tax expenses associated with unrealized gains and
losses on available for sale securities affect Other Comprehensive Income rather than Net Income but revaluation of
these positions would nonetheless affect Net Income.
9

11

differences. In the year when it acquires this asset, the firm records a deferred tax expense and
liability related to this asset in the amount of τ*(depreciation1, book-depreciation1,tax), where the
subscript denotes the age of the asset (with 1 denoting the year of its purchase) and the type of
depreciation, tax or book. This expression indicates that at some point in the future the
accelerated tax depreciation deduction will be less than the book depreciation expense and then
the IRS will expect to receive additional tax at the rate of τ. Similarly, in the next year, the
deferred tax liability related to this asset will increase by τ*(depreciation2,book-depreciation2,tax).
The firm now has a deferred tax liability due to the IRS of Σj=1,2 τ*(depreciationj,bookdepreciationj,tax). When τ changes to τ', not only does the layer added by this year’s difference
between book and tax depreciation change, but also the balances previously recorded change
because the IRS will now expect to settle this liability at τ', rather than at τ. The new liability
recorded on the balance sheet will equal Σj=1,2 τ’*(depreciationj,book-depreciationj,tax). Assuming
that the deferred tax expense for year 2 was recorded at the historic rate τ, an adjustment equal to
Σj=1,2 (τ – τ’)*(depreciationj,book-depreciationj,tax) will be reported in book income. In this example
of a net deferred tax liability position, a tax rate decrease will cause the liability to decrease and
Net Income to increase. If the firm had a net deferred tax asset position, the effect of a rate
change would be reversed.
We study temporary differences by analyzing reported deferred tax positions. Three
features of SFAS 109 that affect these reports are particularly significant for our study. First,
firms must report both deferred tax assets and liabilities, not just a net deferred tax position.
Deferred tax positions are categorized as current or non-current based on the underlying asset or
liability that gave rise to that position. Deferred tax positions are aggregated based on this
classification and both a net current deferred tax asset or liability and a net non-current deferred

12

tax asset or liability is presented on the balance sheet. Second, firms must adjust their reported
DTAs and DTLs when laws change, in particular to reflect changes in statutory corporate tax
rates. For many firms, and for many but not all components of deferred taxes, a reduction in the
statutory corporate tax rate would reduce DTLs (DTAs) and thereby have a positive (negative)
effect on reported earnings. Third, firms must report a valuation allowance that reflects the
probability of realizing deferred tax assets.11 This permits an assessment of the potential tax
benefit associated with a deferred tax asset.
Disaggregating deferred tax assets and liabilities makes it possible to study many aspects
of deferred tax positions, but we are aware of only four studies that have moved beyond
machine-readable data to examine the components of the deferred tax account.12 Phillips, Pincus,
Rego, and Wan (2004) explore which types of deferred tax positions reveal aggressive financial
reporting. They find that changes in deferred tax positions related to revenue and expense
accruals and reserves are particularly likely to signal aggressive financial reporting. Givoly and
Hayn (1992) study how share prices of firms with deferred tax liabilities reacted to the corporate
tax rate reduction in the 1986 Tax Reform Act. They find that the decline in corporate rates had a
favorable effect on the market value of firms with deferred tax liabilities, after controlling for the
other effects of tax reform. Chen and Schoderbek (2000) distinguish changes in deferred tax
positions that were triggered by the 1993 corporate tax rate increase from other changes to
deferred tax positions. They find that analysts reacted in roughly the same way to both types of
changes, even though the persistence and predictive power of the two are likely to differ. Finally,
11

A valuation allowance is a contra-asset account that reflects the value of deferred tax assets that are not likely to
be recognized. (A contra-asset is an account that is entered on the asset side of the balance sheet even though it has a
credit balance. This is done to reflect that the credit—negative—balance in the contra-asset offsets some debit—
positive—balance in the associated asset account. The valuation allowance contra-asset decreases the value of the
deferred tax asset.) The deferred tax asset is netted with the valuation allowance to assess the firm’s expected future
tax benefit.
12
Several studies analyze a portion of the deferred taxes. For example, Miller and Skinner (1998) and Bauman,
Bauman, and Halsey (2001) study the valuation allowance related to deferred tax assets.

13

Amir, Kirschenheiter, and Willard (1997) find some evidence that market participants consider
the source of deferred tax positions in valuation. We follow these studies in disaggregating
deferred tax balances, but we focus on how temporary differences change over time and on how
they affect the income statement rather than market values.
III. DATA COLLECTION
Machine-readable data, such as the deferred tax liability balance recorded by Compustat,
measure firms’ deferred tax positions with substantial noise. Until recently, Compustat collected
deferred tax liabilities that were separately stated on the face of the balance sheet, but it omitted
deferred tax positions reported as assets or included in other liabilities, thereby preventing
researchers from identifying firms with net deferred tax assets or from accurately measuring the
position of firms with net liabilities.13 Compustat’s new database format (termed
‘Fundamentals’), introduced in 2007, collects data on net deferred tax positions as well as the
balance of short-term and long-term deferred tax assets and liabilities.14 This dramatically
improves the ability of researchers to measure net deferred tax positions. However, the
Fundamentals dataset does not yet contain data for all firms for all years.15 Our dataset has many
advantages over the historical Compustat format (termed ‘Legacy’). Relative to Fundamentals
Compustat, its primary advantage is its completeness.

13

For example, the 2005 balance sheet for Kimberly-Clark reports a current deferred tax asset of $223.4 million and
a long-term deferred tax liability of $572.9 million. Legacy Compustat only collects the liability disclosed on the
balance sheet of $572.9 million. Even if Compustat had also collected the balance-sheet-disclosed current asset of
$223.4 million, the user would not have been able to tie to the footnote-disclosed net deferred tax liability position
of $121.4 million because of deferred tax positions included in other assets on the balance sheet.
14
In the 2005 Kimberly-Clark example of the previous note, Fundamentals Compustat collects $223.4 million for
short-term deferred tax assets, $228.1 million for non-current deferred tax assets, and $572.9 million for long-term
deferred tax liability as well as the net deferred tax liability position of ($121.4) million.
15
Fundamentals Compustat has backfilled tax data for a number of firms and continues to backfill fairly rapidly
(nearly 30 percent of our sample was populated during the first six months of 2010.) However, only 50.9 percent of
the valid observations during our period have a non-missing value for Net Deferred Tax Balance. We found that
96.9 percent of the Net Deferred Tax Balances collected by Compustat are approximately equal to the Net Deferred
Tax Balances we hand-collected.

14

A second limitation of machine-readable data is that it does not allow detailed
component-based analysis of deferred tax asset and liability positions. As part of our study, we
endeavor to provide evidence about which types of differences have contributed to the rise in the
book-tax gap. Neither Fundamentals Compustat nor Legacy Compustat includes information on
the type of temporary difference which created the deferred tax position.
We collect data from the tax footnote in 10-K filings for FORTUNE 50 firms for fiscal
years between 1993 and 2004. Our sample begins in FY 1993 because it is the first year when all
firms’ financial statements were prepared in accordance with SFAS 109, which took effect for
fiscal years beginning after December 15, 1992. FORTUNE ranks firms by gross revenue.16 Our
sample includes both financial and non-financial firms. Since we are interested in tracking
deferred tax positions over time, we use the annual FORTUNE 50 lists to construct a panel data
set. For any firm in the FORTUNE 50 in any of our sample years, we collect data for the entire
sample period. There is moderate turnover in the FORTUNE 50. Only 25 of the firms in the
1995 FORTUNE 50 were in the 2004 FORTUNE 50. Nine of the 50 firms on the 1995 list were
acquired between 1995 and 2004. In a typical year, five firms leave the FORTUNE 50 for
various reasons. One hundred firms appear in the FORTUNE 50 at least once between 1995 and
2004. We drop four firms from this group: State Farm Insurance and TIAA-CREF, private
companies that are not required to file 10-Ks, and Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, which are
government-sponsored enterprises. This leaves a sample of ninety-six firms.
Corporate control transactions complicate the problem of tracking FORTUNE 50 firms
through time. Sample firms acquire other firms, or in some cases are themselves acquired. When
this occurs we collect data on the acquired or acquiring firm for years prior to the acquisition. To
16

Prior to 1995, FORTUNE rankings included only manufacturing firms. To avoid including firms that are only in
the FORTUNE 50 due to the exclusion of non-manufacturing firms, we formed our sample using the FORTUNE
rankings from 1995-2004.

15

preserve data comparability over time, we create “super-firms” by combining the distinct
accounts of the two firms that subsequently consolidated. This process is designed to minimize
discrete changes in deferred tax positions that are due to acquisitions. However, no methodology
we know of will completely eliminate these changes because the merger itself can create
deferred tax assets and liabilities.17
Because most of the companies acquired by FORTUNE 50 firms are companies that are
not part of the FORTUNE 50, constructing super-firms involves data collection on many small
companies. This increases the number of firms in our sample in at least one year to 420; these
firms combine to create 81 super-firms. Due both to limited availability of electronic filings in
the early years of our sample and to the non-traded nature of some firms, the number of superfirms in our sample rises from 71 in the first year (1993) to 78 in the final year (2004). Appendix
A lists the individual firms in our sample. Our analysis relies on super-firms rather than
individual companies as our units of observation to preserve comparability across years.
SFAS 109 mandates: (i) an income tax summary, which details the significant
components of income tax expense; (ii) a rate reconciliation, which reconciles reported income
tax expense with the amount that would result from applying the domestic federal statutory rate
to pretax income; and (iii) a schedule of deferred tax positions, which provides information about
DTAs and DTLs. Firms also are expected to disclose information regarding the amounts and
expiration dates of loss and credit carry-forwards, the division of tax expense between continuing
operations and all other items, the composition between domestic and foreign earnings before

17

Our super-firm methodology will minimize differences due to non-taxable mergers accounted for as a pooling-ofinterest. However, a non-taxable merger accounted for as a purchase will result in stepped-up basis for book but not
tax purposes, increasing deferred tax liability positions. While our methodology, computing the change between the
merged firm and the sum of the target and the acquiring firm, will usually reduce the change relative to considering
a change between the merged firm and the acquiring firm only, our methodology does not always eliminate the
change caused by the merger.

16

income taxes, and temporary differences for which the firm has not recorded a deferred tax
liability, including permanently reinvested foreign earnings.
We match each firm-year observation with Compustat using both firm name and year,
and validate the match using total assets and Net Income.18 We collect the tax summary, rate
reconciliation, and the schedule of deferred tax positions from tax footnotes. There is substantial
variation across firms in the level of detail presented in the tax footnote, although most firms
follow a fairly stable reporting policy from year to year. Appendix B describes our procedure for
disaggregating DTAs and DTLs into their component parts.
There are several data limitations inherent in our approach to collecting and
disaggregating the components of deferred tax assets and liabilities. First, our procedure is
limited by the level of disclosure provided in the 10-K. Firms who disclose relatively few line
items or use vague language hamper our categorization efforts. Second, SFAS 109 is a worldwide consolidated firm disclosure. Most firms are taxed in multiple jurisdictions, but they do not
make jurisdiction-specific income tax disclosures. Rather than allocating DTAs and DTLs across
jurisdictions in an arbitrary fashion, we assume that all DTAs and DTLs relate to federal
temporary differences. Finally, there may be heterogeneity across firms in the auxiliary
assumptions that are used to compute and present the value of DTAs and DTLs. We do not have
any information regarding the detailed calculations underlying the tax footnotes, so we are
unable to address such potential heterogeneity or its effects.
IV. SUMMARY FINDINGS

18

We collected tax information from the first 10-K or annual report filing for each fiscal year. Restatements may
cause differences between the total assets and net income entries in the 10-K and those reported in Compustat. We
hand-checked the 48 firm-years where neither Compustat codes AT nor NI corresponded to our hand-collected total
assets and net income numbers. The majority of differences were due to small restatements. We dropped 17 firmyears, 15 for which Compustat did not have any data and two where a stub year or merger caused a mismatch.

17

We begin our analysis by reporting summary statistics. Table 1 reports aggregate and
median values of the estimated book-tax income gap, temporary differences, and the share of the
book-tax income gap attributable to temporary differences for our super-firm sample. We define
the book-tax income gap on a world-wide basis as Pretax Income less estimated Taxable Income,
where Taxable Income is defined as Current Tax Expense divided by the maximum U.S.
corporate statutory tax rate (35 percent throughout our sample). We calculate temporary
differences as Deferred Tax Expense divided by 0.35. We present and discuss two alternative
calculation approaches in Appendix C. The share measure equals the book-tax gap due to
temporary differences divided by the total book-tax gap. While Compustat in principle collects
the data necessary for both of these calculations, we find that Current Tax Expense in
Compustat, which we calculate as the sum of TXFED, TXFO and TXS, is missing or zero for
25.2 percent of the firm-year observations. By comparison, Current Tax Expense is only missing
or zero for 7.6 percent in the comparable set of firm-years in our hand-collected data. Deferred
Tax Expense in Compustat, which we calculate as the sum of TXDFED, TXDFO and TXDS is
missing or zero for 37.4 percent if the firm-year observations; it is missing or zero for 8.8 percent
of the firm-year observations in the comparable component of our dataset. Given these
discrepancies, we use hand-collected data for the calculations throughout the paper.
[insert Table 1 around here]
The third through fifth columns of Table 1 present medians. The median share
attributable to temporary differences is the median of (estimated temporary differences/estimated
total book-tax gap), calculated at the super-firm level. For the median firm in our sample, the
share of the imputed book-tax difference attributable to temporary differences varies across
years, ranging from 61.3 percent in 1994 to 93.2 percent in 1999. In every year, however,

18

estimated temporary differences comprise the majority of the estimated book-tax gap for the
median super-firm in our sample.
In columns six through eight of Table 1, we report aggregate statistics. The aggregate
share attributable to temporary differences is calculated as the sum of temporary differences
across super-firms divided by the sum of the book-tax gap across super-firms. This measure
offers further insight into the distribution of temporary differences. For example, in 2001 the
median super-firm reports a positive book-tax gap and positive temporary differences but the
aggregate figures are both negative. Just slightly less than half of the sample firms, 43.6 percent,
report a negative book-tax gap in 2001. On average, the negative values are significantly larger
($2.942 billion) than the positive values of the book-tax gap, which average $1.814 billion. The
difference between the median and the aggregate (or the mean) arises because firms with large
book-tax gaps or large temporary differences are more influential in the computation of the
aggregate measure than in the computation of the median. For instance, the very large aggregate
share attributable to temporary differences in 2002 is driven by AOL Time Warner Inc., which
reports a book-tax gap of ($46.254 billion) but temporary differences of only ($1.42 billion).19
Even though the aggregate ratio is less stable than the median ratio, both measures yield a similar
inference: temporary differences are the largest component of the book-tax gap for the firms in
our sample.
Table 2 presents additional information on the total market value and assets for the firms
in our sample. Market Value of Equity is calculated as Compustat Common Shares Outstanding
(CSHO) multiplied by fiscal year-end price (PRCC_F); all other variables are hand-collected.

19

There is not a lone culprit for the negative share attributable to temporary differences in 1998 but rather three
super-firms that report large negative book-tax differences and either a small negative or a positive book-tax gap:
Citigroup, IBM, and Johnson & Johnson. Removing these three super-firms results in an aggregate book-tax gap of
$9.588 billion, 28.4 percent of which is attributable to temporary differences.

19

With regard to market value of equity (assets), our sample represents 39.2 percent (41.9 percent)
of the Compustat universe in 2004 and averages 41.2 percent (40.3 percent) over our whole
sample period.
The last four columns in Table 2 show the number of firms in each sample-year that
report net deferred tax assets, the number that report net deferred tax liabilities, and the total
value of these net deferred tax positions. The data demonstrate the heterogeneity in firm tax
positions, as well as the evolution of these positions through time. In 1993, 31 of 72 super-firms
report net deferred tax assets that total $52.2 billion, while the remaining 41 report net deferred
tax liabilities totaling $79.7 billion. The proportion of net DTL firms increases through our
sample period, and in 2004, 27 of 78 super-firms report net DTAs. While Neubig (2006) cites a
recent survey that suggests that the majority of surveyed firms prefer a lower corporate tax rate
to other incremental or fundamental tax reforms, Table 2 suggests that there is a significant
minority of firms that would experience at least one adverse effect of such a rate reduction—a
decline in the value of their DTAs.
[insert Table 2 around here]
Table 2 suggests that the share of firms with net DTLs rose during our sample period. A
net DTL, indicating cumulative book income higher than taxable income, could be due to a
number of factors, including but not limited to aggressive financial reporting which raises pretax
book income and aggressive tax reporting which lowers taxable income. In addition to showing
an increase in the proportion of firms with a net DTL, the table also shows that firms with a net
DTL have larger deferred tax positions than firms with a net DTA. In 1993, the average net DTL
is $2.0 billion while the average net DTA is $1.7 billion. The average net DTL increases by 122
percent during our sample period, to $4.4 billion in 2004, while the average net DTA increases

20

by only 42 percent. This is consistent with the increase in DTLs over our sample period that was
evident in Table 1.
Tables 3 and 4 explore the increases in temporary differences that have contributed to the
rise in the book-tax income gap and present detailed information on the composition of deferred
tax positions. Table 3 disaggregates deferred tax positions into their constituent components, and
indicates the sources of the most important temporary book-tax differences. Table 4 separates
DTA positions from DTL positions for components that do not consist almost exclusively of
either assets or liabilities. We report means of these disaggregate measures to facilitate
comparison across years with different sample sizes.
[insert Table 3 around here]
The results in Table 3 suggest some variation over time in the key sources of deferred tax
positions within our sample. The most important source of deferred tax liabilities is Property.
Early in the sample, the most important source is Benefits, which includes benefits related to
current employees as well as retiree health benefits and pensions. This is not a surprise, because
our sample begins in 1993 shortly after SFAS 106, Accounting for Other Postretirement
Benefits, required firms to record liabilities for unfunded retiree medical costs. In the following
decade, many companies eliminated or scaled back such coverage, thereby decreasing the DTA
values associated with Benefits. By the end of the sample in 2004, Credits and Carryforwards
replaces Benefits as the most significant deferred tax asset, although Benefits remains a major
contributor. Although the economy had substantially recovered by 2004, many firms likely still
have unused loss and credit carryforwards from the economic downturn of 2001.
While the overall ranking of various components of deferred tax assets does not change
dramatically between 1993 and 2004, the magnitude of certain categories does. For example,

21

deferred tax positions related to mark-to-market adjustments rise and fall with the general equity
market. NOL Carryforwards increase 248 percent while Other Tax Credits and Carryforwards
increase 148 percent, consistent with the extension of the carryforward period under the
Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997. Deferred tax liabilities related to Property, Plant and Equipment
(PPE) increase 45 percent. Possible explanations for the rise in PPE include special “bonus tax
depreciation” that took effect in 2001 as well as the implementation of SFAS 142, which
removed book amortization of intangible assets. Liabilities related to Intangible Assets and
Leases rise 113 percent and 77 percent, respectively. Intangible Assets includes goodwill and is
likely a result of substantial merger activity recently. Some fraction of the rise in leasing-related
deferred tax components may reflect a rise in either, or both, of aggressive financial and tax
reporting using leased assets. Table 3 also shows that book revenues rose relative to tax revenues
during the 1990s, a result consistent with Plesko’s (2004) study. The data in Table 3 suggests
that the increase in temporary differences that contributed to the rise in the book-tax income gap
was not driven by a single source, but was instead the result of increases in many deferred tax
liabilities including Property, Subsidiary-Related Items and Valuation Allowance (the latter
being a contra-asset).
In addition to describing which categories have contributed most to the rise in temporary
differences, Tables 3 and 4 offer insight into the deferred tax positions that managers might try to
control if they foresee changes in statutory tax rates. Between 1993 and 2004, the stock of
deferred tax assets related to total loss and credit carryforwards increased nearly 200 percent.
While much of this increase was offset through increases in Valuation Allowances, the rise in
loss- and credit carryforward-related deferred tax positions still suggests in the event of a pre-

22

announced decline in the corporate tax rate, there would be strong incentives to accelerate the
recognition of income, and thereby to utilize carryforwards before the statutory tax rate declines.
Table 4 separates deferred tax assets from deferred tax liabilities for sub-categories that
include substantial assets as well as liabilities. Some categories, such as Revenue-Related, appear
relatively small in Table 3 when the net deferred tax positions are presented, but represent a
significant deferred tax asset for some firms and a significant deferred tax liability for others. For
example, a firm that receives cash but has not yet provided the service may have to pay income
tax on that cash but does not record revenue until the associated goods or services are delivered,
and so will record an unearned revenue liability and a corresponding deferred tax asset. A firm
with installment sales, for which it recognizes a gain for book purposes when the sale closes but
recognizes the gain for tax purposes as the payments are received, will have a deferred tax
liability. Disaggregating into the asset and liability positions for certain categories also allows us
to see the effect of changes to book or tax calculation of these items.
SAB 101, published in late 1999, tightened guidelines regarding how companies can
recognize revenue; SAB 104, published in late 2003, further curtailed aggressive financial
recognition of revenue. Evidence in Table 4 is consistent with both of these pronouncements—
the upward trend in the DTL for Revenue-Related slows beginning in 1999 and even reverses
beginning in 2002.20 Table 4 presents additional detailed information that may be helpful in
understanding the contribution of temporary differences to the increase in the book-tax income
gap.
[insert Table 4 around here]

20

An alternative explanation for the observed trend in Revenue-Related deferred tax positions that we cannot rule
out is the slowing economy in the later years of our sample.

23

The foregoing tables suggest that temporary differences are a significant portion of the
book-tax income gap and provide evidence on the components of these temporary differences.
We now explore the size of deferred tax positions relative to assets. This normalization is helpful
for judging the importance of DTAs and DTLs relative to the book value of the firm. Table 5
reports the distribution of net DTAs and DTLs as a share of firm assets for each super-firm and
for each individual firm. The net deferred tax balance is substantial for many firms. In 2002, for
example, 35 percent of both super-firms and individual firms reported a net deferred tax position
in excess of five percent of assets. Although the table does not show it, almost ten percent of
both individual firms and super-firms had a net deferred tax position exceeding ten percent of
assets. For super-firms, the maximum (minimum) net deferred tax position as a function of assets
occurred in 2004 (1995) and was 14.5 percent (-31.9 percent). Overall, Table 5 suggests that
while the majority of firms have a small deferred tax position relative to total assets, a nontrivial
number have a more significant position.
[insert Table 5 around here]
Table 6 presents information similar to that in Table 5, but it distinguishes financial and
non-financial firms. We have not separated these two groups in our earlier tables because we did
not find a significant difference between them in the average (unscaled) size of the deferred
balance positions or in the percent of the book-tax gap attributable to temporary differences.
However, in Table 6, we separate financial and non-financial firms; their balance sheets appear
to be affected differently by deferred tax positions.
[insert Table 6 around here]
Financial firms have relatively smaller deferred tax positions than non-financial firms,
largely because their base of financial assets is so large. In every sample year, more than three-

24

quarters of the financial firms in our sample have a net deferred tax position, either positive or
negative, that represents less than three percent of total assets. About half of non-financial firms,
in contrast, have deferred tax positions in this range. The extreme values of the ratio of deferred
tax positions to firm assets are also smaller for financial than for non-financial firms. The
maximum (minimum) net deferred tax position relative to assets for a financial firm occurred in
1994 (1997) and was 16.2 percent (-18.5 percent) while the maximum (minimum) net deferred
tax position relative to assets for a non-financial firm occurred in 2001 (1995) and was 48.0
percent (-46.3 percent). For financial firms, the net deferred tax positions as a percentage of
assets are distributed more tightly around zero than are the comparable positions for nonfinancial firms.
V. TEMPORARY DIFFERENCES AND FIRM BEHAVIOR
The presence of deferred tax positions on a corporation’s balance sheet may affect
several aspects of firm performance and create a range of incentives for firm behavior. We now
describe several consequences of the presence of temporary differences. To focus attention on a
concrete policy setting, we consider a situation in which the statutory corporate rate is expected
to decline.
A. Income Re-Timing Incentives
All firms face incentives to alter the timing of reported income in the periods
immediately surrounding a tax rate cut. Absent deferred tax considerations, firms will increase
the present value of their after-tax income by shifting income from the period prior to the rate cut
into the future in order to pay tax on that income at the lower future rate.21 The presence of

21

Guenther (1994) discusses nontax costs that limit this type of tax rate arbitrage, including the cost of reporting
lower financial income for debt covenants and management compensation. We acknowledge these constraints but do
not measure them. Our estimates of the percent of firms who are likely to shift for NOL CF purposes may be

25

deferred tax liabilities should exacerbate this incentive—firms will also want to delay the
reversal of deferred tax liabilities so the liability is settled at a lower rate than currently recorded.
Firms with deferred tax assets, however, will want to receive the deferred benefits at the higher
tax rate and so have an incentive to accelerate income to the period before the tax rate reduction.
Many firms hold deferred tax positions related to NOL carryforwards—they have carried
the NOL as far back as is allowed and some NOL remains to offset taxable profits in future
periods. In 2004, 37 percent of the individual firms in our sample had a beginning-of-year, NOL
carryforward-related DTA that would likely be affected by a federal rate cut.22 While firms with
deferred tax assets related to NOL carryforwards have a strong incentive to create income in the
final higher-tax-rate period in order to receive the benefit of the NOL carryforward at the higher
rate, some firms with a net NOL carryforward may be unable to shift income. We assume that
firms reporting taxable income have more scope to accelerate income than do firms currently in a
tax loss position. In 2004, three of the firms with a net NOL carryforward are estimated to be in a
tax loss positions, leaving 26 of the 78 firms with both a beginning-of-year net NOL
Carryforward and positive estimated taxable income. This calculation suggests that nearly one
third of our sample would have an incentive to accelerate income, as well as some capacity to do
this. We are unable to extend this analysis to estimate the dollars of income these firms are likely
to shift. However, Maydew’s (1997) finding that the average firm in his sample shifts $11.2
million of income, or 1.5 percent of Net Sales, in response to a 12 percent decrease in the
corporate income tax rate suggests that the re-timing of corporate income associated with a
change in statutory tax rates could be large enough to warrant revenue estimators considering
considered an upper bound for the percentage of firms who are likely to undertake income shifting into the higher
tax regime.
22
This calculation excludes disclosed state and foreign NOL carryforwards as well as carryforwards disclosed
together with a tax credit (i.e., Credit and Loss Carryforwards.) The latter exclusion may cause us to understate the
percentage of firms with a federal NOL carryforward.

26

such rate-motivated income shifting in their estimates of the short-run revenue effects of a
change in the statutory corporate tax rate.
B. Preference for Tax Rate Change
Temporary differences generally do not affect book income, while they do affect cash
flow. Both when they arise and when they reverse, temporary differences affect the allocation
between current and deferred tax expense and therefore affect cash paid for taxes in the current
period. In most cases, the effect when the difference is recorded and when it reverses are equal
and opposite. For example, when taxable depreciation exceeds book depreciation, cash outflow
for taxes decreases, increasing cash flow relative to a situation in which book and taxable
depreciation are equal. When this temporary difference reverses, book depreciation exceeds
taxable depreciation and cash outflow for taxes increases. Both when the temporary difference
arises and when it reverses, the temporary difference does not affect book income but does shift
cash flow.
However, when tax rates change, the firm must revalue its deferred tax asset or liability,
which in turn affects book income. Neubig (2006) and Mills (2006) argue that firms are very
sensitive to the impact of tax reform on their reported earnings and recognize the potential
income effect through revaluation of DTAs and DTLs. Managers who will report lower earnings
as a result of these revaluations may be particularly concerned that analysts may inadvertently
assume that these one-time effects are persistent—a concern supported by Chen and
Schoderbek's (2000) study of deferred tax revaluations around the 1993 tax rate change.
We illustrate the potential Net Income impact of deferred tax position revaluations with a
counterfactual example in which the federal corporate income tax rate drops by five percentage

27

points in 2004.23 Using the data in Tables 1 and 2, we estimate the revaluation of beginning-ofyear deferred tax positions. We do not allow for any income shifting associated with the rate
change, since we do not have a shifting elasticity to apply in this setting. We limit the sample to
just those firms that report federal income tax separately. This limited sample includes 80.8
percent of our firm-year observations, representing 81.8 percent of sample adjusted net deferred
tax positions. The revaluation calculations exclude deferred tax positions related to tax credits,
including foreign tax credits. Because credits directly offset tax liability, rather than taxable
income, a rate change will not affect their valuation.
Our results are presented in Table 7. A lower tax rate reduces federal tax expense on
current period income and increases the period’s Net Income; we refer to this as its “direct
effect.” This is a persistent and long-lived effect of the rate reduction. If the 2004 corporate tax
rate had been reduced to 30 percent, the direct effect would have reduced federal tax expense by
$147 million for the average super-firm. The average super-firm’s Net Income in 2004 was
$3,625 million, so this reduction in tax expense represents an increase in Net Income of 4.1
percent.
[insert Table 7 around here]
In the year of the rate change, Net Income reflects both the direct effect and the
revaluation effect. While we might expect the deferred tax revaluation to be second-order, for
many firms it is considerably larger than the direct effect of the tax rate change. Our estimates in
Table 7 suggest that for the average super-firm, the revaluation of 2003 deferred tax positions

23

While many other changes in the business environment, including changes in Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles, also affect deferred tax positions, we consider a statutory rate change because it is broadly applicable and
its impact is relatively easy to estimate.

28

would have increased 2004 Net Income by $328 million, or 9.0 percent.24 Our average superfirm would have experienced a 13.1 percent increase in Net Income—two-thirds of which would
have been attributable to the revaluation effect. This effect, not surprisingly, differs across firms.
For firms with net DTAs, the write-down of net DTA decreases Net Income, offsetting the
positive Net Income effect of the reduction in the current period’s tax expense. For net DTL
firms, on the other hand, the revaluation reduces the value of a balance sheet liability, which
increases their Net Income. Net DTA super-firms in our sample would on average experience a
$315 million revaluation decrease in net DTA and Net Income.25 The lower tax rate would have
decreased these firms' current tax expense and increased their Net Income by $103 million. On
net, these firms would report a $212 million earnings decrease due to the rate change, a 7.7
percent decrease in their average Net Income of $2,755 million. Firms in our sample with a net
DTL would experience, on average, a $677 million dollar revaluation decrease in their net DTL,
and a matching Net Income increase.26 They would also report $171 million less in taxes on
income generated in the current period. DTL firms average $4,097 million of Net Income in
2004. For net DTL firms the revaluation effect reinforces the direct tax expense effect. Net
Income rises, on average, by 20.7 percent for our sample firms with a net DTL.
Although our estimates of DTAs and DTLs provide some guidance on the effects of
statutory rate changes, there are several reasons for caution in evaluating our estimates. First, our
assumption that all DTAs and DTLs relate to federal temporary differences may lead to some
overstatement of the effect of U.S. federal income tax rate changes. Second, not all DTAs and
DTLs are affected by statutory rate changes. Tax credit carry-forwards, for example, are not,

24

In results that are not reported here, we found that the median revaluation effect in 2004 would have increased net
income by 2.1 percent - still substantial, but considerably lower than the mean effect of 9.0 percent.
25
The median revaluation effect in 2004 for Net DTA firms would have decreased net income by 4.2 percent.
26
The median revaluation effect in 2004 for Net DTL firms would have increased net income by 6.3 percent.

29

because they are applied after the tax rate. We address this concern by removing credits from
base deferred tax positions where possible when we estimate the revaluation effect of a tax rate
change. We make the conservative assumption that any disclosure which includes credits, such
as “Net Operating Loss and Credit Carry-forwards,” is comprised entirely of credits.
C. Deferred Taxes and Corporate Tax Reform
A change in the corporate tax rate would affect firms through many channels. Our
analysis highlights one aspect of corporate tax reform that is often overlooked: changes statutory
rates will affect firms by requiring revaluation of their deferred tax assets and liabilities. This
"temporary differences" channel will have divergent effects on firms with net deferred tax assets
and those with net deferred tax liabilities, and it may lead their respective managers to have
different reactions to tax reform and to pursue different strategies to shift income from the old to
the new regime. Anecdotal and other evidence suggests that managers are sensitive to the impact
of tax reform on reported earnings. Our findings suggest that for some firms, the effects of some
corporate tax reforms on the value of deferred tax assets and liabilities can be substantial.
Managers at firms with significant net deferred tax assets may lobby against statutory corporate
tax rate cuts if they are primarily concerned with the short-term effect of such policy changes on
reported after-tax income.
The political history of tax policy changes is replete with examples of corporate groups
with closely-aligned incentives affecting policy design. In the introduction, we cited Hanna's
(2010) description of the corporate tax reform debate of 2004. Pressure from firms with
accumulated net operating losses was one factor in Congress’ decision to enact a "qualified
production activities” deduction rather than a reduction in corporate tax rates. For firms with
large net deferred tax assets positions, a rate cut would have generated substantial tax expense.

30

Less than two months after the passage of the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004, the Financial
Accounting Standards Board (FASB) published its interpretation of the qualified production
activities deduction as a special deduction, rather than a tax rate reduction, under SFAS 109.
While firms with deferred tax liabilities would have preferred FASB treat the new qualified
production activities deduction as a tax rate reduction, FASB’s treatment is additional evidence
that firms are concerned about the financial statement impact of tax rate changes.
In a different context, Neubig (2006) notes that one concern some firms may have about
expanding investment incentives by adopting expensing for tax purposes is that expensing
creates deferred tax liabilities that could be subject to revaluation if the corporate tax rate
changes in the future - an event that some managers may seek to avoid.
Ohio’s recent corporate tax reform further illustrates how firms with substantial deferred
tax positions may affect the tax legislative process. The reform legislation included three distinct
forms of transition relief for firms that would lose deferred tax assets when the corporate income
tax was replaced by a gross receipts tax. First, firms operating in Ohio under the income tax
regime were encouraged to schedule the reversal of their temporary differences during the phaseout of the corporate income tax. To the extent that any temporary items would not reverse by the
end of the phase-out, an adjustment for the estimated deferred tax position at the end of the
transition period was recognized in income in the period in which the phase-out began. Second,
certain deferred tax assets, primarily research and development tax credits, were retained as
credits under the new activity tax regime. Alvarez & Marsal Holdings (2008) explain that these
credits are not recorded as assets on the financial books of the firm, however, because SFAS 109
applies only to taxes on income. Finally, there was special transition tax relief aimed at those
firms with large NOL carryforwards, which would lose the ability to use these assets under the

31

new tax regime. These policies provide transition relief to firms that were ‘owed’ tax relief under
the income tax regime and that lost this prospective tax relief as a result of the tax reform.
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
This paper explores the role of temporary differences in contributing to the disparity
between reported pretax book and estimated tax earnings for large U.S. corporations. Temporary
differences comprise a substantial fraction of the book-tax income gap. Temporary differences
that increase the book-tax income gap are larger than those that decrease it in our data sample.
More than half of the firms in our sample have a net deferred tax liability, which reflects the
accumulation of past excesses of book income over taxable income. Additionally, the average
net deferred tax liability position is greater than the average net deferred tax asset position.
Firms exhibit substantial heterogeneity in their deferred tax positions. In 2004, more than
forty percent of the firms in our sample of FORTUNE 50 companies reported a net deferred tax
position valued at more than five percent of corporate assets. The observed heterogeneity
suggests that firms may be affected in different ways by tax and accounting reforms. We
estimate that roughly one third of the firms in our sample have strong incentives to shift income
forward to maximize their use of NOL Carryforwards in response to a pre-announced reduction
in the statutory corporate tax rate, while a large part of the sample likely has the opposite income
shifting incentives. This heterogeneity also affects the impact of a statutory rate cut on Net
Income. If the corporate tax rate had been reduced by five percentage points in 2004, then the
average firm in our sample would have experienced a $328 million increase in Net Income due
to the revaluation of its deferred tax positions. The average revaluation effect for a firm with a
net deferred tax asset position is a $315 million decrease in Net Income while the average
revaluation effect for a firm with a net deferred tax liability position is a $677 million increase.

32

Understanding the disparate incentives created by deferred tax asset and liability positions is
important for crafting transitional relief associated with changes in the structure of the corporate
income tax.
The prospective importance of deferred tax assets and liabilities in affecting firm
behavior and firm incentives is possibly even greater than the findings from our sample suggest.
Many corporations are likely to experience growing deferred tax assets as a result of the
recession that began in 2007. While the recently-extended NOL carryback period will enable
some firms to draw down their deferred tax assets, the new tax provisions will not affect all
firms.27 Moreover, as new financial products provide firms with potentially greater control over
the timing of income recognition, the magnitude of their behavioral response to transitory tax
incentives associated with deferred tax assets and liabilities may increase.
Our descriptive findings suggest a number of possibilities for future research. The
detailed information on deferred tax positions that we have collected may provide a starting point
for studying the interplay between financial accounting for taxes and various aspects of corporate
behavior. One particularly interesting question is how managers respond to the incentives created
by deferred tax assets and liabilities. Their responses might involve political action in support of,
or opposition to, policies that would be beneficial to, or costly for, their firms, or might involve
changes in the investment or financing policies that are designed to take advantage of
opportunities, or minimize burdens, associated with deferred tax positions. It may, for example,
be possible to investigate whether firms that are large contributors to the campaigns of legislators
who serve on tax-writing committees are particularly sensitive to the nature of tax reform insofar
as they have large deferred tax positions. Data such as that collected for the current project
27

The Worker, Homeownership, and Business Assistance Act of 2009 allows five-year NOL carryback for NOLs
incurred in 2008 or 2009. This is only useful for firms with a tax loss in 2008 or 2009 who paid tax in 2003, 2004 or
2005, since tax payments in those years were not "accessible" under the prior two-year carryback rules.

33

provides a much richer description of the potential heterogeneous effect of tax policies created
by cross-firm differences than does the more aggregate data reported in machine-readable
databases, and it consequently makes it possible to test more refined hypotheses about firm
behavior.

34

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to many research assistants at MIT and the University of North Carolina for
collecting 10-K data entries, to Erin Towery for outstanding research assistance standardizing the
mountains of data, to William Gentry (the editor), James Hines, Richard Larsen, Thomas
Neubig, Richard Sansing, Andrew Schmidt, Jake Thomas, two anonymous referees, and
especially Lillian Mills for helpful comments and discussion, and to the American Tax Policy
Institute, the Bradley Foundation, and the National Science Foundation for research support.

REFERENCES
Alvarez & Marsal Holdings, LLC, 2008. “Trends in State Gross Receipts Taxes and Their FAS
109 Implications.” A&M Tax Advisor Weekly 50. Alvarez & Marsal, New York, NY.
Amir, Eli, Michael Kirschenheiter, and Kristen Willard, 1997. “The Valuation of Deferred
Taxes.” Contemporary Accounting Research 14(4): 597-622.
Bauman, Christine. C., Mark P. Bauman, and Robert F. Halsey, 2001. “Do Firms Use the
Deferred Tax Asset Valuation Allowance to Manage Earnings?” Journal of American
Taxation Association 23(S-1): 27-48.
Chen, Kevin C. W., and Michael P. Schoderbek, 2000. “The 1993 Tax Rate Increase and
Deferred Tax Adjustments: A Test of Functional Fixation.” Journal of Accounting Research
38(1): 23-44.
Edgerton, Jesse, 2010. “Investment, Accounting, and the Salience of the Corporate Income Tax.”
Federal Reserve Board working paper.
Financial Accounting Standards Board, 1990. Employers’ Accounting for Postretirement
Benefits Other than Pensions—Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 106.
Financial Accounting Standards Board, Norwalk, CT.
Financial Accounting Standards Board, 1992. Accounting for Income Taxes—Statement of
Financial Accounting Standards No. 109. Financial Accounting Standards Board, Norwalk,
CT.
Financial Accounting Standards Board, 2001. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets—Statement
of Financial Accounting Standards No. 142. Financial Accounting Standards Board,
Norwalk, CT.
Financial Accounting Standards Board, 2004. “Application of FASB Statement No. 109,
Accounting for Income Taxes, to the Tax Deduction on Qualified Production Activities
Provided by the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004.” FASB Staff Position FAS109-1.
Financial Accounting Standards Board, Norwalk, CT.
Givoly, Dan, and Carla Hayn, 1992. “The Valuation of Deferred Tax Liability: Evidence from
the Stock Market.” The Accounting Review 67(2): 394-410.
Guenther, David A., 1994. “Earnings Management in Response to Corporate Tax Rate Changes:
Evidence from the 1986 Tax Reform Act.” The Accounting Review 69(1): 230-243.
Hanna, Christopher H., 2010. "Corporate Tax Reform: Listening to Corporate America.” Journal
of Corporation Law 35 (2): 283-325.
Leone, Marie, 2010. “Don’t Panic: Health-Care Hit is Minimal.” CFO.Com, March 29.
36

Maydew, Edward L., 1997. “Tax-induced Earnings Management by Firms with Net Operating
Losses.” Journal of Accounting Research 35(1): 83-96.
Miller, Gregory S., and Douglas J. Skinner, 1998. “Determinants of the Valuation Allowance for
Deferred Tax Assets Under SFAS No. 109.” The Accounting Review 73(2): 213-233.
Mills, Lillian F., 2006. “Five Things Economists and Lawyers can Learn from Accountants: An
Illustration using the Domestic Production Activities Deduction.” National Tax Journal
59(3): 585-597.
Neubig, Tom, 2006. “Where’s the Applause? Why Most Corporations Prefer a Lower Tax
Rate.” Tax Notes April 24: 483-486.
Ohio Department of Taxation, 2006. “Commercial Activity Tax Credit for Unused Franchise Tax
Net Operating Losses.” Information Release 2006-06. Ohio Department of Taxation,
Columbus, OH.
Phillips, John D., Morton Pincus, Sonja O. Rego, and Huishan Wan, 2004. “Decomposing
Changes in Deferred Tax Assets and Liabilities to Isolate Earnings Management Activities.”
Journal of the American Taxation Association 26(Supplement): 43-66.
Plesko, George A., 2004. “Corporate Tax Avoidance and the Properties of Corporate Earnings.”
National Tax Journal 57(3): 729-737.
Robinson, Leslie A., 2010. “Do Firms Incur Costs to Avoid Reducing Pre-Tax Earnings?
Evidence from the Accounting for Low-Income Housing Tax Credits.” The Accounting
Review 85(2): 637-670.
Shackelford, Douglas A., Joel Slemrod, and James M. Sallee, 2009. “Financial Reporting, Tax,
and Real Decisions: A Unifying Framework.” University of North Carolina working paper.
Securities and Exchange Commission, 1999. SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin: No. 101—Revenue
Recognition in Financial Statements. Securities and Exchange Commission, Washington,
DC.
Securities and Exchange Commission, 2003. SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin: No. 104—Revenue
Recognition, Corrected Copy. Securities and Exchange Commission, Washington, DC.
Scholes, Myron S., G. Peter Wilson, and Mark A. Wolfson, 1992. “Firms’ Responses to
Anticipated Reductions in Tax Rates: The Tax Reform Act of 1986.” Journal of Accounting
Research 30(Supplement): 161-185.

37

APPENDIX A: SAMPLES FIRMS AND YEARS IN SAMPLE
Our sample was constructed based on FORTUNE magazine’s annual sales-based ranking
of U.S. firms. The top 50 firms for each year from 1995 until 2004 were included in the sample.
To mitigate the effects of changes in firm size in the net deferred tax analysis, the tax notes for
all firms acquired or sold by FORTUNE 50 firms during the sample period were also included.
For example, Berkshire Hathaway acquired General Re Corp in 1998, so the tax note information
for General Re Corp was added to Berkshire Hathaway for years 1993-1997. Similarly, AMR
Corp spun off Sabre in 2000, so going forward, tax note details for Sabre were added to AMR
Corp for years 2000-2004. We use online firm histories and 10-Ks to research merger and
acquisition activity. Four FORTUNE 50 firms were dropped due to insufficient disclosures:
Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, State Farm, and TIAA-CREF.
For the net deferred tax descriptive analysis, the main FORTUNE 50 firm and all of its
acquired and divested components were combined into a singe aggregate firm observation,
summing over the deferred tax and liability categories as well as total assets and market values.
The following 81 FORTUNE 50 “super-firms” are included in our sample: Aetna Inc,
Allstate Corp., Albertsons Inc, Altria Group, American Electric Power Co., American
International Group Inc, AmerisourceBergen Corp., Amoco, AMR Corp, AOL Time Warner Inc,
Aquila Inc, AT&T Corp, Bank of America Corp, BellSouth Corp, Berkshire Hathaway Inc,
Cardinal Health, CenterPoint Energy Inc, Chevron Texaco Corp., Cigna Corp, Citigroup Inc,
Chrysler, Coca-Cola Co, Columbia/HCA Health, ConAgra Foods Inc, ConocoPhillips, Costco
Wholesale Corp., Dell Computer Corp, Dow Chemical Co, Duke Energy Co, Dynegy Inc,
Eastman Kodak, El Paso Corp., Enron Corp, Exxon Mobil Corp, Ford Motor Co, General
Electric Co, General Motors Corp, Goldman Sachs Group Inc., Hewlett Packard Co., Home
Depot Inc., Ingram Micro Inc., Intel Corp, International Paper Co, International Business
Machines, ITT Industries Inc, J C Penney Corp Inc, J P Morgan Chase & Co, Johnson &
Johnson, Kmart Holding Corp., Kroger Co., Lockheed Martin Corp, Loews Corp., Lowe's,
Marathon Oil Corp, MCI Worldcom, McKesson Corp, Merck & Co Inc, Merrill Lynch & Co
Inc, MetLife Inc, Microsoft Corp, Morgan Stanley, Motorola Inc, PepsiCo Inc, Pfizer Inc,
Procter and Gamble Co, Prudential Financial Inc, Safeway Inc, Sara Lee Corp, SBC
Communications Inc, Sears Roebuck Co, Supervalu Inc, Target Corp., The Boeing Co., United
Parcel Service Inc, United Technologies, Valero Energy Corp, Verizon Communications Inc,
Walgreen Co, Walmart, Wells Fargo & Co, Xerox Corp.
The following 15 FORTUNE 50 firms are included in our sample as part of another superfirm: American Stores, included with Albertsons Inc; Bank One, included with J.P. Morgan
Chase & Co; BankAmerica, included with Bank of America Corp; Bell Atlantic, included with
Verizon Communications Inc; Chase Manhattan Corp, included with J.P. Morgan Chase & Co;
Citicorp, included with Citigroup Inc; Compaq Computer, included with Hewlett Packard Co.;
Conoco, included with ConocoPhillips; DuPont E I De Nemours & Co, included with
ConocoPhillips; GTE, included with Verizon Communications Inc; Lucent, included with AT&T
Corp.; Medco Health, included with Merck & Co Inc; Mobil, included with ExxonMobil Corp;
Prudential Insurance, included with Prudential Financial Inc; Texaco, included with Chevron
Texaco Corp.
38

APPENDIX B: CLASSIFICATION OF DEFERRED TAX ASSETS AND LIABILITIES
Each deferred tax asset or liability category listed in a firm’s 10-K tax footnote is classified
into one of the following aggregate categories:























Allowances for doubtful accounts
Employee benefits
Other (non-pension) post-employment benefits
Pensions
NOL carryforwards
Foreign tax credit carryforwards
Other tax credits and carryforwards
International activity-related
Inventory
Restructuring, merger & acquisition
Oil & Gas, environmental
Warranties
Valuation allowances
Expense-related
Mark-to-market adjustments
Intangible assets
Leases
Property, plant & equipment
Regulated accruals and deferrals
Revenue-related
U.S. State-related
Subsidiary-related

Items that were too vague to categorize (e.g., ‘other adjustments’), included multiple categories
(e.g., ‘A/R and inventory reserves’) or too unusual to warrant a category (e.g., ‘Bond Premiums’)
were classified as ‘Other’.

39

APPENDIX C: CALCULATION EXAMPLE, THE COCA-COLA CO., 2004
Baseline calculations, corresponding to entries in our dataset and tables:
Pretax book income =$6222
Taxable income =current tax expense/0.35 =$1213/0.35 =$3466
Book-tax income gap =$6222 - $3466 =$2756
Temporary differences =deferred tax expense/0.35 =$162/0.35 =$463
Permanent and other differences =book-tax gap less temporary differences =$2756 -$463 =$2293
While we believe the deferred tax method of calculating temporary differences suffers from fewer
confounding factors than any other method, we present two alternative methods below. They, like
our deferred tax method, contain noise, not bias.
Alternative Method I
One alternative method of calculating temporary differences uses the rate reconciliation to
calculate permanent and other differences, and then defines temporary differences as the resulting
residual. Reconciling items total 12.9% of pretax income. This translates to $803 tax dollars of
permanent and other differences (12.9% x pretax income of $6222) or $2294 of permanent and
other differences ($803/0.35) for Coca Cola Co. in 2004. When the firm discloses the
current/deferred break down for their total tax provision (i.e. current tax expense plus deferred tax
expense equals total tax provision), this alternative method results in the same figures as calculated
using the first method. However, jurisdiction-specific disclosures and the tax effect of nonrecurring items often do not include current/deferred specifics. These disclosures confound this
relationship and results in over- or under-stated temporary differences relative to the deferred tax
expense method.
Alternative Method II
A third method of calculating temporary differences uses the change in the net deferred tax
position, divided by the tax rate. For example, for Coca Cola, this would equal ($671-$235)/0.35.
This alternative method results in a higher number than is calculated using the deferred tax
expense. Text in the 10-K suggests that the discrepancy is due to a valuation allowance booked
against foreign deferred tax assets. There are a number of other reasons why the change in
deferred tax assets may not equal the deferred tax expense, including mergers and acquisitions,
change in accounting standards and change in tax law or tax rates. As such, this method may also
result in over- or understated temporary differences relative to the deferred tax method.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF INCOME
The Coca-Cola Company and Subsidiaries
Year Ended December 31,

INCOME BEFORE INCOME TAXES AND CUMULATIVE
EFFECT OF ACCOUNTING CHANGE
Income taxes
NET INCOME BEFORE CUMULATIVE EFFECT OF
ACCOUNTING CHANGE
Cumulative effect of SFAS No. 142, net of income taxes:
Company operations
Equity investees
NET INCOME

40

2004

2003

2002

6,222
1,375

5,495
1,148

5,499
1,523

4,847

4,347

3,976

—
—

—
—

$ 4,847

$ 4,347

(367)
(559)
$ 3,050

Income tax expense (benefit) consists of the following (in millions):
Year Ended December 31,

2004
Current
Deferred

United
States

State and
Local

$ 350
209

$ 64
29

International

$ 799
(76)

Total

$ 1,213
162

A reconciliation of the statutory U.S. federal rate and effective rates is as follows:
Year Ended December 31,

2004

Statutory U.S. federal rate
State income taxes—net of federal benefit
Earnings in jurisdictions taxed at rates different
from the statutory U.S. federal rate
Equity income or loss
Other operating charges
Write-down/sale of certain bottling investments
Other—net

35.0 %
1.0

Effective rates

22.1 %

(9.4)1,2
(3.1)3,4
(0.9)5
—
(0.5)6

2003

2002

35.0 %
0.9
(10.6)7
(2.4)8
(1.1)9
—
(0.9)
20.9 %

35.0 %
0.9
(6.0)
(2.0)10
—
0.7 11
(0.9)
27.7 %

The tax effects of temporary differences and carryforwards that give rise to deferred tax assets and liabilities consist
of the following (in millions):
December 31,

Deferred tax assets:
Property, plant and equipment
Trademarks and other intangible assets
Equity method investments (including translation adjustment)
Other liabilities
Benefit plans
Net operating/capital loss carryforwards
Other

$

Gross deferred tax assets
Valuation allowance
Total deferred tax assets1
Deferred tax liabilities:
Property, plant and equipment
Trademarks and other intangible assets
Equity method investments (including translation adjustment)
Other liabilities
Other

2004

2003

71 $
65
530
149
594
856
257

87
68
485
242
669
711
195

2,522
(854)

2,457
(630)

$

1,668 $

1,827

$

(684) $
(247)
(612)
(71)
(180)

(737)
(247)
(468)
(55)
(211)

Total deferred tax liabilities

$ (1,794) $ (1,718)

Net deferred tax assets (liabilities)

$

41

(126) $

109

Year
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004

Table 1
Book-Tax Income Gap and Share Attributable to Temporary Differences, 1993-2004
Median Share
Aggregate Share
Median SuperMedian SuperAggregate Super- Aggregate SuperNumber of
Attributable to
Attributable to
Firm Book-Tax Firm Temporary
Firm Book-Tax Firm Temporary
Super-Firms
Temporary
Temporary
Income Gap ($M) Differences ($M)
Income Gap ($M) Differences ($M)
Differences (%)
Differences (%)
71
25.0
(2.5)
67.08%
(7,987.5)
(14,368.0)
179.9%
76
96.3
72.0
61.34
29,488.4
20,371.7
69.08
76
115.9
47.4
64.10
31,022.9
22,762.2
73.37
78
134.6
155.4
71.36
41,440.6
29,578.7
71.38
78
117.5
136.2
67.69
33,839.3
19,123.2
56.51
77
10.8
10.1
63.17
9,870.7
(2,534.0)
-25.67
77
251.0
245.7
93.20
83,660.6
67,123.7
80.23
78
219.7
238.9
80.97
67,715.3
63,341.0
93.54
78
180.8
142.0
82.22
(20,192.0)
(26,220.9)
129.86
78
302.3
144.1
71.24
2,246.1
42,485.6
1,891.52
78
736.0
477.1
75.62
139,877.3
68,004.2
48.62
78
607.4
296.6
66.63
89,942.7
18,694.0
20.78

All data are hand-collected. Sample includes firms ranked in the Fortune 50 from 1995-2004. To standardize firms across time, firms engaged in merger,
acquisition, or divestiture activity with the Fortune 50 ranked firm are included with the Fortune 50 ranked firm to create a “super-firm.” The Book-Tax Income
gap is calculated as Pretax Book Income less Taxable Income, where Taxable Income is calculated as Current Tax Expense divided by the maximum corporate
statutory rate of 35% in all periods. Temporary differences are calculated as Deferred Tax Expense divided by 35%. Median Share Attributable to Temporary
Differences is the median value of (Temporary Differences/Book-tax Income Gap) calculated at the super-firm level. Aggregate measures are computed by
summing all firms' book-tax gaps and temporary differences.

42

Year

Number of
Super-Firms

Aggregate Market
Capitalization of
Super-Firms ($B)

1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004

71
76
76
78
78
77
77
78
78
78
78
78

$1,718
1,804
2,484
3,199
4,311
5,764
6,651
6,468
5,938
4,543
5,466
5,800

Table 2
Sample Characteristics by Year, 1993-2004
Cross-sectional Super-Firms with Net DTA Super-Firms with Net DTL
Aggregate Total
Std. Dev. of Net
Assets of SuperAggregate
Aggregate
Deferred Tax
Number
Number
Firms ($B)
Value ($B)
Value ($B)
Positions ($B)
$5,202
6,328
4,918
5,719
6,768
7,295
8,305
9,340
10,229
10,625
11,757
13,302

$3.5
3.3
3.2
3.4
3.8
4.0
5.4
6.2
6.6
7.3
7.5
7.0

31
35
32
31
29
33
33
31
33
33
29
27

$52.2
52.7
41.5
43.8
48.2
56.9
52.0
58.3
69.1
94.1
68.4
65.4

40
41
44
47
49
44
44
47
45
45
49
51

-$79.7
-81.2
-83.7
-97.4
-110.5
-108.2
-148.0
-166.5
-181.6
-186.9
-226.9
-226.6

All data are hand-collected except as noted. Sample includes firms ranked in the Fortune 50 from 1995-2004. To standardize firms across time, firms engaged in
merger, acquisition, or divestiture activity with the Fortune 50 ranked firm are included with the Fortune 50 ranked firm to create a “super-firm.” Market
capitalization is calculated as Common Shares Outstanding (Compustat CSHO) multiplied by Fiscal Year-End Price (Compustat PRCC_F).

43

Table 3
Components of Net Deferred Tax Positions ($M), Average per Super-Firm, 1993-2004
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
Allowance for doubtful accounts
206
193
206
226
239
264
250
212
283
287
255
244
Benefits
Employee benefits
242
241
235
312
380
441
459
452
514
655
434
482
Other post-employment benefits
519
522
526
481
432
365
348
328
335
395
377
318
Pensions
-25
-65
-73
-103
-105
-82
-120
-129
-172
-117
-152
-207
Credits and Carryforwards
NOL carryforwards
165
168
161
174
174
214
265
310
369
509
524
575
Foreign tax credit carryforwards
18
22
18
1
2
4
9
11
5
5
5
11
Other tax credits & carryforwards
182
190
183
176
197
186
214
215
241
379
435
452
International activity-related
6
4
6
4
22
24
34
44
37
48
-31
-75
Inventory
15
16
18
9
13
15
12
17
8
5
2
-5
Restructuring, Merger & Acquisition
205
141
113
80
45
43
13
-37
34
23
2
41
Oil & Gas, Environmental
23
22
27
17
11
4
4
-9
1
11
25
28
Warranties
5
5
6
4
3
5
5
5
60
84
90
102
Other Assets/Liabilities
454
451
463
456
489
548
556
628
398
517
413
545
6
4
6
4
22
24
34
44
37
48
31
75
Valuation allowance
-248
-268
-257
-243
-248
-186
-234
-255
-245
-615
-578
-688
Expense-related
-40
-55
-55
-48
-36
-39
-65
-75
-97
-129
-169
-197
Mark-to-market adjustments
-117
-15
-193
-186
-276
-300
-361
-275
-286
-345
-451
-484
Property
Intangible assets
-148
-142
-143
-179
-166
-152
-327
-385
-394
-142
-351
-315
Leases
-208
-217
-227
-256
-280
-266
-293
-328
-333
-376
-365
-369
Property, plant & equipment
-1,479 -1,448 -1,416 -1,450 -1,500 -1,468 -1,584 -1,600 -1,707 -1,989 -2,057 -2,148
Regulated accruals and deferrals
-17
-20
-21
-22
-29
-25
-32
-36
-35
-40
-43
-45
Revenue-related
-139
-113
-114
-125
-132
-205
-220
-210
-219
-197
-178
-93
U.S. State-related
5
2
-2
-4
-9
-17
-20
-10
-6
-3
-1
1
Subsidiary-related Items
-13
-9
-17
-14
-23
-41
-161
-260
-237
-153
-219
-240
17
20
21
22
29
25
32
36
35
40
43
45
Number of "Super-Firms" in Sample
71
76
76
78
78
77
77
78
78
78
78
78
Number of Firms in Sample
201
223
233
285
268
236
193
170
149
134
126
120
Information on deferred tax positions are hand collected from income tax disclosures in 10-K and Annual Report filings and assigned to 23 principal categories based on
frequency and monetary significance of disclosure items. Amounts presented here are annual averages per super-fir, as super-firm is defined in Table 1 and in the text.

44

Table 4
Detail of Select Components of Net Deferred Tax Positions ($M), Average per Super-Firm, 1993-2004
1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003

2004

Benefits
Employee benefits
Other post-employment
benefits
Pensions
Expense-related
International activity-related
Inventory-related
Mark-to-market adjustments
Restructuring, Merger &
Acquisition
Oil & Gas, Environmental
Intangible assets
Regulated accruals and deferrals
Revenue-related
U.S. State-related

DTA
DTL
DTA
DTL
DTA
DTL
DTA
DTL
DTA
DTL
DTA
DTL
DTA
DTL
DTA
DTL
DTA
DTL
DTA
DTL
DTA
DTL
DTA
DTL
DTA
DTL

269
-27
537
-18
51
-76
5
-45
24
-18
32
-17
11
-127
210
-5
35
-13
44
-191
22
-39
50
-189
7
-2

276
-35
539
-16
35
-99
6
-61
33
-29
38
-22
72
-87
143
-2
33
-11
46
-188
16
-36
49
-162
5
-2

303
-68
553
-27
43
-115
9
-63
35
-29
39
-21
7
-200
118
-5
35
-8
46
-190
18
-39
53
-167
3
-4

391
-79
511
-29
29
-133
24
-72
43
-39
36
-27
7
-193
86
-5
30
-13
44
-223
18
-39
75
-199
2
-5

452
-72
462
-30
34
-139
28
-64
60
-39
36
-24
5
-281
62
-17
27
-16
54
-220
15
-44
85
-217
2
-11

501
-60
409
-43
42
-123
36
-75
76
-52
43
-28
7
-307
59
-16
18
-15
61
-213
17
-42
91
-296
2
-19

542
-83
395
-46
18
-138
32
-97
90
-56
48
-36
50
-411
27
-14
16
-12
47
-373
7
-39
96
-316
7
-26

536
-84
380
-52
1
-130
53
-128
99
-55
52
-35
34
-309
28
-66
18
-27
36
-422
6
-43
118
-328
5
-15

534
-20
395
-60
9
-181
54
-151
118
-80
50
-41
83
-369
58
-24
22
-20
50
-444
8
-43
135
-354
7
-13

681
-26
429
-34
39
-156
44
-173
137
-89
53
-49
163
-508
49
-26
25
-14
116
-257
2
-42
152
-349
7
-10

572
-137
426
-48
40
-192
48
-217
118
-150
53
-52
167
-617
28
-25
40
-15
131
-483
2
-44
157
-335
8
-9

633
-151
368
-50
36
-243
48
-246
111
-186
44
-49
135
-619
73
-32
44
-16
136
-451
2
-47
164
-257
10
-9

Hand-collected Information on deferred tax positions are assigned to 23 categories based on frequency and monetary significance of disclosure items. Amounts
presented are annual averages per super-firm. For principal components which are primarily DTA or DTL, we do not present the DTA and DTL detail here.

45

Table 5
Distribution of Net Deferred Tax Positions as a Share of Firm Assets, 1993-2004
Super-Firm Sample
Firms with
Firms with
Sample
Net DTL/Assets in range (%)
Net DTA/Assets in range (%)
Year
Size
≤ -5 %
-5 to -3 %
-3 to 0 %
0 to 3 %
3 to 5 %
≥5%
1993
71
25.4
5.6
25.4
31.0
2.8
9.9
1994
76
27.6
5.3
21.1
35.5
6.6
3.9
1995
76
21.1
13.2
23.7
31.6
5.3
5.3
1996
78
23.1
6.4
30.8
25.6
10.3
3.8
1997
78
23.1
7.7
32.1
25.6
7.7
3.8
1998
77
22.1
9.1
26.0
28.6
7.8
6.5
1999
77
27.3
5.2
24.7
31.2
6.5
5.2
2000
78
25.6
5.1
29.5
28.2
5.1
6.4
2001
78
24.4
5.1
28.2
25.6
10.3
6.4
2002
78
23.1
7.7
26.9
25.6
2.6
14.1
2003
78
26.9
3.8
32.1
21.8
6.4
9.0
2004
78
25.6
9.0
30.8
19.2
7.7
7.7
Individual Firm Sample
Firms with
Firms with
Sample
Net DTL/Assets in range (%)
Net DTA/Assets in range (%)
Year
Size
≤ -5
-5 to -3 %
-3 to 0 %
0 to 3 %
3 to 5 %
≥5%
1993
201
21.9
6.5
21.4
38.8
4.0
7.5
1994
223
20.6
6.7
22.9
34.5
9.9
5.4
1995
233
17.2
8.6
27.0
32.6
7.3
7.3
1996
285
17.5
7.4
25.3
34.7
6.7
8.4
1997
268
16.8
7.1
20.1
36.9
9.0
10.1
1998
236
16.9
7.2
19.5
36.0
9.3
11.0
1999
193
20.2
5.7
18.7
38.3
7.3
9.8
2000
170
18.8
7.1
21.8
35.3
8.8
8.2
2001
149
18.8
5.4
22.8
32.9
7.4
12.8
2002
134
17.9
6.0
26.1
29.1
3.0
17.9
2003
126
22.2
6.3
27.0
23.0
10.3
11.1
2004
120
21.7
9.2
28.3
23.3
6.7
10.8
All data are hand-collected. The distribution in the upper panel is calculated at the super-firm level; the distribution
in the lower panel is calculated with each individual firm as its own observation.

46

Table 6
Distribution of Net Deferred Tax Positions as a Share of Firm Assets: Financial and NonFinancial Firms, 1993-2004
Financial Firms
Firms with
Firms with
Sample
Net DTL/Assets in range (%)
Net DTA/Assets in range (%)
Year
Size
≤ -5 %
-5 to -3 %
-3 to 0 %
0 to 3 %
3 to 5 %
≥5%
1993
34
2.9
0.0
23.5
70.6
0.0
2.9
1994
34
2.9
0.0
29.4
50.0
11.8
5.9
1995
32
3.1
3.1
40.6
43.8
0.0
9.4
1996
36
5.6
2.8
44.4
36.1
2.8
8.3
1997
35
2.9
2.9
51.4
37.1
0.0
5.7
1998
33
6.1
3.0
48.5
36.4
3.0
3.0
1999
28
3.6
3.6
35.7
53.6
3.6
0.0
2000
24
8.3
4.2
37.5
50.0
0.0
0.0
2001
24
0.0
8.3
41.7
37.5
8.3
4.2
2002
23
4.3
4.3
43.5
43.5
4.3
0.0
2003
21
0.0
0.0
47.6
47.6
4.8
0.0
2004
18
0.0
0.0
50.0
50.0
0.0
0.0
Non-Financial Firms
Firms with
Firms with
Sample
Net DTL/Assets in range (%)
Net DTA/Assets in range (%)
Year
Size
≤ -5 %
-5 to -3 %
-3 to 0 %
0 to 3 %
3 to 5 %
≥5%
1993
167
25.7
7.8
21.0
32.3
4.8
8.4
1994
189
23.8
7.9
21.7
31.7
9.5
5.3
1995
201
19.4
9.5
24.9
30.8
8.5
7.0
1996
249
19.3
8.0
22.5
34.5
7.2
8.4
1997
233
18.9
7.7
15.5
36.9
10.3
10.7
1998
203
18.7
7.9
14.8
36.0
10.3
12.3
1999
165
23.0
6.1
15.8
35.8
7.9
11.5
2000
146
20.5
7.5
19.2
32.9
10.3
9.6
2001
125
22.4
4.8
19.2
32.0
7.2
14.4
2002
111
20.7
6.3
22.5
26.1
2.7
21.6
2003
105
26.7
7.6
22.9
18.1
11.4
13.3
2004
102
25.5
10.8
24.5
18.6
7.8
12.7
All data are hand-collected except as noted. The distributions are calculated with each individual firm as its own
observation. The sample parallels that of the individual firm analysis in the lower panel of Table 5. Industry is
determined using SIC codes obtained from Compustat; financial firms are SIC codes 6000-6799.

47

Table 7
Mean Impact of Federal Statutory Rate Decrease to 30% ($M), 1993-2004
Panel A: All Super-Firms
Number
Beginning
Current
Direct
Mean
Mean
of
of Period Revaluation Period
Effect
SuperPretax
Net
Adjusted
Effect on
Federal
on Net
Year
Firms
Income Income Net DTA Net Income Tax Exp Income
1994
66
2,606
4,841
-486
69
569
81
1995
69
2,902
1,629
-463
66
615
88
1996
69
3,542
2,243
-516
74
763
109
1997
72
3,615
2,530
-574
82
767
110
1998
69
3,484
2,884
-690
99
789
113
1999
69
4,575
3,012
-580
83
1,121
160
2000
69
5,152
2,142
-1,241
177
1,219
174
2001
71
3,049
1,933
-1,466
209
578
83
2002
72
2,785
140
-1,615
231
759
108
2003
73
4,520
3,100
-1,438
205
876
125
2004
74
5,302
3,625
-2,298
328
1,029
147
Panel B: Super-Firms with Beginning of Period Net DTA
1994
29
3,079
7,234
1,514
-216
656
94
1995
31
3,820
2,448
1,414
-202
778
111
1996
29
3,625
2,337
1,152
-165
683
98
1997
30
3,859
2,552
1,280
-183
658
94
1998
28
3,145
2,677
1,569
-224
589
84
1999
32
4,089
2,645
1,590
-227
881
126
2000
31
4,501
2,920
1,430
-204
952
136
2001
26
3,749
2,459
1,857
-265
608
87
2002
32
2,994
1,808
1,720
-246
537
77
2003
28
3,623
2,493
2,865
-409
629
90
2004
26
4,065
2,755
2,203
-315
721
103
Panel C: Super-Firms with Beginning of Period Net DTL
1994
37
2,219
2,965
-2,054
293
501
72
1995
38
2,145
960
-1,995
285
482
69
1996
40
3,471
2,174
-1,724
246
820
117
1997
43
3,428
2,514
-1,898
271
849
121
1998
41
3,690
3,025
-2,232
319
922
132
1999
37
4,971
3,329
-2,457
351
1,329
190
2000
38
5,570
3,526
-3,421
489
1,437
205
2001
45
2,644
1,629
-3,387
484
560
80
2002
40
2,618
-1,194
-4,283
612
937
134
2003
45
5,079
3,478
-4,116
588
1,029
147
2004
48
5,973
4,097
-4,737
677
1,195
171

Total
Effect
on Net
Income
150
154
183
192
212
243
351
292
339
330
475
-122
-91
-67
-89
-140
-101
-68
-178
-169
-319
-212
365
354
363
392
451
541
694
564
746
735
848

All data are hand-collected. The sample is limited to firms who separately report Federal Tax Expense. We adjust
Beginning of Period Net DTA for Credits, as discussed in Section V. All effects are calculated assuming a 30%
Federal Statutory Rate, rather than the actual rate of 35%.

48

