NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BUILDING CRIMINAL CAPITAL BEHIND BARS:
PEER EFFECTS IN JUVENILE CORRECTIONS
Patrick Bayer
Randi Hjalmarsson
David Pozen
Working Paper 12932
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12932

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2007

The authors wish to thank the Florida Department of Juvenile Justice (DJJ) and the Justice Research
Center (JRC), Inc. for providing the data used in this study. In particular, we wish to thank Sherry
Jackson, Dr. Steven Chapman, and Ted Tollett from the Florida DJJ and Julia Blankenship and Dr.
Kristin Winokur from the JRC for many helpful conversations concerning the data and, more generally,
the operation of the DJJ. We are also grateful to Joe Altonji, Dan Black, Tracy Falba, Erik Hjalmarsson,
Caroline Hoxby, Mireia Jofre-Bonet, Thomas Kane, Jeffrey Kling, Steve Levitt, Carolyn Moehling,
Robert Moffitt, Steve Rivkin, Paul Schultz, Doug Staiger, Ann Stevens, Chris Timmins, Chris Udry,
and seminar participants at APPAM, BU, Duke, IRP, Maryland, NBER, Syracuse, UCLA, UCSC,
and Yale for their valuable comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Patrick Bayer, Randi Hjalmarsson, and David Pozen. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Building Criminal Capital behind Bars: Peer Effects in Juvenile Corrections
Patrick Bayer, Randi Hjalmarsson, and David Pozen
NBER Working Paper No. 12932
February 2007, Revised April 2008
JEL No. H0,H23,J0,J24,K0
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the influence that juvenile offenders serving time in the same correctional facility
have on each other’s subsequent criminal behavior. The analysis is based on data on over 8,000 individuals
serving time in 169 juvenile correctional facilities during a two-year period in Florida. These data
provide a complete record of past crimes, facility assignments, and arrests and adjudications in the
year following release for each individual. To control for the non-random assignment to facilities,
we include facility and facility-by-prior offense fixed effects, thereby estimating peer effects using
only within-facility variation over time. We find strong evidence of peer effects for burglary, petty
larceny, felony and misdemeanor drug offenses, aggravated assault, and felony sex offenses; the influence
of peers primarily affects individuals who already have some experience in a particular crime category.
We also find evidence that the predominant types of peer effects differ in residential versus non-residential
facilities; effects in the latter are consistent with network formation among youth serving time close
to home.

Patrick Bayer
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Sciences
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
patrick.bayer@duke.edu
Randi Hjalmarsson
School of Public Policy
2101 Van Munching Hall
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
rhjalmar@umd.edu

David Pozen
Yale Law School
127 Wall Street
New Haven, CT 06511
david.pozen@yale.edu

“Danbury wasn’t a prison. It was a crime school. I went in with a bachelor of marijuana and
came out with a doctorate of cocaine.” George Jung (Johnny Depp) describing his introduction
to cocaine industry in the motion picture Blow.

I.

Introduction
Understanding the importance and nature of social interactions in criminal behavior not

only provides insight into crime as an economic and social phenomenon, it is also important from
a policy perspective. Broadly speaking, social interactions are likely to magnify the impact of
any changes to economic and social fundamentals, which implies that policy changes are likely to
have important dynamic benefits and costs. A better understanding of how criminal knowledge is
spread and how criminal networks form can also be used to shape decisions throughout the
criminal justice system, such as how to optimally group individuals convicted of various crimes
within correctional facilities so as to reduce future recidivism.
Prior empirical research has documented evidence consistent with the possibility that
social interactions are of first-order importance in criminal behavior. Glaeser et al. (1996), for
example, show that crime exhibits extremely high variance across time and space and that only a
small portion of this can be explained by detailed measures of fundamental economic and social
conditions.1 A longstanding criminology literature, starting with Glueck and Glueck (1950),
documents a strong positive correlation between individual and peer criminal (delinquent)
behavior.2 But, few papers convincingly document causal effects of peers on one another. Jacob
and Lefgren (2003) find that school attendance increases violent crimes but decreases property
crimes, which underscores the role played by social interactions in explaining violent crimes.
Other research has studied the role of neighborhoods in determining criminal behavior, although
it remains unclear in these studies whether the results are driven by changes in private incentives
or by social interactions (Case and Katz, 1991; Ludwig et. al., 2001; Kling et. al., 2005).
In light of the limited direct evidence to date, the central goal of this paper is to estimate
the effects of peer characteristics on criminal behavior in a manner that deals directly with the
non-random matching of individuals to their peers. Specifically, we examine whether the
behavior of a juvenile offender upon release from a correctional facility is influenced by the
characteristics of individuals with whom he concurrently served time in that facility. The analysis
is based on data on over 8,000 individuals who served time in 169 juvenile correctional facilities
1

Glaeser et al. (1996) builds on earlier work on social interactions and crime by Sah (1991) and Murphy,
Shleifer and Vishny (1993).
2
See Akers et. al., 1979; Elliott et. al., 1985; Erickson and Empey, 1965; Jensen, 1972; Matsueda and
Heimer, 1987; Tittle et. al. 1986; Voss; 1964; Warr and Stafford; 1991). Reiss (1988) and Warr (1996)
provide a summary of sociological research based on co-offender surveys.

2

during a two-year period in Florida. These data provide a complete record of past crimes, facility
assignments, and arrests and adjudications in the year following release for each individual.
Our empirical analysis consists of a series of regressions that relate recidivism in each of
a number of crime categories to individual demographic and criminal history characteristics, peer
demographic and criminal history characteristics, and interactions between these individual and
peer characteristics. To control for the non-random assignment of juveniles to facilities, we
include facility and facility-by-prior offense fixed effects in these regressions. This ensures that
the impact of peers on recidivism is identified using only the variation in the length of time that
any two individuals who are committed to the same facility happen to overlap.
Relative to other settings where the estimation of social interactions has proven more
difficult, this empirical strategy exploits a unique feature of correctional facilities—namely, that
the peer group is constantly evolving over time with the admittance and release of individuals as
their sentences begin and expire.3 As long as the date at which a given individual is assigned to a
facility within the two-year sample period is random with respect to the peers in the facility at
that time, this empirical strategy properly controls for the non-random assignment of individuals
to facilities. We provide a number of tests of this central identifying assumption, demonstrating
that: (i) the within-facility variation in peer characteristics is orthogonal to all observable
individual characteristics, (ii) the estimated peer effects are completely robust to general or
localized trends in criminal activity, and (iii) the estimated peer effects cannot be explained by the
facility assignment of individuals who have committed crimes together.
One of the goals of this paper is to understand how crime is spread and the mechanisms
underlying this dispersion. Thus, an important feature of our analysis is that it allows crimespecific peer effects to vary with an individual’s own criminal experience. In this way, we seek to
distinguish between peer effects that reinforce existing criminal tendencies and those that cause
individuals to branch out into new areas of criminal activity. Our analysis provides strong
evidence of the existence of peer effects in juvenile correctional facilities. In almost every
instance, these peer effects are reinforcing in nature: exposure to peers with a history of
committing a particular crime increases the probability that an individual who has already
committed the same type of crime recidivates with that crime. In our main specification,
reinforcing peer effects exist for burglary, petty larceny, felony and misdemeanor drug offenses,
3

Recent research on peer and neighborhood effects in other settings has relied on particular randomizing
events, such as the random assignment of roommates (Sacerdote, 2001) or social experiments such as MTO
in Boston (Katz et. al., 2001) or STAR in Tennessee schools (Boozer and Cacciola, 2001). While the
explicit randomization present in these events or experiments is ideal, relying exclusively on such events
severely limits the settings where peer effects can be studied and the generalizability of the findings.

3

aggravated assault, and felony sex offenses. In contrast, there is no evidence of such peer effects
for individuals with no prior experience in a given crime category.

We demonstrate the

robustness of these results to a variety of alternative specifications and explore heterogeneity in
the magnitude and nature of peer effects across individuals, peers, and facilities. Taken as a
whole, these results help to distinguish among alternative explanations for the existence of crimespecific peer effects, a matter we take up later in the paper.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the data and
provides some background on the Florida juvenile justice system. Section III outlines our basic
empirical methodology and presents a number of diagnostic tests of our identifying assumption.
Section IV presents the results and Section V concludes.

II.

Data and Juvenile Corrections in Florida

Assignment to Juvenile Corrections in Florida
The assignment of juveniles to facilities in Florida typically occurs in two steps with the
judge first deciding the appropriate risk level of the youth and the Department of Juvenile Justice
then assigning the youth to a particular program. More specifically, upon the finding by the
courts that a juvenile has committed a delinquent act, Department of Juvenile Justice probation
officers must prepare a predisposition report and assessment. Under Florida statutes, this
predisposition report must include a classification of the risk level of the youth, which captures
the degree to which the youths represent a risk to themselves and the public. There are five risk
levels: minimum-, low-, moderate-, high-, and maximum-risk. During the period of our study,
decisions were primarily made on the basis of current and past offense characteristics.4 In
addition, individuals whose current offense is a first-degree felony, a sex offense, or a firearmrelated offense are automatically excluded from the minimum and low risk categories. Based on
the probation officer’s recommendation and assessment of the youth, the judge makes the final
decision about the appropriate risk level.5

4

More recently, the probation officer’s report is largely based on the results of an assessment tool that was
put in place in 2005; in addition to information about current and past offenses, PACT (Positive
Achievement Change Tool) includes a series of questions about schooling, free time, employment,
relationships, family history, living arrangements, alcohol and drugs, mental health problems, attitudes,
aggression and skills. The recommended risk level is largely based on the youth’s PACT score.
5
Significant efforts were made to identify an algorithm that is used to assign the risk level. Such an
algorithm is not written into Florida statutes nor readily available.

4

These risk levels are also used to classify facilities.6 One of the primary differences
across facilities within these different risk levels is the level of access that youths have to the
community. Minimum risk facilities are non-residential; youths in these facilities live at home
and participate at least five days a week in a day treatment program. Low risk facilities are
residential but the youth are allowed to have unsupervised access to the community. Only
supervised access to the community is allowed in moderate risk facilities and rare access in high
and maximum risk facilities. The level of security also increases with facility level.
Given this judge-assigned risk level, the Florida Department of Juvenile Justice places
the juvenile in a particular program. These programs vary greatly in type: there are halfway
houses, group treatment homes, boot camps, contracted day treatment programs, intensive
residential treatment programs, sex offender programs, work and wilderness programs, jails, etc.7
The decision as to the appropriate program within a given risk level for a particular youth is based
on a number of factors, including: the recommendation of the probation officer, any special needs
of the youth that were determined in the assessment, and the availability of beds.
Data Description
The primary data source is the internal database maintained by the Florida Department of
Juvenile Justice (DJJ) for juvenile offenders under its care. We were granted access to the DJJ’s
records on all youths (16,164 individuals) released from a Florida-based juvenile correctional
facility between July 1, 1997 and June 30, 1999.8 For each of these individuals, the data detail
whether or not the individual recidivates within the first year following release. Because the type
of crime committed upon recidivating is only available if the individual is younger than age
eighteen at the date of re-arrest (i.e. still a juvenile in the Florida system), we restrict the sample
to individuals age seventeen and younger at the time of release.9 Of the 9,382 individuals younger
than seventeen at release, the data are missing facility assignment in 982 cases and admit/release
date information in an additional 184 cases. Thus, the primary sample used in our analysis
contains 8,216 juveniles aged seventeen and younger at the time of release. It is important to
6

See the Florida Department of Juvenile Justice website, http://www.djj.state.fl.us/Residential/index.html,
for more details.
7
A detailed description of the different types of facilities can be found in Bayer and Pozen (2005).
8
Note that this sample structure does not limit our ability to observe sentences of any length. The
individuals that we observe serving longer sentences simply tend to have been admitted earlier, sometimes
well before our study period begins.
9
Individuals who are 14 and older and who commit sufficiently serious crimes may be processed in the
adult criminal system. Though we cannot observe such recidivism offenses, this should not influence the
results regarding relatively minor crimes such as misdemeanor drugs, petty larceny, and burglary.

5

emphasize, however, that all individuals for whom facility assignment and admit/release date
information is available are used in constructing the measures of peer characteristics.
The sample includes not only detailed information on recidivism behavior, but also data
on the youths’ correctional facility assignments, criminal histories, personal characteristics, and
home neighborhoods. Descriptive statistics are presented in Table 1. Measures of overall
recidivism can be constructed on the basis of either a subsequent adjudication (conviction) or a
subsequent criminal charge. 51 percent of the sample recidivates within a year of release by the
former measure and 67 percent by the latter. We use a subsequent criminal charge as our
definition of recidivism because this characterization permits individuals to recidivate in multiple
crime categories (many do) and avoids a series of issues related to adjudication when an
individual has been charged in multiple categories.10 Using this measure of recidivism, Table 1
shows that 14 percent of the sample recidivates with a burglary offense, 12 percent with a petty
larceny offense, and 9 percent with a felony drug offense, misdemeanor drug offense, auto theft,
and a grand larceny offense, respectively. Note that because the different possible outcome
variables are not mutually exclusive, the sum of the recidivism rates in all possible crime
categories is greater than the overall recidivism rate of 67 percent.
The paper focuses on ten main crime categories: auto theft, burglary, grand larceny, petty
larceny, robbery, felony drug crimes, misdemeanor drug crimes, aggravated assault and/or
battery, felony weapons crimes, and felony sex crimes. Appendix Table 1 contains descriptions of
particular crimes associated with each of these categories. These categories were chosen on the
basis of three criteria: (i) the offense is serious enough to contribute to the FBI crime index; (ii)
the offense is defined well enough to interpret the results; and (iii) recidivism rates are great
enough so that the estimation is reasonably precise. Disorderly conduct is not included, for
example, because the exact nature of the offense varies greatly across crimes, and misdemeanor
sex offense is not included because only 27 of the 8,216 individuals recidivate with this crime.
The individual characteristics listed in Table 1 provide basic information on the youths’
age, gender, race, and sentence length. The criminal history variables encompass all charges
formally brought against the youth within the Florida system prior to placement in a correctional
facility; the variables used in our analysis indicate whether an individual has any history of
committing a particular type of offense, regardless of the number of times the individual has
committed the offense. Neighborhood characteristic variables are constructed using each youth’s

10

Analogous specifications to those included in the paper with recidivism defined as a subsequent
adjudication yielded qualitatively similar results.

6

zip code of residence. With the exception of Youth Crime Rate in Zip, which comes directly from
DJJ records, these measures are derived from the 1990 Census of Population of Housing.
Constructing the Peer Measures
Table 1 also presents descriptive statistics for measures of peer characteristics; the list of
peer characteristics parallels the list of individual characteristics (i.e. the demographic, criminal
history, and neighborhood characteristics). The peer measures are essentially weighted averages
of a particular characteristic, where the weights are the number of days an individual is exposed
to each peer. In constructing these peer measures, however, one must account for the fact that we
only observe individuals who are released in the two-year period from July 1, 1997 to June 30,
1999. Thus, for individuals who are released towards the beginning (end) of the sample period,
any peers who are released before (after) the sample period begins will not be observed; we
classify these individuals as pre and post-censoring cases. However, while we cannot identify
each youth’s exact set of peers, we can calculate an unbiased estimate of their peer exposure
under the assumption that the within-facility variation in peer characteristics is random with
respect to when an individual is assigned to the facility. This is the central identifying assumption
of the paper and we provide direct evidence to support this assumption below.
In particular, we estimate each individual’s exposure to peers who would have been
released either before or after the sample period by using the characteristics of the individuals
observed to be released from the facility during the full sample period. In this way, we form the
peer measure used in the analysis by averaging (i) the characteristics of those peers actually
observed to overlap with the individual and (ii) a properly weighted measure of the estimated
characteristics of the peers with whom this individual would have overlapped, but who were
released outside of the sample period. This ensures that the peer measure used in the analysis is
an unbiased measure of the true peer measure for each individual as long as the sample of
individuals released during the study period is not systematically different than those released just
before or after it. In this way, while our subsequent peer measure is subject to some measurement
error, this error is uncorrelated with the individual characteristics included in the regression. We
describe the exact procedure used to construct the peer measure, dealing with four separate cases
of censoring, in Appendix 1.

III.

Empirical Methodology and Identification

7

Empirical Specification
The primary analysis presented in this paper relates recidivism to vectors of individual
and peer characteristics.11 The general specification that we take to the data can be written as: 12
(1)

Rijth = ! 0 (Offenseijth * Peer _ offenseijth )+ !1 (No _ Offenseijth * Peer _ offenseijth )
+ Pijt" + X ijt # + $ j + Offenseijth * µ j + %t + & ijth

The dependent variable, Rhijt indicates whether individual i in facility j, who is released in period
t, recidivates with offense type h. Peer_offensehijt describes an individual’s exposure to peers with
a history of offense type h. Offensehijt equals one if individual i has a history of offense type h,
while No_Offensehijt indicates no prior history of that offense. Pijt is a vector of additional peer
characteristics including demographic variables as well as peer criminal histories in all other
crime categories. Similarly, Xijt is a vector of individual demographic and criminal history
variables, including prior histories in all other crime categories. We estimate equation (1) for ten
crime categories simultaneously using a seemingly unrelated regression (SUR) framework.13
Following the theoretical motivation laid out in the introduction, we focus our analysis on
crime-specific peer effects: e.g., does the increased exposure to peers with a history of auto theft
make an individual more likely to commit auto theft upon release? These crime-specific peer
effects are captured by the parameters !0 and !1 in equation (1). It is important to emphasize that
the total number of prior felonies along with controls for the prior histories of peers in each of the
ten crime categories are included in each regression in the vector Pijt.
A second important feature of equation (1) is that it allows crime-specific peer effects to
vary with an individual’s own criminal experience, as reflected in the parameters !0 and !1. We
chose this specification at the outset for two main reasons. First, the distinction between peer
11

Clearly, recidivism is a function of both actual criminal activity and the probability of arrest and
adjudication. To the extent that some peer effects take the form of learning to avoid arrest and adjudication,
our analysis will understate the overall level of increased criminal activity that follows exposure to peers
with more experience at a given crime. On the other hand, it is possible that exposure to peers in prison
makes an individual bolder or less cautious when committing crimes upon release; this type of “machismo”
effect could increase arrest rates even if the underlying level of criminal activity has not changed.
12
In the context of juvenile correctional facilities, the simultaneity problem (first described by Manski
(1993)) is that the influence of peer characteristics, such as the intensity of peer criminal history, cannot be
distinguished from the influence of future peer behavior. Because it is impossible to distinguish these types
of peer effects without strong a priori functional form assumptions, we simply assume that peer effects
operate through the influence of peer characteristics rather than subsequent peer behavior.
13
The standard errors that are reported for this system of regressions that include facility fixed effects are
not further adjusted for clustering at the facility level. An analysis of the effects of controlling for clustering
in a series of separate regressions had almost no effect on the estimated standard errors for models that
included facility fixed effects. In fact, the standard errors on our parameters of interest decreased about as
often as they increased.

8

effects that reinforce existing criminal tendencies and those that cause individuals to branch out
into new areas of criminal activity is of first-order importance for (i) determining which
theoretical explanations for the presence of peer effects are consistent with the data and (ii)
policymakers concerned with optimal assignment, as knowledge of the nature of crime-specific
peer effects helps to determine the best way to group individuals on the basis of prior criminal
records. Second, the existing literature demonstrates that juvenile offenders show tendencies to
specialize – i.e., recidivate in a crime category in which they already have a criminal history
(Wolfgang et. al., 1972; Bursik, 1980; Rojek and Erickson, 1982; Cohen, 1986; Farrington et. al.,
1988). Within our dataset, Table 2 reports OLS estimates of regressions of recidivism in each
crime category on whether the individuals had any history of each of the ten crimes. The first row
presents the diagonal coefficients (e.g. the relationship between having a history of auto theft and
recidivating with auto theft) while the second row presents the average of the off-diagonal
coefficients. In every case but felony weapons, experience in a particular crime is a significant
predictor of recidivating with that crime; in addition, the magnitudes of these specialization
coefficients are greater than those for all other types of criminal experience (as reflected in the
average of the off-diagonal coefficients). Thus, allowing an individual’s prior criminal experience
to have both a level and slope effect in equation (1) permits the estimated peer effects to take a
flexible form with respect to the baseline propensity to recidivate in a crime category.14
A third important feature of our main specification, and the main innovation of our
analysis vis a vis the existing literature, is the inclusion of facility-by-prior offense fixed effects.
As written, "j applies to all individuals in the facility, while µj is an additional facility fixed effect
that applies to individuals with a history of offense type h, Offensehijt. The inclusion of these fixed
effects controls for: (i) the non-random assignment of individuals to facilities and (ii) any
unobserved differences correlated across all individuals in a facility. In both cases, separate fixed
effects are estimated for those with and without a prior history in a given crime category. This
ensures that the impact of peers on recidivism is identified using only within-facility variation in
peer exposure.15 In order for this methodology to yield consistent estimates of causal peer effects,
14

It is important to note that both individual and peer criminal history measures are based on whether an
individual has any history of the particular offense rather than whether it is the most recent offense. The
results of additional regressions (not included in the paper) that include distinct variables characterizing an
individual’s past versus most recent crimes indicate that prior offenses have a remarkably similar impact on
recidivism no matter when they occurred. This may reflect the short criminal histories of juveniles, which
typically impy that even the most distant crimes have occurred in the not so distant past.
15
A natural concern that arises when including facility fixed effects is whether there is sufficient variation
in the peer measures within facilities to identify peer effects precisely. Table 1 reports both overall and
within-facility standard deviations for each peer measure, showing that a substantial amount of variation in
peer measures remains when the variation is restricted to within-facility.

9

the timing of the assignment of individuals to facilities with respect to the particular peers in the
facility at that time must be as good as random within the two-year sample period.16
Therefore, an important concern, which could invalidate this identifying assumption, is
the possibility of trends in criminal activity. If, for example, there is a general upward trend in
felony drug crimes over the course of our sample, then individuals observed later in the sample
will both (i) likely be exposed to a higher proportion of peers with a history of felony drug crimes
and (ii) be more likely to recidivate with a felony drug crime upon release; this would bias
estimated peer effects upwards. To assess the extent to which peer composition (and therefore
crime itself) has changed over the course of our sample period, we regress peer exposure in each
of the ten crime categories on quarter of release dummies. Relative to the first quarter, we find
that there is some evidence of downward trends in crime; this pattern is strongest for property
crimes. However, just 29 of the 70 estimated coefficients are significant and the magnitudes of
the coefficients are consistently quite small, especially when compared to the average peer
measure; the average coefficient on the quarter of release dummies is just -.009.
To account for these slight trends in crime, we include quarter of release dummies !t in
our baseline specification - equation (1), although it is worth noting that these have a negligible
effect on the estimated coefficients. We also provide additional evidence below that these
minimal trends in crime are not a significant concern. In particular, we show that our main results
are not sensitive to controlling for crime trends in a number of ways, including: month dummies,
judicial circuit by quarter dummies, and judicial circuit specific monthly time trends.
Diagnostic Tests of Identifying Assumption and Other Threats to Identification
As mentioned above, our ability to identify causal peer effects rests on the assumption
that the timing of the assignment of individuals to facilities is as good as random within the twoyear study period. This assumption gives rise to a clear implication that is testable on observable
characteristics: within-facility variation in peer characteristics should be uncorrelated with
individual characteristics. In Tables 3a and 3b, we provide a test that individual observable
characteristics are essentially orthogonal to the within-facility variation in peer measures. In
16

It is important to note that because we do not directly observe whether an individual interacts with all of
his peers, the peer effect identified in our analysis combines the true impact of each peer interaction within
the facility with the likelihood (or intensity) with which that interaction occurs. In this way, it is important
to recognize that the effect captured here is context-specific. While this would be the effect of interest for
policymakers concerned with optimal assignment in Florida’s juvenile facilities, because this effect
depends in part on the nature of the interactions that occur within Florida’s juvenile correctional facilities, it
is impossible to ascertain the more structural effect associated with each distinct peer interaction.

10

particular, we construct an index of individual characteristics for each crime category using a
measure of predicted recidivism derived from a regression of recidivism on individual
characteristics and facility fixed effects; the predicted recidivism measure is the fitted value for
the individual characteristics in this regression. This measure captures that part of recidivism that
can be explained by observable attributes related to an individual’s prior criminal history, age,
sex, race, age at first offense, and residential neighborhood.
Table 3a reports the results of regressing this predicted recidivism measure on just the
two peer measures of primary interest for each crime category; i.e. the two interaction terms.
Table 3b repeats these regressions adding facility-by-prior offense fixed effects. In Table 3a, the
estimated coefficients are statistically significant in almost every instance. Thus, peer exposure is
strongly correlated with pre-determined individual attributes that likely affect facility assignment.
In Table 3b, on the other hand, where only within-facility variation in peers is used in both
measures, there is almost no evidence of correlation between peer characteristics and predicted
recidivism. Almost all of the coefficients decrease in size by one to two orders of magnitude. In
fact, for individuals without a prior history in the crime category, the coefficients, !1, are never
significant and in all cases are quite small. For individuals with a prior history in a crime
category, only the felony weapons coefficient is significant, although it is still quite small in size.
In general, then, this strenuous test of our central identifying assumption strongly
supports the conclusions that: (i) there is almost no correlation of the within-facility variation in
peer measures with the key pre-determined individual attributes related to recidivism in each
crime category and (ii) any analysis of peer effects that incorporates across-facility variation is
likely to lead to sizeable biases in the estimated effects.
A separate issue related to facility assignment that might invalidate our identifying
assumption is the concern that youths who have committed crimes together might be assigned to
the same facility. If, for example, individuals who belong to the same gang have similar criminal
histories and are sentenced to the same facility at similar times, we might estimate positive
interactions between peer and individual criminal history variables in our recidivism regressions
even in the absence of peer effects in correctional facilities. With regards to this potential
concern, it is important to first point out that the lack of any systematic within-facility correlation
between individual and peer characteristics described above already implies that there is not any
undo clustering in the timing of assignment to correctional facilities for individuals with
particular criminal histories. However, we further address this potential issue by examining
clustering in the assignment of individuals to facilities on the basis of residential zip code. As a
starting point, it is important to note that individuals are not generally exposed to many peers

11

from the same zip code. In particular, of the 189 individuals released, on average, from a facility,
an individual is exposed to only six individuals with the same residential zip code. Thus,
individuals from the same zip code generally contribute only about two to three percent of the
characteristics used in calculating an individual’s peer measures.
Table 4 tests whether there is any undue clustering of release or admit dates for
individuals from the same zip code. To test whether individuals from the same zip code are
disproportionately released or admitted closer to one another in time, we examine the difference
between the proportion released (admitted) from the same zip code in a specified time period and
the proportion released (admitted) from the same zip code in the overall sample. We consider
individuals released within 7, 14, and 21 days of each other. Of the individuals released within
seven days of one another, 2.8 percent share the same zip code, while 2.7 percent of all
individuals released from the same facility share the same zip code. Similarly, 2.9 percent of
those admitted within seven days of one another share the same zip code compared to 2.8 percent
of those admitted during the first year of our sample period.17 These differences, as well as those
for the 14- and 21-day time periods, are not significant at the 5 percent level. More importantly,
even if these differences were statistically significant, the magnitudes, which are only between
0.2 and 0.3 percent, would contribute so little to the variation in our peer measures that such
neighborhood clustering cannot possibility explain even a small fraction of our results.

IV.

Results

Main Results
Table 5 reports the coefficients !0 and !1 for a specification of the type shown in equation
(1) for each crime category. The full specification is reported in Appendix Table 2 and includes
facility-by-prior offense fixed effects as well as additional controls for peer and individual
characteristics characterizing criminal history in each crime category, total number of past
felonies, age at first offense, current age, sex, and characteristics of the residential zip code. 18
The first row of Table 5 reports !0, the estimated crime-specific peer effect for those with
a history of having committed the relevant offense and the second row reports !1, the estimated
17

We restrict the sample to this period because we observe most of the individuals admitted during this
period, missing only those serving particularly long sentences. In general, because our sample is based on
all individuals released during a two-year period, we are not able to characterize all of the individuals
admitted during any particular period.
18
While we look for evidence of peer effects in particular crime categories (such as grand larceny), it is
certainly possible that individuals specialize in groups of particular crime categories (such as all thefts)
rather than in just one particular crime category. Appendix Table 2 generally reveals broad specialization
across drug crimes as well all forms of theft.

12

peer effect for individuals without a history of having committed this offense. The estimates of

!1 are negative as often as positive, with no statistically significant evidence of positive peer
effects in any crime category. In addition, the hypothesis that !1 equals zero in each category
cannot be rejected; the p-value of the joint test is 0.3694. In contrast, the parameter estimates
for !0 are positive in almost every case and statistically significant for burglary, petty larceny,
felony and misdemeanor drug crimes, aggravated assault, and felony sex offenses.19 Thus,
exposure to a greater percentage of peers with a history of having committed burglaries increases
the likelihood that an individual with a prior adjudication for burglary commits another burglary
upon release; no such effect exists for those without a prior history of burglary.
As shown in Table 2 above, the history of a prior offense in a category is a strong
predictor of future recidivism. Thus, in order to get a sense of the magnitudes of the estimated
reinforcing peer effects, it is helpful to compare them to the mean propensity of an individual
with a prior offense to recidivate in that same crime category. On average, for example, as
indicated in Table 2, individuals with a prior history of burglary recidivate with a burglary 13.6
percent of the time. Thus, the estimated reinforcing peer effect of 0.19 for burglary implies that a
standard deviation increase in exposure to peers that have committed burglaries (0.16) increases
the likelihood of recidivism from 13.6 to 16.6 percent for these individuals at the mean. Similarly,
the estimated reinforcing peer effect for felony drug crimes of 0.31 implies that a one standard
deviation increase in exposure to peers with a history of a felony drug crime (0.10) increases the
likelihood of recidivating with a felony drug crime at the mean from 28.5 to 31.6 percent. In this
way, the estimated magnitudes of these peer effects are sizeable, but also appear to be reasonable
given the relatively high baseline propensities of individuals to recidivate in a crime category in
which they have prior experience.20
While the nature of our analysis limits our ability to distinguish specific mechanisms
through which peer effects operate, the general pattern of results presented in Table 5 does fit
better with some mechanisms.

One explanation that fits well with the existence of strong

reinforcing peer effects and limited effects on those without prior experience in a crime category
19

Additional specifications, not included in the paper, show that the strong evidence of peer effects for
felony drug crimes is primarily driven by felony non-marijuana drug crimes.
20
The magnitudes of the peer effects estimated here are also reasonable when compared to other setting
where peers are randomly assigned. In a study of the effect of college roommate drinking on GPA, for
example, Kremer and Levy (2003) find evidence of a large reinforcing peer effect. Specifically, they find
that, on average, males assigned to roommates who reported drinking prior to entering college had a onequarter point lower GPA than those assigned non-drinking roommates. This effect is four times as large, a
full point GPA, for males who themselves had a history of frequent drinking prior to college. Sacerdote
(2001) also reports evidence that the interaction between own and roommate background characteristics has
a strong influence on an individual’s own freshman year GPA in college.

13

(particularly for misdemeanor drug crimes) is that peers reinforce addictive behavior. Another
explanation that fits well with economic theory is that individuals may experience different
returns from participation in different types of crimes related to natural abilities, opportunities,
human capital accumulation, involvement in crime networks, or other factors (as in the legitimate
sector of the economy). In this case, individuals with a history in a crime category have already
revealed themselves to have high returns and, likely, substantial human capital in this category.
Consequently, access to peers that increase the individual’s returns to this type of crime through,
for example, social learning, may lead to increased activity in this category.21 Conversely, access
to peers that increase returns in another category may be much less valuable, as this may not raise
the returns in that category enough to change the individual’s optimal behavior.22
Robustness and Heterogeneity of Main Results
As discussed previously, one concern is that our findings are driven by trends in criminal
activity. We therefore controlled for quarter of release in our main specification, as presented in
Table 5. To further assess the validity of this concern, we first test the joint significance of the
quarter of release dummies in each crime category presented in Table 5 and present the resulting
p-values. They are jointly significant at the five percent level only for auto theft and at the ten
percent level for petty larceny. Thus, not only is there a low correlation between quarter of release
and our peer measures, quarter of release also predicts little of recidivism. Table 6 further shows
the robustness of our results across crime categories to time trends and presents the results of
estimating equation (1) with (i) no controls for time, (ii) quarter of release dummies (i.e. our
baseline specification), and (iii) interactions between dummies for the 20 judicial circuits and
each quarter of release. The point estimates are remarkably similar across each of these
specifications and evidence of a reinforcing peer effect is consistently seen for burglary, felony
drugs, misdemeanor drugs, aggravated assault, and felony sex offenses; the reinforcing peer
effect for petty larceny loses its significance when quarter by judicial circuit interactions are
included, but is still very close in magnitude.
To simplify the comparison of our main results presented in Table 5 with alternative
specifications (like those in Table 6), the rest of our analysis estimates equation (1) under the
constraints that (i) the reinforcing peer effects are equal across crime categories and (ii) the non21

A small but growing body of research in economics on social learning and network formation includes
Besley and Case (1994), Foster and Rosenzweig (1995), Munshi (1999), and Conley and Udry (2002).
22
Put another way, it is important to distinguish between learning from one’s peers and how that learning
translates into subsequent criminal activity. The results suggest that learning in a category in which the
youth already has experience may be more valuable and therefore more likely to be translated into action.

14

reinforcing peer effects are equal across crime categories. This yields just two coefficients of
interest from each specification rather than twenty. Row (1) of Table 7 displays the results of
estimating our baseline specification, presented in Table 5, in this way. This yields a highly
significant reinforcing peer coefficient of 0.111 and insignificant non-reinforcing peer coefficient
of 0.006. These coefficients are virtually identical when controlling for quarter by judicial circuit
interactions, month of release dummies, and judicial circuit specific time trends, as seen in rows
(2) – (4) of Table 7.
Row (5) of Table 7 presents the constrained coefficients that result when estimating
equation (1) without individual characteristics. The estimated reinforcing and non-reinforcing
peer effects are virtually identical to our baseline results (0.114 and 0.007). This result is further
evidence in support of our identifying assumption since the inclusion of individual characteristics
should have no effect on the estimated peer effects if they are uncorrelated with peer measures.
Although each regression presented thus far includes separate fixed effects for
individuals with and without a history of having committed that crime, it is important to note that
an individual’s own history of committing an offense is interacted with only a single peer
measure – the propensity of peers to have previously committed crimes in that category. This
naturally leads to the question of whether the evidence of reinforcing peer effects would be
eliminated if an individual’s own offense history was fully interacted with the complete set of
peer offense characteristics. To explore this possibility, we estimated the following fully
interacted specification.
Rijth = ! 0 (Offenseijth * Peer _ offenseijth )+ !1 (No _ Offenseijth * Peer _ offenseijth )

(2)

+ (Offenseijth * Peer _ offenseijt( h )" + (No _ Offenseijth * Peer _ offenseijt( h )#
+ X ijt $ + % j + Offenseijth * µ j + &t + ' ijth

Row (6) of Table 7 presents the results from estimating equation (2) when ! 0 and !1 are
constrained to be constant across crime categories; the estimates are 0.117 and 0.006 respectively.
These are virtually identical to our baseline specification. In addition, most of the coefficients on
the off-diagonal interactions, ! and ! , are not significant. Tests of the joint significance of these
off-diagonal terms for each crime category indicate that (i) none of the non-reinforcing offdiagonal coefficients, ! , are jointly significant and (ii) the reinforcing off-diagonal terms, ! ,
are jointly significant at the ten percent level for only burglary, aggravated assault, and felony sex
offenses. In addition, none of the off-diagonal coefficients are consistently significant across the
ten crime categories. For instance, exposure to peers with a history of felony drug offenses or sex
offenses does not increase the recidivism of all individuals, just those individuals with histories of

15

these offenses themselves. Thus, the reinforcing peer effect reported in our main specification is
driven by crime-specific peer exposure.
To test the robustness of our measures of peer exposure to the measurement error
associated with the censoring of the sample, we estimate equation (1) using only those individuals
who are released during the middle two-thirds of our sample, October 31, 1997 through February
28, 1999. Because the average sentence length for the sample is less than six months, only a small
portion of the peer exposure measure must be estimated for these individuals. The estimated
constrained coefficients are presented in row (7) of Table 8 and are equal to 0.176 ( ! 0 ) and 0.014
( !1 ). The magnitudes of these effects are somewhat greater than those reported in our baseline
specification, which is consistent with the notion that the measurement error induced by the
portion of the peer measure that needs to be estimated for some individuals due to censoring has
an attenuating effect on the estimated peer effects.
Finally, we assess whether the estimated peer effects are heterogeneous across facility
characteristics, beginning with facility size. As discussed above, the peer effect identified in our
analysis combines the true impact of each peer interaction within the facility with the likelihood
(or intensity) with which that interaction occurs. Thus, the estimated peer effect might differ by
facility size for two reasons: (i) the true peer effect is different in small facilities or (ii) peers
interact differently within large versus small facilities.23 Row (8) of Table 7 presents the results of
estimating the constrained version of equation (1) for the sample of 3,998 individuals in the 115
smallest facilities, i.e. those facilities with an average of 20 or fewer individuals concurrently
serving sentences. The estimated reinforcing and non-reinforcing peer effects are equal to 0.134
and -0.002, which are again quite comparable to the results for the whole sample.
While we do not have enough data to examine peer effects separately for each type of
programming used in the state (e.g., group homes, boot camps), we can estimate the model
separately for the 6,990 individuals in residential facilities and 1,226 individuals in nonresidential facilities. Rows (9) and (10) of Table 7 present the results for residential and nonresidential facilities, respectively. The constrained reinforcing peer coefficient is equal to 0.100 in
residential facilities, which is very similar to that seen for the entire sample. For non-residential
facilities, this coefficient is equal to 0.171. Thus, reinforcing peer effects appear to be even larger
23

Also note, it is generally not possible to sign the bias that would result if true peer groups consisted of a
smaller subset of the individuals within a facility. Manski (1993) points out that it is impossible to identify
the true reference group without some a priori knowledge of the way that individuals interact within a
larger group; see Section 2.5 in particular. In general, depending on how peer characteristics are defined in
the analysis and how individuals actually interact, the mis-specification of the proper reference group can
bias the results in any direction.

16

in non-residential facilities. The constrained specification, however, masks the fact that this
reinforcing peer effect is being driven by large coefficients for the crimes of auto theft, robbery,
felony drug offenses, and aggravated assault. A potential explanation for these effects is that the
crimes of auto theft and felony drugs are largely dependent on access to networks.24 Nonresidential facilities may inadvertently increase the formation and expansion of criminal networks
by bringing together young offenders from surrounding neighborhoods.25 This points to an
obviously difficult issue for policymakers in how best to deal with first-time and other young
juvenile offenders, as the evidence presented here implies that grouping them together in nonresidential facilities may lead to the rapid expansion of criminal networks.26

V.

Conclusion
This paper analyzes the influence that juvenile offenders serving time in the same

correctional facility have on each other’s subsequent criminal behavior. The results provide
strong evidence of the existence of peer effects in juvenile correctional facilities. In almost all
instances, these peer effects have a reinforcing nature, whereby exposure to peers with a history
of committing a particular crime increases the probability that an individual who has already
committed the same type of crime recidivates with that crime. In our main analysis, this form of a
reinforcing peer effect is positive and significant for the cases of burglary, petty larceny, felony
drug offenses, misdemeanor drug offenses, aggravated assault, and felony sex offenses. In
contrast, we find no evidence that exposure to peers with particular criminal histories
significantly increases an individual’s propensity to recidivate in a crime category in which the
individual has no prior experience. In addition, there are large reinforcing peer effects for the
crimes of auto theft and felony drug offenses in non-residential facilities; we, therefore,
conjecture that the grouping of juveniles from nearby neighborhoods may inadvertently foster the
formation and expansion of criminal networks.
A number of mechanisms are particularly capable of explaining the most robust feature
of our findings: that peer effects tend to reinforce existing criminal behavior. One such
24

Ayres and Levitt (1998) describe the types of networks that exist in auto theft rings. Stolen cars must be
transferred from the individual who steals the car to a chop-shop or another appropriate sales outlet. As in
other forms of organized crime, such a transaction may require a level of confidence that the individual will
not reveal the network if arrested.
25
Individuals in the lowest risk category are typically assigned to non-residential facilities close to their
homes (94 percent are in the same county of residence), while all others are assigned to residential facilities
typically much further from home (only 27 percent are in the county of residence).
26
Previous specifications also considered the role played by sentence length in more detail and, in
particular, controlled for the number of days served by peers. The coefficient on this variable (both when
other peer measures were included and excluded) varied in sign and was never significant.

17

explanation is that peers reinforce addictive behavior, which may explain part of the large
reinforcing peer effect for misdemeanor drug crimes. Another important explanation is that the
matching of peers with common histories may lead to the creation and expansion of criminal
networks, which are important for crimes such as auto theft and felony drug crimes. A more
general explanation for reinforcing peer effects that we advance in the paper is that peers may
increase knowledge about specific crimes, thereby increasing returns to committing those crimes.
While one might initially expect this to lead to increased criminal activity by all individuals, the
importance of specialization in criminal activity suggests that increased returns to a criminal
activity are likely to lead to the largest increase in criminal activity in a crime category in which
an individual has already specialized, thereby leading to the existence of reinforcing peer effects.
The results of our analysis have several policy implications. First, while a policy of
grouping offenders with others who have committed the same crimes may seem prudent to
prevent the exposure of young offenders to peers with experience in other criminal activities,
such a policy may inadvertently increase exposure to peers with experience precisely in those
crime categories where it is likely to be of greatest use. Second, and more broadly speaking, the
existence of peer effects in juvenile criminal behavior suggests that any reduction in crime leads,
through reductions in the criminal histories of peers, to future reductions in crime. It is important
to account for these dynamic benefits when considering the overall benefits of reducing crime.
Our analysis suggests caution in pursuing strategies that incarcerate more juveniles, as the intense
exposure of juvenile offenders to one another in correctional facilities may increase the amount of
criminal behavior upon release.27 However, our analysis also suggests that other programs that
reduce juvenile crime might have dynamic benefits that greatly enhance the short-term benefits
derived from the decreased criminal behavior of program participants, so long as they do not
increase the intensity of juvenile offenders’ exposure to one another or maintain a controlled
social environment.

References
Akers, RL, MD Krohn, L. Lanza-Kaduce, and M. Radosevich. “Social Learning and Deviant
Behavior: a Specific Test of a General Theory” Am. Sociol. Rev. 44 (1979) 636-655.
Ayres, Ian, and Levitt, Steven. “Measuring Positive Externalities from Unobservable Victim
Precaution: An Empirical Analysis of Lojack.” Q.J.E. 113 (February 1998): 43-77.

27

Our paper does not explicitly provide any evidence that the intensity of peer effects is greater inside a
correctional facility than on the outside, but one might certainly imagine that this is the case.

18

Bayer, Patrick, and Pozen, David. “The Effectiveness of Juvenile Correctional Facilities: Public
versus Private Management.” J. Law and Econ., 2005, 48(2): 549-90.
Besley, Timothy, and Case, Anne. “Diffusion as a Learning Process: Evidence from HYY
Cotton.” Manuscript. Princeton: Princeton Univ., 1994.
Boozer, Michael, and Cacciola, Stephen. “Inside the ‘Black Box’ of Project STAR: Estimation of
Peer Effects Using Experimental Data.” Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper no. 832.
New Haven: Yale Univ., 2001.
Bursik, Robert. “The Dynamics of Specialization in Juvenile Offenses” Social Forces 58 (1980):
851-64.
Case, Anne, and Katz, Lawrence F. “The Company You Keep: The Effects of Family and
Neighborhood on Disadvantaged Youths.” Working Paper no. 3705. Cambridge, Mass.: NBER,
May 1991.
Cohen, Jacqueline (1986) “Research on Criminal Careers: Individual Frequency Rates and
Offense Seriousness.” In Alfred Blumstein, Jacqueline Cohen, Jeffrey Roth, and Christy Visher
(eds), Criminal Careers and “Career Criminals.” Vol. 1. Washington DC: National Academy
Press.
Conley, Timothy G., and Udry, Christopher R. “Learning about a New Technology: Pineapple in
Ghana.” Manuscript. Chicago: Univ. Chicago, and New Haven: Yale Univ., 2002.
Elliott, DS., D. Huizinga, and SS. Ageton. Explaining Delinquency and Drug Use. Beverly Hills:
Sage. 1985.
Erickson, ML. and LT. Empey. “Class Position, Peers, and Delinquency” Sociol. Soc. Res. 49
(1965): 268-282.
Farrington, David, Howard Snyder, and Terrence Finnegan. “Specialization in Juvenile Court
Careers” Criminology 26:3(1988). 461-487.
Foster, Andrew D., and Rosenzweig, Mark R. “Learning by Doing and Learning from Others:
Human Capital and Technical Change in Agriculture.” J.P.E. 103 (December 1995): 1176-1209.
Glaeser, Edward L.; Sacerdote, Bruce; and Scheinkman, Jose A. “Crime and Social Interactions.”
Q.J.E. 111 (May 1996): 507-48.
Glueck, S. and E. Glueck. Unraveling Juvenile Delinquency. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press. 1950.
Jacob, Brian A., and Lefgren, Lars. “Are Idle Hands the Devil’s Workshop? Incapacitation,
Concentration and Juvenile Crime.” A.E.R. 93(5), 2003.
Jensen, G.F. “Parents, Peers, and Delinquent Action: A Test of the Differential Association
Perspective” Am. J. Sociol. 78 (1972): 562-75.
Katz, Lawrence F.; Kling, Jeffrey R.; and Leibman, Jeffrey B. “Moving to Opportunity in Boston:
Early Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment.” Q.J.E. 116 (May 2001): 607-54.

19

Kling, Jeffrey R., Jens Ludwig and Lawrence F. Katz. “Neighborhood Effects on Crime for
Female and Male Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment.” Q.J.E.,
120:1 (February 2005), 87-130.
Kremer, Michael, and Levy, Dan. (2003) “Peer Effects and Alcohol Use Among College
Students.” Cambridge, Mass.: NBER Working Paper No. 9876.
Ludwig, Jens; Duncan, Greg J.; and Hirschfield, Paul. “Urban Poverty and Juvenile Crime:
Evidence from a Randomized Housing-Mobility Experiment.” Q.J.E. 116 (May 2001): 655-80.
Manski, Charles F. “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem.” Rev.
Econ. Stud. 60 (July 1993): 531-42.
Matsueda, R.L. and K. Heimer. “Race, Family Structure, and Delinquency: A Test of Differential
Association and Social Control Theories” Am. Sociol. Rev. 52 (1987): 826-840.
Munshi, Kaivan. “Learning from Your Neighbors: Why Do Some Innovations Spread Faster
Than Others?” Manuscript. Philadelphia: Univ. Pennsylvania, 1999.
Reiss, Albert J. “Co-Offending and Criminal Careers.” In Crime and Justice: A Review of
Research, vol. 10, edited by Michael Tonry and Norval Morris. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press,
1988.
Rojek, Dean and Maynard Erickson. “Delinquent Careers: A Test of the Career Escalation
Model.” Criminology 20 (1982): 5-28.
Sacerdote, Bruce. “Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth Roommates.”
Q.J.E. 116 (2001): 681-704.
Sah, Raaj K. “Social Osmosis and Patterns of Crime.” J.P.E. 99 (December 1991): 1272-95.
Tittle, C.R., M.J. Burke, and E.F. Jackson. “Modeling Sutherland’s Theory of Differential
Association: Toward and Empirical Clarification.” Social Forces 65 (1986): 405-432.
Voss, H.L. “Differential Association and Reported Delinquency Behavior: A Replication” Soc.
Problems. 12 (1964) 78-85.
Warr, Mark. “Organization and Instigation in Delinquent Groups.” Criminology 34 (February
1996): 11-37.
Warr, M. and M. Stafford. “The Influence of Delinquent Peers: What They Think or What They
Do?” Criminology 29 (1991): 851-865.
Wolfgang, Marvin, Robert Figlio, and Thorsten Sellin. “Delinquency in a Birth Cohort.”
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972.

20

Appendix 1
This appendix describes the exact procedure we use to calculate the peer characteristics
used in the analysis. More specifically, when calculating an individual i’s peer exposure, we
allow each observed potential peer, j, in the facility to contribute to this measure in two ways—
directly and indirectly. A potential peer contributes directly to the peer measure if his sentence
actually overlaps with individual i’s sentence, in which case, we weight the relevant peer
characteristic, cj, by the number of days that individual i is exposed to the jth peer, dij. A potential
peer also contributes indirectly to the peer measure in certain circumstances, leading to an
additional weight, wij, on the relevant peer characteristic. This weight is based on the fraction of
sentences of the length served by the potential peer j that would not have been observed for those
peers who overlap with the individual. In this way, peer exposure to characteristic cj is calculated
by the following equation

Expij =

! (d
j

ij

+ wij )• c j

! (d
j

ij

(A1)

+ wij )

We estimate wij by calculating the expected number of days that individual i is exposed to
an individual with a sentence the length of individual j’s who would have been released either
before or after the sample period. In doing so, we make the assumption that each facility is in a
steady state with respect to the peers served over the relevant period and that the release date of
each individual is randomly distributed across the sample period. The calculation of wij is best
understood by considering an example. Consider individual i released 30 days after the sample
period begins, having served a sentence of 150 days. Additionally, consider a peer, j, in the same
facility with a sentence of 50 days. This information is depicted in the following diagram, where
the horizontal axis represents time, t, and the vertical axis represents the number of days
individual i would be exposed to peer j if peer j is released at date t.
Scenario 1:

date_release[i] <= days_in[i] - days_in[j]

Example:

date_release[i] = 30; days_in[i] = 150; days_in[j] = 50

21

Any individuals who are released before t = 0 will be unobserved in the sample. To calculate the
average number of days that individual i is expected to have been exposed to individual j, we
simply divide the area of the shaded region by 729 (the number of days in the observed sample).
To see this more clearly, imagine, for example, that one individual with a 50-day sentence is
released during the sample period. In this case, the probability that such an individual was also
released in the 120 days before the sample period is 120/729 and the average exposure of
individual i to this individual is simply the average height of the shaded region. Thus, the correct
weight for individual j, wij, is simply the area of the shaded region (length * average height)
divided by 729.
This example depicts the correction made for just one case of pre-censoring. For peers
with very long sentences, pre-censoring can occur such that the unobserved region is just the
shaded triangular portion of the diagram above. Similarly, there are two cases of post-censoring
that parallel those of pre-censoring. The following are examples and diagrams that depict the
three additional censoring scenarios. In each scenario, wij is set equal to the area of the shaded
region divided by 729.
Scenario 2:

days_in[i] - days_in[j] < date_release[i] <= days_in[i]

Example:

date_release[i] = 30; days_in[i] = 150; days_in[j] = 160

Scenario 3:

days_in[j] >= 729 - date_release[i] + days_in[i]

Example:

date_release[i] = 700; days_in[i] = 50; days_in[j] = 100

22

Scenario 4:

729 - date_release[i] <= days_in[j] <= 729 - date_release[i] + days_in[i]

Example:

date_release[i] = 700; days_in[i] = 150; days_in[j] = 50

23

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics and Variable Definitions
Variable

Standard
Deviation
Overall Within

N

Mean

Recidivism
Recidivism
R_Felony Drug
R_Misd. Drug
R_Felony Weapon

8216
8216
8216
8216

.67
.093
.090
.027

.47
.29
.29
.16

.45
.28
.28
.16

R_Agg. Assault
R_Felony Sex
R_Auto Theft
R_Burglary
R_Grand Larceny

8216
8216
8216
8216
8216

.099
.013
.093
.14
.094

.30
.11
.29
.34
.29

.29
.11
.28
.33
.29

R_Petty Larceny
R_Robbery

8216
8216

.12
.045

.32
.21

.32
.20

Facility Characteristics
# Individuals in Facility per day

14421

48.7

73.5

0

# Released
Min Risk
Low Risk
Mod Risk
High Risk
Max Risk
Nonprofit Mgt

14421
14421
14421
14421
14421
14421
14421

196.5
.15
.17
.49
.17
.010
.54

240.5
.36
.38
.50
.38
.099
.50

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

For-profit Mgt

14421

.15

.36

0

County Mgt

14421

.091

.29

0

State Mgt

14421

.22

.41

0

Individual Characteristics
Female
Black
Age First Offense
Age Exit
Days In

8216
8216
8216
8216
8216

.14
.48
12.7
15.7
168.5

.35
.50
2.0
1.0
106.4

.19
.48
1.8
.87
64.0

1 if client is female, 0 otherwise
1 if client is black, 0 otherwise
Client’s age in years at first adjudicated criminal offense
Client’s age in years at exit from facility
Number of days an individual is in facility

Individual Criminal History Characteristics
Felonies
8216
4.7
Fel Drug
8216
.13
Mis Drug
8216
.16
Fel Sex
8216
.067
Mis Sex
8216
.0095
Fel_wpn
8216
.095
Agg_Ass
8216
.29
Mis Weap
8216
.042
Auto Theft
8216
.26
Grlrcn
8216
.35
Plrcn
8216
.61
Burglary
8216
.58
Robbery
8216
.13
Escape
8216
.077
Vandalism
8216
.31
Disorder
8216
.093
Other
8216
.92

4.6
.33
.37
.25
.097
.29
.45
.20
.44
.48
.49
.49
.33
.27
.46
.29
.27

4.1
.32
.36
.24
.096
.29
.44
.20
.16
.46
.48
.47
.32
.25
.45
.29
.26

Number of felony charges on client’s record
1 if any felony drug charges on client’s record, 0 otherwise
1 if any misd. drug charges on client’s record, 0 otherwise
1 if any felony sex offense charges on client’s record, 0 otherwise
1 if any misd. sex offense charges on client’s record, 0 otherwise
1 if any felony weapon offense charges on client’s record, 0 otherwise
1 if any aggravated assault offense charges on client’s record, 0 otherwise
1 if any misd. weapon offense charges on client’s record, 0 otherwise
1 if any auto theft charges on client’s record, 0 otherwise
1 if any grand larceny charges on client’s record, 0 otherwise
1 if any petty larceny charges on client’s record, 0 otherwise
1 if any burglary charges on client’s record, 0 otherwise
1 if any robbery charges on client’s record, 0 otherwise
1 if any escape charges on client’s record, 0 otherwise
1 if any vandalism charges on client’s record, 0 otherwise
1 if any disorderly conduct charges on client’s record, 0 otherwise
1 if any other charges on client’s record, 0 otherwise

Individual Neighborhood Characteristics
Youth Crime Rate in Zip
8216
% Own Race in Zip
8216
Per-Cap Inc Race
8216
Unemployment Rate
8216
Incarcerated in Zip
8216

260
.33
4331
.028
307

247
.32
4180
.027
301

Total number of juvenile referrals in client’s home zip code, FY 2000-01
% of inhabitants in client’s home zip code of same racial group as client, 1990
Median per-capita income of client’s racial group in client’s home zip code, 1990
% unemployment rate in client’s home zip code, 1990
Number of people incarcerated in client’s home zip code, 1990

358
.60
10710
.068
109

Definition
1 if client recidivated within one year of release, 0 otherwise
1 if client committed felony drug offense within one year of release, 0 otherwise
1 if client committed misd. drug offense within one year of release, 0 otherwise
1 if client committed felony weapon offense within one year of release, 0
otherwise
1 if client committed aggravated assault within one year of release, 0 otherwise
1 if client committed felony sex offense within one year of release, 0 otherwise
1 if client committed auto theft offense within one year of release, 0 otherwise
1 if client committed burglary offense within one year of release, 0 otherwise
1 if client committed grand larceny offense within one year of release, 0
otherwise
1 if client committed petty larceny offense within one year of release, 0 otherwise
1 if client committed robbery offense within one year of release, 0 otherwise

Calculated as number of individuals released multiplied by avg. sentence length
in the facility, divided by 729 (total number of sample days)
# of individuals released from each facility
1 if facility to which client is assigned is designated minimum risk, 0 otherwise
1 if facility to which client is assigned is designated low risk, 0 otherwise
1 if facility to which client is assigned is designated moderate risk, 0 otherwise
1 if facility to which client is assigned is designated high risk, 0 otherwise
1 if facility to which client is assigned is designated maximum risk, 0 otherwise
1 if facility to which client is assigned is managed by a private nonprofit
organization, 0 otherwise
1 if facility to which client is assigned is managed by a private for-profit
organization, 0 otherwise
1 if facility to which client is assigned is publicly managed by the county, 0
otherwise
1 if facility to which client is assigned is publicly managed by the state, 0
otherwise

24

Per-Cap Income

8216

12316

3661

3533

Median per-capita income in home zip code, 1990

Peer Demographic Characteristics
Peer_male
8216
Peer_age_exit
8216
Peer_age1st
8216

.86
16.4
13.1

.29
.88
.81

.038
.22
.32

Weighted average of whether or not an individual’s peers are male
Weighted average of the age at exit of an individual’s peers
Weighted average of the age at first offense of an individual’s peers

Peer Criminal History Characteristics
Peer_fel
8216
Peer_fel_drg
8216

4.7
.16

2.1
.10

.63
.053

Peer_mis_drg

8216

.19

.11

.065

Peer_fel_sex

8216

.069

.097

.038

Peer_mis_sex

8216

.010

.023

.016

Peer_felwpn

8216

.092

.070

.046

Peer_aggass

8216

.28

.13

.070

Peer_mis_wpn

8216

.042

.038

.028

Peer_auto
Peer_glrcn
Peer_plrcn
Peer_burg
Peer_rob
Peer_vand
Peer_dsord

8216
8216
8216
8216
8216
8216
8216

.27
.35
.61
.57
.13
.30
.090

.14
.13
.12
.16
.11
.11
.069

.066
.077
.081
.079
.051
.070
.048

Peer_escp
Peer_other

8216
8216

.077
.92

.093
.074

.039
.048

Weighted average of the number of felony charges of an individual’s peers
Weighted average of whether an individual’s peers have a record of any felony
drug offenses
Weighted average of whether an individual’s peers have a record of any misd.
drug offenses
Weighted average of whether an individual’s peers have a record of any felony
sex offenses
Weighted average of whether an individual’s peers have a record of any misd. sex
offenses
Weighted average of whether an individual’s peers have a record of any felony
weapon offenses
Weighted average of whether an individual’s peers have a record of any
aggravated assault offenses
Weighted average of whether an individual’s peers have a record of any misd.
weapon offenses
Weighted average of whether an individual’s peers have a record of auto theft
Weighted average of whether an individual’s peers have a record of grand larceny
Weighted average of whether an individual’s peers have a record of petty larceny
Weighted average of whether an individual’s peers have a record of burglary
Weighted average of whether an individual’s peers have a record of robbery
Weighted average of whether an individual’s peers have a record of vandalism
Weighted average of whether an individual’s peers have a record of disorderly
conduct
Weighted average of whether an individual’s peers have a record of escape
Weighted average of whether an individual’s peers have a record of other
offenses

10754
93

1988
65

810
42

Peer Neighborhood Characteristics
Peer_percapi
8216
Peer_percorin
8216

Weighted average of the per-capita income in an individual’s peers’ zip codes
Weighted average of the number of incarcerated people in an individual’s peers’
zip codes
NOTE.—Neighborhood characteristics are constructed for Florida zip codes only. Individuals with zip codes from other states are assigned a zero for all
neighborhood characteristics, and a dummy variable denoting that an individual has an out-of-state zip code of residence is included in all regressions. This
allows us to maintain the full sample for the regressions, and it controls for the potential problem that out-of-state youths are less likely to recidivate in
Florida.

25

Table 2. Specialization in Crime
(4)
R_Petty
Larceny
0.047**
(6.57)

(5)

R_Burglary
0.093**
(10.73)

(3)
R_Grand
Larceny
0.055**
(6.54)

0.013

0.014

0.001

Constant

0.029**
(4.68)

0.043**
(5.83)

Observations
R-squared

8216
0.03

8216
0.04

Offense
Average of OffDiagonal Coefficients

(1)
R_Auto
Theft
0.096**
(9.78)

(2)

R_Robbery
0.065**
(5.74)

(6)
R_Felony
Drug
0.256**
(15.60)

(7)
R_Misd.
Drug
0.125**
(11.05)

(8)
R_Felony
Weapon
0.014
(1.40)

(9)
R_Agg.
Assault
0.112**
(7.25)

(10)
R_Felony
Sex
0.050**
(5.93)

0.002

0.014

0.015

0.012

0.008

0.025

0.000

0.041**
(6.43)

0.072**
(9.62)

0.008
(1.50)

0.029**
(3.66)

0.042**
(6.40)

0.013**
(3.12)

0.074**
(5.84)

0.008**
(3.27)

8216
0.03

8216
0.01

8216
0.02

8216
0.11

8216
0.04

8216
0.01

8216
0.02

8216
0.01

NOTE.—Each column represents a different specification which is estimated by OLS, where the dependent variable is recidivism in the crime category at the top of the column. Offense varies across
specifications, according to the crime category listed at the top of the column. Thus, in the first column, Offense is “Auto Theft” (individuals with a history of auto theft). Each specification also includes
controls for whether the individual has any history of each of the other nine crime categories; for brevity, only the average of these off-diagonal coefficients is presented in the table. The absolute values of tstatistics are in italics. ** represents significance at 5% level and * represents significance at 10% level. All standard errors are corrected for clustering at the facility level.

26

Table 3a. Regressions of Predicted Recidivism on the Relevant Peer Measure without Facility-by-Prior Offense Fixed Effects
Predicted
Auto

Predicted
Burglary

Predicted
Grand
Larceny

Predicted
Petty
Larceny

Predicted
Robbery

Predicted
Felony Drug

Predicted
Misd. Drug

Predicted
Felony
Weapon

Predicted
Agg. Ass.

Predicted
Felony Sex

Offense*Peer_offense (!0)

.131**
13.34

.137**
13.27

.041**
4.92

.084**
10.71

.143**
10.94

.522**
23.34

.215**
14.16

.092**
11.24

.176**
12.86

.068**
3.82

No_Offense*Peer_offense (!1)

-.055**
5.49

.022**
2.06

-.016*
1.88

-.028**
3.63

.022*
1.93

-.039**
2.22

-.038**
3.18

.031**
5.65

-.022*
1.71

-.008**
2.13

Facility-by-Prior Offense Fixed
Effects

NO

NO

NO

NO

NO

NO

NO

NO

NO

NO

# observations

8216

8216

8216

8216

8216

8216

8216

8216

8216

8216

.3427

.3236

.2227

.1263

.1550

.3522

.3060

.0387

.2043

.2450

Dependent Variable =

R

2

NOTE.—Each

column represents a different specification; Offense and Peer_offense vary across specifications. Thus, in the first column, Offense is “Auto Theft” (individuals with a history of auto theft)
while Peer_offense in this specification is Peer_auto (exposure to peers with a history of auto theft). The absolute values of t-statistics are in italics and are based standard errors that are clustered at the facility
level. ** represents significance at 5% level and * represents significance at 10% level. The dependent variable is predicted recidivism of the crime labeled at the top of each column. The predicted value for
each crime category is calculated from a regression of recidivism with the particular crime category on the entire set of observable individual characteristics and facility fixed effects. This predicted value is then
regressed with OLS on just the variables presented in these tables.

Table 3b. Regressions of Predicted Recidivism on the Relevant Peer Measure with Facility-by-Prior Offense Fixed Effects
Predicted
Auto

Predicted
Burglary

Predicted
Grand
Larceny

Predicted
Petty
Larceny

Predicted
Robbery

Predicted
Felony Drug

Predicted
Misd. Drug

Predicted
Felony
Weapon

Predicted
Agg. Ass.

Predicted
Felony Sex

-.000045
0.01

-.0011
0.31

-.0015
0.44

.00089
0.42

.0036
0.78

.0021
0.23

.0020
0.42

.0077*
1.83

-.00026
0.06

.00078
0.27

No_Offense*Peer_offense (!1)

.0018
0.92

.0051
1.21

-.0030
1.19

-.0018
0.67

.00061
0.32

-.00027
0.08

.00021
0.09

.00041
0.29

.0011
0.36

.00084
1.28

Facility-by-Prior Offense Fixed
Effects

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

# observations

8216

8216

8216

8216

8216

8216

8216

8216

8216

8216

.5552

.5486

.4262

.3812

.4353

.5751

.5844

.3055

.4130

.8432

Dependent Variable =
Offense*Peer_offense (!0)

R

2

NOTE.—Each

column represents a different specification; Offense and Peer_offense vary across specifications. Thus, in the first column, Offense is “Auto Theft” (individuals with a history of auto theft)
while Peer_offense in this specification is Peer_auto (exposure to peers with a history of auto theft). The absolute values of t-statistics are in italics. ** represents significance at 5% level and * represents
significance at 10% level. The dependent variable is predicted recidivism of the crime labeled at the top of each column. The predicted value for each crime category is calculated from a regression of
recidivism with the particular crime category on the entire set of observable individual characteristics and facility fixed effects. This predicted value is then regressed on just the variables presented in these
tables; all specifications are simultaneously estimated as a seemingly unrelated regression (SUR).

27

Table 4. Test for Clustering of Individuals by Five Digit Zip Codes
Observations

Release Date
Mean in 5digit zip

Overall

8,216

0.0273

Within 7 days

7,185

0.0284

Within 14 days

7,808

0.0290

Within 21 days

8,102

0.0290

Difference
from Overall

0.0022
1.34
0.0026
1.91
0.0022
1.86

Observations

Admit Date
Mean in 5-digit
zip

4,148

0.0278

3,553

0.0292

3,938

0.0291

4,096

0.0297

Difference from
Overall

0.0027
1.22
0.0022
1.36
0.0023
1.80

NOTE.— The value in each ‘Mean in 5-digit zip’ cell represents the proportion of individuals who have a peer released (admitted) from the same facility that is from the same zip code during the specified time
period. Note that the mean for the overall sample period is calculated using the sample of individuals who have at least one peer released (admitted) within 7, 14, and 21 days, respectively. The absolute value of
the t-statistic corresponding to each difference is presented in italics.

28

Table 5. Main Results: Crime-Specific Peer Effects in Florida Juvenile Correctional Facilities
R_Auto
Theft

Offense*Peer_offense (!0)
No_Offense*Peer_offense (!1)

Dependent Variable =

% recidivate with offense
# observations
R2
P-value on test of joint
significance of quarter
dummies
H0: !0auto = … = !0sex = 0
H0: !1

auto

= … = !1

sex

=0

R_Robbery

R_Felony
Drug

R_Misd.
Drug

R_Felony
Weapon

R_Agg.
Assault

R_Felony
Sex

.098*
1.67

.079
0.69

.31*
1.90

.25**
2.29

-.12
0.78

.26*
1.78

.34**
2.30

-.00044
0.01
9.4%
8216
.0712

-.11
1.52
11.6%
8216
.0536

-.084*
1.70
4.5%
8216
.0942

.075
1.18
9.3%
8216
.1965

-.045
0.82
9.0%
8216
.1002

.049
0.88
2.7%
8216
.0468

.090
0.91
9.9%
8216
.0724

.043
1.27
1.3%
8216
.0722

.1557

.0575

.7902

.7817

.1463

.7371

.3827

.1096

R_Burglary

R_Grand
Larceny

R_Petty
Larceny

-.029
0.31

.19**
2.93

-.027
0.38

.032
0.56
9.3%
8216
.0970

-.022
0.29
13.6%
8216
.0943

.0328

.1075

p = 0.0008
p = 0.3694

NOTE.— This table presents the results of estimating equation (1) for the ten crime categories simultaneously via a seemingly unrelated regression (SUR). Offense and Peer_offense vary across columns

according to the crime category listed at the top of each column. In the first column, Offense is “Auto Theft” (individuals with a history of auto theft) while Peer_offense in this specification is Peer_auto
(exposure to peers with a history of auto theft). Each specification controls for: facility-by-prior offense fixed effects, quarter of release dummies, peer demographic and criminal history characteristics, and
individual demographic and criminal history characteristics. The absolute values of t-statistics are in italics. ** represents significance at 5% level and * represents significance at 10% level. The joint
hypotheses that the coefficients are equal to zero are evaluated using a Wald test.

29

Table 6. Robustness of Main Results to Time Trends
R_Auto
Theft

R_Burglary

R_Grand
Larceny

R_Petty
Larceny

R_Robbery

R_Felony
Drug

R_Misd.
Drug

R_Felony
Weapon

R_Agg.
Assault

R_Felony
Sex

Offense*Peer_offense (!0)

-.017
0.18

.21**
3.19

-.038
0.53

.10*
1.75

.091
0.79

.32*
1.95

.25**
2.23

-.13
0.80

.27*
1.88

.34**
2.30

No_Offense*Peer_offense (!1)

.037
0.65

-.0084
0.12

-.0091
0.17

-.11
1.50

-.074
1.52

.078
1.24

-.044
0.81

.050
0.90

.092
0.93

.037
1.09

Dependent Variable =
Panel1: No Time Controls

Panel2: Quarter Dummies (Baseline)
Offense*Peer_offense (!0)

-.029
0.31

.19**
2.93

-.027
0.38

.098*
1.67

.079
0.69

.31*
1.90

.25**
2.29

-.12
0.78

.26*
1.78

.34**
2.30

No_Offense*Peer_offense (!1)

.032
0.56

-.022
0.29

-.00044
0.01

-.11
1.52

-.084*
1.70

.075
1.18

-.045
0.82

.049
0.88

.090
0.91

.043
1.27

Panel3: Quarter By Judicial Circuit Interactions
Offense*Peer_offense (!0)

.045
0.48

.20**
3.03

-.042
0.58

.081
1.36

.049
0.42

.34**
2.08

.24**
2.15

-.14
0.87

.24*
1.68

.30**
2.05

No_Offense*Peer_offense (!1)

.042
0.73

-.033
0.45

.019
0.34

-.11
1.51

-.097
1.95*

.12*
1.87

-.052
0.94

.028
0.49

.065
0.65

.036
1.05

NOTE.— Each of the above panels estimates equation (1) for the ten crime categories simultaneously via a seemingly unrelated regression. The results presented in each panel control for facility-by-prior fixed
effects, peer demographic and criminal history characteristics, and individual demographic and criminal history characteristics. Controls for time trends differ across panels. The first panel has no controls for time
trends, the second panel includes quarter of release dummies, and the third panel includes quarter of release dummies, judicial circuit dummies, and a complete set of interactions between quarter of release and
judicial circuit. Offense and Peer_offense vary across columns, and correspond to the crime category noted at the top of the column. In the first column, Offense is “Auto Theft” (individuals with a history of auto
theft) while Peer_offense in this specification is Peer_auto (exposure to peers with a history of auto theft). The absolute values of t-statistics are in italics. ** represents significance at 5% level and * represents
significance at 10% level.

30

Table 7. Robustness and Heterogeneity with Peer Effects Constrained to Be Equal
Across Crime Categories
Offense*
No_Offense*
Peer_offense
Peer_offense
(!0)
(!1)
Row
Specification/Subsample Description
(1)
Baseline Specification (see Table 5)
.111**
.006
3.83
0.34
(2)

Quarter by Judicial Circuit Interactions

.109**
3.73

.004
0.22

(3)

Monthly Dummies

.112**
3.85

.006
0.33

(4)

Judicial Circuit Monthly Time Trends

.105**
3.60

.004
0.21

(5)

Without Individual Characteristics

.114**
3.92

.007
0.38

(6)

Fully Interacted Specification

.117**
3.95

.006
0.33

(7)

Middle Two-Thirds of the Sample

.176**
4.61

.014
0.62

(8)

Small Facilities

.134**
4.14

-.002
0.12

(9)

Residential Facilities

.100**
3.12

.005
0.28

(10)

Non-Residential Facilities

.171**
2.38

-.001
0.03

NOTE.— Each row of this table presents the results of a separate specification. A brief description of the specification (i.e. the
variables included/excluded or the sub-sample used) is presented in the second column. We estimate each specification for all ten
crime categories using a seemingly unrelated regression (SUR) but constrain both the estimated reinforcing and non-reinforcing peer
effects to be equal across crime categories. Thus, rather than 20 coefficients of interest, each of these specifications generate just two
coefficients of interest and provide a way of summarizing the results presented, for instance, in the first two rows of Table 5. Unless
otherwise indicated, ach specification also controls for: facility-by-prior offense fixed effects, quarter of release dummies, peer
demographic and criminal history characteristics, and individual demographic and criminal history characteristics.

31

Appendix Table 1. Examples of Crimes Included in Each Crime Category
Crime Category
Included Crimes
Auto Theft
Vehicle theft (2nd degree); grand theft auto (2nd degree)
Burglary

Burglary of a dwelling structure; Possession of burglary tools; Unarmed burglary
of a dwelling; Burglary of unoccupied dwelling

Grand Larceny

Grand larceny in the 1st degree (excluding auto theft); Grand larceny valued
between $20,000 and $100,000 (excluding auto theft); Grand larceny valued
between $300 and $20,000 (excluding auto theft); Grand larceny of a firearm; 3rd
or subsequent petty larceny conviction

Petty Larceny

Shoplifting; 1st or 2nd petty larceny conviction

Robbery

Robbery with firearm or weapon; Robbery/carjacking with firearm or weapon;
Robbery (no firearm or weapon); Robbery and residential home invasion; other
robbery

Felony Drug

Possession; Possession with intent to sell; Use; Purchase; Distribution;
Manufacturing – Includes a variety of drug categories and amounts

Misdemeanor Drug

Possession or distribution of less than 20 grams marijuana; Possession of narcotic
equipment; Possession of drug paraphernalia; Possession of legend drugs without
a prescription

Aggravated Assault

Aggravated assault and/or battery; Battery on elected or education official; Hit and
run (failure to remain at scene) ; Aggravated assault with deadly weapon;
Aggravated assault with intent to commit a felony.
Carry concealed weapon; Possession of weapon on school property; Fire a weapon
from vehicle; Bomb threat

Felony Weapon
Misdemeanor
Weapon

Openly carrying prohibited weapon; Improper exhibition of a firearm

Felony Sex

Sexual assault/battery; Sexual offense against a child; Lewd and lascivious act;
Other felony sex offenses

Misdemeanor Sex

Obscene phone call; Indecent exposure in public; prostitution

Escape

Escape from training school, secure detention, or residential program

Vandalism

Damage property or criminal mischief

Disorderly Conduct

Disturbing the peace; Disturbing a school function; Disorderly intoxication;
Conspire to interrupt education

32

Appendix Table 2. Full Set of Table 5 Results: Crime-Specific Peer Effects in Florida Juvenile
Correctional Facilities
R_Auto
Theft

R_Burglary

R_Grand
Larceny

R_Petty
Larceny

R_Robbery

R_Felony
Drug

R_Misd.
Drug

R_Felony
Weapon

R_Agg.
Assault

R_Felony
Sex

Offense*Peer_offense (!0)

-.029
0.31

.19**
2.93

-.027
0.38

.098*
1.67

.079
0.69

.31*
1.90

.25**
2.29

-.12
0.78

.26*
1.78

.34**
2.30

No_Offense*Peer_offense (!1)

.032
0.56

-.022
0.29

-.00044
0.01

-.11
1.52

-.084*
1.70

.075
1.18

-.045
0.82

.049
0.88

.090
0.91

.043
1.27

.0067
0.11

.045
0.87

.051
0.88

-.020
0.55

.036
0.75

.059
1.18

-.085**
2.24

.16*
1.79

-.027
1.34

.031
0.66

.025
0.48

.013
0.38

.027
0.62

-.0093
0.21

.0053
0.15

.088
1.09

-.00094
0.05

-.021
0.40

-.0026
0.08

.036
0.83

.049
1.09

.028
0.81

.091
1.13

.027
1.46

.018
0.59

.0089
0.23

.011
0.26

-.019
0.61

.020
0.28

.0053
0.32

.071
1.19

.047
0.76

-.040
0.85

-.040
0.36

-.0098
0.39

.036
0.57

-.0020
0.04

.27**
2.39

-.018
0.69

.0027
0.07

-.077
0.87

.030
1.52

.27**
2.17

.019
0.68

Dependent Variable =

Peer Characteristics
Peer_auto
Peer_burg

-.0071
0.16

Peer_glrcn

-.049
1.06

.041
0.75

Peer_plrcn

.0029
0.07

-.090*
1.84

-.019
0.44

Peer_rob

.033
0.52

-.068
0.92

-.12*
1.87

-.024
0.33

Peer_fel_drg

-.0053
0.08

-.086
1.14

-.0036
0.06

.11
1.53

-.043
0.94

Peer_mis_drg

-.039
0.78

-.095
1.59

-.042
0.82

-.028
0.49

.058
1.60

.023
0.49

Peer_fwpn

-.0045
0.06

-.017
0.20

.085
1.18

.014
0.18

-.048
0.95

.089
1.33

.0045
0.06

Peer_aggass

.050
1.05

.021
0.37

.0091
0.19

.022
0.41

.046
1.34

-.057
1.26

.021
0.45

.0097
0.27

Peer_fel_sex

.036
0.44

.18*
1.87

.070
0.83

-.054
0.58

.046
0.78

-.028
0.36

.017
0.21

.020
0.32

.14
0.95

Peer_black

-.070*
1.74

.068
1.42

-.020
0.49

-.015
0.32

.0031
0.11

.066*
1.74

-.014
0.36

.017
0.55

.055
0.77

.0091
0.57

Peer_age_exit

.020
1.25

.041**
2.18

.049**
3.01

.020
1.09

.018
1.57

.0021
0.14

.0033
0.21

.011
0.89

-.019
0.69

-.0031
0.49

Peer_age1st

.0056
0.51

.00037
0.03

-.0058
0.51

-.0068
0.54

-.013*
1.69

-.0028
0.27

-.014
1.30

.011
1.38

.011
0.58

.0021
0.47

Peer_Percapi

-.0000051
1.29

.0000055
1.18

.0000063
1.57

.00000075
0.17

.0000037
1.33

-.0000075**
2.03

-.0000071*
1.82

.0000012
0.40

.0000031
0.44

.0000016
0.99

Peer_Percorin

-.000074
0.98

.000069
0.77

-.000012
0.16

.000021
0.25

.000057
1.06

.000078
1.10

.000076
1.03

.000047
0.83

-.000043
0.33

.000018
0.59

Peer_Felonies

.0066
1.01

-.013*
1.73

-.0053
0.79

-.00063
0.09

-.0015
0.32

-.0050
0.82

-.0086
1.35

.0018
0.36

-.010
0.91

.00067
0.26

.019**
2.02

.0028
0.35

.0091
1.03

.025**
4.48

.019**
2.56

.021**
2.78

.0020
0.34

.014
1.02

.0016
0.52

.022**
2.90

.020**
2.38

.0027
0.50

.0051
0.71

.0038
0.51

.0068
1.19

-.0040
0.30

.0029
0.98

.0052
0.60

.0044
0.82

-.0074
1.03

-.0067
0.90

-.0047
0.83

-.018
1.37

-.0016
0.52

.0034
0.70

-.0025
0.40

.0066
0.99

-.0047
0.92

-.0099
0.84

-.00036
0.13

.022**
2.33

.0065
0.66

.011
1.45

.027
1.56

-.0037
0.95

.041**
4.04

.0042
0.55

-.014
0.81

.0018
0.44

.011*
1.70

.017
1.11

-.0017
0.50

.043**
2.24

.0029
0.68

.036*
1.88

Individual Characteristics
Auto theft
Burglary

.014*
1.87

Grlrcn

.0024
0.32

.019**
2.07

Plrcn

.011*
1.63

.021**
2.66

.025**
3.69

Robbery

-.0034
0.34

-.010
0.85

-.034**
3.39

.0013
0.12

Fel drug

-.022**
2.19

-.042**
3.48

-.031**
3.00

-.032**
2.82

.0040
0.55

Mis drug

-.0021
0.24

-.0070
0.67

-.012
1.29

-.025**
2.47

.0046
0.73

.0062
0.74

Fel_wpn

-.0090
0.83

.028**
2.20

.015
1.35

.037**
3.00

.013*
1.68

.0055
0.53

.0039
0.36

AggAss

.0027
0.37

-.0052
0.60

-.0071
0.94

.0041
0.49

.011**
2.03

.00027
0.04

.0037
0.51

33

.020**
3.62

.00062
0.21

Fel sex

.0023
0.17

-.020
1.25

-.029**
2.12

-.0067
0.44

-.0043
0.45

-.030**
2.35

-.029**
2.24

-.014
1.40

.022
0.92

Black

.035**
5.14

-.0054
0.67

-.018**
2.56

-.000073
0.01

.029**
5.98

.085**
13.17

.012*
1.76

.015**
2.88

.080**
6.68

.00024
0.09

Female

-.017
1.08

-.093**
4.79

-.031*
1.88

-.014
0.75

-.018
1.60

-.046**
3.00

-.052**
3.31

-.021*
1.75

.029
1.03

-.017**
2.61

Age Exit

-.014**
3.79

-.012**
2.77

-.0056
1.44

-.017**
3.84

-.0039
1.45

.011**
3.14

.0036
0.95

-.0026
0.92

-.015**
2.23

-.00093
0.61

Age First Offense

-.00072
0.38

-.0013
0.59

-.0021
1.11

.0017
0.77

-.0026*
1.91

-.0062**
3.47

-.0049**
2.64

-.0019
1.34

-.0066**
1.99

.00079
1.05

Incarcerated in Zip

.0017
1.58

.0018
1.37

.000051
0.05

.0016
1.26

.0010
1.28

-.0012
1.12

-.000039
0.36

.0011
1.30

-.0000054
0.03

.00025
0.57

.00000034
0.56

-.00000039
0.54

-.00000024
0.38

-.0000011
1.51

-.0000014**
3.25

-.0000008
1.38

.00000065
1.08

.000000060
0.13

-.00000083
0.77

-.00000037
0.15

.0031**
3.36

.0046**
4.17

.0022**
2.33

.0015
1.41

.00020
0.31

-.00055
0.63

-.00088
0.96

.00024
0.35

.0043**
2.68

.000077
0.21

8216

8216

8216

8216

8216

8216

8216

8216

8216

8216

Per Capita Income in Zip
Felonies
# Observations

R2
.0970
.0943
.0712
.0536
.0942
.1965
.1002
.0468
.0724
.0722
NOTE.— This table presents the results of estimating equation (1) for the ten crime categories simultaneously via a seemingly unrelated regression (SUR) and

correspond to the main results presented in Table 5. All specifications include facility-by-prior fixed effects and quarter of release dummies. Offense and Peer_offense
vary across columns according to the crime category listed at the top of each column. In the first column, Offense is “Auto Theft” (individuals with a history of auto
theft) while Peer_offense in this specification is Peer_auto (exposure to peers with a history of auto theft). The absolute values of t-statistics are in italics. ** represents
significance at 5% level and * represents significance at 10% level.

34

