NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STOCKS AS LOTTERIES:
THE IMPLICATIONS OF PROBABILITY WEIGHTING FOR SECURITY PRICES
Nicholas Barberis
Ming Huang
Working Paper 12936
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12936

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2007

We are grateful to Alon Brav, Michael Brennan, Markus Brunnermeier, John Campbell, Bing Han,
Harrison Hong, Jon Ingersoll, Bjorn Johnson, Mungo Wilson, Hongjun Yan, and seminar participants
at the AFA meetings, Columbia University, Cornell University, Dartmouth University, Duke University,
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, the NBER, New York University's 5-star conference,
Ohio State University, the Stockholm Institute for Financial Research, the University of Illinois, and
the University of Maryland for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Nicholas Barberis and Ming Huang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Stocks as Lotteries: The Implications of Probability Weighting for Security Prices
Nicholas Barberis and Ming Huang
NBER Working Paper No. 12936
February 2007
JEL No. D1,D8,G11,G12
ABSTRACT
We study the asset pricing implications of Tversky and Kahneman's (1992) cumulative prospect theory,
with particular focus on its probability weighting component. Our main result, derived from a novel
equilibrium with non-unique global optima, is that, in contrast to the prediction of a standard expected
utility model, a security's own skewness can be priced: a positively skewed security can be "overpriced,"
and can earn a negative average excess return. Our results offer a unifying way of thinking about a
number of seemingly unrelated financial phenomena, such as the low average return on IPOs, private
equity, and distressed stocks; the diversification discount; the low valuation of certain equity stubs;
the pricing of out-of-the-money options; and the lack of diversification in many household portfolios.
Nicholas Barberis
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street PO Box 208200
New Haven CT 06520-8200
and NBER
nick.barberis@yale.edu
Ming Huang
Johnson Graduate School of Management
319 Sage Hall
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
mh375@cornell.edu

1

Introduction

Over the past few decades, researchers have accumulated a large body of experimental evidence on attitudes to risk. This evidence reveals that, when people evaluate risk, they often
depart from the predictions of expected utility. In an eﬀort to capture the experimental data
more accurately, economists have developed so-called non-expected utility models. Perhaps
the most prominent of these is Tversky and Kahneman’s (1992) “cumulative prospect theory.”
In this paper, we study the pricing of ﬁnancial securities when investors make decisions
according to cumulative prospect theory. Our goal is to see if a model like cumulative
prospect theory, which captures attitudes to risk in experimental settings very eﬀectively,
can also help us understand investor behavior in ﬁnancial markets. Of course, there is no
guarantee that this will be the case. Nonetheless, given the diﬃculties the expected utility
framework has encountered in addressing a number of ﬁnancial phenomena, it may be useful
to document the pricing predictions of non-expected models and to see if these predictions
shed any light on puzzling aspects of the data.
Cumulative prospect theory is a modiﬁed version of “prospect theory” (Kahneman and
Tversky, 1979). Under this theory, people evaluate risk using a value function that is deﬁned
over gains and losses, that is concave over gains and convex over losses, and that is kinked at
the origin; and using transformed rather than objective probabilities, where the transformed
probabilities are obtained from objective probabilities by applying a weighting function. The
main eﬀect of the weighting function is to overweight the tails of the distribution it is applied
to. The overweighting of tails does not represent a bias in beliefs; it is simply a modeling
device for capturing the common preference for a lottery-like, or positively skewed, wealth
distribution.
Previous research on the pricing implications of prospect theory has focused mainly on
the implications of the kink in the value function (Benartzi and Thaler, 1995; Barberis,
Huang, and Santos, 2001). Here, we turn our attention to other, less-studied aspects of
cumulative prospect theory, and, in particular, to the probability weighting function.
First, we show that, in a one-period equilibrium setting with Normally distributed security payoﬀs and homogeneous investors, the CAPM can hold even when investors evaluate
risk according to cumulative prospect theory. Under the assumption of Normality, then, the
pricing implications of cumulative prospect theory are no diﬀerent from those of expected
utility.
Our second and principal result is that, as soon as we relax the assumption of Normality,
cumulative prospect theory can have novel pricing predictions. We demonstrate this using the
most parsimonious model possible, one with the minimum amount of additional structure.
2

Speciﬁcally, we introduce a small, independent, positively skewed security into the economy.
In a standard concave expected utility model, this security would earn an average return of
zero in excess of the risk-free rate. We show that, in an economy with cumulative prospect
theory investors, the skewed security can become overpriced, relative to the prediction of
the expected utility model, and can earn a negative average excess return. To be clear, an
investor who overweights the tails of a portfolio return distribution will, of course, value
a positively skewed portfolio highly; what is surprising is that he also values a positively
skewed security highly, even if that security is small and independent of other risks.
Our unusual result emerges from an equilibrium structure which, to our knowledge, is
new to the ﬁnance literature. In an economy with cumulative prospect theory investors and
a skewed security, there are non-unique global optima, so that even though investors have
homogeneous preferences, they can hold diﬀerent portfolios. In particular, some investors
take a large, undiversiﬁed position in the skewed security, because by doing so, they make the
distribution of their overall wealth more lottery-like, which, as people who overweight tails,
they ﬁnd highly desirable. The skewed security is therefore very useful to these investors; as
a result, they are willing to pay a high price for it and to accept a negative average excess
return on it. We show that this eﬀect persists even if there are several skewed securities in the
economy. We also argue that the eﬀect cannot easily be arbitraged away: while arbitrageurs
can try to exploit the overpricing by taking short positions in skewed securities, there are
signiﬁcant risks and costs to doing so, and this limits the impact of their trading.
Our results suggest a unifying way of thinking about a number of seemingly unrelated
empirical facts. Consider, for example, the low long-term average return on IPO stocks
(Ritter, 1991). IPOs have positively skewed returns, probably because they are issued by
young ﬁrms, a large fraction of whose value is in the form of growth options. Our analysis
implies that, in an economy with cumulative prospect theory investors, IPOs can become
overpriced and earn low average returns. Under cumulative prospect theory, then, the poor
historical performance of IPOs may not be so puzzling. We discuss several other applications,
including the low average return on private equity and on distressed stocks, the diversiﬁcation
discount, the low valuations of certain equity stubs, the pricing of out-of-the-money options,
and the under-diversiﬁcation in many household portfolios.
Through the probability weighting function, cumulative prospect theory investors exhibit a preference for skewness. There are already a number of papers that analyze the
implications of skewness-loving preferences. We note, however, that the pricing eﬀects we
demonstrate here are new to the skewness literature. Earlier papers have shown that a security’s coskewness with the market portfolio can be priced (Kraus and Litzenberger, 1976).
We show that it is not just coskewness with the market that can be priced, but also a security’s own skewness. For example, in our economy, a skewed security can earn a negative
average excess return even if it is small and independent of other risks; in other words, even

3

if its coskewness with the market is zero.
How do we obtain this new eﬀect? In our model, the pricing of idiosyncratic skewness
traces back to the fact that, in equilibrium, some investors hold an undiversiﬁed position
in a skewed security. The earlier skewness literature considers economies in which investors
have concave expected utility preferences. Such investors always hold diversiﬁed portfolios
and, as a result, only coskewness with the market is priced; idiosyncratic skewness is not.
Our ﬁrst result – that, under cumulative prospect theory, the CAPM can still hold – was
originally proved by De Giorgi, Hens, and Levy (2003). We include this result here for two
reasons. First, it provides a very useful springboard for our main contribution, namely the
analysis of how skewed securities are priced. Second, we are able to oﬀer a diﬀerent proof
of the CAPM result, one that is much shorter. As part of our proof, we show that, within
certain classes of distributions, cumulative prospect theory preferences satisfy second -order
stochastic dominance – a result that is interesting in its own right and that is new to the
literature.
In Section 2, we discuss cumulative prospect theory and its probability weighting feature
in more detail. In Section 3, we present our assumptions on investor preferences. We
then examine how cumulative prospect theory investors price Normally distributed securities
(Section 4) and positively skewed securities (Section 5). Section 6 considers applications of
our results and Section 7 concludes.

2

Cumulative Prospect Theory and Probability Weighting

Tversky and Kahneman’s (1992) cumulative prospect theory is one of the best-known models
of decision-making under risk. We introduce it by ﬁrst reviewing the original version of
prospect theory, laid out by Kahneman and Tversky (1979), on which it is based.
Consider the gamble
(x, p; y, q),
to be read as “get x with probability p and y with probability q, independent of other risks,”
where x ≤ 0 ≤ y or y ≤ 0 ≤ x, and where p + q = 1. In the expected utility framework, an
agent with utility function U(·) evaluates this risk by computing
pU(W + x) + qU(W + y),

(1)

where W is his current wealth. In the original version of prospect theory, the agent assigns
the gamble the value
π(p)v(x) + π(q)v(y),
(2)
4

where v(·) and π(·) are known as the value function and the probability weighting function,
respectively. Figure 1 shows the forms of v(·) and π(·) suggested by Kahneman and Tversky
(1979). These functions satisfy v(0) = 0, π(0) = 0, and π(1) = 1.
There are four important diﬀerences between (1) and (2). First, the carriers of value in
prospect theory are gains and losses, not ﬁnal wealth levels: the argument of v(·) in (2) is x,
not W + x. This is motivated in part by experimental evidence, but is also consistent with
the way in which our perceptual apparatus is more attuned to a change in the level of an
attribute – brightness, loudness, or temperature, say – than to the level itself.
Second, the value function v(·) is concave over gains, but convex over losses. Kahneman
and Tversky (1979) infer this from subjects’ preference for a certain gain of $500 over1
1
($1000, ),
2
and from their preference for
1
(−$1000, )
2
over a certain loss of $500. In short, people are risk averse over moderate-probability gains,
but risk-seeking over moderate-probability losses.
Third, the value function is kinked at the origin, so that the agent is more sensitive to
losses – even small losses – than to gains of the same magnitude. This element of prospect
theory is known as loss aversion. Kahneman and Tversky (1979) infer the kink from the
widespread aversion to bets of the form
1
1
($110, ; −$100, ).
2
2
Such aversion is hard to explain with diﬀerentiable utility functions, whether expected utility
or non-expected utility, because the very high local risk aversion required to do so typically
predicts implausibly high aversion to large-scale gambles (Epstein and Zin, 1990; Rabin,
2000; Barberis, Huang, and Thaler, 2006).
Finally, under prospect theory, the agent does not use objective probabilities when evaluating the gamble, but rather, transformed probabilities obtained from objective probabilities
via the probability weighting function π(·). This function has two salient features. First,
low probabilities are overweighted: in the lower panel of Figure 1, the solid line lies above
the dotted line for low p. Given the concavity (convexity) of the value function in the region
of gains (losses), this is inferred from people’s preference for
($5000, 0.001)
1

We abbreviate (x, p; 0, q) to (x, p).

5

over a certain $5, and from their preference for a certain loss of $5 over
(−$5000, 0.001);
in other words, it is inferred from their simultaneous demand for both lotteries and insurance.
Spelling this out in more detail, note that
($5, 1) ≺ ($5000, 0.001)
⇒ v(5)π(1) < v(5000)π(0.001) < 1000 v(5)π(0.001)
⇒ π(0.001) > 0.001,
so that low probabilities are overweighted. A similar calculation in the case of the (−$5000, 0.001)
gamble, using the fact that v(·) is convex over losses, produces the same result.
The other main feature of the probability weighting function is a greater sensitivity to
diﬀerences in probability at higher probability levels: in the lower panel of Figure 1, the solid
line is ﬂatter for low p than for high p. For example, subjects tend to prefer a certain $3000
to ($4000, 0.8), but also prefer ($4000, 0.2) to ($3000, 0.25). This pair of choices violates
expected utility, but, under prospect theory, implies
π(1)
π(0.25)
<
.
π(0.2)
π(0.8)

(3)

The intuition is that the 20 percent jump in probability from 0.8 to 1 is more striking to
people than the 20 percent jump from 0.2 to 0.25. In particular, people place much more
weight on outcomes that are certain relative to outcomes that are merely probable, a feature
sometimes known as the certainty eﬀect.
The transformed probabilities π(p) and π(q) should not be thought of as beliefs, but
as decision weights that help capture evidence on individual risk attitudes. In Kahneman
and Tversky’s (1979) framework, an agent evaluating the lottery-like ($5000, 0.001) gamble
understands that he will only receive the $5000 will probability 0.001. The overweighting of
0.001 introduced by prospect theory is simply a modeling device for capturing the agent’s
preference for the lottery over a certain $5.
In this paper, we do not work with the original version of prospect theory, but with a
modiﬁed version, cumulative prospect theory, proposed by Tversky and Kahneman (1992).
In this version, Tversky and Kahneman (1992) suggest explicit functional forms for v(·) and
π(·). Moreover, they apply the probability weighting function to the cumulative probability
distribution, not to the probability density function. This ensures that the preferences do not
violate ﬁrst-order stochastic dominance – a weakness of the original 1979 version of prospect
theory – and also that they can be applied to gambles with any number of outcomes, not
just two. Finally, Tversky and Kahneman (1992) allow the probability weighting functions
for gains and losses to diﬀer.
6

Formally, cumulative prospect theory says that the agent evaluates a gamble
(x−m , p−m ; . . . ; x−1 , p−1 ; x0 , p0 ; x1 , p1 ; . . . ; xn , pn ),
where xi < xj for i < j and x0 = 0, by assigning it the value
n

i=−m

πi v(xi ),

(4)

where


πi =

w + (pi + . . . + pn ) − w + (pi+1 + . . . + pn )
w − (p−m + . . . + pi ) − w − (p−m + . . . + pi−1 )

for

0≤i≤n
,
−m ≤ i < 0

(5)

and where w + (·) and w − (·) are the probability weighting functions for gains and losses,
respectively.
Equation (5) emphasizes that, under cumulative prospect theory, the weighting function
is applied to the cumulative probability distribution. If it were instead applied to the probability density function, as in the original prospect theory, the probability weight πi , for i < 0
say, would be w − (pi ). Instead, equation (5) shows that, under cumulative prospect theory,
the probability weight πi is obtained by taking the total probability of all outcomes equal to
or worse than xi , namely p−m + . . . + pi , the total probability of all outcomes strictly worse
than xi , namely p−m + . . . + pi−1 , applying the weighting function to each, and subtracting
one from the other.
The eﬀect of applying the probability weighting function to a cumulative probability
distribution is to make the agent overweight the tails of that distribution. In equations (4)(5), the most extreme outcomes, x−m and xn , are assigned the probability weights w − (p−m )
and w + (pn ), respectively. Since they are probability weighting functions, w − (·) and w + (·)
overweight low probabilities, so that if p−m and pn are small, w − (p−m ) > p−m and w + (pn ) >
pn . The most extreme outcomes – the outcomes in the tails – are therefore overweighted. Just
as in the original prospect theory, then, a cumulative prospect theory agent likes positively
skewed, or lottery-like, wealth distributions. This will play an important role in our analysis.
Tversky and Kahneman (1992) propose the functional forms


v(x) =

xα
−λ(−x)α

and
w + (P ) = w − (P ) = w(P ) =

for

x≥0
,
x<0

Pδ
.
(P δ + (1 − P )δ )1/δ

(6)

(7)

For 0 < α < 1 and λ > 1, v(·) captures the features of the value function highlighted
earlier: it is concave over gains, convex over losses, and exhibits a greater sensitivity to
7

losses than to gains. The degree of sensitivity to losses is determined by λ, which is known
as the coeﬃcient of loss aversion. For 0 < δ < 1, w(·) captures the features of the weighting
function described earlier: it overweights low probabilities, so that w(P ) > P for low P , and
is ﬂatter for low P than for high P .
Using experimental data, Tversky and Kahneman (1992) estimate α = 0.88, λ = 2.25,
and δ = 0.65. Figure 2 shows the form of the probability weighting function w(·) for δ = 0.65
(the dashed line), for δ = 0.4 (the dash-dot line), and for δ = 1, which corresponds to no
probability weighting at all (the solid line). The overweighting of low probabilities and the
greater sensitivity to changes in probability at higher probability levels are both clearly
visible for δ < 1.
In our subsequent analysis, we work with the speciﬁcation of cumulative prospect theory
laid out in equations (4)-(5) and (6)-(7), adjusted only to allow for continuous probability
distributions.

3

Investor Preferences

In Sections 4 and 5, we study security prices in economies where investors evaluate risk using
cumulative prospect theory, paying particular attention to the implications of the probability
weighting function. In this section, we lay the groundwork for that analysis by specifying
investor preferences in more detail.
Suppose that an investor uses cumulative prospect theory to evaluate risk, and that his
 = W R,
 respectively.
beginning-of-period wealth and end-of-period wealth are W0 and W
0
In prospect theory, utility is deﬁned over gains and losses, which we interpret as ﬁnal wealth
 minus a reference wealth level W . In symbols, the gain or loss in wealth, W
 , is
W
z
 =W
 −W .
W
z

(8)

One possible reference level is initial wealth W0 . In this paper, we use another reference
level, namely W0 Rf , where Rf is the gross risk-free rate, so that
 =W
 −W R .
W
0 f

(9)

This speciﬁcation is more tractable, and potentially more plausible: the agent thinks of the
change in his wealth as a gain only if it exceeds what he would have achieved by investing
at the risk-free rate. We also assume:
Assumption 1: |E(Ŵ )| < ∞, and Var(Ŵ ) < ∞.

8

In the economies we study later, each investor has the goal function:
 ) ≡ V (Ŵ ) = V (Ŵ + ) + V (Ŵ − ),
U(W

(10)

 , 0), Ŵ − = min(W
 , 0), and
where Ŵ + = max(W
+

V (Ŵ ) = −
V (Ŵ − ) =

 ∞

 0

0

−∞

v(W ) dw +(1 − P (W ))

v(W ) dw −(P (W )),

(11)
(12)

 . Equations (10)-(12)
and where P (·) is the cumulative probability distribution function of W
are equivalent to equations (4)-(5), modiﬁed to allow for continuous probability distributions.
As before, w + (·) and w − (·) are the probability weighting functions for gains and losses,
respectively. We assume:

Assumption 2: w + (·) = w − (·) ≡ w(·).
Assumption 3: w(·) takes the form proposed by Tversky and Kahneman (1992),
w(P ) =

Pδ
,
(P δ + (1 − P )δ )1/δ

(13)

where δ ∈ (0, 1). As mentioned above, experimental evidence suggests δ ≈ 0.65.
Assumption 4: v(·) takes the form proposed by Tversky and Kahneman (1992),


v(x) =

xα
−λ(−x)α

for x ≥ 0
for x < 0,

(14)

where λ > 1 and α ∈ (0, 1). As noted earlier, experimental evidence suggests α ≈ 0.88 and
λ ≈ 2.25.
Assumption 5: α < 2δ.
Taken together with Assumptions 1-4, Assumption 5 ensures that the goal function V (·)
in (10) is well-behaved at ±∞, and therefore well-deﬁned. The values of α and δ estimated
by Tversky and Kahneman (1992) satisfy this condition. In the case of Normal or Lognormal
distributions, Assumption 5 is not needed.
Before embarking on our analysis, we present a useful lemma. In informal terms, the
lemma shows that we can reverse the order of v(·) and w(·) in equations (11)-(12).
Lemma 1: Under Assumptions 1-5,
+

V (Ŵ ) =

 ∞
0

V (Ŵ − ) = −

w(1 − P (x))dv(x)

 0
−∞

9

w(P (x))dv(x).

(15)
(16)

Proof of Lemma 1: See the Appendix for a full derivation. In brief, the lemma follows by
applying integration by parts to equations (11) and (12).

4

The Pricing of Normally Distributed Securities

We now study the implications of cumulative prospect theory for asset prices. We ﬁrst
show that, in a one-period equilibrium model with Normally distributed security payoﬀs,
the CAPM can hold. Under the assumption of Normality, then, the pricing implications of
cumulative prospect theory are no diﬀerent from those of expected utility.
Our proof of the CAPM builds on the following two propositions, which show that cumulative prospect theory preferences satisfy ﬁrst-order stochastic dominance and, within
certain classes of distributions, second-order stochastic dominance as well. That they satisfy
ﬁrst-order stochastic dominance is not surprising: Tversky and Kahneman (1992) themselves
point this out. The result that, under certain conditions, they can also satisfy second-order
stochastic dominance is surprising and is new to the literature.
Proposition 1: Under Assumptions 1-5, the preferences in (10)–(12) satisfy the ﬁrst-order
stochastic dominance property. That is, if Ŵ1 ﬁrst-order stochastically dominates Ŵ2 , then
V (Ŵ1 ) ≥ V (Ŵ2 ). Moreover, if Ŵ1 strictly ﬁrst-order stochastically dominates Ŵ2 , then
V (Ŵ1 ) > V (Ŵ2 ).
Proof of Proposition 1: Since Ŵ1 ﬁrst-order stochastically dominates Ŵ2 , P1 (x) ≤ P2 (x)
for all x ∈ , where Pi (·) is the cumulative distribution function for Ŵi . Equations (15) and
(16) imply V (Ŵ1+ ) ≥ V (Ŵ2+ ) and V (Ŵ1− ) ≥ V (Ŵ2− ), and therefore that V (Ŵ1 ) ≥ V (Ŵ2 ).
If, moreover, Ŵ1 strictly ﬁrst-order stochastically dominates Ŵ2 , then P1 (x) < P2 (x) for
some x ∈ . Given that cumulative distribution functions are right continuous, we have
V (Ŵ1 ) > V (Ŵ2 ).2
Proposition 2: Suppose that Assumptions 1-5 hold. Take two distributions, Ŵ1 and Ŵ2 ,
and suppose that:
(i) E(Ŵ1 ) = E(Ŵ2 ) ≥ 0
(ii) Ŵ1 and Ŵ2 are both symmetrically distributed
(iii) Ŵ1 and Ŵ2 satisfy a single-crossing property, so that if Pi (·) is the cumulative
2

Not all of Assumptions 1-5 are needed for this result. Assumptions 2-4 can be replaced by “w+ (·),
w (·), and v(·) are strictly increasing and continuous,” and Assumption 5 can be replaced by “the integrals
in equations (11) and (12) are well-deﬁned and ﬁnite.”
−

10

distribution function for Ŵi , there exists z such that P1 (x) ≤ P2 (x) for x < z and P1 (x) ≥
P2 (x) for x > z.
Then, V (Ŵ1 ) ≥ V (Ŵ2 ). If, furthermore, the inequalities in condition (iii) hold strictly
for some x, then V (Ŵ1 ) > V (Ŵ2 ).
Proof of Proposition 2: See the Appendix.
Proposition 2 immediately implies that, for certain classes of distributions – speciﬁcally,
for any set of symmetric distributions that have the same non-negative mean and that,
pairwise, satisfy a single-crossing property – cumulative prospect theory preferences satisfy

second-order stochastic dominance. To see this, take any two distributions in the set, W
1



and W2 , say. The single-crossing property means that we can rank W1 and W2 according
to the second-order stochastic dominance criterion: we can obtain one distribution from the
other by adding a mean-preserving spread. Proposition 2 then shows that the distribution
which dominates is preferred by a cumulative prospect theory investor.
Given that the probability weighting function w(·) and the convexity of the value function
v(·) in the region of losses induce risk-seeking, cumulative prospect theory preferences do not,
in general, satisfy second-order stochastic dominance: an agent with these preferences is not
necessarily averse to a mean-preserving spread. The intuition for why, within certain classes
of distributions, he is averse to such a spread, is discussed in detail in our proof of Proposition
2. In brief, the idea is that, within these classes, a mean-preserving spread fattens the right
tail of the wealth distribution – an attractive feature for a cumulative prospect theory investor
– but also fattens the left tail of the distribution, which is unattractive. Since the investor
is loss averse, he is more sensitive to changes in the left tail, and so, on balance, is averse to
the mean-preserving spread.
We now use Propositions 1 and 2 to derive a CAPM result. We make the following
assumptions:
Assumption 6: We study a one-period economy with two dates, t = 0 and t = 1.
Assumption 7: Asset supply. The economy contains a risk-free asset, which is in perfectly
elastic supply, and has a gross return of Rf . There are also J risky assets. Risky asset j has
 . The
nj > 0 shares outstanding, a per-share payoﬀ of X̃j at time 1, and a gross return of R
j
random payoﬀs {X̃1 , · · · , X̃J } have a positive-deﬁnite variance-covariance matrix, so that no
linear combination of the J payoﬀs is a constant.
Assumption 8: Distribution of payoﬀs. The joint distribution of the time 1 payoﬀs on
the J risky assets is multivariate Normal.

11

Assumption 9: Investor preferences. The economy contains a large number of price , deﬁned in (9).
taking investors who derive utility from the time 1 gain or loss in wealth, W
All investors have the same preferences, namely those described in equations (10)–(12) and
Assumptions 2-5. In particular, the parameters α, δ, and λ are the same for all investors.
Assumption 10: Investor beliefs. All investors assign the same probability distribution
to future payoﬀs and security returns.
Assumption 11: Investor endowments. Each investor is endowed with positive net
wealth in the form of traded securities.
Assumption 12: There are no trading frictions or constraints.
We can now prove:
Proposition 3: Under Assumptions 6-12, there exists an equilibrium in which the CAPM
holds, so that
(17)
E(R̃j ) − Rf = βj (E(R̃M ) − Rf ), j = 1, · · · , J,
where
βj ≡

Cov(R̃j , R̃M )
,
Var(R̃M )

(18)

 is the market return. The excess market return, R̂ ≡ R̃ − R , satisﬁes
and where R
M
M
M
f

V (R̂M ) ≡ −

 0
−∞

w(P (R̂M ))dv(R̂M ) +

 ∞
0

w(1 − P (R̂M ))dv(R̂M ) = 0,

(19)

and the market risk premium is positive:
 ) > 0.
E(R
M

(20)

Proof of Proposition 3: See the Appendix.
The intuition behind the proposition is straightforward. When security payoﬀs are Normally distributed, the goal function in (10)-(12) becomes a function of the mean and standard
deviation of the distribution of wealth. Since these preferences satisfy ﬁrst-order stochastic
dominance, all investors choose a portfolio on the mean-variance eﬃcient frontier, in other
words, a portfolio that combines the risk-free asset and the tangency portfolio. Market clearing means that the tangency portfolio is the market portfolio, and the CAPM then follows
in the usual way.
The previous paragraph explains why, if there is an equilibrium, that equilibrium must be
a CAPM equilibrium. In our proof of Proposition 3, we also show that a CAPM equilibrium
12

satisfying conditions (17), (19), and (20) does indeed exist. It is in this part of the argument
that we make use of the second-order stochastic dominance result in Proposition 2.
The result that, under cumulative prospect theory, the CAPM can still hold, also appears
in De Giorgi, Hens, and Levy (2003). For two reasons, we include this result here as well.
First, it provides a very useful springboard for our main contribution, namely the analysis in
Section 5 of how skewed securities are priced. Second, thanks to our new result on secondorder stochastic dominance in Proposition 2, we are able to oﬀer a diﬀerent proof of the
CAPM; speciﬁcally, one that is much shorter.3

5

The Pricing of Skewed Securities

Under the assumption of Normality, then, the pricing implications of cumulative prospect
theory are identical to those of expected utility. We now show that, as soon as we relax
the assumption of Normality, cumulative prospect theory can have novel pricing predictions.
We demonstrate this using the most parsimonious model possible, one with the minimum
amount of additional structure. Speciﬁcally, we study an economy in which Assumptions
6-12 still apply, but which, in addition to the risk-free asset and the J Normally distributed
risky assets, also contains a positively skewed security. We make the following simplifying
assumptions:
Assumption 13: Independence. The return on the skewed security is independent of the
returns on the J original risky securities.
Assumption 14: Small supply. The payoﬀ of the skewed security is inﬁnitesimal relative
to the total payoﬀ of the J original risky securities.4
In a representative agent economy with concave, expected utility preferences, a small,
independent, skewed security earns an average return inﬁnitesimally above the risk-free rate;
in other words, an average excess return inﬁnitesimally above zero. We now show that, when
investors have the cumulative prospect theory preferences in (10)-(12), we obtain a very
3

De Giorgi, Hens, and Levy (2003) also point out that, if investors have cumulative prospect theory
preferences with heterogeneous preference parameters, some of them may want to take an inﬁnite position
in the market portfolio and a CAPM equilibrium may therefore not exist. This problem can be avoided by
imposing the condition that each investor’s terminal wealth be non-negative; by adding a second term to
investors’ utility, namely a concave utility of consumption term; or, as De Giorgi, Hens, and Levy (2003)
themselves suggest, by slightly modifying Tversky and Kahneman’s (1992) speciﬁcation.
4
We assume an “inﬁnitesimal” payoﬀ for technical convenience. In practice, the payoﬀ of the skewed
security simply needs to be small, relative to the total payoﬀ of the J original risky securities. Just how
small it needs to be will become clearer when we present quantitative examples of equilibria.

13

diﬀerent prediction: a small, independent, skewed security earns a negative average excess
return. For simplicity, our initial analysis imposes short-sale constraints. Our results are not
driven by these constraints, however: in Section 5.7, we show that our main conclusions are
valid even when investors can sell short.
We ﬁrst note that, in any equilibrium, all investors must hold portfolios that are some
combination of the risk-free asset, the skewed security, and the tangency portfolio T formed
in the mean / standard deviation plane from the J original risky assets. To see this, suppose
that an investor allocates a fraction 1 − θ of his wealth to a portfolio P which is some
combination of the risk-free asset and the J original risky assets, and a fraction θ of his
wealth to the skewed security. If the gross returns of portfolio P and of the skewed security
 and R
 , respectively, the expected return E and variance V of the overall allocation
are R
p
n
strategy are
 ) + θE(R
 )
E = (1 − θ)E(R
p
n

V

= (1 − θ)

2


Var(R

p)

+θ

2

(21)


Var(R

n ).

(22)

Now, recall that cumulative prospect theory satisﬁes ﬁrst-order stochastic dominance.
The investor is therefore interested in portfolios which, for given variance in (22), maximize
expected return in (21). For a ﬁxed position in the skewed security, these are portfolios
 ) for given Var(R
 ), in other words, as claimed above, portfolios that
that maximize E(R
p
p
combine the risk-free asset with the tangency portfolio T formed in the mean / standard
deviation plane from the J original risky assets. Market clearing further implies that the
tangency portfolio T must be the market portfolio formed from the J original risky assets
alone, excluding the skewed asset. If we call the latter portfolio the “J-market portfolio,”
for short, we conclude that all investors hold portfolios that are some combination of the
risk-free asset, the J-market portfolio, and the skewed security.
The simplest candidate equilibrium is a homogeneous holdings equilibrium: an equilibrium in which all investors hold the same portfolio. In Section 5.1, however, we show that,
for a wide range of parameter values, no such equilibrium exists. We therefore consider the
next simplest candidate equilibrium: a heterogeneous holdings equilibrium with two groups
of investors, where all investors in the same group hold the same portfolio. Speciﬁcally,
we conjecture an equilibrium with the following structure: all investors in the ﬁrst group
hold a portfolio that combines the risk-free asset and the J-market portfolio, but takes no
position at all in the skewed security; and all investors in the second group hold a portfolio
that combines the risk-free asset, the J-market portfolio, and a long position in the skewed
security.
The heterogeneous holdings in our conjectured equilibrium do not stem from heterogeneous preferences: as speciﬁed in Assumption 9, all investors have identical preferences.
Rather, they stem from the existence of non-unique optimal portfolios. By assigning each
14

investor to one of the two proposed optimal portfolios, we can clear the market in the skewed
security, even though that security is in small supply.
 and R
 ≡ R
 − R be the excess returns of the J-market portfolio and of the
Let R
M
n
n
f
skewed security, respectively. The conditions for our proposed equilibrium are then:
 ) = V (R
 + x∗ R
 )=0
V (R
M
M
n
 + xR
 ) < 0 for 0 < x = x ,
V (R
M
n
∗

where
V (R̂M + xR̂n ) = −

 0
−∞

w(Px (R))dv(R) +

 ∞
0

w(1 − Px (R))dv(R)

(23)
(24)
(25)

and
 + xR
 ≤ R).
Px (R) = Pr(R
M
n

(26)

Here, x∗ is the fraction of wealth allocated to the skewed security relative to the fraction
allocated to the J-market portfolio, for those investors who allocate a positive amount to the
skewed security.
Why are these the appropriate equilibrium conditions? First, recall that, in the conjectured equilibrium, each investor in the ﬁrst group holds a portfolio with return (1 − θ)Rf +
 , with θ > 0. Since
θR
M
 )) = V (W θ R
 ) = W α θ α V (R
 ),
U(W0 ((1 − θ)Rf + θR
M
0
M
M
0

(27)

 ) = 0. Each investor in the second
an investor will only choose a ﬁnite and positive θ if V (R
M

 , with φ > 0 and φ > 0.
group holds a portfolio with return (1 − φ1 − φ2 )Rf + φ1 RM + φ2 R
n
1
2
If this portfolio is to be a second global optimum, it must also oﬀer a utility level of zero, so
that, if x∗ = φ2 /φ1 ,
α α
∗ 
 +φ R


U(W0 ((1 − φ1 − φ2 )Rf + φ1 R
M
2 n )) = W0 φ1 V (RM + x Rn ) = 0.

(28)

This explains condition (23). Condition (24) ensures that these two portfolios are the only
global optima.
In general, when a new security is introduced into an economy, the prices of existing
securities are aﬀected. A useful feature of our conjectured equilibrium, which we derive formally in the Appendix, is that the prices of the J original risky assets are not aﬀected by the
introduction of the skewed security: their prices in the heterogeneous holdings equilibrium
are identical to what they were in the economy of Section 4, where there was no skewed
security.

5.1

An example

We now show that an equilibrium satisfying conditions (23)-(24) actually exists. To do this,
we construct an explicit example.
15

From Assumption 8, the J-market return – the return on the market portfolio excluding
the skewed security – is Normally distributed:
 ∼ N(µ , σ ).
R
M
M
M

(29)

We model the skewed security in the simplest possible way, using a binomial distribution:
with some low probability q, the security pays out a large “jackpot” L, and with probability
1 − q, it pays out nothing. Using our earlier notation, the payoﬀ distribution is therefore
(L, q; 0, 1 − q).

(30)

For very large L and very low q, this resembles the payoﬀ distribution of a lottery ticket.
 and excess return R
 = R
 − R are
If the price of this security is pn , its gross return R
n
n
n
f
distributed as:
L
, q; 0, 1 − q)
pn
L
∼ ( − Rf , q; −Rf , 1 − q).
pn


R
n ∼ (

(31)


R
n

(32)

We now specify the preference parameters (α, δ , λ), the skewed security payoﬀ parameters
(L, q), the risk-free rate Rf , and the standard deviation of the J-market return σM , and search
for a mean excess return on the J-market, µM , and a price pn for the skewed security, such
that conditions (23)-(24) hold. Speciﬁcally, we take the unit of time to be a year and set
the annual stock market standard deviation to σM = 0.15 and the annual risk-free rate to
Rf = 1.02. We set L = 10 and q = 0.09, which imply substantial positive skewness in the
new security’s payoﬀ. Finally, we set
α = 0.88, δ = 0.65, λ = 2.25,
the values estimated by Tversky and Kahneman (1992).
 ) = 0 in (23) implies µ = 7.5%. This
For these parameter values, the condition V (R
M
M
is consistent with Benartzi and Thaler (1995) and Barberis, Huang, and Santos (2001), who
show that, in an economy with prospect theory investors who derive utility from annual
ﬂuctuations in the value of their stock market holdings, the equity premium can be very
substantial. The intuition is that, under prospect theory, investors are much more sensitive
to stock market losses than to stock market gains. They therefore perceive the stock market
to be very risky, and charge a high average return as compensation.

We now search for a price pn of the skewed security such that conditions (23)-(24) hold.
To do this, we need to compute Px (R), deﬁned in (26). Given our assumptions about the
distribution of security returns, it is given by
 + xR
 ≤ R)
Px (R) = Pr(R
M
n

16

L
 ≤ R − x( L − R )) + Pr(R
 = −R ) Pr(R
 ≤ R + xR )
− Rf ) Pr(R
M
f
n
f
M
f
pn
pn
R − x( pLn − Rf ) − µM
R + xRf − µM
) + (1 − q)N(
),
(33)
= qN(
σM
σM
 =
= Pr(R
n

where N(·) is the cumulative Normal distribution.
We ﬁnd that the price level pn = 0.925 satisﬁes conditions (23)-(24). Figure 3 provides a
graphical illustration. For this value of pn , the solid line in the ﬁgure plots the goal function
 + xR
 ) for a range of values of x, where x is the amount allocated to the skewed
V (R
M
n
security relative to the amount allocated to the J-market portfolio. The two global optima
are clearly visible: one at x = 0 and one at x = 0.086. So long as the skewed security is in
small supply – speciﬁcally, so long as its value is less than 8.6% of the value of the J-market
portfolio – we can clear the market for it by assigning each investor to one of the two global
optima. Given the return distribution in (32), the equilibrium average excess return on the
skewed security is
E(R̂n ) =

qL
(0.09)(10)
− 1.02 = −0.047,
− Rf =
pn
0.925

(34)

 ) − 1 = E(R
 ) + R − 1 = −0.027.
so that the average net return is E(R
n
n
f

The shape of the solid line can be understood as follows. Adding a small position in
the skewed security to an existing position in the J-market portfolio initially lowers utility
because of the security’s negative average excess return and because of the lack of diversiﬁcation the strategy entails. As we increase x further, however, the security starts to add
skewness to the return on the investor’s portfolio. Since the investor overweights the tails
of his wealth distribution, he values this highly and his utility increases. At a price level of
pn = 0.925, the skewness eﬀect oﬀsets the diversiﬁcation and negative excess return eﬀects
in a way that produces two global optima at x = 0 and x = 0.086. As x increases beyond
0.086, utility falls again: at this point, a higher value of x preserves the lottery-like structure
of the investor’s wealth but increases the size of the lottery jackpot. Since the prospect
theory value function is concave over gains, the beneﬁt of a larger jackpot is too small to
compensate for the lack of diversiﬁcation, and utility falls.
Figure 3 also explains why the skewed security earns a negative average excess return.
By taking a large position in this security, some investors can add skewness to their portfolio
return; they value this highly, and are therefore willing to accept a low average return on
the security.
In summary, we have shown that, under cumulative prospect theory, a positively skewed
security can become overpriced, relative to its price in a concave expected utility model, and
can earn a low average return. We emphasize that this result is by no means an obvious
one. An investor who overweights the tails of a portfolio return distribution will, of course,
17

value a positively skewed portfolio highly; what is surprising is that he also values a skewed
security highly, even if that security is small and independent of other risks.
It is natural to ask whether the parameter values in our example, namely (σM , L, q) =
(0.15, 10, 0.09), admit any equilibria other than the heterogeneous holdings equilibrium described above. While it is diﬃcult to give a deﬁnitive answer, we can at least show that, for
these parameter values, there is no homogeneous holdings equilibrium, in other words, no
equilibrium in which all investors hold the same portfolio.
In any homogeneous holdings equilibrium, each investor would need to be happy to hold
an inﬁnitesimal amount ε∗ of the skewed security. The equilibrium conditions are therefore
 + ε∗ R
 ) = 0
V (R
M
n
 + εR
 ) < 0,
V (R
M
n

(35)
0 ≤ ε = ε∗ .

(36)

Using the same reasoning as for condition (23), we need condition (35) to ensure that investors will optimally choose positive but ﬁnite allocations to the J-market portfolio and
the skewed security. Condition (36) ensures that an allocation ε∗ to the skewed security is
a global optimum. Since this global optimum is also a local optimum, a necessary condition
 + ε∗ R
 ) = 0.
for equilibrium is V  (R
M
n
If a homogeneous holdings equilibrium exists, we can approximate it by studying the
limiting case as ε∗ → 0. We therefore search for a price pn of the skewed security such that
 ) = 0 and V  (R
 ) = 0. We ﬁnd that these conditions are satisﬁed for p = 0.882. The
V (R
M
M
n
 +xR
 ) for this case. We immediately see
dashed line in Figure 3 plots the goal function V (R
M
n
that pn = 0.882 does not represent an equilibrium, as it violates condition (36): all investors
would prefer a substantial positive position in the skewed security to an inﬁnitesimal one,
making it impossible to clear the market. There is therefore no homogeneous holdings
equilibrium for these preference and payoﬀ parameters.5

5.2

How does expected return vary with skewness?

The skewness of the new security’s excess return in (32) is primarily determined by q, the
probability of the large payoﬀ: a low value of q corresponds to a high degree of skewness. In
this section, we examine how the equilibrium average excess return on this security changes
as we vary its skewness; or, more precisely, as we vary q.6
5

Given the scale of Figure 3, it is hard to tell whether the dashed line really does have a derivative of 0 at
x = 0. Magnifying the left side of the graph conﬁrms that the derivative is 0 at x = 0, although it quickly
turns negative as x increases.
6
It is straightforward to check that the skewness of the excess return in (32) is (L/pn )(1 − 2q). We can
approximate the price of the new security by pn ≈ qL/Rf , its price in a representative agent economy with

18

Our main ﬁnding, obtained by searching across many diﬀerent values of q, is that the
results in Section 5.1 for the case of q = 0.09 are typical of those for all low values of q.
Speciﬁcally, for all q ≤ 0.105, a heterogeneous holdings equilibrium can be constructed, but
a homogeneous holdings equilibrium cannot. For q in this range, the expected excess return
on the new security is negative, and becomes more negative as q falls. The intuition is that,
when q is low, the skewed security is highly skewed and can add a large amount of skewness
to the investor’s portfolio; as a result, it is more valuable to him and he lowers the expected
return he requires on it.
For q above 0.105, however – in other words, for a skewed security that is only mildly
skewed – the opposite is true: a homogeneous holdings equilibrium can be constructed,
but a heterogeneous holdings equilibrium cannot. The reason the heterogeneous holdings
equilibrium breaks down for higher values of q is that, if the new security is not suﬃciently
skewed, no position in it, however large, adds enough skewness to the investor’s portfolio to
compensate for the lack of diversiﬁcation the position entails.
To see this last point, suppose that, as before, σM = 0.15 and L = 10, so that, once
again, µM = 0.075, but that q is set to 0.2 rather than to 0.09. Figure 4 plots the goal
 + xR
 ) for various values of p , namely p = 2.5 (dashed line), p = 1.96
function V (R
M
n
n
n
n
(solid line), and pn = 1.35 (dash-dot line). While these lines correspond to only three values
of pn , they hint at the outcome of a more extensive search, namely that no value of pn can
deliver two global optima. In other words, no value of pn can satisfy conditions (23)-(24) for
a heterogeneous holdings equilibrium.
For the parameter values (σM , L, q) = (0.15, 10, 0.2), we can only obtain a homogeneous
holdings equilibrium, one which satisﬁes conditions (35)-(36). As before, we study this
equilibrium in the limiting case of ε∗ → 0 by searching for a price pn of the skewed security
 ) = 0 and V  (R
 ) = 0. We ﬁnd that p = 1.96 satisﬁes these conditions.
that satisﬁes V (R
M
M
n
The solid line in Figure 4 plots the goal function for this value of pn . The graph shows that
x = ε∗ is not only a local optimum, but also a global optimum. We have therefore identiﬁed
a homogeneous holdings equilibrium. In this equilibrium, the expected excess return of the
skewed security is
 ) = qL − R = (0.2)(10) − 1.02 = 0.
E(R
n
f
pn
1.96
It is no coincidence that the skewed security earns an expected excess return of zero.
The following proposition shows that, whenever a homogeneous holdings equilibrium exists, the expected excess return on the skewed security is always zero, or, more precisely,
inﬁnitesimally greater than zero. In other words, in a homogeneous holdings setting, cumulative prospect theory assigns the skewed security the same average return that a concave
concave expected utility, where it earns an average excess return of zero. A rough estimate of the skewness
of the new security is therefore Rf (1/q − 2), so that skewness is primarily determined by q.

19

expected utility speciﬁcation would.
Proposition 4: Consider an agent with the preferences in (10)-(12) who holds a portfolio
with return R̃ ≡ R̂ + Rf . Suppose that he adds a small amount of an independent security
 to his portfolio; and that he ﬁnances this by borrowing, so that his
with excess return R
n
excess portfolio return becomes R̂ + εR̂n . If R̂ has a probability density function that satisﬁes
σ(R̂) > 0, then
V (R̂ + εR̂n ) − V (R̂)
(37)
lim
= E(R̂n )V  (R̂),
ε→0
ε
where, with some abuse of notation, V  (·) is deﬁned as
V  (R̂)
≡ lim
=

x→0
 0
−∞

V (R̂ + x) − V (R̂)
x




w (P (R))P (R)dv(R) +

 ∞
0

w  (1 − P (R))P (R)dv(R) > 0,

(38)

with P (R) ≡ Prob(R̂ ≤ R).
Proof of Proposition 4: See the Appendix.
 + xR
 ) to have a local optimum
In any homogeneous holdings equilibrium, we need V (R
M
n
 ) ≈ 0.
at x = ε∗ , for inﬁnitesimal ε∗ . From the proposition, this implies that E(R
n

Figure 5 summarizes the ﬁndings of this section by plotting the expected return of the
skewed security as a function of q when (σM , L) = (0.15, 10). For q ≤ 0.105, we obtain
heterogeneous holdings equilibria in which the expected excess return is negative and falls as
q falls. For q > 0.105, a heterogenous holdings equilibrium can no longer be constructed, but
a homogeneous holdings equilibrium can, and here, the skewed security earns an expected
excess return of zero.
Figure 5 emphasizes that, while cumulative prospect theory predicts a relationship between a security’s skewness and its average return, the predicted relationship is highly nonlinear. Only securities with a high degree of skewness earn a negative expected excess return.
Those with merely moderate skewness have an expected excess return of zero.

5.3

Relation to other research on skewness

Our analysis of economies with cumulative prospect theory investors has led us to a prediction that is new to the asset pricing literature, namely that idiosyncratic skewness is priced.
Our main motivation for working with cumulative prospect theory is that, given its status as
20

a leading model of how investors evaluate risk, it is interesting to document its implications
for security pricing. At the same time, it is reasonable to ask whether the pricing of idiosyncratic skewness can also be derived in an expected utility framework with skewness-loving
preferences.
In fact, models in which investors have expected utility preferences with concave, skewnessloving utility functions do not predict the pricing of idiosyncratic skewness. In such economies,
only a security’s coskewness with the market portfolio is priced; the security’s own skewness
is not (Kraus and Litzenberger, 1976; Harvey and Siddique, 2000). A small, independent,
skewed security therefore earns a zero risk premium: its coskewness with the market is zero.
It does not earn the negative risk premium we observe under cumulative prospect theory.
One way to think about this point is to note that, in our model, the pricing of idiosyncratic
skewness traces back to the undiversiﬁed positions some investors hold in the skewed security.
By contrast, investors with concave, skewness-loving, expected utility preferences always hold
diversiﬁed portfolios. As a result, only coskewness with the market is priced; idiosyncratic
skewness is not.
Can idiosyncratic skewness be priced when investors have expected utility preferences
with convex, skewness-loving utility functions, such as cubic utility functions? It is hard to
give a deﬁnitive answer, because the pricing implications of these preferences have not yet
been fully analyzed. One well-known diﬃculty with such preferences, however, is that, given
a skewed security as an investment option, the optimal portfolio may involve an inﬁnite
position in that security, a phenomenon known as “plunging” (Kane, 1982; Polkovnichenko,
2005).7
One framework that does predict the pricing of idiosyncratic skewness is the optimal
expectations model of Brunnermeier and Parker (2005), in which investors choose their beliefs
in order to maximize the discounted value of expected future utility ﬂows. Brunnermeier,
Gollier, and Parker (2007) show that, in this framework, all investors allocate a signiﬁcant
fraction of their wealth to positively skewed assets, which, in equilibrium, earn low average
returns.
7

In order to provide a theoretical framework for some empirical results on skewness, Mitton and Vorkink
(2007) consider an expected utility model in which some investors have convex, skewness-loving preferences.
A potential pitfall of this model, however, is that the global optimum for these investors may indeed involve
an inﬁnite position in the skewed security; the authors focus on a ﬁnite local optimum, but do not prove
that it is also a global optimum. We suggest later that their empirical results may be more easily interpreted
using the cumulative prospect theory model we present here.

21

5.4

How does expected return vary with the preference parameters?

In Section 5.2, we saw how the expected return on the skewed security changes as we vary
the probability q of winning the large payoﬀ. Throughout that analysis, we kept the preference parameters ﬁxed at the values estimated by Tversky and Kahneman (1992), namely
(α, δ, λ) = (0.88, 0.65, 2.25). In this section, we ﬁx q, and examine the eﬀect of varying α, δ,
and λ. The three panels in Figure 6 plot the expected excess return of the skewed security
against each of these parameters in turn, holding the other two constant.
The top left panel shows that, as δ increases, the expected return of the skewed security
also rises. A low value of δ means that the investor weights the tails of a probability distribution particularly heavily and therefore that he is strongly interested in a positively skewed
portfolio. Since the skewed security oﬀers a way of constructing such a portfolio, it is very
valuable, and the investor is willing to hold it in exchange for a very low average return.
Once δ rises above 0.68, however, no heterogeneous holdings equilibrium is possible: by this
point, the investor does not care enough about having a positively skewed portfolio for him
to want to take on an undiversiﬁed position in the skewed security. Only a homogeneous
holdings equilibrium is possible, and, in such an equilibrium, the skewed security earns an
average excess return of zero.
The top right panel shows that, as λ increases, the expected return on the skewed security
also goes up. The parameter λ governs the investor’s aversion to losses. In order to add
skewness to his portfolio, the investor needs to hold a large, undiversiﬁed position in the
skewed security. As λ increases, he ﬁnds it harder to tolerate the high volatility of this
undiversiﬁed position and is therefore only willing to hold the skewed security if it oﬀers a
high expected return. Once λ rises above 2.48, no position in the skewed security, however
large, contributes suﬃcient skewness to oﬀset the painful swings in the value of the overall
portfolio. In this range, only a homogeneous holdings equilibrium is possible.
Finally, the lower left panel shows that, as α falls, the expected return on the skewed
security goes up. A lower α means that the value function in the region of gains, depicted in
Figure 1, is more concave. This means that the investor derives less utility from a positively
skewed portfolio. The skewed security is therefore less useful to him, and he is only willing
to hold it in exchange for a higher average return.

5.5

Additional skewed securities

We now show that our main result – that, under cumulative prospect theory, a positively
skewed security can earn a negative average excess return – continues to hold even when we
22

introduce additional skewed securities into the economy.
Suppose that Assumptions 6-12 apply as before, but that, in addition to the risk-free
asset and J Normally distributed securities described there, the economy now contains two
skewed securities, each in inﬁnitesimal supply, independent of other securities, and with the

payoﬀ distribution in (30). The excess return and price of the j’th skewed security are R
n,j
and pn,j , respectively.
As before, optimizing investors hold portfolios that combine the risk-free asset, the Jmarket portfolio, and the skewed securities. Each investor’s goal function is therefore
 +x R


V (R
M
1 n,1 + x2 Rn,2 ) = −

 0
−∞

w(Px1,x2 (R))dv(R) +

 ∞
0

w(1 − Px1 ,x2 (R))dv(R) (39)

where
 +x R


Px1 ,x2 (R) = Pr(R
M
1 n,1 + x2 Rn,2 ≤ R),

(40)

and where xj is the amount allocated to skewed security j relative to the amount allocated
to the J-market portfolio.
Now that there are two skewed securities, we conjecture an equilibrium with three global
optima: a portfolio that combines the risk-free asset and the J-market portfolio with a large,
undiversiﬁed position x∗ > 0 in just the ﬁrst skewed security; a portfolio that combines the
risk-free asset and the J-market portfolio with a large, undiversiﬁed position x∗ in just the
second skewed security; and a portfolio that holds only the risk-free asset and the J-market
portfolio and takes no position at all in either of the skewed securities. In other words, the
three conjectured optima are
(x1 , x2 ) = (x∗ , 0), (0, x∗ ), and (0, 0).

(41)

By assigning each investor to one of these three optima, we can clear markets in all securities.
Earlier, we saw that if (x1 , x2 ) = (0, 0) is an optimum – in other words, if combining the
risk-free asset with a positive, ﬁnite position in the J-market portfolio is an optimum – we
 ) = 0. The goal function must therefore take the value 0 at all three optima.
need V (R
M
This leads to the equilibrium conditions:
 ) = V (R
 + x∗ R
 ) = 0,
V (R
M
M
n,j
 +x R


V (R
M
1 n,1 + x2 Rn,2 ) < 0,

j = 1, 2

0 < x1 = x∗ , 0 < x2 = x∗ .

(42)
(43)

We now check that this conjectured equilibrium exists. Suppose that, as in the example
in Section 5.1, (α, δ, λ) = (0.88, 0.65, 2.25), (σM , Rf ) = (0.15, 1.02), and that, for each of
 ) = 0 again implies
the two skewed securities, (L, q) = (10, 0.09). The condition V (R
M
µM = 0.075. All that remains is to ﬁnd pn,1 and pn,2 that satisfy conditions (42)-(43).
23

We ﬁnd that the values pn,1 = pn,2 = 0.925 satisfy these conditions with x∗ = 0.086. In
other words, for these prices, the goal function has three global optima, namely
(x1 , x2 ) = (0.086, 0), (0, 0.086), and (0, 0).
We note that the two skewed securities have the same price as the skewed security in the
original one-skewed-security economy of Section 5.1. Their average excess return is therefore
also the same, namely −4.7%.
An important feature of this heterogeneous holdings equilibrium is that investors prefer
a large, undiversiﬁed position in just one skewed security to a diversiﬁed position in two of
them. The intuition is that, by diversifying, an investor lowers the volatility of his overall
portfolio – which is good – but also lowers its skewness – which is bad. Which of the two forces
dominates depends on the distribution of security returns. For the binomial distribution in
(31), skewness falls faster than volatility as the investor diversiﬁes; diversiﬁcation is therefore
unattractive.
Our goal here is a modest one. We simply show that, when there are two skewed securities,
we can construct an equilibrium in which these skewed securities earn a negative average
excess return. We do not claim to characterize the full set of preference and payoﬀ parameters
for which this is possible; nor do we claim that this equilibrium is unique. At the same time,
we have explored many sets of preference and payoﬀ parameters, and have found that,
whenever these parameters support a heterogenous holdings equilibrium in the case of one
skewed security, a heterogeneous holdings equilibrium can also be constructed in the case of
two skewed securities, and the average excess return of the skewed securities in this case is
the same as in the original one-skewed-security economy.
What happens when there are more than two skewed securities? Suppose that there are
N skewed securities in the economy, each in small supply, independent of other securities,
and with the payoﬀ distribution in (30). In this case, we conjecture an equilibrium with
N + 1 optima: a portfolio that combines the risk-free asset and the J-market portfolio with a
large, undiversiﬁed position x∗ in just the ﬁrst skewed security; a portfolio that combines the
risk-free asset and the J-market portfolio with a large, undiversiﬁed position x∗ in just the
second skewed security; and so on for each of the skewed securities; and, ﬁnally, a portfolio
that holds only the risk-free asset and the J-market portfolio and takes no position at all in
any of the skewed securities. By assigning each investor to one of these optima, we can clear
markets for all securities.
We have analyzed economies with as many skewed securities as computational limits
will allow: speciﬁcally, economies with N ≤ 10. For N in this range, we ﬁnd that we can
construct a heterogeneous holdings equilibrium of the form conjectured; for example, the
preference and payoﬀ parameters considered above, namely (α, δ, λ) = (0.88, 0.65, 2.25) and
(σM , L, q) = (0.15, 10, 0.09), support such an equilibrium. In this equilibrium, the average
24

excess return on each of the skewed securities is the same as in the original one-skewedsecurity economy. Even as we add more skewed securities, then, investors show no interest
in diversifying across them. Diversiﬁcation lowers volatility, but also lowers skewness, and
the latter eﬀect dominates.

5.6

Relaxing the short-sales constraint

We now show that the novel pricing implications of cumulative prospect theory continue to
hold even when short sales are allowed.
We start with the simplest case: that of one skewed security. Suppose that Assumptions
6-12 apply as before, but that, in addition to the risk-free asset and J Normally distributed
securities described there, the economy also contains an independent, skewed security with
 and p , respectively.
the payoﬀ distribution in (30), and with an excess return and price of R
n
n
For the purposes of this section, we assume that the skewed security is in zero net supply;
this will simplify our discussion.
We conjecture that, when shorting is allowed, there is an equilibrium with two optima:
a portfolio which combines a position in the risk-free asset and the J-market portfolio with
a positive position x∗ in the skewed security; and a portfolio which combines a position
in the risk-free asset and the J-market portfolio with a short position x∗∗ in the skewed
security. Since the skewed security is in zero net supply, we can clear markets by assigning
an appropriate number of investors to each optimum.
 + xR
 )
The equilibrium we have just described requires that the goal function V (R
M
n
is maximized at x = x∗ and x = −x∗∗ . As before, V (·) must take the value zero at both
optima; otherwise, the investor would prefer to hold only the risk-free asset or to take an
inﬁnite position in the risky assets. The equilibrium conditions are therefore:
 + x∗ R
 ) = V (R
 − x∗∗ R
 )=0
V (R
M
n
M
n

(44)

 + xR
 ) < 0, ∀x = x , − x .
V (R
M
n

(45)

∗

∗∗

We now check that this equilibrium exists. For the parameters values of Section 5.1,
namely (α, δ, λ) = (0.88, 0.65, 2.25), (σM , Rf ) = (0.15, 1.02), and (L, q) = (10, 0.09), we
search for µM and pn such that conditions (44)-(45) hold.
We ﬁnd that µM = 0.075 and pn = 0.924 satisfy these conditions. In this equilibrium,
the skewed security earns an average excess return of
 )=
E(R
n

qL
− Rf = −0.046.
pn
25

(46)

Our main result – that, under cumulative prospect theory, a positively skewed security can
earn a negative average excess return – therefore continues to hold even when shorting is
allowed.
The intuition behind the two optima is straightforward. Some investors take a long
position in the skewed security. This gives them a tiny chance of a huge wealth payoﬀ.
Since they overweight the tails of the wealth distribution, they ﬁnd this very attractive,
and are willing to hold the skewed security even if it oﬀers a low average return. Other
investors take a short position in the skewed security. This exposes them to the possibility
of a large drop in wealth. Since they overweight the tails of the wealth distribution, they
ﬁnd this unattractive, but, because they are compensated by a high average return, they
are nonetheless willing to take the position. For pn = 0.924, the two strategies are equally
attractive. The expected excess return of the skewed security, −0.046, is slightly higher than
in the no-short-sales economy of Section 5.1. Shorting allows some investors to exploit the
“overpricing” of the skewed security: this exerts some downward pressure on the price, and
some upward pressure on the expected return.
Now suppose that the economy contains N > 1 skewed securities, each in zero net supply,
independent of other securities, and with the payoﬀ distribution in (30). The excess return

and price of the j’th skewed security are R
n,j and pn,j , respectively. What form does the
equilibrium take now?
We conjecture a heterogeneous holdings equilibrium with N + 1 optima: the N portfolios
which combine a position in the J-market portfolio with a long position x∗ in any one of
the N skewed securities and a short position x∗∗ /(N − 1) in the remaining N − 1 skewed
securities, where 0 < x∗∗ < x∗ ; and a portfolio which combines a position in the J-market
portfolio with a short position x∗∗∗ in each of the N skewed securities. Mathematically, our
conjecture is that the goal function
 +x R


V (R
M
1 n,1 + . . . + xM Rn,M ),

(47)

where xj is the allocation to the j’th skewed security relative to the allocation to the J-market
portfolio, is maximized at the N + 1 points
(x1 , x2 , . . . , xN ) = (x∗ , −

x∗∗
x∗∗
x∗∗
x∗∗
,...,−
), . . . , (−
,−
, . . . , x∗ )
N −1
N −1
N −1 N −1

(48)

and
(x1 , x2 , . . . , xM ) = (−x∗∗∗ , −x∗∗∗ , . . . , −x∗∗∗ ),

(49)

x∗ , x∗∗ , x∗∗∗ > 0 and x∗∗ < x∗ .

(50)

where
Since x∗∗ < x∗ , we can clear markets for all securities by assigning each investor to one of
these optima.
26

Why do we conjecture that the optimal portfolios involve a long position in one skewed
security but a short position in many of them? As noted in Section 5.5, investors prefer
to go long in just one skewed security because, while diversifying across several long positions reduces volatility, it also reduces desirable positive skewness; since the latter eﬀect
dominates, investors prefer that their long positions remain undiversiﬁed. On the short side,
however, diversiﬁcation across skewed securities is very valuable: it reduces both volatility
and undesirable negative skewness.
Following the usual reasoning, the equilibrium conditions are that the goal function takes
the value zero at each of the optima in (48) and (49), and that it takes a value less than
zero for all other values of (x1 , . . . , xM ). For the parameter values of Section 5.1, namely
(α, δ, λ) = (0.88, 0.65, 2.25), (L, q) = (10, 0.09), and (σM , Rf ) = (0.15, 1.02), we search for
µM and {pn,j }N
j=1 that satisfy these conditions.
We have again analyzed economies with as many skewed securities as computational
limits will allow: speciﬁcally, economies with N ≤ 10. For N in this range, we ﬁnd that
the conjectured heterogeneous holdings equilibrium does indeed exist. Its properties are
 ) =
described in Table 1. For each N, we report the equilibrium values of µM , E(R
n,j
NS

qL/pn,j − Rf , and, for comparison, E(Rn ), the average excess return of a skewed security
in an economy with N skewed securities when short sales are not allowed; as discussed in
Section 5.5, this is −0.047 for N in the range 1 ≤ N ≤ 10.
The table shows that, for ﬁxed N, the average excess return on a skewed security is higher
when short sales are allowed. Intuitively, short sales make it easier to exploit the overpricing
of the skewed security, thereby bringing the expected return slightly closer to zero. However,
the table also shows that, even when there are ten skewed securities in the economy, each
skewed security continues to earn a signiﬁcantly negative excess return. In other words,
even though, in equilibrium, all investors take a short position in many skewed securities,
the shorting activity does not remove the overpricing. A strategy that shorts ten positively
skewed stocks has signiﬁcant negative skewness – ten stocks are not enough to diversify the
negative skewness away. The strategy is therefore risky. In light of this risk, investors limit
the size of their short positions. This, in turn, means that signiﬁcant overpricing remains.8
Of course, if there were many skewed securities in the economy – if N were as high as
200, say – the overpricing of the skewed securities would be signiﬁcantly reduced: a strategy
which shorts 200 positively skewed stocks does not exhibit much negative skewness. As a
result, investors would be willing to take more substantial short positions, and this would
attenuate the overpricing.
8

The table also shows that, when N = 10, the market risk premium µM falls slightly when short sales
are allowed. The reason is that, when shorting is allowed, all investors take some position in the skewed
securities. This takes them away from the kink in the value function v(·), making the market portfolio of
Normally distributed securities seem slightly less risky, and lowering the market risk premium.

27

The analysis in this section also allows us to make predictions about the pricing of
negatively skewed securities. Since a long (short) position in a positively skewed security
is equivalent to a short (long) position in a negatively skewed security, the model of this
section can be interpreted as saying that, in an economy with negatively skewed securities,
these securities will earn a positive average excess return.

5.7

Can arbitrageurs correct the mispricing?

The economies we study in this paper do not contain arbitrage opportunities. Since cumulative prospect theory satisﬁes ﬁrst-order stochastic dominance, investors with these preferences would immediately exploit an arbitrage opportunity: in equilibrium, then, there are
no such opportunities.
At the same time, it is reasonable to ask how overpriced skewed securities would be in
an economy with both cumulative prospect theory investors and more standard, risk averse
expected utility agents. It is hard to give a deﬁnitive answer, because constructing such a
model poses signiﬁcant technical challenges. However, there is good reason to think that
expected utility agents would not fully reverse the overpricing. While they could try to
exploit the overpricing by taking a short position in a large number of skewed securities,
such a strategy entails signiﬁcant risks and costs, and these may blunt its impact.
One way to see this is to think about the model of Section 5.6. The cumulative prospect
theory investors in that economy are already trying to exploit the overpricing: they are all
shorting many of the skewed securities. Interestingly, however, this does not remove the
overpricing: unless there are many skewed securities in the economy, the strategy of shorting
skewed securities retains signiﬁcant negative skewness; investors do not, therefore, short very
aggressively, and the overpricing remains. Expected utility agents who attempt this strategy
face exactly the same problem, and so it is likely that they, too, will fail to remove the
overpricing.
Investors who short overpriced securities also face other risks and costs. They may have
to pay signiﬁcant short-selling fees. They run the risk that some of the borrowed securities
are recalled before the strategy pays oﬀ, as well as the risk that the strategy performs poorly
in the short run, triggering an early liquidation. Taken together, these factors suggest
that investors may be unwilling to trade very aggressively against the overpricing of skewed
securities, thereby allowing it to persist.
An interesting prediction of our model is that, since cumulative prospect theory investors
value positively skewed securities so highly, we should see the creation of new skewed securities that cater to this demand. For example, there is an incentive to raise some capital and
to issue N lottery tickets, each oﬀering a 1/N chance of winning the capital. A ﬁrm with
28

a subsidiary whose business model has positively skewed fundamentals has an incentive to
spin that subsidiary oﬀ. And there is an incentive to issue out-of-the-money options.
In practice, of course, we do see the creation of new, positively skewed securities. New
riskless lotteries do get initiated; and ﬁrms do spin oﬀ subsidiaries with positively skewed
fundamentals – subsidiaries working with cutting-edge technologies, say. One interpretation
of this activity is that intermediaries are catering to a preference for skewness, like that
captured by cumulative prospect theory.
One concern is that the supply of new skewed securities may be so large as to dampen
the premium that investors pay for them. We note, however, that there are important
limits to the creation of skewed securities, and this suggests that existing skewed securities
will remain overpriced. The creation of riskless lotteries, for example, is limited by federal
regulation. The issuance of securities backed by positively skewed fundamentals is limited
by the supply of businesses that have such fundamentals. And a market-maker who writes
out-of-the-money options faces substantial risk: unless he writes options on a large number
of uncorrelated assets, his returns will be strongly negatively skewed.

5.8

Alternative framing assumptions

In our analysis, we assume that agents apply cumulative prospect theory to gains and losses
in overall wealth. A simpler way to derive the pricing of idiosyncratic skewness is to assume
that agents apply cumulative prospect theory at the level of an individual stock: if agents
overweight the tails of an individual stock’s return distribution, it is intuitive that a positively
skewed security will be overpriced and will earn a negative average excess return. When an
agent gets utility directly from the outcome of a speciﬁc risk he is facing, even if it is just
one of many that determine his overall wealth risk, he is said to exhibit “narrow framing”
(Kahneman, 2003; Barberis, Huang, and Thaler, 2006).
In this paper, we retain the traditional assumption of portfolio-level framing in order to
show that we do not need strong additional assumptions, such as narrow framing, to draw
interesting implications out of cumulative prospect theory. At the same time, a framework
which allows for both portfolio-level and stock-level framing might ﬁt the data better. Our
current model, for example, predicts that some investors hold a non-trivial fraction of their
wealth in one positively skewed security. A model that allows for narrow framing would
likely preserve the pricing of idiosyncratic skewness while also predicting a lower allocation
to the skewed security. Such a model poses signiﬁcant technical hurdles, however, and is
beyond the scope of our current analysis.

29

6

Applications

The cumulative prospect theory models of Section 5 predict that a skewed security in small
supply will earn a low average return. This result oﬀers a unifying way of thinking about a
number of pricing phenomena which, at ﬁrst sight, may appear unrelated.
Our ﬁrst application is the low average return on IPO securities (Ritter, 1991).9 The
distribution of IPO returns in the three years after issue is highly positively skewed, probably
because IPOs are conducted by young ﬁrms, a large fraction of whose value is in the form
of growth options. Our analysis therefore implies that, in an economy with cumulative
prospect theory investors, IPOs can be overpriced and earn a low average return. By taking
a substantial position in an IPO, the investor gives himself a chance, albeit a small chance,
of a very large return on wealth. He values this highly, and is willing to hold the IPO even
if it oﬀers a low average return. Under cumulative prospect theory, then, the historical
performance of IPOs may not be so puzzling.
Figure 5 raises a possible caveat. It shows that investors with cumulative prospect theory
preferences overprice highly skewed securities, but not those with merely moderate skewness.
We therefore need to check that there is enough skewness in IPO returns to support a
heterogeneous holdings equilibrium and, thereby, to justify a low average return. A full
analysis of this issue is beyond the scope of our paper, but, in preliminary calculations,
available on request, we ﬁnd that there is enough skewness in actual IPO returns to support
a heterogeneous holdings equilibrium.
Our model may also be relevant to the “private equity premium puzzle” documented
by Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002): the fact that the return on private business
holdings is low, despite the high idiosyncratic risk these holdings entail. In their analysis,
the authors ﬁnd that the returns on private equity are highly positively skewed. Under
cumulative prospect theory, then, a low average return is exactly what we would expect to
see.
Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2006) suggest that our framework may shed light on
the average return of “distressed” stocks: stocks of ﬁrms with a high predicted probability of
bankruptcy. Some theories of distress risk predict that such stocks will earn a high return,
on average; but Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2006) show that their average return is,
in fact, very low. While investigating this puzzle, they also ﬁnd that distressed stocks have
high idiosyncratic skewness. In an economy with cumulative prospect theory investors, then,
such stocks should indeed earn a low average return.
9

Just how low this average return is, is a matter of debate. Most recently, researchers have investigated
the extent to which the low average return may reﬂect “pseudo market timing” (Schultz, 2003; Dahlquist
and De Jong, 2004).

30

Mitton and Vorkink (2006) point out that the pricing of idiosyncratic skewness predicted
by our model may be relevant to the diversiﬁcation discount: the fact that conglomerate
ﬁrms trade at a discount to a matched portfolio of single segment ﬁrms (Lang and Stulz,
1994; Berger and Ofek, 1995). The idea is that investors may pay a premium for single
segment ﬁrms if the returns of these ﬁrms are more positively skewed than those of conglomerates. Mitton and Vorkink (2006) conﬁrm that the returns of single segment ﬁrms are
more positively skewed, and that the diversiﬁcation discount is most pronounced when the
diﬀerence between the return skewness of a conglomerate and its matched single segment
ﬁrms is particularly large.
A related line of reasoning suggests a link between our results and the recently-documented
examples of “equity stubs” with remarkably low valuations (Mitchell, Pulvino, and Staﬀord,
2002; Lamont and Thaler, 2003). These are cases of ﬁrms with publicly traded subsidiaries
in which the subsidiaries make up a surprisingly large fraction of the value of the parent
company; in extreme cases, more than 100 percent of the value of the parent company, so
that the equity stub – the claim to the parent company’s businesses outside of the subsidiary
– has negative value.
Our model cannot explain negative stub values, but it may explain stub values that are
surprisingly low, albeit positive. If a subsidiary is valued mainly for its growth options, its
returns may be positively skewed, leading investors to overprice it relative to its parent, and
thereby generating a low stub value. Consistent with this, in most of the examples listed
by Mitchell, Pulvino, and Staﬀord (2002), the subsidiary’s business activities involve newer
technologies – and therefore, in all likelihood, more growth options – than do the parent
company’s.10
Our results may also be relevant for understanding option prices. Deep out-of-the-money
options have positively skewed returns and so, according to our analysis, may be overpriced.
By put-call parity, deep in-the-money options will then also be overpriced. Our model
therefore predicts a “smile” in the implied volatility curve.11
Options on individual stocks do indeed exhibit a smile (Bollen and Whaley, 2004). For
index options, however, the implied volatility curve is downward-sloping, rather than Ushaped. It is not unreasonable that our model would ﬁt individual stock option data better.
10

Of course, since the subsidiary forms part of the parent company, its growth options will also give the
returns of the parent company a positively skewed distribution. The parent company’s returns will be less
skewed than the subsidiary’s returns, however, and, as we saw in Section 5.2, it is only high levels of skewness
that are overpriced; more moderate skewness is fairly valued. The subsidiary can therefore be overpriced
even relative to its parent.
11
Implicit in this argument are two assumptions: ﬁrst, that, as discussed by Bollen and Whaley (2004)
and others, market makers face risks when they attempt to implement the dynamic strategy needed to
enforce Black-Scholes pricing, and that prices can therefore deviate from those predicted by that formula;
and second, that put-call parity, based as it is on a static strategy, does hold.

31

In our framework, investors buy options for speculative purposes: to give themselves a small
chance of becoming very wealthy. A speculative trading motive is more plausible in the
context of individual stock options than in the context of stock index options, where a large
fraction of trading is thought to be driven by institutions.12
Our analysis also points to a possible cause for the lack of diversiﬁcation in many household portfolios. Under cumulative prospect theory, investors may willingly take an undiversiﬁed position in positively skewed stocks in order to add skewness to their portfolios.13
Goetzmann and Kumar (2004) and Mitton and Vorkink (2007) present some relevant evidence. Using data on the portfolios of individual investors, they show that the stocks held by
undiversiﬁed investors have greater return skewness than those held by diversiﬁed investors.
Our framework suggests a link, then, between a number of seemingly unrelated phenomena. At the same time, it also oﬀers a new empirical prediction: that positively skewed stocks
should earn lower average returns. Unfortunately, this prediction is not easy to test, because
it is hard to forecast a security’s future skewness: past skewness, the most obvious potential
predictor, has little actual predictive power. We therefore need to ﬁnd more sophisticated
ways of forecasting skewness.
Zhang (2006) suggests one way forward. He groups stocks into industries, and, for each
industry in turn, records the return, over the past month, of each stock in the industry. For
an industry with 100 ﬁrms, say, he therefore has 100 return observations. He then computes
the cross-sectional skewness of those 100 returns, and uses it as a measure of the skewness
of all stocks in that industry. The logic is that, if one stock in the industry did very well
last month, leading to a high cross-sectional skewness measure for that industry, then, since
stocks in the same industry are similar, we can conjecture that all stocks in that industry
could potentially earn a high return in the coming months. Zhang (2006) shows that his
measure of skewness does predict future skewness; but also, in line with the models in this
paper, that it predicts returns, negatively, in the cross-section.
12

Driessen and Maenhout (2004) oﬀer a portfolio choice view of this argument. In a partial equilibrium
setting, they show that, across several expected utility and non-expected utility speciﬁcations, the only
preferences for which an agent would not short out-of-the-money puts on the S&P 500 index are cumulative
prospect theory preferences. This suggests, as does our analysis, that such preferences may oﬀer one way of
understanding the high prices of out-of-the-money options.
13
This point is also noted by Polkovnichenko (2005) who, in a portfolio choice setting, shows that an
agent with cumulative prospect theory preferences may take an undiversiﬁed position in a positively skewed
security.

32

7

Conclusion

We study the asset pricing implications of Tversky and Kahneman’s (1992) cumulative
prospect theory, with particular focus on its probability weighting component. Our main result, derived from a novel equilibrium with non-unique global optima, is that, in contrast to
the prediction of a standard expected utility model, a security’s own skewness can be priced:
a positively skewed security can be “overpriced,” and can earn a negative average excess
return. Our results oﬀer a unifying way of thinking about a number of seemingly unrelated
ﬁnancial phenomena, such as the low average return on IPOs, private equity, and distressed
stocks; the diversiﬁcation discount; the low valuation of certain equity stubs; the pricing of
out-of-the-money options; and the lack of diversiﬁcation in many household portfolios.

33

8

Appendix

Proof of Lemma 1: Since w(1 − P (·)) is right-continuous and v(·) is continuous, we can
integrate (11) by parts to obtain
V (Ŵ + ) = [−v(x)w(1 − P (x))]x=∞
x=0 +

 ∞
0

w(1 − P (x))dv(x).

(51)

From Chebychev’s inequality,


P |Ŵ − E(Ŵ )| ≥ Z ≤

Var(Ŵ )
,
Z2

(52)

which, in turn, implies


1 − P (x) ≤ P |Ŵ − E(Ŵ )| ≥ x − E(Ŵ ) ≤

Var(Ŵ )
.
(x − E(Ŵ ))2

(53)

Assumptions 1-5 then imply that there exists A > 0 such that
v(x)w(1 − P (x)) ≤ Axα−2δ → 0,

as x → ∞.

(54)

The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of equation (51) is therefore zero, and so equation (15)
is valid. A similar argument leads to equation (16).
Proof of Proposition 2: If we deﬁne g(·) : [0, ∞) → to be g(x) = xα , we can rewrite
v(·) as

g(x)
for x ≥ 0
(55)
v(x) =
−λg(|x|)
for x < 0.
For Ŵi , i = 1, 2, with the same mean µ ≥ 0, we have
V (Ŵi ) = V (Ŵi− ) + VA (Ŵi+ ) + VB (Ŵi+ ) + VC (Ŵi+ ),

i = 1, 2,

(56)

where
V (Ŵi− ) = −λ
VA (Ŵi+ ) =
VB (Ŵi+ ) =
VC (Ŵi+ ) =

 µ
0

 0
−∞

w(1 − Pi (x))g  (x) dx,

 2µ
µ
 ∞
2µ

w(Pi(x))g  (|x|) dx,

i = 1, 2,

(57)

i = 1, 2,

(58)

w(1 − Pi (x))g  (x) dx,

i = 1, 2,

(59)

w(1 − Pi (x))g  (x) dx,

i = 1, 2.

(60)

34

Applying the change of variable x = 2µ − x to equations (59) and (60), and noting that,
since the distributions are symmetric, 1 − Pi (x) = Pi (2µ − x) = Pi (x ), we have
VB (Ŵi+ )

= −
=

 µ
0

VC (Ŵi+ ) = −
=

 0
µ

w(Pi(x ))g (2µ − x ) dx ,

w(Pi(x))g  (2µ − x) dx,

 −∞

 0

0

−∞

i = 1, 2,

(61)

w(Pi(x ))g (2µ − x ) dx

w(Pi(x))g  (2µ + |x|) dx,

i = 1, 2.

(62)

Summing up equations (57), (58), (61), and (62), we have
V (Ŵi ) = −
+

 0
−∞
 µ
0

w(Pi(x))[λg  (|x|) − g  (2µ + |x|)] dx

[w(1 − Pi (x))g  (x) + w(Pi(x))g  (2µ − x)] dx,

i = 1, 2,

(63)

and
V (Ŵ1 ) − V (Ŵ2 )
 0

=
+

−∞
 µ
0

[w(P2(x)) − w(P1 (x))][λg  (|x|) − g  (2µ + |x|)]dx

{[w(1 − P1 (x)) − w(1 − P2 (x))]g  (x) − [w(P2 (x)) − w(P1(x))]g  (2µ − x)}dx.
(64)

 and W
 are symmetric, if condition (iii) holds at all, it must hold for z = µ.
Since W
1
2
This means that P1 (x) ≤ P2 (x) for x < 0 ≤ µ. Using this fact, as well as the fact that w(·)
is increasing and that λg  (|x|) − g (2µ + |x|) > 0, we see that the ﬁrst term on the right-hand
side of equation (64) is non-negative. Below, we show that

w(1 − P1 (x)) − w(1 − P2 (x)) ≥ w(P2 (x)) − w(P1 (x)) ≥ 0 for x ∈ (0, µ),

(65)

and that this holds strictly if P1 (x) < P2 (x). Combining this with the fact that g  (x) >
g  (2µ − x) > 0 for x ∈ (0, µ), we see that the second term on the right-hand side of equation
(64) is also non-negative. This implies V (Ŵ1 ) ≥ V (Ŵ2 ). Furthermore, given that all distribution functions are right continuous, it is straightforward to show that, if the inequalities
in the single-crossing property hold strictly for some x ∈ , then V (Ŵ1 ) > V (Ŵ2 ).
To ﬁnish the proof, we need to show that (65) holds, and that it holds strictly if P1 (x) <
P2 (x). To do this, consider the function
h(p) ≡ w(p) + w(1 − p) = (pδ + (1 − p)δ )−(1−δ)/δ .

(66)

Since
h (p) = −(1 − δ)(pδ + (1 − p)δ )−1/δ

1
p1−δ

−

35

1
(1 − p)1−δ

< 0 for p ∈ (0, 1/2),

(67)

the function h(p) is strictly decreasing for p ∈ [0, 1/2]. Since, for any x ∈ (0, µ), P1 (x) ≤
P2 (x) ≤ 1/2, we have h(P1 (x)) ≥ h(P2 (x)), which then implies the ﬁrst inequality in (65).
The second inequality in (65) follows from the monotonicity of w(·). Finally, if P1 (x) < P2 (x),
then (65) holds strictly because h(·) is strictly decreasing in [0, 1/2] and w(·) is strictly
increasing.
We now discuss the intuition behind the proof. Proposition 2 implies that, within any
class of symmetric distributions that have the same non-negative mean and that satisfy
the single-crossing property, a mean-preserving spread is undesirable for an agent with the
preferences in (10)-(12), in spite of the risk-seeking induced by the probability weighting
function w(·) and the convexity of v(·) in the region of losses.
To see why, note ﬁrst that for a distribution with positive mean µ > 0 that satisﬁes
conditions (i)-(iii) in the statement of the proposition, a mean-preserving spread means one
of two things: either, (a), taking density around µ and spreading it symmetrically outwards
towards losses and towards larger gains; or, (b), taking density around µ and spreading it
symmetrically outwards towards smaller gains and towards larger gains.
For spreads of type (a), the convexity of v(·) in the region of losses is irrelevant, precisely
because it applies to gambles involving only losses. Moreover, the probability weighting
function w(·) is neutral to such spreads: while they do add mass to the right tail, which
is attractive to an agent who overweights the tails of distributions, they also adds mass to
the left tail, which is unattractive. The agent’s attitude to type (a) spreads is therefore
determined by the kink in v(·) at the origin, which, of course, generates aversion to these
spreads.
For type (b) spreads, the convexity of v(·) in the region of losses is again irrelevant. The
probability weighting function w(·) induces aversion to such spreads, because w(·) is more
sensitive to diﬀerences in probabilities at higher probability levels; in particular, it is more
sensitive over p ( 12 , 1) – the relevant range for shifts in mass from µ to below µ – than it is
over (0, 12 ), the relevant range for shifts in mass from µ to above µ. The concavity of v(·) in
the region of gains only compounds this aversion.
Proof of Proposition 3: Before proving Proposition 3, we ﬁrst prove the following useful
lemma.
Lemma 2: Consider the preferences in (10)–(12) and suppose that Assumptions 2-5 hold.
 is Normally distributed with mean µ and variance σ 2 , then V (Ŵ ) can be written
If W
W
W
2
2
2
2
, F (µW , σW
). Moreover, for any σW
, F (µW , σW
) is strictly
as a function of µW and σW
2
2
increasing in µW ; and for any µW ≥ 0, F (µW , σW ) is strictly decreasing in σW .
Proof of Lemma 2: Since every Normal distribution is fully speciﬁed by its mean and
36

2
2
variance, we can write V (Ŵ ) = F (µW , σW
). Proposition 1 implies that F (µW , σW
) is strictly
increasing in µW . Now consider any pair of Normal wealth distributions, Ŵ1 and Ŵ2 , with
the same mean but diﬀerent variance. These two wealth distributions satisfy conditions (i)2
(iii) in Proposition 2. That proposition therefore implies that, for any µW ≥ 0, F (µW , σW
)
2
is strictly decreasing in σW .

Our proof of Proposition 3 will now proceed in the following way. We ﬁrst derive the
conditions that characterize equilibrium, assuming that an equilibrium exists. We then show
that an equilibrium does indeed exist.
We ignore the violation of limited liability and assume that all securities have positive
prices in equilibrium. Consider the mean/standard deviation plane. For any set of positive
prices for the J risky assets, Assumption 7 means that we can construct a hyperbola representing the mean-variance (MV) frontier for those assets. Since a risk-free asset is also
available, the MV frontier is the tangency line from the risk-free asset to the hyperbola, plus
the reﬂection of this tangency line oﬀ the vertical axis. The MV eﬃcient frontier is the
upper of these two lines. The tangency portfolio, composed only of the J risky securities,
has return R̃T .
By Lemma 2, each agent chooses a portfolio on the MV eﬃcient frontier, in other words, a
portfolio with return R̃ = Rf + θ(R̃T − Rf ), where θ is the weight in the tangency portfolio.
Since agents have identical preferences, they choose the same θ. Market clearing implies
θ > 0, and so the tangency portfolio has to be on the upper half of the hyperbola in
equilibrium. This, in turn, implies E(R̂T ) > 0: the risk-free rate Rf has to be lower than
the expected return of the minimum-variance portfolio, the left-most point of the hyperbola.
At time 1, each agent’s wealth is given by
W̃ = W0 (Rf + θ(R̃T − Rf ))

(68)

Ŵ = W0 θR̂T .

(69)

For θ ≥ 0, utility is therefore given by
U(θ) = W0α θα V (R̂T ),
where
V (R̂T ) = −

 0
−∞

w(P (R̂T ))dv(R̂T ) +

 ∞
0

w(1 − P (R̂T ))dv(R̂T ).

(70)

(71)

The optimal solution for an agent is:
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨

0
for V (R̂T ) < 0
θ = any θ ≥ 0 for V (R̂T ) = 0
⎪
⎪
⎩ ∞
for V (R̂T ) > 0.
37

(72)

 ) = 0.
To clear markets, we therefore need V (R
T

In equilibrium, the aggregate demand for risky assets, given by (72), must equal the
 =R
 . Earlier,
aggregate supply of risky assets, namely the market portfolio. Therefore, R
T
M




we saw that E(RT ) > 0 and that V (RT ) = 0. Since RT = RM , we immediately obtain
 ) > 0 and V (R
 ) = 0, as claimed in (19) and (20). Finally, R̃ = R̃ also implies
E(R
M
M
T
M
equations (17)-(18). For example, this can be shown by noting that a portfolio with return
R̃M + x(R̃i − Rf ) attains its highest Sharpe ratio at x = 0.
So far, we have shown that, if an equilibrium exists, it is characterized by conditions
(17), (19), and (20). We now show that an equilibrium does indeed exist; in other words,
that we can ﬁnd prices for the J risky assets such that conditions (17), (19), and (20) hold.
In conditions (17) and (19), we have J non-redundant equations in J non-redundant
unknowns: the J non-redundant equations are condition (19) and any J −1 of the J equations

in (17); the J non-redundant unknowns are the market price pM = j nj pj and any J − 1
of the J prices {p1 , p2 , . . . , pJ }. We can therefore solve the J non-redundant equations to
obtain the risky asset prices.
It only remains to show that the risky asset prices also imply condition (20). To see this,
note that
 )),
(73)
0 = F (0, 0) > F (0, σ 2(R
M
where the inequality follows from Lemma 2, which also introduces the function F (·, ·). If
 ) ≤ 0, Lemma 2 would then also imply F (E(R
 ), σ 2 (R
 )) < 0, contradicting conE(R
M
M
M
 ), σ 2 (R
 )) = 0. We therefore have E(R
 ) > 0, as
dition (19), which says that F (E(R
M
M
M
in condition (20). The intuition is straightforward. Under conditions that apply here, cumulative prospect theory satisﬁes second-order stochastic dominance. An agent with these
preferences therefore dislikes the variance of the market portfolio and only holds it if compensated by a positive risk premium.
The eﬀect of introducing a small skewed security on the prices of existing securities
In Section 5, we noted a useful feature of the heterogeneous holdings equilibrium: the
prices of the J original risky assets are not aﬀected by the introduction of the skewed security.
To see this, note that, after the introduction of the skewed security, the prices of the J original
risky assets are determined by
 ) = R + β (E(R
 ) − R ),
E(R
j
f
j
M
f

j = 1, . . . , J,

(74)

or equivalently,
)
 ,X
 )p

E(X
Cov(X
j
j
M
M E(XM )
= Rf +
(
− Rf ),
 ) pj
pj
pM
V ar(X
M

38

j = 1, . . . , J,

(75)

where pj is the price of asset j, pM =



j

nj pj , and xM =



j

nj xj .

In the economy of Section 4, the prices {pj } of the J original risky assets are given by
)
 ,X
 ) p E(X
 )
Cov(X
E(X
j
j
M
M
M
=
R
+
(
− Rf ),
f




pj
pM
V ar(XM ) pj

j = 1, . . . , J,

(76)



where pM = j nj pj . From equations (19) and (23), we know that the return on the market
 ) = 0, whether or not the
portfolio formed from the J risky assets alone satisﬁes V (R
M

skewed security is present. This implies pM = pM , which, in turn, means that the equations
for {pj } in (75) are identical to the equations for {pj } in (76). The prices of the J original
risky assets are therefore the same, whether or not the skewed security is present.
Proof of Proposition 4: The Gateaux derivative in (38) follows from




 0
 ∞
∂
∂V (R̂ + x)
w(P (R − x))dv(R) +
w(1 − P (R − x))dv(R) . (77)
|x=0 =
|x=0 −
∂x
∂x
−∞
0

To show the main result, note that, to the ﬁrst order of ε,
δV

≡ V (R̂ + εR̂n ) − V (R̂)
≈ −

 0

−∞



w (P (R))δP (R)dv(R) −

 ∞
0

w  (1 − P (R))δP (R)dv(R),

(78)

where, again to the ﬁrst order of ε,
δP (R) ≡ P (R̂ + εR̂n ≤ R) − P (R̂ ≤ R)


= E 1(R̂ + εR̂n ≤ R) − 1(R̂ ≤ R)


= E −1(εR̂n > 0)1(R − εR̂n < R̂ ≤ R) + 1(εR̂n < 0)1(R < R̂ ≤ R − εR̂n )


≈ E −1(εR̂n > 0)f (R|R̂n )(εR̂n ) + 1(εR̂n < 0)f (R|R̂n )(−εR̂n )


= E f (R|R̂n )(−εR̂n )
= −εE(R̂n )f (R),

(79)

where f (R|R̂n ) and f (R) are the conditional and unconditional probability densities of R̂ at
R, respectively, and where the last equality in equation (79) follows from the independence
assumption. Substituting equation (79) into equation (78), we obtain equation (37).

39

9

References

Barberis, N., Huang, M., and T. Santos (2001), “Prospect Theory and Asset Prices,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1-53.
Barberis, N., Huang, M., and R. Thaler (2006), “Individual Preferences, Monetary Gambles,
and Stock Market Participation: A Case for Narrow Framing,” American Economic Review
96, 1069-1090.
Benartzi, S. and R. Thaler (1995), “Myopic Loss Aversion and the Equity Premium Puzzle,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 75-92.
Berger, P. and E. Ofek (1995), “Diversiﬁcation’s Eﬀect on Firm Value,” Journal of Financial
Economics 37, 39-66.
Bollen, N. and R. Whaley (2004), “Does Net Buying Pressure Aﬀect the Shape of Implied
Volatility Functions?” Journal of Finance 59, 711-753.
Brunnermeier, M. and J. Parker (2005), “Optimal Expectations,” American Economic Review 95, 1092-1118.
Brunnermeier, M., Gollier, C., and J. Parker (2007), “Optimal Beliefs, Asset Prices, and
the Preference for Skewed Returns,” American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings),
forthcoming.
Campbell, J.Y., Hilscher, J. and J. Szilagyi (2006), “In Search of Distress Risk,” Working
paper, Harvard University.
Dahlquist, M. and F. De Jong (2004), “Pseudo Market Timing: Fact or Fiction?” Working
paper, Stockholm Institute for Financial Research.
De Giorgi, E., Hens, T., and H. Levy (2003), “Prospect Theory and the CAPM: A Contradiction or Co-existence?” Working paper, University of Zurich.
Driessen, J. and P. Maenhout (2004), “A Portfolio Perspective on Option Pricing Anomalies,”
Working paper, INSEAD.
Epstein, L. and S. Zin (1990), “First-order Risk Aversion and the Equity Premium Puzzle,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 26, 387-407.
Goetzmann, W. and A. Kumar (2004), “Why do Individual Investors Hold Undiversiﬁed
Portfolios?” Working paper, Yale University.
40

Harvey, C. and A. Siddique (2000), “Conditional Skewness in Asset Pricing Tests,” Journal
of Finance 55, 1263-1290.
Kahneman, D. (2003), “Maps of Bounded Rationality: Psychology for Behavioral Economics,” American Economic Review 93, 1449-75.
Kahneman, D. and A. Tversky (1979), “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under
Risk,” Econometrica 47, 263-291.
Kane, A. (1982), “Skewness Preference and Portfolio Choice,” Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 17, 15-25.
Kraus, A. and R. Litzenberger (1976), “Skewness Preference and the Valuation of Risk
Assets,” Journal of Finance 31, 1085-1100.
Lamont, O. and R. Thaler (2003), “Can the Market Add and Subtract? Mispricing in Tech
Stock Carve-outs,” Journal of Political Economy 111, 227-268.
Lang, L. and R. Stulz (1994), “Tobin’s Q, Corporate Diversiﬁcation, and Firm Performance,”
Journal of Political Economy 102, 1248-1280.
Mitchell, M., Pulvino P., and E. Staﬀord (2002), “Limited Arbitrage in Equity Markets,”
Journal of Finance 57, 551-584.
Mitton, T. and K. Vorkink (2006), “Why Do Firms with Diversiﬁcation Discounts Have
Higher Expected Returns?” Working paper, Brigham Young University.
Mitton, T. and K. Vorkink (2007), “Equilibrium Undiversiﬁcation and the Preference for
Skewness,” Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Polkovnichenko, V. (2005), “Household Portfolio Diversiﬁcation: A Case for Rank-dependent
Preferences,” Review of Financial Studies 18, 1467-1501.
Rabin, M. (2000), “Risk Aversion and Expected Utility Theory: A Calibration Theorem,”
Econometrica 68, 1281-1292.
Ritter, J. (1991), “The Long-run Performance of Initial Public Oﬀerings,” Journal of Finance
46, 3-27.
Schultz, P. (2003), “Pseudo Market Timing and the Long Run Performance of IPOs,” Journal
of Finance 58, 483-518.
Tversky, A., and D. Kahneman (1992), “Advances in Prospect Theory: Cumulative Repre41

sentation of Uncertainty,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 5, 297-323.
Zhang, Y. (2006), “Individual Skewness and the Cross-section of Average Returns,” Working
paper, Yale University.

42

Table 1: The table describes the properties of equilibrium when agents with cumulative prospect theory preferences are allowed to invest in N identical, independent, positively skewed securities in addition to a Normally distributed market
portfolio: µM is the average excess return on the market portfolio, E(R̂n ) is the
average excess return on each positively skewed security; E(R̂nN S ) is the average
excess return on each positively skewed security in an economy that is identical
in structure except that short sales are not allowed.
E(R̂n ) E(R̂nN S )

N

µM

1

0.075

-0.046

-0.047

2

0.075

-0.046

-0.047

5

0.075

-0.046

-0.047

10 0.074

-0.046

-0.047

43

VALUE

GAINS

LOSSES

1.0
"Q.
~

F
I-

:I:
52
UJ

~

.5

z

Q

~
u

UJ

C
0

1.0

.5

STATED

PROBABiliTY:

p

Figure 1. The two panels show Kahneman and Tversky's (1979) proposed value
function v(.) and probability weighting function 7r(').

PROBABILITY WEIGHTING FUNCTIONS
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
p

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Figure 2. The figure shows the form of the probability weighting function proposed by
Tversky and Kahneman (1992), for parameter values δ = 0.65 (dashed line), δ = 0.4
(dash-dot line), and δ = 1, which corresponds to no probability weighting at all (solid
line). p is the objective probability.

45

GOAL FUNCTION

−3

8

x 10

6

4

2

0

−2

−4

−6

−8

−10

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08
x

0.1

0.12

0.14

0.16

Figure 3. The figure shows the utility that an investor with cumulative prospect theory
preferences derives from adding a position x in a positively skewed security to his current
holdings of a Normally distributed market portfolio. The two lines correspond to different
mean returns on the skewed security.

46

GOAL FUNCTION
0.1

0

−0.1

−0.2

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

x

Figure 4. The figure shows the utility that an investor with cumulative prospect theory
preferences derives from adding a position x in a positively skewed security to his current holdings of a Normally distributed market portfolio. The three lines correspond to
different mean returns on the skewed security.

47

EXPECTED RETURN ON THE SKEWED SECURITY
0.2

0.15

Expected excess return (percent)

0.1

0.05

0

−0.05

−0.1

−0.15

−0.2
0.06

0.07

0.08

0.09

0.1
q

0.11

0.12

0.13

0.14

Figure 5. The figure shows the expected return in excess of the risk-free rate earned by
a small, independent, positively skewed security in an economy populated by cumulative
prospect theory investors, plotted against a parameter of the the security’s return distribution, q, that determines the security’s skewness (a low q corresponds to high skewness).

48

15
expected return (percent)

expected return (percent)

15
10
5
0
−5
−10
−15

0.62

0.64

0.66
δ

0.68

0.7

0.72

10
5
0
−5
−10
−15

2

2.2

λ

2.4

2.6

2.8

expected return (percent)

15
10
5
0
−5
−10
−15
0.8

0.85

α

0.9

Figure 6. The figure shows the expected return in excess of the risk-free rate earned by
a small, independent, positively skewed security in an economy populated by cumulative
prospect theory investors, plotted against parameters of investors’ utility functions. As δ
falls, investors overweight small probabilities more heavily; as λ increases, they become
more sensitive to losses; and as α falls, their marginal utility from gains falls.

49

