NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

METHODOLOGICAL FRONTIERS OF PUBLIC FINANCE FIELD EXPERIMENTS
Jeffrey R. Kling
Working Paper 12931
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12931

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2007

I thank Rosanne Altshuler, Greg Duncan, William Gale, Lisa Gennetian, Lawrence Katz, Erzo Luttmer,
and Sendhil Mullainathan for comments and suggestions. I gratefully acknowledge support for this
work provided by the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, the Charles Stuart Mott Foundation,
and the William T. Grant Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Jeffrey R. Kling. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Methodological Frontiers of Public Finance Field Experiments
Jeffrey R. Kling
NBER Working Paper No. 12931
February 2007
JEL No. C93,H0,I0,J18
ABSTRACT
The purpose of this article is to demonstrate how a rich array of methods can be applied to increase
the relevance of field experiments in public economics. Two cross-cutting themes are important in
multiple phases of the research. First, greater statistical sophistication can draw more value from a
field experiment without obscuring the simple and compelling information from the differences in
average outcomes of intervention and control groups. Second, the methodological frontier is interdisciplinary,
drawing on knowledge and techniques developed in psychology, anthropology, and sociology that
can be adapted in order to make public finance field experiments more useful.
Jeffrey R. Kling
The Brookings Institution
1775 Massachusetts Ave NW
Washington, DC 20036
and NBER
jkling@brookings.edu

An economics graduate student starting her dissertation today would do well to follow
the example of Heather Ross and think big. After working in 1965 and 1966 as an intern with the
President's Council of Economic Advisers and the U.S. Department of Health, Education and
Welfare, Ross became interested in income maintenance policy, particularly in how the behavior
of low income people might respond to transfer payments. In 1966, Ross, then a visiting research
fellow at the Brookings Institution, wrote a paper entitled A Proposal for Demonstration of New
Techniques in Income Maintenance, which was subsequently submitted to the Johnson
Administration’s anti-poverty agency, the Office for Economic Opportunity. The experiment that
resulted from this proposal, the New Jersey Income Maintenance experiment, is generally
considered to be the first large-scale social experiment ever conducted. Ross’s thesis proposal
instigated a project that cost over $30 million in 2006 dollars, and sparked a wave of large-scale
experiments in health, housing, and welfare.1
Over the past forty years, many of the essential goals of public finance economists in
assessing policy interventions have remained the same as they were for Ross. We would like to
have a credible strategy for identifying the causal effect of the intervention, and we would like to
have data about situations that are as similar as possible to that in which the policy would occur
in the future. In the case of income maintenance programs, there was little data in 1966 that
could be used to meaningfully forecast the potential effects of the negative income tax proposals
that were being made. The compelling logic of Ross’s proposal was that in addition to collecting
contextually relevant data, one could use the power of random assignment in an experimental
framework to assess how otherwise similar groups of individuals responded when assigned to
1

Ross received her PhD in economics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1970 and subsequently
held various posts in government including Special Assistant to the President for Economic Policy. She is currently
a visiting scholar with Resources For the Future. The historical account of her dissertation and its influence is based
on Greenberg and Shroder (2004) and Orr (1999). The results of that and other early subsequent experiments were
reviewed by Ferber and Hersh (1978).

1

different policy interventions. The difference in outcomes between an intervention group and a
comparison group in a social experiment could be used as an estimate of the effect of the
intervention in a setting similar to that in which a policy intervention might be enacted.
The purpose of this article is to demonstrate how a rich array of methods can be applied
to increase the relevance of field experiments in public economics. Given that the essence of
analyzing experiments typically involves looking at the difference between two sample means,
one might ask whether experiments involve more than rudimentary research methods, and even
whether there are any important methodological frontiers in this area. I focus on advances in the
research methods used in conducting field experiments, using examples from government
taxation and expenditure, public goods, and externalities. The examples are intended to illustrate
methods with general applicability, and this is not an exhaustive survey of particular studies. In
this article I assume that the reader is familiar with the basics of how to design an experiment
and the conditions under which it identifies the causal effect of a policy intervention, as
discussed by Orr (1999) and others. The focus here is on research in North America.2 To
emphasize frontiers of research, the examples are primarily drawn from studies using data
collected within the past few years.
To characterize the public finance field experiments I discuss, the circumstances are
generally intended to be close to an actual application of a policy intervention as possible –
although some are clearly closer than others.3 In focusing on public finance field experiments, I
also adopt criteria delineated by Greenberg and Shroder (2004) for identifying social
2

For discussion of field experiments in developing countries, including some relating to public finance, see Duflo
(2006).
3
Harrison and List (2004) contrasted lab and field experiments in terms of the subjects, the information they bring
to the task, the nature of the commodities, the tasks, the stakes, and the environment for the subjects to develop a
taxonomy of experiments. In their taxonomy, experiments with a non-student subjects and non-lab contexts for the
commodity, task, or information set of subjects are referred to as framed field experiments. A framed field
experiment where the subjects do not know they are in an experiment is referred to as a natural field experiment. In
this taxonomy, I discuss include both framed and natural field experiments.

2

experiments, which are: random assignment, policy intervention, follow-up data collection, and
analysis. I use the term ‘field experiments’ here mainly because some authors, including Ferber
and Hirsch (1978), have defined ‘social experiments’ as those being conducted with government
funds or by government agencies. For the purposes of this article, I will consider all social
experiments to be public finance field experiments.
In this article I will not focus on the lengthy and informative debate over the value of
public finance field experiments relative to other types of research. Many of the potential issues
were identified early on by Rivlin (1974) and others. For instance, an experiment may not be a
good estimate of the effects of a policy if people behave differently when they know they are
being observed, if they believe the experimental intervention is temporary but the policy would
be permanent, or if the policy created spillovers when implemented at scale that were not present
in the experiment. Each experiment attempts to minimize the impacts of such issues, and
naturally there is variation in the success of these attempts. The issues have been ably discussed
at length by Burtless (1995), Heckman and Smith (1995), Harrison and List (2004), Moffitt
(2004) and others. Rather than reviewing this terrain again, I will start from the premise that
most experiments have value and focus on methodological approaches to making public finance
field experiments more useful.4
This article is organized around the sequence of activities involved in conducting an
experiment and discusses related methodological innovations. First, topics are selected. Second,
a conceptual framework is developed that motivates hypotheses about the potential impacts of

4

I wish to acknowledge at the outset that I make disproportionate reference to the work of myself and my
collaborators in describing various techniques. I do so merely because so much of my own thinking is based on
lessons from my own research and I can use specific examples from that work to vividly and concretely illustrate
approaches that I believe have general applicability.

3

interventions. Third, a field experiment is designed. Fourth, the experiment is implemented and
data is collected. Fifth, data is analyzed. Lastly, results are interpreted.

Topics
In selecting a specific topic for study, there will always be value in working in areas
where there is interest in taking action based on results, and in areas that are understudied.
Sometimes it will make sense to go directly from idea to field experiment. As complementary
approaches, ideas for the topics of study for field experiments may be generated from earlier
stages involving exploratory research methods that can be implemented more quickly and less
expensively. The value of field experiments can be enhanced by imbedding them in a program of
related research, so that the experimental work can interact synergistically with research of
scholars involved and with the broader literature in order to build a deep, coherent, synthesized
body of knowledge. This section illustrates the methodological technique of building field
experiments at early stages that use two different approaches: non-experimental research and
laboratory research.
Building on non-experimental research. Analyses of participation in a Tax Deferred
Account offer an example of entrepreneurship in collecting new data and of creating a program
of research building directly on earlier non-experimental research. This line of research focused
on analysis of the decision to enroll in a savings plan by university staff, and an attempt was
made to study the spillovers from colleagues in the same department on individual decisions.
Duflo and Saez (2002) used an instrumental variables strategy for identification, assuming that
average wage or tenure in a department did not directly affect individual decisions (conditional
on individual wages or tenure) in order to use average wages or tenure as instruments for average

4

participation. They later followed up on this initial work to implement an experiment in which
some individuals in some departments received incentives to visit a benefit fair to learn more
about the savings plan. The effects of spillovers could be assessed by comparing the outcomes of
the non-incentivized individuals in incentivized departments to individuals in non-incentivized
departments. In analysis of the experiment, Duflo and Saez (2003) found that the estimates of the
social effect were smaller in the experiment than in the preceding work using instrumental
variables, but that small changes in the environment induced by the experiment did have a
noticeable impact on plan participation.
Building on laboratory research. Studies of matching and rebate subsidies for charitable
contributions have been the subject of a sustained program of research in both the laboratory and
the field. The U.S. tax code provides a form of a rebate for charitable contributions by making
them tax-deductible. As an example of economic equivalence, a 20 percent rebate on $1 of
contribution means that the gift would cost the donor 80 cents. An 80 cent donation with a 25
percent match would also cost the donor 80 cents and raise $1 for the charity. The economically
equivalent rebate may not be as successful as a match in encouraging charitable giving – perhaps
because the rebate is more complicated, less certain to be given, or just that the rate associated
with the rebate (20 percent) is lower than the match (25 percent). Eckel and Grossman built on
their earlier laboratory experiments (2005) examining this issue by conducting field experiments
(2006a, 2006b) with two different charities in Minnesota where potential donors were offered
rebates or matches. Although each experiment had complications, the preponderance of the
evidence was that the matches consistently raised more funds for the charities in both the
laboratory and field experiments. Thus, it may be possible for the government to implement a

5

match received directly by charities having the same overall budgetary cost as the current
deductions, but resulting in greater donations.5
Summary. A good topic for a field experiment can sometimes be identified from studies
that may not be completely convincing but that offer intriguing results. One illustration is of nonexperimental instrumental variables analysis of informational spillovers in saving decisions
followed by a field experiment. Another is of a series of laboratory experiments on matching
versus rebate incentives in charitable giving leading to two field experiments.

Conceptual framework
Economic theory provides a powerful set of tools to generate hypotheses about the
potential impacts of policy interventions. In order to make the framework in which we consider
the potential impacts of a policy intervention more complete, it can be helpful to look outside the
toolbox of conventional economic theory. Two methods for doing so that have led to fruitful
insights are the consideration of psychological factors and the development of hypotheses based
on direct interaction with the individuals who will be affected by the intervention.
Consideration of psychological factors. There are various decisions relevant to public
finance in which models of purely financial terms have been extended to include psychological
factors, such as the potential importance of social stigma in the decision to take-up government
benefits. Contributions to public goods have been of long-standing interest in public finance, and
there have recently been a number of field experiments that examined psychological factors
affecting giving. Field experiments can be very useful in establishing the magnitude of
substantive importance to ascribe to psychological factors in decision-making by making direct

5

The responsiveness of very high income individuals to the match would be a key factor in such calculations, and
has yet to be explored.

6

comparisons to other factors in decisions such as prices. Because the specifics of context are so
important in psychological factors, the clear incorporation of context within an experimental
study of an intervention can enhance the value of knowledge generated by the experiment. To
the extent that government subsidizes charitable giving through the tax code and may undertake
additional policy interventions in the future to encourage giving, this line of work may also
become relevant to public policy.
In one field experiment embedded in a general population survey, participants were asked
to decide how they will split $100 between themselves and the local chapters of Habitat for
Humanity in a small city that was heavily affected by Hurricane Katrina (with a 10% chance
their decision will be implemented), with experimental conditions changing the information
available about the residents of the city. Fong and Luttmer (2006) found that only income had a
substantial effect on giving, which was more generous when Katrina victims are perceived to be
poorer, while information about race had no effect.
Another field experiment was designed around university fundraising. List and LuckingReily (2002) found solicitations that described the current level of seed funding as 67 percent of
the fundraising goal generated nearly six times more in gifts than seed funding of 10 percent.
Offering to refund contributions if a goal was not met increased contributions by about 20
percent. Other work in this literature finds that donors are sensitive to expectations about the
giving of other donors (Frey and Meier 2004; Shang and Croson 2007).
Direct interaction with potentially affected individuals. Anthropologists and sociologists
often incorporate qualitative methods into their research that are based on finding patterns in the
richer data of open-ended interviews and field observation. These methods can be incorporated
into the process of creating a field experiment. The result is a mixture of methods for a larger

7

project including both open-ended exploratory interviews and closed-end survey questions.
These are most often used iteratively in order to develop hypotheses based on both theory and
context given from qualitative work, to test hypotheses quantitatively, to examine puzzling
findings qualitatively, and then develop new hypotheses.
One example of hypothesis generation is a study of the use of housing vouchers to move
out of neighborhoods with high concentrations of poverty. Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2005)
reported that they had initially intended to focus on housing, labor market, and schooling effects
of this intervention. However, an initial period of fieldwork visiting intervention facilities and
conducting open-ended interviews with a small number of families resulted in a re-orientation of
research to include health issues like depression and asthma in addition to the issues of
employment and education that had been the original focus. In a follow-up survey, families
offered housing vouchers by lottery to move to low-poverty neighborhoods had adults with
better mental health, and children with fewer asthma attacks than in a control group not offered
vouchers (Katz, Kling, and Liebman, 2001).
Summary. Hypotheses about the potential effects of interventions can come from
economic theory, but can also come from consideration of psychological factors and from direct
interaction with potentially affected individuals. In a series of charitable giving experiments, the
body of evidence indicates that the framing of the conditions of recipients does influence giving
levels. In a housing voucher study, open-ended interviews and field observation led to the
hypotheses about impacts on health that suggested additional data to be collected.

8

Design
The design phase of an experiment is the unique aspect of the research. In contrast with
correlational or quasi-experimental analysis, the researcher has the flexibility and the
responsibility to create variation in the data that will plausibly identify a causal effect of an
intervention rather than having to rely on unplanned variation that may not be plausibly related
to the intervention of interest. There are many aspects of design, of which I will focus on four.
First, the circumstances of individuals who do not receive the intervention (that is, the
counterfactual) should be carefully considered. Second, any variations in the intervention should
be chosen to provide the most information about the questions of interest. Third, the outcomes of
interest need well-defined measures. Fourth, summary indices of key outcomes should be
identified at the design stage to increase statistical power in analyses confirming key hypotheses.
Counterfactuals. The field experiment will be informative about the effect of the
intervention relative to the experience of the control group. This makes the circumstances of the
control group key to the policy relevance of the results. Typically, the control experiences
whatever would have happened in the absence of the experimental intervention (that is, business
as usual). Information on these circumstances is often available in the design stage, and is
critically important to examine.
New Chance was a program that provided intensive employment services, on-site child
care, and other services to young unmarried mothers. The program had few effects on either
mother or child outcomes relative to control group (Quint, Bos, and Polit, 1997). It turned out,
however, that the control group was able to tap into similar types of services in the community as
those in New Chance and as a result the differences in the experiences of the intervention and

9

control groups were diminished. The study was a weak test of the effect of the intervention
relative to its absence.
Intervention variations. In the social experiments of the 1970s, there was a conscious
attempt to design studies that could provide estimates of a response function, such as the
response of medical expenditure to the price of health insurance or labor supply to earnings
subsidies, over ranges of price or income. These complicated designs offered many variations of
the intervention, with small numbers of individuals receiving each variation. They were more
susceptible to implementation problems and more difficult to explain to policy-makers in simple
and understandable terms. In some cases the implementation problems involved with having
many intervention variations can surely be solved, such as when the intervention is delivered
entirely by computer. However, many interventions involve delivery of services by people, and
people can be confused by multiple variations of an intervention, degrading the intervention
itself. Reflecting on the experiences of early experiments, Hausman and Wise (1985) explicitly
advocated simpler “black box” designs with sometimes only intervention being compared to a
control group. Yet, use of more than one intervention can substantially enhance the value of the
experiment.
One example of multiple interventions in a field experiment is that of welfare reform in
Minnesota. One variant of the intervention involved only financial incentives, letting individuals
keep more of their welfare benefit when earnings increased. Another variant combined financial
incentives with work requirements, requiring longer-term public assistance recipients to work or
participate in employment services. A control group had neither enhanced financial incentives
nor work requirements. Gennetian, Miller, and Smith (2005) found that the financial incentives
caused employment rates to increase somewhat and led to increased income on average, but also

10

led some people to reduce their hours of work. The resulting effects on earnings were offsetting
and similar on average to that of the control group. Combining the financial incentives with work
requirements did effectively increase both employment and earnings, demonstrating the
additional effect of the work requirement – which would have been impossible to separate out
without including the financial incentives only group in the experimental design.
Another example of multiple interventions involves a charitable giving experiment in
which three groups that were randomly assigned to receive different offers of matching rates for
donations relative to a control group. Karlan and List (2006) found that larger match ratios of
$3:$1 and $2:$1 had no additional impact relative to match ratios of $1:$1. These results suggest
that future research on policy interventions to encourage charitable giving with incentives should
attempt to incorporate tests for nonlinearities in responsiveness to these incentives.
Well-defined measures. One of the most challenging elements of experimental design is
determining the precise definitions of the outcome data to be collected. One may have a general
idea of studying asset accumulation, for example. The challenge lies in translating this idea into
specific data elements to be collected on home ownership and different types of financial assets
such that they can be collected efficiently, cleanly aggregated and compared to national data,
requiring attention to detail. Making trade-offs between what should be collected versus omitted
given the constraints of survey data collection requires a strong conceptual framework to guide
prioritization of measure selection.
To give one example of measure selection, a random assignment field experiment was
used to study the impact of individual development accounts (IDAs) on asset accumulation.
IDAs are saving accounts that provide low-income households with matching payments when
the balances are withdrawn and used for special purposes. The IDA program examined matched

11

funds used for home purchases at 2:1 and funds used for business start-up and investment in
education at 1:1. It also provided participants with financial education and counseling, as well as
reminders and encouragement to make regular contributions. Survey data was collected at
baseline, 18 months, and 48 months.
In developing measures of financial net worth, about which it is often difficult to obtain
accurate reports, special effort was made to develop criteria to help identify and verify responses
that might have been misreported or misrecorded. Responses were verified if they fell outside a
specified range for each question, the change in the recorded value between one wave and the
next fell outside a specified range, or the value was inconsistent with another response in the
same wave. The results reported by Mills et al. (2006) show little overall effect on asset
accumulation of IDAs. For the subgroup of African-Americans who were initially renters, the
IDA raised home ownership rates by almost 10 percentage points over 4 years but reduced
financial assets and business ownership.
Indices. We often want to know the answer to a broad question, such as whether an
intervention improved economic self-sufficiency. Various measures, such as employment,
earnings, lack of government assistance, and amount of government assistance all might
contribute to our assessment that economic self-sufficiency was higher or lower. The relative
weight given to different measures will inevitably be somewhat arbitrary. It is often simplest and
most transparent to divide each measure by its standard deviation and average these together to
form an index. Alternatives include principal components analysis, factor analysis, or least
squares projection (say, from a regression using an auxiliary panel dataset to use multiple
indicators to predict long-run average income). All will normalize the measures to a common
scale and form some weighted average. The resulting index can later be used as an outcome in

12

experimental analysis to come to a general conclusion about the impact of an intervention on a
broad domain such as economic self-sufficiency.6
It is valuable to specify indices at the design stage because doing so allows the analyst to
later make a clear statement of what was to be tested and what the results were. When key
indices are not specified in advance, then there are many results that could be reported and it is
not clear how to choose which should be emphasized. If there was no true effect of the
intervention but there were 100 intervention effect estimates, then we would expect 5 with tstatistics absolute values of 1.96 or greater just by chance. If the 5 most significant results from a
set of 100 had t-statistics around 2 and were emphasized in the analysis, it would be hard to
know if these simply occurred by chance. If there is one pre-specified index, then we can
precisely characterize the probability that a result that large would occur by chance if the null
hypothesis of no effect were true. It can also be used in the power calculations needed to assess
whether the sample size will be sufficient to detect effects of plausible magnitude.7
The approach of using summary indices has been applied in re-analysis of the long-term
effects of pre-school programs. Anderson (2007) created summary index measures for each of
three programs for three parts of the life course (pre-teen, teen, and adult). The indices contain
multiple measurements of variables such as IQ and educational attainment. Analysis focused on
this set of nine outcomes. Analyses were conducted separately by gender to answer two separate
6

At the analysis stage, the test statistic for intervention effects on this index will be most powerful against an
alternative hypothesis that intervention impacts on all components of the index were equally beneficial, which is
often the working alternative hypothesis in assessment of policy interventions. An F-test on intervention effects for
each separate outcome included in an index would be a more powerful test against a non-directional alternative
where some impacts might be beneficial and some adverse.
7
Even if a single measure and an index are both normalized to have a standard deviation of one, the index will
typically have a higher signal to noise ratio, which increases the statistical power. Note that a common error in
power calculations involves setting the sample size such that the t-statistic will equal 1.96 for particular intervention
effect size. If the true effect is of this size, then half the time the estimated effect will be higher half the time and
lower half the time. Thus, the power to detect a true effect is only 50 percent when using this critical value.
Conventional calculations usually involve 80 percent power and use a critical value of 2.8. See Orr (1999) for
details.

13

questions: what is the evidence on the effectiveness of any one of these interventions at a lifecourse stage for females, and what is the evidence for males? The results show that females
display significant long-term effects from early intervention, while males show weaker and
inconsistent effects. Among the components of the indices, females receiving pre-school
interventions show particularly sharp increases in high school graduation and college attendance
rates, but they also demonstrate positive effects for better economic outcomes, less criminal
behavior, less drug use, and higher marriage rates.
Summary. Design gives a field experiment unique flexibility to tailor variation in the data
to answer the research question of interest. When the circumstances of the control group are
known, the intervention can be designed so that there is a sufficient difference in experience
between the control group and the intervention group. Without attention paid to the
counterfactual, a well-designed experiment in every other way can yield null findings, similar to
what happened in the study of services for young mothers. Planned variations in interventions
can show the effects of components of a composite intervention (such as financial incentives and
work requirements in welfare reform) or increased intensity (such as higher matching rates in a
charitable giving experiment). Carefully selecting measures at the design stage translate a
concept into something measurable (such as translating asset accumulation into housing and
financial assets). Indices can aggregate information, form the basis of general conclusions, and
protect against later distortion of statistical inference when specified at the design stage (as in
analysis of the effect of early childhood interventions on later educational outcomes).

14

Data collection
In many areas of public finance, the data relating to a current or potential policy needs to
be created for the research. As a point of departure, the thirty-year old advice of Rivlin (1974)
still rings true today:
Economists and others who seek to improve the basis for policy formulation should
devote far more attention and resources to data collection than they have in the past. Ever
fancier statistical manipulation of data from traditional sources is unlikely to improve
policy choices significantly. The effort required to design and to carry out both surveys
and experiments may be painful and unglamorous, but it is the sine qua non of more
rational and informed policy formulation. (p. 353)
Seldom are our data measured without error, but key questions for the use of
experimental data are whether there is a systematic bias in the data, and whether that bias differs
across intervention groups. This section describes methods to assess potential biases. First,
analyses of administrative records data provide an opportunity to check for the presence of bias.
Second, combined analyses of administrative and survey data can reveal directions of bias.
Administrative data. A particular challenge for early social experiments was the
collection of follow-up data from the control group, which had less incentive to stay in touch
with program operators and which was harder to locate later on. In field experiments, the greatest
single threat to the analysis is attrition. One way to minimize these potential problems is to focus
on outcomes that are collected for everyone automatically through a record keeping system that
collects data for an administrative purpose, typically covering a much broader population than
individuals in the experiment.
An example using this approach was a field experiment designed to analyze the effects of
matching rates on contributions to retirement savings accounts among low and middle income
individuals. The experiment was implemented as an added incentive on top of the existing tax
code in order to assess the potential impact of matching incentives that have been contemplated

15

but not implemented as policy interventions. Clients at a tax preparation firm were randomly
assigned to groups offered either no match, a 20 percent match, or a 50 percent match if they
opened an IRA at the time of their meeting with the tax professional. The offers of matches were
added into an existing software system that collected data on the opening of IRAs. Although
other outcome data such as net worth would certainly also be of interest, the built-in
administrative data collection allowed the analysts to have complete data on account openings
and later balances for everyone in both the intervention and control groups. Duflo et al. (2006)
used these data for analysis and found a significant increase in retirement contributions in
response to the matching offer, even among low and middle-income households with generally
low propensities to save.
Survey and administrative data combinations. Since administrative records are by
definition designed for administrative purposes other than research, they sometimes do not
contain the detail that can be introduced into a survey created for research purposes. Moreover,
administrative data may not have the geographical coverage needed or may miss certain
important activities. Use of both survey and administrative data can make the results of
experiments more informative.
Both types of data were used in the National Job Corps Study, which followed groups
randomized into and out of receiving the Job Corps services of basic education, vocational skills
training, health care and education, counseling, and residential support. According to both the
survey and administrative records data analyzed by Schochet, McConnell, and Burghart (2003),
the estimated earnings impacts are negative in the first and second years (the period during Job
Corps enrollment) and positive and statistically significant in the third and fourth years after

16

random assignment. Assuming these earnings effects after four years would persist, cost-benefit
analysis indicated that the social benefits of Job Corps were greater than the costs.
Comparison of results from the administrative and survey data found that reported
earnings levels are much higher according to the survey data, perhaps because of incorrect social
security numbers and employment not covered in the administrative records data or overreporting of hours worked in the survey data. Also, earnings impacts were larger for survey
respondents than for non-respondents according to the administrative records data, suggesting
that the survey-based impact estimates are slightly biased upward. A key advantage of the
administrative data was the ability to inexpensively extend the original analysis out to seven
years after random assignment. In years five to seven, all the impacts were near zero. Revised
cost-benefit estimates from 2003, based on more extensive data than those published in 2001,
suggested that the benefits to society of Job Corps are smaller than the substantial program costs.
Another illustration of the value of using both survey and administrative data is taken
from an analysis of the effect of housing vouchers and residential location on criminal behavior
of youth. Kling, Ludwig and Katz (2005) found that female youth in the voucher groups had
fewer property crime arrests, while the male youth in the voucher groups had more property
crime arrests than the control group. One concern with administrative arrest data, however, was
that it might be affected by differing policing intensity in different areas. If the probability of
arrest for property crime conditional on offense is higher in low-poverty neighborhoods, then the
appearance of an effect could be spurious. Another source of information was survey self-reports
about behavior problems. These reports have their own measurement issues, but one virtue is that
policing intensity likely plays a minor role in self-reports about trouble getting along with
teachers, etc. The results based on self-reported behavior problems also showed an adverse effect

17

for male youth that was opposite in sign and significantly different from the effect on female
youth.
Summary. Incomplete data could lead to biased estimates based on a field experiment,
but administrative sources can provide complete data on some outcomes. Administrative data on
IRA account openings was used to study the effects of matching incentives on savings. Survey
and administrative data can be combined to assess potential bias. Both a Job Corps and a housing
voucher study used survey data to assess reporting biases in outcomes levels based on
administrative data and biases having different sources in survey data. These studies both found
similar results for differences between intervention and control groups using the two types of
data having two different types of errors, strengthening the cases that the estimates of the
intervention effects were less likely to be artifacts of one particular type of reporting error. The
use of multiple data sources from different perspectives greatly aided the formulation of a
consistent set of substantive conclusions.

Analysis
The core of experimental analysis is the difference in average outcomes between
intervention and control groups. This elegantly simple approach is straightforward to conduct
and easy to understand. Complications for statistical inference arise when there are multiple
comparisons of interest, which is the subject of the first part of this section. The second part of
this section, addresses the question about how to predict what would happen if something similar
but not quite the same were implemented. For forecasting these effects of untried policy
interventions, a structural model can be used.

18

Inference from multiple comparisons. Assume you were interested in the costeffectiveness of government funding for a Big Brother & Big Sister program, which may be
expanded if it is successful for either boys or for girls. Given two separate intervention estimates
(one for boys and one for girls), the probability both have t-statistics less than 1.96 when the true
parameters are both zero is .952 = .9025 (under independence), so the probability one or both are
1.96 or higher is .0975. If we looked at ten age groups, the probability when the null hypothesis
of no effect is true that at least one group will have a t-statistic of 1.96 or higher is 1-.9510 = .40.
The probability of observing a t-statistic around 2 is quite high even when there is no true effect.
The underlying problem is that when we engage in a process of searching across many
comparisons for those that have particular value of a t-statistic, our inferences based on that tstatistic are distorted by the search process itself. Yet, it may be a core question of the research to
know whether the intervention is effective for boys or for girls, for outcomes of educational
achievement or delinquency. These questions involve sets of multiple comparisons. Fortunately,
we can adjust our statistical inference to answer the question: what is the probability that the
highest t-statistic observed in a set of comparisons would have occurred by chance under the
joint null hypotheses that all of the true parameters in a set were zero? These probabilities are
known as adjusted p-values. The adjusted p-value for a t-statistic of 1.96 in a set of two
independent comparisons is .0975. When the estimates for two comparisons are likely to be
correlated (say, as in the case of the education and delinquency outcomes), then an estimate
based on an independence assumption is too conservative. A corrected estimate can be obtained
using a bootstrap technique.
An illustration of special attention to statistical inference with multiple comparisons is the
analysis the effects of housing vouchers on adult outcomes by Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2007).

19

They focused comparison of two intervention groups to a control group for four summary
indices: economic self-sufficiency, mental health, physical health, and an overall measure. In this
set of eight estimates, the effect on mental health had by far the largest effect size, and it had a tstatistic of 2.8. The adjusted p-value was .06 for the t-statistic on the mental health index being
2.8 or higher under the joint null hypothesis of no effect on any of the eight adult indices being
considered.
Using the technique of adjusting p-values naturally leads to the question of which pvalues should be adjusted. The authors pre-specified a set of eight key comparisons, and
implemented their adjustments on this set. That means for these eight comparisons, they can
precisely calculate the adjusted p-value. They kept the set limited for a reason, however. As the
size of the set increases, the adjustments become larger and true effects become harder to detect.
Despite restricting use of adjusted p-values to this key pre-specified set, the authors did report
plenty of other comparisons. However, these other comparisons were discussed as being more
exploratory and statistical inference about these other comparisons was not as rigorous.
For example, another notable result was that those who used housing vouchers to move
were eleven percentage points less likely to be obese, with a t-statistic of 2.2. While obesity was
a component of the physical health index, this comparison was not part of the set of primary
outcomes. The authors looked at this result in two ways, depending on the process the reader
used to get to that estimate. If an obesity researcher went straight to that point estimate because
she was looking for experimental evidence of the effects of housing vouchers and residential
location on obesity and was interested in this estimate regardless of its t-statistic because of the
unique nature of the experiment, then traditional statistical inference would be valid as though
this was the only outcome from the experiment (since for her, it essentially was). However, if a

20

public finance economist searched through the full range of results from the experiment and
focused on the obesity result because of its high t-statistic, then she should be aware that the
obesity result was more likely to have been caused by sampling variation than a non-adjusted pvalue would suggest. Moreover, the fact that there were not impacts on other physical health
measures that some theories suggested would have been affected in the same way as obesity
suggested that the obesity result should be treated with caution.
Structural modeling. In order to base out-of-sample projections about policy alternatives
on sound parameter estimates, empirical work from field experiments can be combined with
general equilibrium modeling. If the structural model is specified during the design phase of the
experiment, alterations to the design may even be suggested (and weighed against other factors)
that would improve the usefulness of the model.
In examination of welfare reform policies that subsidize employment search, one group
of researchers used data from Canadian welfare reform. This experimental intervention provided
monthly cash payments for up to three years to long-term recipients of income assistance
contingent on their finding full-time employment within one year of the supplement offer and
leaving the income assistance program. The approach started with a textbook Pissarides
matching model. The model was calibrated to the control group, and found to do a good job
predicting the partial equilibrium outcomes of the single parents receiving the earning
supplement intervention (Lise, Seitz, and Smith, 2005b). This was a much more stringent test of
the model than the typical replication of general economic conditions, as it had to capture the
effects of a policy change without directly using data on that change in the calibration.
Lise, Seitz, and Smith (2005a) went on to use the model to assess general equilibrium
effects of the intervention. Among the key results were that employment increases for recipients

21

were offset by employment decreases among other groups for no net employment changes, and
that subsidy recipients had higher exit rates from unemployment but received lower equilibrium
wages. In contrast to partial equilibrium analysis, the general equilibrium analysis suggested that
the benefits of the intervention did not outweigh the costs.
Summary. First, when examining multiple comparisons in an experiment, the probability
of observing a t-statistic of 1.96 or higher rises with the number of comparisons under the joint
null hypothesis of no effect. Adjusted p-values can be used to rigorously show the probability
that highest t-statistic in a set would be at least that high if there were no effect. This technique is
valuable when a set of estimates for key pre-determined outcomes are all important, and one
wants to make statistical inferences about the most significant estimates in the set – as illustrated
in statistical inference about adult mental health effects in a housing voucher experiment.
Second, use of a structural model provides a way to simulate a much broader range of policy
alternatives while remaining grounded on parameter estimates in which there is high confidence
and rigorously benchmarked against particular interventions for which the results have been
observed, as illustrated for a welfare reform experiment.

Interpretation
As soon as the impacts (or lack of impacts) from an intervention are clear, the question of
why those effects occurred immediately follows. This interpretative process is the phase of the
experiment that moves beyond the results of the experiment on the primary outcomes. For
understanding results, first a detailed description is needed of how the experiment was
implemented and sustained (or, not) during the follow-up. Second, non-experimental analyses
may help draw linkages between particular aspects of an intervention and subsequent effects on

22

outcomes. Third, narratives from open-ended interviews can be studied for patterns that suggest
hypotheses consistent with the observed results that can be tested in future work.
Intervention description. Understanding interventions can be complicated. It is helpful to
understand the variability in the intervention across locations and across time. Sometimes
interventions have multiple components. Even when the intervention itself is simple, the
intermediate pathways that it may affect an outcome of interest can be complicated. For example,
let’s say we were interested in the effect of a housing voucher on the educational achievement of
children. The housing voucher could affect the housing quality, the neighborhood poverty and
safety, the school quality, parenting practices, and a host of other factors. Address data from
program operations and survey data can help describe both what the circumstances of
intervention group were and how they differed from the control group. Sanbonmatsu et al.
(2006) found that the intervention caused sharp changes in neighborhood poverty and safety, but
relatively little change in school quality and essentially no change in parenting. The fact that
there were no discernable impacts on school achievement suggested a logical argument that the
linkage between neighborhood factors and school achievement was not strong. Since the
intervention had little impact on school or parents, the effects of these factors would likely be
better investigated using another experimental design.
Non-experimental analysis. There are a variety of ways to use non-experimental methods
to learn from data collected from an experiment. For example, it is often quite useful to examine
the predictors of who participates in an intervention when it is offered to them. In this section, I
focus on one particular type of non-experimental analysis, combining planned variation across
intervention types and unplanned variation across sites in experiments that are conducted in
multiple locations. As with the description of the intervention, the goal of these analyses is to

23

look inside the black box of an intervention. However, instead of using a chain of logic to
suggest that a relationship does or does not exist, the method used here relies on the formulation
of an econometric model and its attendant assumptions.
One example of the use of such a model was in analysis of welfare reform involving two
interventions at each of three sites. Welfare recipients with young children were randomly
assigned to either an education-focused group, a work-focused group or to a control group that
received no additional assistance. In order to examine the responsiveness of child outcomes to
changes in the mother’s employment and education, the variation in treatment effects across
interventions and sites was projected onto the two dimensions of maternal employment duration
and maternal education level using a two stage least squares instrumental variable estimation.
Estimates based on this method are valid if the assumption holds that the effect of the
intervention works through the two hypothesized mechanisms and not through other omitted
variables. Since the variation across sites was not planned into the experimental design, the site
differences in intervention effects could be related to some other factor (such as local economic
conditions), but sometimes a convincing case can be made that the econometric model has
captured the factors of primary importance. Magnuson (2003) found that increases in maternal
education are positively associated with children’s academic school readiness, and negatively
associated with mothers’ reports of their children’s academic problems, but with little to no
effect on children’s behavior. This methodology and related extensions are described in
Gennetian, Magnuson, and Morris (2006).
In a second example of this technique, a control group and treatment groups receiving
two different types of housing vouchers across five different sites allowed use of treatment-site
interactions to instrument for measures of neighborhood crime rates, poverty and racial

24

segregation in analysis of which neighborhood factors affect individual arrest outcomes. The
underlying logic of this approach is that interventions at some sites had large impacts on area
crime and not area poverty while other sites had larger impacts on area poverty than area crime.
A useful device for putting magnitudes of effects in context was to scale measurements in
standard deviation units so that a large change in neighborhood poverty rate could be
meaningfully compared to a large change in neighborhood crime rate. While it is not likely to be
true that any two particular characteristics of neighborhoods are the only ones through which a
housing voucher intervention works, one would have expected bias in estimates of the effect of
local area crime on own crime to result in estimates that were large and positive. The lack of an
effect found by Ludwig and Kling (2007) even when one might have expected upward bias
indicated lack of support for the hypothesis that local area crime increases own crime.
Neighborhood racial segregation appears to have been the most important explanation for
variation across neighborhoods in arrests for violent crimes, perhaps because drug market
activity is more common in high-minority neighborhoods.
Patterns in narrative data. Using survey data collected for this same housing voucher
study, a surprising pattern of results was found in which teen girls appeared to have benefited
from being in a family encouraged to move to a lower-poverty neighborhood with a housing
voucher while teen boys were affected adversely. Clampet-Lundquist et al. (2006) showed these
gender differences in effects, and then examined patterns in the narratives from open-ended
interviews to generate several new hypotheses. Teen boys appeared more isolated from the
mainstream when they moved to areas of lower poverty. Teen boys in new neighborhoods tended
to spend their free time on neighborhood basketball courts and on street corners, in closer
proximity to illegal activity than the teen girls who tended to spend free time at home or in malls

25

or other more supervised spaces. Teen boys in families offered housing vouchers also had
relatively lower rates of contact with father figures (stepfathers, mother’s boyfriends, and
uncles). All of these factors may have contributed to the gender differences in effects.
Another example of mixing narrative data analysis in study of a policy experiment is the
examination of a bundle of anti-poverty services known as the New Hope intervention. New
Hope required proof of 30 hours of work per week, and provided an earnings supplement that
raised income above the poverty line, subsidized child care, subsidized health insurance, and a
temporary community-service job if needed. Duncan, Huston, and Weisner (2007) found that
poverty rates declined dramatically, and that employment and earnings increased among
participants who were not initially working full-time. Among children in families receiving the
intervention, school performance improved (especially for boys) with academic gains equivalent
to half of the average achievement gap between black and white school kindergartners.
One of the important and initially puzzling findings from New Hope was on teacherreported achievement and behavior of younger children. In the experimental group boys, but not
girls, were 0.3 to 0.5 standard deviations better behaved and higher achieving than their controlgroup counterparts. Based on the survey data alone, however, the authors were unable to
understand this gender difference. A systematic analysis of qualitative data from 44 families,
sampled randomly from both program and control group members, focused on instances where
parents made specific references to the gender of their children, shed light on this puzzle
(Duncan and Gibson, 2005). Respondent narratives made clear that mothers believed that gangs
and other neighborhood peer pressures were much more threatening to their boys than their girls,
and that mothers in the experimental group channeled more of the program's resources (e.g.,
child care subsidies for extended-day programs) to their boys. One mother put it this way: “Not

26

all places have gangs, but [my neighborhood] is infested with gangs and drugs and violence. My
son, I worry about him. He may be veering in the wrong direction...it’s different for girls. For
boys, it’s dangerous. [Gangs are] full of older men who want these young ones to do their dirty
work. And they’ll buy them things and give them money.”
Summary. The interpretation of results extends beyond discussion of the effect of the
experimentally tested intervention on outcomes. Descriptive information about the
implementation of the intervention provides details about what the conditions that comprised the
intervention and affected participants – for example, characterizing the neighborhoods and
schools of youth in a housing voucher study. Intervention variants and locations can serve as
instrumental variables for selected conditions within the intervention that can be linked to their
effects on outcomes, as demonstrated in a welfare reform study and a housing voucher study.
Patterns in narrative data generate suggestive new hypotheses that potentially explain why
certain intervention effects may have been observed and that can be tested in future research
through collection of larger samples of data.

Conclusion
Although this article is organized around the linear end-to-end process of conducting a
field experiment, there are two main cross-cutting themes that are important in multiple phases
of the research. First, greater statistical sophistication can draw more value from a field
experiment without obscuring the simple and compelling information from the differences in
average outcomes of intervention and control groups. Non-experimental econometric techniques
can form the basis of studies that motivate the topics of field experiments, and that extend the
analysis to look inside the black box of the experiment. Creation of indices and focus on key

27

outcomes during design can lead to more credible statistical inference, and these inferences can
also be made more meaningful in studies where there are multiple comparisons of interest.
Structural models can be calibrated to policy experiments and then used to simulate policy
variations.
Second, the methodological frontier is interdisciplinary. Hypotheses are generated from
consideration of psychological factors. Direct interaction with participants both generates
hypotheses and assists in developing a conceptual framework rooted in the precise nature of the
intervention. The interpretation of the results is enhanced by observation of patterns in narrative
data relating those in survey and administrative data. These activities draw on knowledge and
techniques developed in psychology, anthropology, and sociology that can be adapted for use in
making public finance field experiments more useful.
Perhaps an economics graduate student starting her public finance dissertation today will
think big, use field experiments, and incorporate the methods suggested here into her research.
Indeed, the use of field experimentation itself in academic public finance appears to be growing.8
Acquiring the methodological expertise to reach and to advance the frontier of experimental field
research in public finance will require the intellectual plasticity to absorb new ways of thinking.
More generally, use of these methods will help engage the creative and vibrant work that will
produce results that are practical and credible. Most importantly, widespread adoption of
methods suggested here has the potential to make the results from field experiments more useful
to public finance and to public policy debate.

8

For example, Greenberg, Shroder, and Onstott (1999) reported that the share of new ongoing social experiments
led by academics was about 50 percent higher than the share of projects led by academics over the previous 34
years.

28

References
Anderson, Michael. “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Preschool: A
Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training Projects.”
Unpublished manuscript, University of California-Berkeley, 2007.
Burtless, Gary T. “The Case for Randomized Field Trials in Economic and Policy Research.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 9 No. 2, (Spring 1995): 63-84.
Clampet-Lundquist, Susan, Kathryn Edin, Jeffrey R. Kling, and Greg J. Duncan. “Moving AtRisk Youth Out of High-Risk Neighborhoods: Why Girls Fare Better Then Boys.” Princeton
IRS Working Paper 509, March 2006.
Duflo, Esther, William G. Gale, Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Peter R. Orszag. “Saving Incentives for
Low- and Middle-Income Families: Evidence from a Field Experiment with H&R Block.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 No. 4 (November 2006): 1311-1346.
Duflo, Esther, and Emmanuel Saez. “The Role of Information and Social Interactions in
Retirement Plan Decisions: Evidence From a Randomized Experiment,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 118 No. 3 (August, 2003): 815-842.
Duflo, Esther, and Emmanuel Saez. “Participation and Investment Decisions in a Retirement
Plan: the Influence of Colleagues’ choices,” Journal of Public Economics 85 No. 1 (July
2002): 121-148.
Duncan, Greg J. and Christina Gibson, “Qualitative/Quantitative Synergies in a RandomAssignment Program Evaluation.” In Discovering Successful Pathways in Children's
Development: Mixed Methods in the Study of Childhood and Family Life. Edited by Thomas
S. Weisner. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2005. 283-303.
Duncan, Greg J., Aletha C. Huston, and Thomas S. Weisner. Higher Ground: New Hope for the
Working Poor and Their Children. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2007.
Eckel, Catherine and Phillip Grossman. “Subsidizing Charitable Giving with Rebates or
Matching: Further Laboratory Evidence.” Southern Economic Journal 72 No. 4 (April 2005):
794-807.
Eckel, Catherine and Phillip Grossman. “Subsidizing Charitable Contributions: A Field Test
Comparing Matching and Rebate Subsidies.” Unpublished manuscript, University of TexasDallas, 2006a.
Eckel, Catherine and Phillip Grossman. “Subsidizing Charitable Contributions in the Field:
Evidence from a Non-Secular Charity.” Unpublished manuscript, University of Texas-Dallas,
2006b.
Ferber, Robert and Werner Z. Hirsch. “Social Experimentation and Economic Policy: A Survey.”
Journal of Economic Literature 16 No. 4 (December, 1978): 1379-1414.
Frey, Bruno S. and Stephan S. Meier. “Social Comparison and Pro-Social Behavior: Testing
Conditional Cooperation in a Field Experiment.” American Economic Review 94 No. 5
(December, 2004):1717-22.
Fong, Christina and Erzo F. P. Luttmer. “Race and Giving to Hurricane Katrina Victims:
Experimental Evidence.” Unpublished manuscript, Harvard University, 2006.

29

Gennetian, Lisa A., Katherine Magnuson, and Pamela Morris. “From Statistical Associations to
Causation: What Developmentalists Can Learn from Instrumental Variables Techniques
Coupled with Experimental Data.” Unpublished manuscript, MDRC, November 2006.
Gennetian, Lisa A., Cynthia Miller, and Jared Smith. Turning Welfare into a Work Support: SixYear Impacts on Parents and Children from the Minnesota Family Investment Program. New
York: MDRC, 2005.
Greenberg, David, Mark Shroder, and Matthew Onstott. “The Social Experiment Market.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 13 No. 3 (Summer, 1999): 157-172.
Greenberg, David and Mark Shroder. The Digest of Social Experiments. Washington, DC: The
Urban Institute Press, 2004.
Harrison, Glenn W. and John A. List. “Field Experiments.” Journal of Economic Literature 42
No. 4 (December, 2004): 1009-1055.
Hausman, Jerry A. and David A. Wise. Social Experimentation. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1985.
Heckman, James, and Jeffrey Smith. “Assessing the Case for Social Experiments,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 9 No. 2 (Spring, 1995): 85-110.
Karlan, Dean and John A. List. “Does Price Matter in Charitable Giving? Evidence from a
Large-Scale Natural Field Experiment.” Unpublished manuscript, Yale University, 2006.
Katz, Lawrence F., Jeffrey R. Kling, and Jeffrey B. Liebman. “Moving To Opportunity In
Boston: Early Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 116 No. 2 (May 2001): 607-654.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman and Lawrence F. Katz. “Bullets Don't Got No Name:
Consequences of Fear in the Ghetto.” In Discovering Successful Pathways in Children's
Development: Mixed Methods in the Study of Childhood and Family Life. Edited by Thomas
S. Weisner. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2005. 243-281.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz. “Experimental Analysis of
Neighborhood Effects.” Econometrica 75 No. 1 (January, 2007): 83-119.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jens Ludwig and Lawrence F. Katz. “Neighborhood Effects on Crime for
Female and Male Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120 No. 1 (February, 2005): 87-130.
Lise, Jeremy, Shannon Seitz and Jeffrey Smith. “Equilibrium Policy Experiments and the
Evaluation of Social Programs.” Unpublished manuscript, University of Michigan, 2005a.
Lise, Jeremy, Shannon Seitz and Jeffrey Smith. “Evaluating Search and Matching Models Using
Experimental Data.” Unpublished manuscript, University of Michigan, 2005b.
List, John A. and David Lucking-Reiley. “The Effects of Seed Money and Refunds on Charitable
Giving: Experimental Evidence from a University Capital Campaign.” Journal of Political
Economy 110 No. 1 (February, 2002): 215-233.
Ludwig, Jens, and Jeffrey R. Kling. “Is Crime Contagious?” Journal of Law and Economics,
2007, forthcoming.

30

Magnuson, Katherine. “The Effect of Increases in Welfare Mothers’ Education on Their Young
Children’s Academic and Behavioral Outcomes: Evidence from the National Evaluation of
Welfare-to-Work Strategies Child Outcomes Study.” Institute for Research on Poverty
Discussion Paper no. 1274-03, 2003.
Mills, Gregory, William G. Gale, Rhiannon Patterson, and Emil Apostolov. “What Do Individual
Development Accounts Do? Evidence from a Controlled Experiment.” Unpublished
manuscript, The Brookings Institution, 2006.
Moffitt, Robert M. “The Role of Randomized Field Trials in Social Science Research: A
Perspective from Evaluations of Reforms of Social Welfare Programs.” American Behavioral
Scientist 47 No. 5 (January 2004), 506-540.
Orr, Larry. Social Experiments. New York: Sage Publications, 1999.
Quint, Janet C., Johannes M. Bos, and Denise F. Polit. New Chance: Final Report on a
Comprehensive Program for Young Mothers in Poverty and Their Children. New York:
MDRC, 1997.
Rivlin, Alice. How Can Experiments Be More Useful?” American Economic Review 64 No. 2
(May, 1974): 346-354.
Sanbonmatsu, Lisa, Jeffrey R. Kling, Greg J. Duncan, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn.
“Neighborhoods and Academic Achievement: Results from the MTO Experiment.” Journal
of Human Resources 41 No. 4 (Fall 2006): 649-691.
Schochet, Peter Z., Sheena McConnell, and John Burghard. National Job Corps Study: Findings
Using Administrative Earnings Records Data - Final Report. Princeton, NJ: Mathematica
Policy Research, 2003.
Shang, Jen and Rachel Croson. “The Impact of Social Comparisons on Nonprofit Fundraising.”
Research in Experimental Economics, 2007, forthcoming.

31

