                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE TERM STRUCTURE OF REAL RATES AND EXPECTED INFLATION

                                            Andrew Ang
                                            Geert Bekaert
                                              Min Wei

                                        Working Paper 12930
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12930


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2007


We thank Kobi Boudoukh, Qiang Dai, Rob Engle, Martin Evans, Rene Garcia, Bob Hodrick, Refet
Gurkaynak, Monika Piazzesi, Bill Schwert, Ken Singleton, Peter Vlaar, Ken West, and Mungo Wilson
for helpful discussions, and seminar participants at the American Finance Association, Asian Finance
Association, Barclays Capital Annual Global Inflation-Linked Conference, CIREQ and CIRANO-MITACS
conference on Macroeconomics and Finance, Empirical Finance Conference at the LSE, European
Finance Association, FRBSF-Stanford University conference on Interest Rates and Monetary Policy,
HKUST Finance Symposium, Washington University-St Louis Federal Reserve conference on State-Space
Models, Regime-Switching and Identification, Bank of England, Bank of Norway, Campbell and Company,
University of Amsterdam, Columbia University, Cornell University, Erasmus University, European
Central Bank, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, Financial Engines,
HEC Lausanne, Indiana University, IMF, London Business School, National University of Singapore,
NYU, Oakhill Platinum Partners, PIMCO, Singapore Management University, Tilburg University,
UCL-CORE at Louvain-la-Neuve, University of Gent, University of Illinois, University of Michigan,
University of Rochester, University of Washington, UCLA, UC Riverside, UC San Diego, USC, and
the World Bank. Andrew Ang and Geert Bekaert both acknowledge funding from the National Science
Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Andrew Ang, Geert Bekaert, and Min Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Term Structure of Real Rates and Expected Inflation
Andrew Ang, Geert Bekaert, and Min Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 12930
February 2007
JEL No. C50,E31,E32,E43,G12

                                            ABSTRACT

Changes in nominal interest rates must be due to either movements in real interest rates, expected
inflation, or the inflation risk premium. We develop a term structure model with regime switches,
time-varying prices of risk, and inflation to identify these components of the nominal yield curve.
We find that the unconditional real rate curve in the U.S. is fairly flat around 1.3%. In one real rate
regime, the real term structure is steeply downward sloping. An inflation risk premium that increases
with maturity fully accounts for the generally upward sloping nominal term structure.

Andrew Ang                                         Min Wei
Columbia Business School                           Federal Reserve Board
3022 Broadway 805 Uris                             min.wei@frb.gov
New York NY 10027
and NBER
aa610@columbia.edu

Geert Bekaert
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway/802 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
gb241@columbia.edu
1     Introduction
The real interest rate and expected inflation are two key economic variables; yet, their dynamic
behavior is essentially unobserved. A large empirical literature has yielded surprisingly few
generally accepted stylized facts. For example, whereas theoretical research often assumes
that the real interest rate is constant, empirical estimates for the real interest rate process vary
between constancy as in Fama (1975), mean-reverting behavior (Hamilton (1985)), or a unit root
process (Rose (1988)). There seems to be more consensus on the fact that real rate variation,
if it exists at all, should only affect the short end of the term structure but that the variation
in long-term interest rates is primarily affected by shocks to expected inflation (see, among
others, Mishkin (1990) and Fama (1990)), but this is disputed by Pennacchi (1991). Another
phenomenon that has received wide attention is the Mundell (1963) and Tobin (1965) effect:
the correlation between real rates and (expected) inflation appears to be negative.
    In this article, we seek to establish a comprehensive set of stylized facts regarding real rates,
expected inflation and inflation risk premiums, and to determine their relative importance for
determining the U.S. nominal term structure. To infer the behavior of these variables, we use a
model with three distinguishing features. First, we specify a no-arbitrage term structure model
with both nominal bond yields and inflation data to efficiently identify the term structure of
real rates and inflation risk premia. Second, our model accommodates regime-switching (RS)
behavior, but still produces closed-form solutions for bond prices. We go beyond the extant
RS literature by attempting to identify the real and nominal sources of the regime switches.
Third, the model accommodates flexible time-varying risk premiums crucial for matching time-
varying bond premia (see, for example, Dai and Singleton (2002)). These features allow our
model to fit the dynamics of inflation and nominal interest rates.
    This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 develops the model and discusses the effect of
regime switches on real yields and inflation risk premia. In Section 3, we detail the specification
tests used to select the best model, analyze factor dynamics, and report parameter estimates.
Section 4 contains the main economic results, which can be summarized as follows:

    1. Unconditionally, the term structure of real rates assumes a fairly flat shape around 1.3%,
       with a slight hump, peaking at a 1-year maturity. However, there are some regimes in
       which the real rate curve is downward sloping.

    2. Real rates are quite variable at short maturities but smooth and persistent at long
       maturities. There is no significant real term spread.

    3. The real short rate is negatively correlated with both expected and unexpected inflation,

                                                 1
          but the statistical evidence for a Mundell-Tobin effect is weak.

    4. The model matches an unconditional upward-sloping nominal yield curve by generating
          an inflation risk premium that is increasing in maturity.

    5. Nominal interest rates do not behave pro-cyclically across NBER business cycles but our
          model-implied real rates do.

    6. The decompositions of nominal yields into real yields and inflation components at various
          horizons indicate that variation in inflation compensation (expected inflation and inflation
          risk premia) explains about 80% of the variation in nominal rates at both short and long
          maturities.

    7. Inflation compensation is the main determinant of nominal interest rate spreads at long
          horizons.

Finally, Section 5 concludes.


2         A Real and Nominal Term Structure Model with Regime
          Switches

2.1        Decomposing Nominal Yields
The nominal yield on a zero-coupon bond of maturity n, ytn , can be decomposed into a real
yield, ŷtn , and inflation compensation, πt,n
                                           e
                                               . The real yield represents the yield on a zero-coupon
bond perfectly indexed against inflation.1 Inflation compensation reflects expected inflation,
Et (πt+n,n ), and an inflation risk premium, ϕt,n (ignoring Jensen’s inequality terms):

                                         ytn = ŷtn + πt,n
                                                       e


                                               = ŷtn + Et (πt+n,n ) + ϕt,n ,                                        (1)

where Et (πt+n,n ) is expected inflation from t to t + n:

                                                       1
                                     Et (πt+n,n ) =      Et (πt+1 + · · · + πt+n ),
                                                       n
    1
        Since real interest rates can be defined as real returns on investment, an alternative literature estimates real
interest rates by using models of capital and productivity. However, this approach produces very imprecise
estimates of real rates with substantial measurement error and often still uses interest rate data to help identification
(see Laubach and Williams (2003)).

                                                            2
and πt+1 is one-period inflation from t to t + 1.
   The goal of this article is to achieve this decomposition of nominal yields, ytn , into real and
inflation components (ŷtn , Et (πt+n,n ), and ϕt,n ) for U.S. data. Unfortunately, we do not observe
real rates for most of the U.S. sample. Inflation-indexed bonds (the Treasury Income Protection
Securities or TIPS) have traded only since 1997 and the market faced considerable liquidity
problems in its early days (see Roll (2004)). Consequently, our endeavor faces an obvious
identification problem as we must estimate two unknown quantities – real rates and inflation
risk premia – from only nominal yields. We obtain identification by using a no-arbitrage term
structure model that imposes restrictions on the nominal term structure. That is, the movements
of long-term nominal yields are linked both to the dynamics of short-term nominal yields and
inflation. These pricing restrictions, together with standard parameter identification restrictions,
uniquely identify the dynamics of real rates and inflation risk premiums using data on inflation
and nominal yields. To pin down the average level of real rates, we further restrict the one-
period inflation risk premium to be zero.
   The remainder of this section sets up the model to identify the various components of
nominal yields. Section 2.2 presents the technical details of the term structure model, while
at the same time discussing the economic background of the term structure factors and our
parametric assumptions. The model must be flexible, yet remain identifiable from a finite set
of nominal yields. Importantly, both the empirical literature and economic logic suggests that
the process generating inflation and real rates may undergo discrete shifts over time, which we
model using a RS model following Hamilton (1990). We present solutions to bond prices in
Section 2.3 and discuss how regime switches affect our decomposition in Section 2.4. Section
2.5 briefly covers econometric and identification issues. Finally, Section 2.6 discusses how our
work relates to the literature.


2.2    The Model
State Variable Dynamics

We employ a three-factor representation of yields, which is the number of factors often used
to match term structure dynamics in the finance literature (see, for example, Dai and Singleton
(2000)). We incorporate an observed inflation factor, denoted by πt , which switches regimes.
The other two factors are unobservable term structure factors. One factor, ft , represents a latent
RS term structure factor. The other latent factor is denoted by qt and represents a time-varying,
but regime-invariant, price of risk factor, which directly enters into the risk prices (see below).
The factor qt plays two roles. First, it helps generate realistic and plausible time-variation in

                                                 3
expected excess returns on long-term bonds,2 as demonstrated by Dai and Singleton (2002).
Second, qt also accounts for part of the time-variation of inflation risk premia, as we show
below.
       We stack the state variables in the 3 × 1 vector Xt = (qt ft πt )0 , which follows the RS
process:
                                  Xt+1 = µ(st+1 ) + ΦXt + Σ(st+1 )εt+1 ,                                         (2)

where st+1 indicates the regime prevailing at time t + 1 and
                                                                                                       
               µq                Φqq 0          0                 σq   0        0
                                                                                                       
 µ(st ) =                   
           µf (st )  , Φ =  Φf q Φf f        0              
                                                    , Σ(st ) =  0 σf (st )    0                            . (3)
                                                                                                            
             µπ (st )            Φπq Φπf Φππ                      0    0     σπ (st )

The regime variable represents K different regimes, st = 1, . . . , K, and follows a Markov
chain with transition probability matrix Π = {pij = P r(st+1 = j|st = i)}. These regimes are
independent of the shocks εt+1 in equation (2). We specify all the transition probabilities to be
constant.3
       In equation (3), the conditional mean and volatility of ft and πt switch regimes, but the
conditional mean and volatility of qt do not. The feedback parameters for all variables in the
companion form Φ also do not switch across regimes. These restrictions are necessary to permit
closed-form solutions for bond prices.
       We order the factors so that the latent factors appear first. As a consequence, expected
inflation depends on lagged inflation, other information captured by the latent variables, as well
as a nonlinear drift term. The inflation forecasting literature strongly suggests that expected
inflation depends on more than just lagged inflation (see, for example, Stockton and Glassman
(1987)). In addition, by placing inflation last in the system, the reduced-form process for
inflation involves moving average terms. This is important because the autocorrelogram of
inflation is empirically well approximated by a low-order ARMA process.
   2
       Fama and Bliss (1987), Campbell and Shiller (1991), Bekaert, Hodrick and Marshall (1997), and Cochrane
and Piazzesi (2005), among many others, document time-variation in expected excess holding period returns of
long-term bonds.
   3
     Transition probabilities must be constant under the risk-neutral measure to obtain closed-form solutions for
bond prices. A price of RS risk can only be identified if the transition probabilities vary through time. Dai,
Singleton and Yang (2006) allow transition probabilities to vary under the real measure, and then define the price of
RS risk to perfectly offset the time-varying component of the probability to obtain a constant transition probability
under the risk-neutral measure. It is hard to motivate this assumption with an equilibrium model. In contrast, our
model can be supported by a representative agent economy with a utility function with habit, and a RS endowment
process.


                                                         4
Real Short Rate Dynamics

We specify the real short rate, r̂t , to be affine in the state variables:

                                            r̂t = δ0 + δ10 Xt .                                                (4)

For reference, we let δ1 = (δq δf δπ )0 . The real rate process nests the special cases of a constant
real rate (δ1 = 03×1 ) advocated by Fama (1975) and mean-reverting real rates within a single
regime (δf = δπ = 0) following Hamilton (1985). Allowing non-zero δf or δπ causes the real
rate to switch regimes. If δq 6= 0, then the time-varying price of risk can directly influence the
real rate, as it would in any equilibrium model with growth. In general, if δπ 6= 0, then money
neutrality is rejected, and real interest rates are functions of inflation.
    The model allows for arbitrary correlation between the real rate and inflation. To gain some
intuition, we compute the conditional covariance between real rates and actual or expected
inflation for an affine model without regime switches. First, δπ primarily drives the covariance
between real rates and unexpected inflation. That is, covt (r̂t+1 , πt+1 ) = δπ σπ2 . Second, without
regimes, the covariance between expected inflation and real rates is given by:

                    covt (r̂t+1 , Et+1 (πt+2 )) = δq Φπq σq2 + δf Φπf σf2 + δπ Φππ σπ2 .

The Mundell-Tobin effect predicts this covariance to be negative, whereas an activist Taylor
(1993) rule would predict it to be positive, as the monetary authority raises real rates in response
to high expected inflation (see, for example, Clarida, Galı́ and Gertler (2000)). Clearly, the sign
of the covariance is parameter dependent, and a negative δπ does not suffice to obtain a Mundell-
Tobin effect.
    To compare the conditional covariance between real rates and expected inflation in our
model with regimes, we derive covt (r̂t+1 , Et+1 (πt+2 )|st = i) for K = 2 regimes to be:

   covt (r̂t+1 , Et+1 (πt+2 )|st = i) = δq Φπq σq2
                                                     "   2
                                                                                                           #
                                                         X
                                        + δf Φπf               pij σf2 (j) + pi1 pi2 (µf (1) − µf (2))2
                                                         j=1
                                                     " 2                                                   #
                                                      X
                                        + δπ Φππ               pij σπ2 (j)                             2
                                                                             + pi1 pi2 (µπ (1) − µπ (2))
                                                         j=1

                                        + δf δπ Φπf Φππ pi1 pi2 [(µπ (1) − µπ (2))(µf (1) − µf (2))].

Relative to the one-regime model, the contribution of the factor variances for the RS factors
now depends on the regime prevailing at time t and has two components: an average of the

                                                         5
two regime-dependent factor variances and a term measuring the volatility impact of a change
in the regime-dependent drifts. In addition, there is a new factor contributing to the covariance
coming from the covariance between these regime-dependent drifts for ft and πt .

Pricing Kernel and Prices of Risk

We specify the real pricing kernel to take the form:

                  m           ct+1 = −r̂t − 1 λt (st+1 )0 λt (st+1 ) − λt (st+1 )0 εt+1
                  b t+1 = log M                                                                         (5)
                                            2
where the vector of time-varying and RS prices of risk λt (st+1 ) is given by:

                                      λt (st+1 ) = (γt λ(st+1 )0 )0 ,

where λ(st+1 ) is a 2 × 1 vector of RS prices of risk λ(st+1 ) = (λf (st+1 ) λπ (st+1 ))0 and the
scalar γt takes the form:
                                    γt = γ0 + γ1 qt = γ0 + γ1 e01 Xt ,                                  (6)

where ei represents a vector of zeros with a 1 in the ith position. In this formulation, the prices
of risk of ft and πt change across regimes. The variable qt controls the time-variation of the
price of risk associated with γt in equation (6) but does not switch regimes. Allowing γt to
switch across regimes results in the loss of closed-form solutions for bond prices.
   We formulate the nominal pricing kernel in the standard way as Mt+1 = M    ct+1 Pt /Pt+1 :

                                    1
            mt+1 = log Mt+1 = −r̂t − λt (st+1 )0 λt (st+1 ) − λt (st+1 )0 εt+1 − e03 Xt+1 .             (7)
                                    2

Real Factor and Inflation Regimes

We introduce two different regime variables, sft ∈ {1, 2}, affecting the drift and variance of
the ft process, and sπt ∈ {1, 2}, affecting the drift and variance of the inflation process. Since
both the ft and πt factors enter the real short rate in equation (4), the real short rate contains
both ft and πt regime components. This modeling choice accommodates the possibility that sft
captures changes of regimes in real factors. Since ft enters the conditional mean of inflation in
equation (2), the ft regime also potentially affects expected inflation and can capture nonlinear
expected inflation components not directly related to past inflation realizations.
    The model with sft and sπt can be rewritten using an aggregate regime variable st ∈
{1, 2, 3, 4} to account for all possible combinations of {sft , sπt } = {(1, 1) , (1, 2) , (2, 1) , (2, 2)}.
Hence, our model has K = 4 regimes. To reduce the number of parameters in the 4×4 transition
probability matrix, we consider three restricted models of the correlation between sft and sπt .

                                                     6
Case A represents the simplest case of independent regimes. In Cases B and C, the sft and sπt
regimes are correlated.
    In Case B, the current ft regime depends on the contemporaneous realization of the inflation
regime and on the past ft−1 regime. Nevertheless, the future inflation regime only depends on
current inflation. Case B could represent a reduced-form description of a monetary authority
changing real rates, through the latent factor ft , in response to inflation shocks. We describe this
case more fully in Appendix A. However, one shortcoming of Case B is that it cannot capture
periods where aggressive real rates, through a regime with high ft , would successfully stave off
a regime of high inflation.
    In Case C, the inflation regime at t + 1 depends on the stance of the ft+1 regime as well as
the previous inflation environment, but we restrict future ft+1 regimes to depend only on current
ft regimes. This leads to the following conditional transition probability:

        P r(sft+1 = j, sπt+1 = k|sft = m, sπt = n)
            = P r(sπt+1 = k|sft+1 = j, sft = m, sπt = n) × P r(sft+1 = j|sft = m, sπt = n)
            = P r(sπt+1 = k|sft+1 = j, sπt = n) × P r(sft+1 = j|sft = m),                              (8)

where we assume that P r(sπt+1 |sft+1 , sft , sπt ) = P r(sπt+1 |sft+1 , sπt ) and P r(sft+1 |sft , sπt ) =
P r(sft+1 |sft ). We denote P r(sft+1 = 1|sft = 1) = pf and P r(sft+1 = 2|sft = 2) = q f and
parameterize P r(sπt+1 = k|sft = m, sπt = n) as p“j”,“m” , where:
                                   
                                    A if sπ = sf = 1
                                                t+1      t+1
                               j=
                                    B if sπ = sf = 2.
                                                 t+1      t+1

The “j”-component captures (potentially positive) correlation between the ft and πt regimes.
The “m”- component captures persistence in πt regimes:
                                      
                                       A if sπ = 1
                                                   t
                                m=
                                       B if sπ = 2.
                                                             t

This formulation can capture instances where a high real rate regime, as captured by the ft
regime, contemporaneously influences the inflation regime. Using the notation introduced
above, the transition probability matrix Π for Case C takes the form:
                       [st+1 = 1]           [st+1 = 2]              [st+1 = 3]         [st+1 = 4]
                          f AA
                                             ¡         ¢     ¡         ¢¡        ¢   ¡       ¢
           [st = 1]      p p              p 1 − pAA
                                          f
                                                               1 − pf 1 − pBA          1 − pf pBA
                                             ¡         ¢     ¡         ¢¡        ¢   ¡       ¢
           [st = 2]       pf pAB          pf 1 − pAB           1 − pf 1 − pBB         1 − pf pBB
                      ¡        ¢      ¡        ¢¡        ¢           ¡         ¢
           [st = 3]     1 − q f pAA     1 − q f 1 − pAA          q f 1 − pBA             q f pBA
                      ¡        ¢      ¡        ¢ ¡       ¢           ¡         ¢
           [st = 4]     1 − q f pAB     1 − q f 1 − pAB          q f 1 − pBB             q f pBB

                                                     7
         This model has four additional parameters relative to the model with independent real and
inflation regimes. We can test Case C against the null of the independent regime Case A by
testing the restrictions:

                                    H0 : pBA = 1 − pAA and pBB = 1 − pAB .

We find evidence to reject the case of independent regimes in favor of Case C with a p-value of
0.033. Thus, our benchmark specification uses the probability transition matrix of Case C.


2.3         Bond Prices
Our model produces closed-form solutions for bond prices, enabling both efficient estimation
and the ability to fully characterize real and nominal yields at all maturities without discretiza-
tion error.

Real Bond Prices

In our model, the real zero coupon bond price of maturity n conditional on regime st = i,
Pbn (st = i), is given by:
 t
                                           Pbtn (i) = exp(A
                                                          bn (i) + B
                                                                   bn Xt ),                                         (9)

where A bn (i) is dependent on regime st = i, B
                                              bn is a 1 × N vector and N is the total number
of factors in the model, including inflation. The expressions for Abn (i) and B
                                                                              bn are given in
Appendix B. Since the real bond prices are given by (9), it follows that the real yields ŷtn (i)
conditional on regime i are affine functions of Xt :4

                                                  log(Pbtn )    1 b        b
                                   ŷtn (i) = −              = − (An (i) + Bn Xt ).                               (10)
                                                     n          n
                                   bn (i) and B
         While the expressions for A          bn are complex, some intuition can be gained on how
the prices of risk affect each term. The prices of risk γ0 and λ(st ) enter only the constant term in
the yields Abn (st ), but affect this term in all regimes. More negative values of γ0 or λ(st ) cause
long maturity yields to be, on average, higher than short maturity yields. In addition, since the
λ(st ) terms differ across regimes, λ(st ) also controls the regime-dependent level of the yield
curve away from the unconditional shape of the yield curve. Thus, the model can accommodate
the switching signs of term premiums documented by Boudoukh et al. (1999). The prices of
     4                                                                     bn parameter does not switch for two reasons.
         The technical innovation in deriving (9) is to recognize that the B
First, Φ remains constant across regimes. Second, the time-varying price of risk parameter γ1 also does not switch
across regimes. If these parameters become regime dependent, closed-form bond solutions are no longer possible.


                                                             8
risk affect the time-variation in the yields through the parameter γ1 . This term only enters the
Bbn terms. A more negative γ1 means that long-term yields respond more to shocks in the price
of risk factor qt .
    The pricing implications of (10), together with the assumed dynamics of Xt in (2), imply
that the autoregressive dynamics of inflation and bond yields are constant over time, but the
drifts vary through time, and shocks to inflation and real yields are heteroskedastic. Hence,
our model is consistent with the macro models of Sims (1999, 2001) and Bernanke and
Mihov (1998), who stress changing drifts, for example induced by changes in monetary policy,
and heteroskedastic shocks. On the other hand, Cogley and Sargent (2001, 2005) advocate
models with changes in the feedback parameters, for example induced by changes in systematic
monetary policy, which we do not accommodate.

Nominal Bond Prices

Nominal bond prices take the form:

                                  Ptn (i) = exp(An (i) + Bn Xt )                            (11)

for Ptn (i), the zero-coupon bond price of a nominal n-period bond conditional on regime i. The
scalar An (i) is dependent on regime st = i and Bn is an 1 × N vector. It follows that the
nominal n-period yield conditional on regime i, ytn (i), is an affine function of Xt :
                                    log(Ptn )    1
                           ytn (i) = −        = − (An (i) + Bn Xt ).                      (12)
                                       n         n
                                                      bn (i) and B
Appendix C shows that the only difference between the A          bn terms for real bond prices
and the An (i) and Bn terms for nominal bond prices are due to terms that select inflation from
Xt . Positive inflation shocks decrease nominal bond prices.


2.4     The Effect of Regime Switches
The key ingredient differentiating our model from the standard affine term structure paradigm
is the presence of regimes. In this section, we develop intuition on how regimes affect the
decomposition of nominal rates into real rate and inflation components.

Expected Inflation

In our model, one-period expected inflation, Et (πt+1 ), takes the form:

                       Et (πt+1 |st = i) = e03 E[µ(st+1 )|st = i] + e03 ΦXt
                                           ÃK                !
                                              X
                                         =        pij µπ (j) + e03 ΦXt .                    (13)
                                                j=1


                                                 9
This process is only different from a simple linear process because of the nonlinear drift,
which can accommodate sudden discrete changes in expected inflation. Because expected
inflation depends on ft and πt , the contemporaneous sft and sπt regimes also both affect expected
inflation.

Inflation Compensation
                                                          e
With only one regime, one-period inflation compensation, πt,1 = yt1 − r̂t , is given by:
                                 µ                   ¶
                                          1 2
                          πt,1 = µπ − σπ − σπ λπ + e03 ΦXt .
                            e
                                          2
With regimes, inflation compensation is more complex:
                          "K          µ                                ¶#
                           X                    1
          e
         πt,1 (i) = − log      pij exp −µπ (j) + σπ2 (j) + σπ (j)λπ (j)   + e03 ΦXt ,                (14)
                           j=1
                                                2

The last term in the exponential represents the one-period inflation risk premium, which is zero
by assumption in our model. The 12 σπ2 (j) term is the standard Jensen’s inequality term, which
now becomes regime dependent. The −µπ (st ) term represents the nonlinear, regime-dependent
part of expected inflation. The last term e03 ΦXt represents the time-varying part of expected
inflation, which does not switch across regimes, and is the only term that is the same as in the
affine model.
    In comparing expected inflation in equation (13) with inflation compensation in equation
                                          e
(14), we see that the constant terms for πt,1 and Et (πt+1 |st ) are different. The constants in the
inflation compensation expression (14) reflect both a Jensen’s inequality term 12 σπ2 (st ) and a
nonlinear term, driven by taking the log of a sum, weighted by transition probabilities. Because
exp(.) is a convex function, Veronesi and Yared (1999) call this effect a “convexity bias.” Like
                                    e
the Jensen’s term, this also makes πt,1 < Et (πt+1 ). In our estimations, both the Jensen’s term
and the convexity bias amount to less than 1 basis point, even for longer maturities.

Real Term Spreads

The intuition for how regimes affect real term spreads can be readily gleaned from considering
a two-period real bond. We first analyze the case of the real term spread, ŷt2 − r̂t , in an affine
model without regime switches:
                               1                       1               1
                ŷt2 − r̂t =     (Et (r̂t+1 ) − r̂t ) − vart (r̂t+1 ) + covt (m
                                                                              b t+1 , r̂t+1 ) .      (15)
                               2                       4               2
The first term (Et (r̂t+1 ) − r̂t ) is an Expectations Hypothesis (EH) term, the second term
vart (r̂t+1 ) is a Jensen’s inequality term and the last term, covt (m
                                                                     b t+1 , r̂t+1 ), is the risk premium.

                                                       10
In the single-regime affine setting, the last term is given by:

                          covt (m
                                b t+1 , r̂t+1 ) = −γ0 σq − λf σf − γ1 σq qt .                  (16)

Hence, the price of risk factor qt determines the time variation in the term premium.
   The RS model has a more complex expression for the two-period real term spread:
                    1                              1
    ŷt2 (i) − r̂t = (Et (r̂t+1 |st = i) − r̂t ) − (γ0 σq + γ1 σq qt )
                    2            Ã K               2
                          1         X            h     ³                        ´
                                                     0
                      − log             pij exp −δ1 µ(j) − E [µ(st+1 )|st = i]
                          2         j=1

                                                         1 0                           i¶
                                                                       0
                                                        + δ1 Σ(j)Σ(j) δ1 + λf (j)σf (j) ,      (17)
                                                         2
for K regimes. First, the term spread now switches across regimes, explicitly shown by the
dependence of ŷt2 (i) on regime st = i. Not surprisingly, the EH term (Et (r̂t+1 |st = i) − r̂t )
now switches across regimes. The time-varying price of risk term, − 12 (γ0 σq + γ1 σq qt ), is the
same as in (16) because the process for qt does not switch regimes. The remaining terms in
(17) are nonlinear, as they involve the log of the sum of an exponential function of regime-
dependent terms, weighted by transition probabilities. Within the nonlinear expression, the
term 21 δ10 Σ(j)Σ(j)0 δ1 represents a Jensen’s inequality term, which is regime-dependent, and
λf (j)σf (j) represents a RS price of risk term. Thus, the average slope of the real yield curve can
potentially change across regimes and produce a variety of regime-dependent shapes of the real
yield curve, including flat, inverse-humped, upward-sloping or downward-sloping yield curves.
A new term in (17) that does not have a counterpart in (16) is −δ10 (µ(j) − E [µ (st+1 ) |st = i]),
reflecting the “jump risk” of a change in the regime-dependent drift.

Inflation Risk Premia

The riskiness of nominal bonds is driven by the covariance between the real kernel and inflation:
if inflation is high (purchasing power is low) when the pricing kernel realization (marginal
utility in an equilibrium model) is high, nominal bonds are risky and the inflation risk premium
is positive. It is tempting to conclude that the sign of the inflation risk premium determines
the correlation between expected inflation and real rates. For example, a Mundell-Tobin
effect implies that when a bad shock is experienced (an increase in real rates), the holders
of nominal bonds experience a countervailing effect, namely a decrease in expected inflation,
which increases nominal bond prices. This intuition is not completely correct as we now
discuss.
   Consider the two-period pricing kernel, which depends on real rates both through its
conditional mean and through real rate innovations. Interestingly, the effects of these two

                                                  11
components are likely to act in opposite directions. High real rates decrease the conditional
mean of the pricing kernel; but, if the price of risk is negative, positive shocks to the real rate
should increase marginal utility. We first focus on the affine model. By splitting inflation into
unexpected and expected inflation, we can decompose the two-period inflation risk premium,
ϕt,2 , into four components (ignoring the Jensen’s inequality term):

           1
  ϕt,2 =     [−covt (r̂t+1 , Et+1 (πt+2 )) − covt (r̂t+1 , πt+1 )
           2
                                                +covt (m   b t+1 , Et+1 (πt+2 )) + covt (m
                                                                                         b t+1 , πt+1 )] (18)

    The first two terms reveal that a negative correlation between real rates and both expected
and unexpected inflation actually implies a positive risk premium. Nevertheless, a Mundell-
Tobin effect does not necessarily imply a positive inflation risk premium because of the last two
terms, which involve the innovations of the pricing kernel. In the affine model equivalent of
our RS model, the last term is zero by assumption, but the third term is not and may swamp the
others. In particular, for the affine specification:
                       1
               ϕt,2 = − [δπ σπ2 (1 + Φππ ) + Φπq (σq2 + γ1 σq qt ) + Φπf (σf2 + λf σf )].               (19)
                       2
    Hence, the time-variation in the inflation risk premium depends on qt , and the mean
premium depends on parameters that also determine the correlation between real rates and
inflation. In particular, if the correlation between real rates and inflation is zero (requiring
δπ = Φπ,q = Φπ,f = 0), then the inflation risk premium is also zero. Note that the price of
risk λf plays a role in determining the inflation risk premium whereas it does not play a role in
determining the correlation between real rates and expected inflation.
    Naturally, the RS model has a richer expression for the inflation risk premium than equation
(19). Conditional on st = i, the two-period inflation risk premium in our model is given by:
                   ½ K      ·µ                            ¶
                  1 X                              1 2
     ϕt,2 (i) = −       pij    µf (j) + δπ µπ (j) + λf (j) ×
                  2 j=1                            2
                               Ã                     K
                                                                               !#
                                                     X
                                 (1 + Φππ ) µπ (j) +    pjk µπ (k) + Φπf µf (j)
                                                                k=1
                                "K        µ                         ¶#
                                 X                           1 2
                              −      pij µf (j) + δπ µπ (j) + λf (j)    ×
                                 j=1
                                                             2
                                "K      Ã                    K
                                                                                      !#
                                 X                           X
                                     pij (1 + Φππ ) µπ (j) +   pjk µπ (k) + Φπf µf (j)
                                   j=1                              k=1




                                                     12
                                                               K
                                                               X                       ¡               ¢
                                     + δπ (1 + Φππ )                  pij σπ2 (j) + Φπq σq2 + γ1 σq qt
                                                                j=1
                                              K
                                              X            ³                            ´¾
                                     + Φπf           pij       σf2   (j) + λf (j) σf (j)                         (20)
                                              j=1

The time-varying inflation risk term involving qt is the same as the affine model, but the other
terms become regime dependent and nonlinear. The inflation risk premium is affected by regime
switches both through the RS price of risk, λf (st+1 ), and also through the regime-dependent
means.5 The effects of the RS drifts impart considerable flexibility to introduce nonlinear
movements in the risk premium, especially the ability to induce sudden shifts due to changing
inflation environments.


2.5       Econometrics and Identification
We derive the likelihood function of the model in Appendix D. The likelihood is not simply the
likelihood of the yields measured without error multiplied by the likelihood of the measurement
errors, which would be the case in a standard affine model estimation. Instead, the regime
variables must be integrated out of the likelihood function. Our model implies a RS-VAR for
inflation and yields with complex cross-equation restrictions imposed by the term structure
model.
       Since the model has latent factors, identification restrictions must be imposed to estimate
the model. We also discuss these issues in Appendix D. An important identification assumption
is that we set the one-period inflation risk premium equal to zero, λπ (st+1 ) = 0. This parameter
identifies the average level of real rates and the inflation risk premium, and is very hard to
identify without using real yields in the estimation. This restriction does not undermine the
ability of the model to fit the dynamics of nominal interest rates and inflation well, as we show
below. Models with non-zero λπ give rise to lower and more implausible real rates than our
estimates imply and have a poorer fit with the data.
       Finally, we specify the dependence of the prices of risk for the ft and πt factors on st .
Because we set λπ = 0, we only need to model λf (st+1 ). In general, there are four possible
λf parameters across the four st+1 regimes. This potentially allows real and nominal yield
curves to take on different unconditional shapes in different inflationary environments. When
   5
       In particular, in the RS model, the term covt (m
                                                      b t+1 , πt+1 ) is not zero even though we assume λπ = 0, but this
term is less than 1 basis point in our estimation.


                                                                 13
estimating a model where λ(st+1 ) varies over all regimes, a Wald test on the equality of λ(st+1 )
across sπt+1 regimes is strongly rejected with a p-value less than 0.001, while a Wald test on the
equality of λ(st+1 ) across sft+1 regimes is not rejected at the 5% level. Hence, in our benchmark
model, we consider prices of f risk to vary only across inflation regimes, sπt+1 .


2.6    Related Models
To better appreciate the relative contribution of the model, we link it to three distinct literatures:
(i) the extraction of real rates and expected inflation from nominal yields and realized inflation
or inflation forecasts, (ii) the empirical RS literature on interest rates and inflation, and (iii) the
theoretical term structure literature and equilibrium affine models in finance.

Time-Series Models

An earlier literature uses neither term structure data, nor a pricing kernel to obtain estimates
of real rates and expected inflation. Mishkin (1981) and Huizinga and Mishkin (1986) simply
project ex-post real rates on instrumental variables. This approach is sensitive to measurement
error and omitted variable bias. Other authors, such as Hamilton (1985), Fama and Gibbons
(1982), and Burmeister, Wall and Hamilton (1986), use low-order ARIMA models and identify
expected inflation and real rates using a Kalman filter, under the assumption of rational
expectations. The time-series processes driving real rates and expected inflation, with rational
expectations, remain critical ingredients in our approach, but we use inflation data and the
entire term structure to obtain more efficient identification. In addition, our approach identifies
the inflation risk premium, which this literature cannot do.

Empirical Regime-Switching Models

Many articles document RS behavior in interest rates (see, among many others, Hamilton
(1988), Gray (1996) Sola and Driffill (1994), Bekaert, Hodrick and Marshall (2001), and Ang
and Bekaert (2002a)) without analyzing the real and nominal sources of the regimes. Evans
and Wachtel (1993) and Evans and Lewis (1995) document the existence of inflation regimes,
whereas Garcia and Perron (1996) focus on real interest rate regimes. Our model simultaneously
identifies inflation and real factor sources behind the regime switches and analyzes how they
contribute to nominal interest rate variation.

Term Structure Models

Relative to the extensive term structure literature, our model appears to be the first to identify


                                                  14
real interest rates and the components of inflation compensation in a model accommodating
regime switches, while still admitting closed-form solutions. Most of the articles using a
pricing model to obtain estimates of real rates and expected inflation have so far ignored RS
behavior. This includes papers by Pennacchi (1991), Boudoukh (1993) and Buraschi and Jiltsov
(2005) for U.S. data and Barr and Campbell (1997) and Evans (1998) for U.K. data. This is
curious, because the early literature implicitly demonstrated the importance of accounting for
potential structural or regime changes. For example, the Huizinga-Mishkin (1986) projections
are unstable over the 1979-1982 period, and the slope coefficients of regressions of future
inflation onto term spreads in Mishkin (1990) are substantially different pre- and post-1979,
which is also recently confirmed by Goto and Torous (2003).
   The articles that have formulated term structure models accommodating regime switches
mostly focus only on the nominal term structure. Articles by Hamilton (1998), Bekaert, Hodrick
and Marshall (2001), Bansal and Zhou (2002), and Bansal, Tauchen and Zhou (2004) allow for
RS in mean reversion parameters which we do not, but their derived bond pricing solutions,
using discretization or linearization, are only approximate. None of these models features a
time-varying price of risk factor like qt in our model. Naik and Lee (1994) and Landén (2000)
present models with closed-form bond prices, but these models feature constant prices of risk
and only shift the constant terms in the conditional mean.
   The RS term structure model by Dai, Singleton and Yang (2006) incorporates regime-
dependent mean reversions and state-dependent probabilities under the real measure, while
still admitting closed-form bond prices. However, under the risk-neutral measure, both the
mean reversion and the transition probabilities must be constants, exactly as in our formulation.
Dai, Singleton and Yang allow for only two regimes, while we have a much richer RS
specification. Another point of departure is that in their model, the evolution of the factors
and the prices of risk depend on st rather than st+1 . In contrast, our model specifies regime
dependence using st+1 as in Hamilton (1989), implying that the conditional variances of our
factors embed a jump term reflecting the difference in conditional means across regimes.
This conditional heteroskedasticity is absent in the Dai-Singleton-Yang parameterization. Our
results show that the conditional means of inflation significantly differ across regimes, while
the conditional variances do not, making the regime-dependent means an important source of
inflation heteroskedasticity.
   There are two related articles that use a term structure model with regime switches to
investigate real and nominal yields. The first specification by Veronesi and Yared (1999) is
quite restrictive as it only accommodates switches in the drifts. The second paper by Evans
(2003) is most closely related to our article. He formulates a model with regime switches for

                                               15
U.K. real and nominal yields and inflation, but he does not accommodate time-varying prices
of risk. Evans incorporates switches in mean-reversion parameters, but does not separate the
sources of the regime switches into real factors and inflation.6

Final Comments

While the model is quite general, it has two main caveats. First, Gray (1996) and Bekaert,
Hodrick and Marshall (2001), among others, show that mean-reversion of the short rate is
significantly different across regimes. Evans and Wachtel (1993) and Evans and Lewis (1995)
also present some evidence for state-dependent mean reversion in inflation. Second, Ang
and Bekaert (2002b) show that only time-varying transition probabilities can reproduce the
nonlinearities in the short rate drift and volatility functions documented by Aı̈t-Sahalia (1996)
and others. If we relax either of these constraints, we can no longer derive closed-form bond
prices. While these are important concerns, the numerical difficulties in computing bond prices
for these more complex specifications are formidable and the use of term structure information
is critical in identifying both the inflation and real rate components in nominal interest rates.
Moreover, our model with a latent term structure factor and a time-varying price of risk,
combined with the RS means and variances, is very rich and cannot be identified from inflation
and short rate data alone. Despite these two caveats, we show below that our model provides a
good fit with the data in terms of matching data moments.


3        Model Estimates

3.1        Data
We use 4-, 12- and 20-quarter maturity zero-coupon yield data from CRSP and the 1-quarter
rate from the CRSP Fama risk-free rate file as our yield data. We compute inflation from the
Consumer Price Index – All Urban Consumers (CPI-U, seasonally adjusted, 1982:Q4=100),
from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Our data spans the sample from 1952:Q2 to 2004:Q4.
Using monthly CPI figures creates a timing problem because prices are collected over the course
    6
        Evans (2003) claims to derive an exact, closed-form bond pricing formula that switches in the mean-reversion
term, but his claim is erroneous. On p378 of his article, Evans defines Φjk,t to be a vector that does not depend on
the regime st , but this should be a matrix Φjk,t (s̃, s), representing values for all transitions between st and st+1 .
Dai and Singleton (2003) show that when Φ becomes state-dependent, the bond prices are given by a solution to
a series of coupled partial differential equations. This reduces to our differential equation solutions (see below)
only for the case when Φ is not regime dependent. When Φ is regime dependent under the risk-neutral measure,
closed-form solutions can no longer be obtained.


                                                          16
of the month and monthly inflation data is seasonal. Therefore, similar to Campbell and Viceira
(2001), we sample all data at the quarterly frequency. For the benchmark model, we specify the
1-quarter and 20-quarter yields to be measured without error to extract the unobserved factors
(see Chen and Scott (1993)). The other yields are specified to be measured with error and
provide over-identifying restrictions for the term structure model.7


3.2       Model Nomenclature
In Table 1, we describe the different term structure models we estimate. The top row represents
models with the three factors (qt ft πt )0 . In the bottom row, we list alternative models that add
an unobserved factor representing expected inflation, which we denote by wt , which generalize
classic ARMA-models of expected inflation. We describe these models in Appendix E.
       To gauge the contribution of regime switches, we estimate single-regime counterparts to the
benchmark and unobserved expected inflation models. The single regime models I and Iw are
simply affine models. Model I is the single regime counterpart of the benchmark RS model IV ,
described in Section 2. Model Iw is similar to the model estimated by Campbell and Viceira
(2001), except that Campbell and Viceira assume that the inflation risk premium is constant,
whereas in all our models the inflation risk premium is stochastic. We specifically contrast
real rates and inflation risk premia from Model Iw with the real rates and inflation risk premia
implied by our benchmark model below.
       The remaining models in Table 1 are RS models. Models II and IIw contain two regimes
where sft = sπt . Two regime models are the main specifications used in the empirical and term
structure literature (see, for example, Bansal and Zhou (2002)). Model III considers a similar
model but the regime variable can take on three values. Model IV represents the benchmark
model, which has four regimes, with the different cases describing the correlation of the sft and
the sπt regimes (Cases A, B, and C as described in Section 2.2). Model V I contains two regimes
for sft which are independent of the three regimes for sπt .


3.3       Specification Tests
We report two specification tests of the models, an unconditional moment test and an in-sample
serial correlation test for first and second moments in scaled residuals. The former is particularly
important because we want to decompose the variation of nominal yields into real and expected
   7
       We estimate several of our models using alternative schemes where other yields are assumed to be measured
without error and find that the results are very similar.



                                                            17
inflation components. A well-specified model should imply unconditional means, variances and
autocorrelograms of inflation and yields close to the sample moments. We outline these tests in
Appendix F.
      Table 2 reports the results of these specification tests. Panel A focuses on matching inflation
dynamics, while Panel B focuses on matching the dynamics of yields. Of all the models, only
Model IV C passes the inflation residual tests and fits the mean, variance, and autocorrelogram
of inflation (using autocorrelations of lags 1, 5, and 10). About half of the models fail to match
the autocorrelogram of inflation. Inflation features a relatively low first-order autocorrelation
coefficient with very slowly decaying higher-order autocorrelations. Generally, the presence of
regimes and the additional expected inflation factor help in matching this pattern. However,
most of the models with the w-factor fail to match the mean and variance of inflation. While
Model V I passes all moment tests, both residual tests reject strongly at the 1% level, eliminating
this model. The match with inflation dynamics is extremely important as the estimated inflation
process not only identifies expected inflation but also plays a critical role in identifying the
inflation risk premium. This makes Model IV C the prime candidate for the best model.
      Panel B reports goodness-of-fit tests for two sets of yield moments: the mean and variance
of the spread and the long rate (all models fit the mean of the short rate by construction in the
estimation procedure) and the autocorrelogram of the spread. Only four models fit the moments
of yields and spreads: I, III, IV A , and IV C . Unfortunately, apart from model IV C , these
other models fail to match the inflation moments in Panel A.
      We also report the residual test for the short rate and spread equations in Panel B. With the
exception of models IV B and V I, most models produce reasonably well-behaved residuals.
While model IV C nails the dynamics of inflation in Panel A and closely matches term structure
moments, the model’s residual tests for short rates and spreads are significant at the 5% level,
but not at the 1% level. Thus, there is some serial correlation and heteroskedasticity that remains
present in the residuals. Consequently, the unconditional moments of unobserved real rates and
inflation risk premia produced by model IV C will imply nominal rates and inflation behavior
close to that in data, but the conditional dynamics of real short rates and inflation risk premia
may be slightly more persistent or heteroskedastic than our estimates suggest.


3.4      Model Estimates
We focus on the benchmark model IV C , which is the model that best fits the inflation and
term structure data.8 We discuss the parameter estimates, the implied factor dynamics, and the
  8
      Estimates of other models are available upon request.


                                                        18
identification and interpretation of the regimes.

Parameter Estimates

Table 3 reports the parameter estimates. Inflation enters the real short rate equation (4) with
a highly significant, negative coefficient of δπ = −0.49. In the companion form Φ of the
VAR, the term structure latent factors qt and ft are both persistent, with correlations of 0.97
and 0.76, respectively. Their effects on the conditional mean of inflation and thus on expected
inflation is positive with coefficients of 0.62 and 0.95, respectively. However, the coefficient on
ft is only borderline significant with a t-statistic of 1.85. Not surprisingly, lagged inflation also
significantly enters the conditional mean of inflation, with a loading of 0.54. A test of money
neutrality (δπ = Φπ,q = Φπ,f = 0) rejects with a p-value less than 0.001.
   The conditional means and variances of the factors reveal that the first sft = 1 regime
is characterized by a low ft mean and low standard deviation. Both the mean and standard
deviations are significantly different across the two regimes at the 5% level. For the inflation
process, the conditional mean of inflation is significantly different across the sπt regimes, with
sπt = 1 being a relatively high inflation environment. However, there is no significant difference
across regimes in the innovation variances. This does not mean that inflation is homoskedastic
in this model. The regime-dependent means of ft induce heteroskedastic inflation across the ft
factor regimes.
   Table 3 also reports that the price of risk for the qt factor is negative but imprecisely
estimated. The prices of risk for the ft factor are both significantly different from zero and
significantly different across the two regimes. Moreover, they have a different sign in each
regime, which may induce different term structure slopes across the regimes.
   The transition probability matrix shows that the sft regimes are persistent with probabilities
P r(sft+1 = 1|sft = 1) = 0.93 and P r(sft+1 = 2|sft = 2) = 0.77. The probability pAA =
P r(sπt+1 = 1|sft+1 = 1, sπt = 1) is estimated to be one. Conditional on a period with a negative
ft and relatively high inflation (regime 1), we cannot transition into a period of lower expected
inflation unless the ft regime also shifts to the higher mean regime. Thus, the model assigns
zero probability from transitioning from st = 1 ≡ (sft = 1, sπt = 1) to st+1 = 2 ≡ (sft+1 =
1, sπt+1 = 2). Similarly, starting in regime 3, st = 3 ≡ (sft = 2, sπt = 1), we can transition into
the low inflation regime (sπt+1 = 2) only with a realization of sft+1 = 2, where ft is high and
volatile. We demonstrate below that this behavior has a plausible economic interpretation.

Factor Behavior

Table 4 reports the relative contributions of the different factors driving the short rate, long

                                                 19
yield, term spread, and inflation dynamics in the model. The price of risk factor qt is relatively
highly correlated with both inflation and the nominal short rate, but shows little correlation with
the nominal spread. In other words, qt can be interpreted as a level factor. The RS term structure
factor ft is highly correlated with the nominal spread, in absolute value, so ft is a slope factor.
The factor ft is also less variable and less persistent than qt . Consequently, ft does not play a
large role in the dynamics of the real rate, only accounting for 9% of its variation. The most
variable factor is inflation and it accounts for 51% of the variation of the real rate. Inflation is
negatively correlated with the real short rate, at -34%, as a result of the negative δπ = −0.49
coefficient, while qt is positively correlated with the real short rate (44%). The model produces
a 69% (-44%) correlation between inflation and the nominal short rate (nominal 5-year spread),
which matches the data correlation of 68% (-37%) very closely.
       Panel A also reports how the different factors contribute to the expected inflation dynamics.
The latent factor components play an important role in the dynamics of expected inflation, with
qt and ft accounting for 37% of the variance of expected inflation. Inflation itself accounts
for is 62% of the variance of inflation. Expected inflation also has a nonlinear RS component.
We calculate the contribution of regimes to the variance of expected inflation by computing
the variance of expected inflation assuming we never transition from regime 1, relative to the
variance of expected inflation from the full model. Unconditionally, RS accounts for 12% of the
variance of expected inflation. We also show later that regimes are critical for capturing sudden
decreases in expected inflation occurring occasionally during the sample.
       The implied processes for expected inflation and actual inflation are both very persistent.
The first-order autocorrelation coefficient of one-quarter expected inflation is 0.89, which
implies a monthly autocorrelation coefficient of 0.96 under the null of an AR(1).                             The
autocorrelations decay slowly to 0.51 at 10 quarters. Fama and Schwert (1977) also note the
strong persistence of expected inflation using time-series techniques to extract expected inflation
estimates. For actual inflation, the first-order autocorrelation implied by the model is 0.76 and
it is 0.35 at 10 quarters, matching the data almost perfectly at 0.72 and 0.35, respectively.9 It is
this very persistent nature of inflation that many of the other models cannot match. For example,
in model Iw similar to Campbell and Viceira (2001), the autocorrelations of actual inflation are
0.48 and 0.20 at one and 10 lags, respectively.
       Because the factors are highly correlated with inflation, the nominal short rate and the
nominal spread, these three variables should capture a substantial proportion of the variance
of expected inflation in our model. To verify this implication of our model with the data, we
   9
       The autocorrelations of inflation only modestly vary across regimes, with the first-order autocorrelation of
inflation being highest in regime st = 1 at 0.77 and lowest in regime st = 4 at 0.74.


                                                         20
project inflation onto the short rate, spread, and past inflation both in the data and in the model.
Panel B of Table 4 reports these results. When the short rate increases by 1%, the model signals
an increase in expected inflation of 39 basis points. A 1% increase in the spread predicts an 8
basis point decrease in expected inflation. These patterns are consistent with what is observed
in the data, but the response to an increase in the spread is somewhat stronger in the data. Past
inflation has a coefficient of 0.52, matching the data coefficient of 0.49 almost exactly.
       The model also matches other predictive regressions of future inflation. For example,
Mishkin (1990) regresses the difference between the future n-period inflation rate and the one-
period inflation rate onto the the n-quarter term spread. In the data, this coefficient takes on
a value of 0.98 with a standard error of 0.36 for a horizon of one year. The model-implied
coefficient is 0.97. Thus, we are confident that the model matches the dynamics of expected
inflation well.

Regime Interpretation

How do we interpret the behavior of the regime variable in economic terms? In Table 5, we
describe the behavior of real short rates, one-quarter ahead inflation compensation (which
is virtually identical to one-period expected inflation except for Jensen’s inequality terms),
and nominal short rates across regimes. This information leads to the following regime
characterization:
                                                    Real Short Rates    Inflation           % Time
                   st = 1   sft = 1, sπt = 1        Low and Stable      High and Stable       72%
                   st = 2   sft   =   1, sπt   =2   High and Stable     Low and Stable         4%
                   st = 3   sft   =   2, sπt   =1   Low and Volatile    High and Volatile     20%
                   st = 4   sft   =   2, sπt   =2   High and Volatile   Low and Volatile       4%

All the levels (low or high) and variability (stable or volatile) are relative statements, so caution
must be taken in the interpretation. The last column lists the proportion of time spent in each
regime in the sample based on the population stable probabilities.10 The means of both real
rates and inflation are driven mostly by the sπt regime, while their volatilities are driven by the
sft regime.
       The first regime is a low real rate-high inflation regime, where both real rates and inflation
are not very volatile. We spend most of our time in this regime. As we will see, it is better
  10
       If we identify the regimes through the sample by using the ex-post smoothed regime probabilities, then
we spend less time in regime st = 1 in sample than the population frequency. Unlike traditional two-regime
estimations, like Gray (1996) and Bansal and Zhou (2002), this is not caused purely by switching out of st = 1
during the monetary targeting period of 1979-1982. In contrast, our model produces more recurring switches into
regimes st = 2 and st = 4 also occur during the early 1990s and early 2000s, which we discuss below.

                                                            21
to characterize the relatively high inflation regime as a “normal regime” and the low inflation
regime as a “disinflation regime.” The volatilities of real short rates, inflation compensation,
and nominal short rates are all lowest in regime 1. The regime with the second largest stable
probability is regime 3, which is also a low real rate regime. In this regime, the mean of inflation
compensation is highest. Thus, in population we spend around 90% of the time in low real rate
environments. Regimes 2 and 4 are characterized by relatively high and volatile real short rates.
The inflation compensation in these regimes is relatively low. Table 5 shows that these regimes
are also associated with downward sloping term structures of real yields. Consequently, the
transition probability estimates imply that passing through a downward sloping real yield curve
is necessary to reach the regime with relatively low inflation. Finally, regime 4 has the highest
volatility of real rates, inflation compensation, and nominal rates.

Regimes Over Time

In Figure 1, we plot the short rate, long rate, and inflation over the sample in the top panel and
the smoothed regime probabilities in the bottom panel over the sample period. From 1952 to
1978, the estimation switches between st = 1 and st = 3. Recall that these regimes feature
relatively low real rates and high inflation. In regime 3, inflation has its highest mean and is
quite volatile, leading to high and volatile nominal rates. These regimes precede the recessions
of 1960, 1970 and 1975.
   Post-1978, the model switches between all four regimes. The period around 1979-1982 of
monetary targeting is mostly associated with regime 4, characterized by the highest volatility of
real rates and inflation and a downward sloping real yield curve. Before the economy transitions
to regime st = 2 in 1982, with high real rates and low and more stable inflation, there are a few
jumps into the higher inflation regime 3.
   Post-1982, the regimes 2 and 4, with lower expected inflation, occur regularly. These
regimes are associated with rapid decreases in inflation and downward sloping real yield curves.
From a Taylor (1993) rule perspective, these regimes may reflect periods where an activist
monetary policy of raising real rates, especially through actions at the short-end of the yield
curve, achieved disinflation. There are several features of the occurrence of these regimes
consistent with this interpretation. First, transitioning into regimes 2 and 4 requires high real
rates. Second, these regimes only occur after the Volcker period, which is consistent with the
economic arguments of Nelson (2004) and Meltzer (2005), who argue that only after 1979,
US monetary authorities had sufficient credibility to change inflation behavior. Third, it also
consistent with the econometric analysis of the Taylor rule in Bikbov (2005), Boivin (2006), and
Cho and Moreno (2006), among others, who document a structural break from accommodating

                                                22
to activist monetary policies around 1980.
       Towards the end of the 1980s we transition back to the normal regime 1, but just before the
1990-1991 recession, the economy enters into regime 4, followed by regime 2, which lasts until
1994. During the late 1990s, the normal regime st = 1 prevails with normal, stable inflation
and low real rates. During the early 2000s, quarter-on-quarter inflation was briefly negative,
and the model transitions to the disinflation regimes st = 2 and st = 4 around the time of the
2001 recession. At the end of the sample, December 2004, the model seems to be transitioning
back to the normal st = 1 regime.
       In Figure 2, we sum the four st regimes into their sft and sπt sources. In the top panel, we
graph the real short and long 20-quarter real rates, together with one-period expected inflation
and long-term inflation compensation for comparison. The real short rate exhibits considerable
short-term variation, sometimes decreasing and increasing sharply. There are sharp decreases
of real rates in the 1958 and 1975 recessions and after the 2001 recession. Real rates are
highly volatile around the 1979-1982 period and increase sharply during the 1980 and 1983
recessions.11 Consistent with the older literature like Mishkin (1981), real rates are generally
low from the 1950s until 1980. The sharp increase in the early 1980s up to above 7% was
temporary, but it took until after 2001 before real rates reached the low levels common before
1980. Over 1961-1986, Garcia and Perron (1996) find three non-recurring regimes for real
rates: 1961-1973, 1973-1980, and 1980-1986. In Figure 2, these periods roughly align with
low but stable real rates, very low to negative and volatile real rates, and high and volatile real
rate periods. We generate this behavior with recurring sft and sπt regimes. The Garcia-Perron
model could not generate the gradual decrease in real rates observed since the 1980s. The long
real rate shows less time variation, but the same secular effects that drive the variation of the
short real rate are visible.
       In the middle panel of Figure 2, we plot the smoothed regime probabilities for the regime
sft    = 1, which is the low volatility ft regime associated with relatively high nominal term
spreads. The high variability sft = 2 regime occurs just prior to the 1960 recession, during the
OPEC oil shocks of the early 1970s, during the 1979-1982 period of monetary targeting, during
the 1984 Volcker disinflation, in the 1991 recession, briefly in 1995, and in 2000.
       In the bottom panel of Figure 2, the smoothed regime probabilities of sπt look very different
from the regime probabilities of sft , indicating the potential importance of separating the real
and inflation regime variables. We transition to sπt = 2, the disinflation regime, only after
1979 with the 1979-1982 period featuring some sudden, short-lived transitions to sπt = 2. The
  11
       The 95% standard error bands computed using the delta method are very tight and well within 20 basis points,
so we omit them for clarity.


                                                         23
second inflation regime also occurs after 1985, during a sustained period in the early 1990s, and
after 2000. In this last recession, there were significant risks of deflation. Clearly, the model
accommodates rapid decreases in inflation by a transition to the second regime.12
         Standard two-regime models of nominal interest rates (both empirical and term structure
models), predominantly pick up the late 1970’s and early 80’s as one regime change. These
two-regime models identify the pre-1979 period and the period after the mid-1980s as a low
mean, low volatility regime (see, for example, Gray (1996), Ang and Bekaert (2002a), and
Dai, Singleton and Yang (2006)). Our regimes for real factors and inflation have more frequent
switches than two-regime models. In fact, the famous 1979-1982 episode is a period of both
high real rates and high inflation in the late 1970s (regime 3), combined with high real rates
and a transition to the second inflation regime caused by a dramatic decrease in inflation in the
early 1980s (regime 4). Hence, our regime identification does not seem to be driven by a single
period, but rather reflects a series of recurring regimes.


4         The Term Structure of Real Rates and Expected Inflation
We describe the behavior of real yields in Section 4.1. Section 4.2 discusses the behavior of
expected inflation and inflation risk premia. Combining real yields with expected inflation and
inflation risk premia produces the nominal yield curve, which we discuss in Section 4.3, before
turning to variance decompositions in Section 4.4.


4.1         The Behavior of Real Yields
The Real Term Structure

We examine the real term structure in Figure 3 and Table 6. Figure 3 graphs the regime-
dependent real term structure. Every point on the curve for regime i represents the expected
real zero coupon bond yield conditional on regime i, (E[ŷtn |st = i]).13 The unconditional real
yield curve is graphed in the circles, which shows a slightly humped real curve peaking around a
1-year maturity before converging to 1.3%. Panel A of Table 6 reports that in the normal regime
    12
         The inflation regime identifications of Evans and Wachtel (1993) and Evans and Lewis (1995) are not directly
comparable as their models feature a random walk component in one regime (with no drift) and an AR(1) model
in the other.
  13
     Appendix G details the computation of these conditional moments. It is also possible to compute the more
extreme case E[ŷtn |st = i, ∀t], that is, assuming that the process never leaves regime i. These curves have similar
shapes to the ones shown in the figures but lie at different levels.



                                                           24
(st = 1), the long-term rate curve assumes the same shape but is shifted slightly downwards,
ranging from 1.14% at a 3-month horizon to 1.29% at a 5-year horizon.
   In regimes 2 and 4, real rates start just below 2% at a 1-quarter maturity and decline to
1.59% for regime 2 and 1.52% for regime 4 at a 20-quarter maturity. Finally, regime 3, a low
real rate-high inflation and volatile regime, has a humped, nonlinear, real term structure. This
real yield curve peaks at 1.54% at the 1-year maturity before declining to the same level as the
unconditional yield curve at 20 quarters. Thus, we uncover our first claim:

Claim 1 Unconditionally, the term structure of real rates assumes a fairly flat shape around
1.3%, with a slight hump, peaking at a 1-year maturity. However, there are some regimes in
which the real rate curve is downward sloping.

   Panel A of Table 6 also reports that while the standard deviation of real short rates are
lowest in regime 1 at 1.40%, the standard deviations of real long rates are approximately the
same across regimes, at 0.55%. We compute unconditional moments of real yields in Panel
B, which shows that the unconditional standard deviation of the real short rate (20-quarter real
yield) is 1.46% (0.55%). These moments solidly reject the hypothesis that the real short rate is
constant, but at long horizons real yields are much more stable and persistent. This is reflected
in the autocorrelations of the real short rate and 20-quarter real rate, which are 60% and 94%,
respectively. The mean of the 20-quarter real term spread is only 7 basis points. The standard
error is only 28 basis points, so that the real term structure cannot account for the 1.00% nominal
term spread in the data. Hence:

Claim 2 Real rates are quite variable at short maturities but smooth and persistent at long
maturities. There is no significant real term spread.

The Correlation of Real Rates and Inflation

Panel C of Table 6 reports conditional and unconditional correlations of real rates and inflation.
At the 1-quarter horizon, the conditional correlation of real rates with actual inflation is negative
in all regimes and hence also unconditionally. The negative estimate for δπ mostly drives this
result. The correlations with expected inflation are smaller in absolute value, but still mostly
negative. However, the differences across regimes are not large in economic terms and the
correlations are overall not significantly different from zero. Consequently, we do not find
strong statistical evidence for a Mundell-Tobin effect:

Claim 3 The real short rate is negatively correlated with both expected and unexpected
inflation, but the statistical evidence for a Mundell-Tobin effect is weak.

                                                 25
   This negative correlation between real rates and inflation is consistent with earlier studies
such as Huizinga and Mishkin (1986) and Fama and Gibbons (1982), but their analysis
implicitly assumes a zero inflation risk premium so their instrumented real rates may partially
embed inflation risk premiums. The small Mundell-Tobin effect we estimate is consistent with
Pennachi (1991), who uses a two-factor affine model of real rates and expected inflation, but
opposite in sign to Barr and Campbell (1997), who use U.K. interest rates and find that the
unconditional correlation between real rates and inflation is small but positive. As each regime
records a negative correlation between real rates and inflation, we do not find any evidence
that the sign of the correlation has changed over time, unlike what Goto and Torous (2006) find
using an empirical model that does not employ term structure information or preclude arbitrage.
   The correlations between real yields and actual or expected inflation robustly turn positive
at long horizons. Some of these correlations are statistically significant, although most are again
not precisely estimated. The positive signs at long horizons result from the positive feedback
effect of the Φ coefficients dominating the negative effect of the δπ coefficient in the short rate
equation. This indicates that the Mundell-Tobin effect is only a short-horizon phenomenon.
Over long horizons, real yields and inflation are positively correlated.
   A commonly-imposed restriction in structural models on the relation between inflation and
real rate is that the effect of inflation on real rates is relatively short lived. Figure 4 graphs
impulse responses of one- and 20-quarter real yields to factor shocks (q, f , and π). The impact
of inflation shocks on both the short and the long real rate dies out quickly, while shocks to the
price of risk factor, q, and the real rate factor, f , have more persistent effects. In particular, the
effect of an inflation shock on real yields lasts less than a year.

The Effect of Regimes on Real Rates

Introducing regimes allows a further nonlinear mapping between latent factors and nominal
yields not available in a traditional affine model, so that the dynamics of real long yields are
not just linear transformations of nominal yield factors. To compare the effect of incorporating
regimes, we contrast our model-implied real yields with those implied by model Iw . Figure 5
plots real yields from models Iw and IV C and we characterize the differences between the real
yields from each model in Table 7.
   Panel A of Table 7 reports the population moments of real yields from models Iw and IV C .
The mean real short rate in model Iw is 1.42%, very close to the 1.39% mean of the one-quarter
real yield for a similar model estimated by Campbell and Viceira (2001). This is slightly higher,
but very similar to the mean level of short rates from our model IV C , at 1.24%. The standard
deviations of real short rates are also similar across the two models, at 1.59% and 1.46%, for

                                                  26
models Iw and IV C , respectively. However, Model Iw ’s real short rates are somewhat more
persistent, at 0.72, than the autocorrelation of short rates from model IV C , at 0.60. There are
bigger differences for population moments for real long yields between the models. The real
long-end of the yield curve for model Iw is, on average, 40bp higher than for model IV C and
twice as variable, with standard deviations of 1.04% and 0.55%, respectively. The correlation
between short and long real rates is higher for model Iw , at 0.79, than for model IV C , at 0.64.
Thus, the addition of regimes has important consequences for inferring long real rates.
   Figure 5 plots the real short and long yields over the sample from the two models. The
top panel shows that the real short rates from models Iw and IV C follow the same secular
trends, but the correlation between the two model implied real rates is only 0.57. The main
difference occurs during the late 1970s. Model IV C documents that real short rates were fairly
low during this period, consistent with the early estimates of Mishkin (1981) and Garcia and
Perron (1986). In contrast, model Iw ’s real rates are much higher during this period. To quantify
these differences, Panel B of Table 7 reports summary statistics on the difference between r̂t
from model Iw and r̂t from model IV C . The largest difference of 6.01% occurs during the 1974
recession. In the bottom panel of Figure 5, we graph the real long yield from the two models.
While the higher variability of the Iw -implied real long yield is apparent, the two models clearly
share the same trends. In fact, the real long rates from the two models have a 0.95 correlation.
   In a traditional affine model, there is a direct linear mapping between the latent factors and
nominal yields, which may imply that real rates, which are linear combinations of the latent
factors, are highly correlated with nominal yields. This is the case for model Iw . The bottom
panel of Figure 5 shows that real long yields from model Iw start from below zero in 1952 and
reach close to 5% in 1981, before declining to 30bp in 2005. These long real rates are highly
correlated with long nominal rates, with a correlation coefficient of 0.98. Incorporating regimes
in model IV C reduces the correlation between real and nominal long rates to 90%. In contrast to
model Iw , real long yields implied by model IV C are more stable and have never been negative.
This appears a more economically reasonable characterization of real long yields.


4.2    The Behavior of Inflation and Inflation Risk
The Term Structure of Expected Inflation
                                                                 e
Table 8 reports some characteristics of inflation compensation, πt,n ; expected inflation,
Et (πt+n,n ); and the inflation risk premium, ϕt,n . We focus first on the inflation compensation
estimates.   The most striking feature in Table 8 is that the term structure of inflation
compensation slopes upwards in all regimes. Regime st = 1 is the normal regime and in this

                                                27
                                              e      e
regime, the inflation compensation spread is πt,20 −πt,1 = 1.17%, very close to the unconditional
inflation compensation spread of 1.14%. In regimes st = 2 and st = 4, inflation compensation
starts at a lower level because these are the regimes with downward sloping real yield curves
and a disinflationary environment. However, the inflation compensation spreads are roughly
comparable to the unconditional compensation spread, at 1.34% and 1.16% for regimes st = 2
and st = 4, respectively. We report the term structure of expected inflation in the second panel
of Table 8. Expected inflation always approaches the unconditional mean of inflation as the
horizon increases in all regimes, because inflation is a stationary process.

The Inflation Risk Premium

Since the term structure of inflation compensation is upward sloping but expected inflation
converges to long-run unconditional expected inflation, the increasing term structure of inflation
compensation is due to an inflation risk premium:

Claim 4 The model matches an unconditional upward-sloping nominal yield curve by generat-
ing an inflation risk premium that is increasing in maturity.

       The third panel of Table 8 reports statistics on the inflation risk premium ϕt,n . In the normal
regime st = 1 and unconditionally, the five-year inflation risk premium is around 1.15%, which
is almost the same magnitude as the 5-year term spread generated by the model of 1.21%. The
inflation risk premium is higher in regime st = 3 with higher and more variable inflation than in
regime st = 1. In the high real rate regimes st = 2 and st = 4, the inflation risk premium is less
than 55 basis points. In regime st = 4, the inflation risk premium is not statistically different
from zero. In Campbell and Viceira’s (2001) one-regime setting, ϕt,40 is approximately 0.42%,
accounting for about half of their model-implied 40-quarter nominal term spread of 0.88%.14
We obtain inflation risk premiums of this low magnitude only in high real rate regimes, and in
normal times assign almost all of the positive nominal yield spread to inflation risk premiums.
       Figure 6 provides some intuition on which parameters have the largest effect on the
unconditional 20-quarter inflation risk premium. The risk premium is not very sensitive to δπ
or Φπq . However, increasing the persistence of the inflation process either through Φππ or Φπf
considerably increases ϕt,n . Increasing these parameters would also turn the slightly negative
  14
       Campbell and Viceira (1996) report that the difference in expected holding period returns on ten-year nominal
bonds over nominal 3-month T-bills in excess of the expected holding period returns on ten-year real bonds
over the real 3-month short rate is approximately 1.1% and define this to be the inflation risk premium. In
                                                                                    £ ¡ 19         ¢     ¤
ourh model,
      ³     the corresponding
                  ´     i     number for this quantity at a 20-quarter maturity is E ln Pt+1  /Pt20 − yt1 −
         19
E ln P̂t+1  /P̂t20 − r̂t = 1.46%.


                                                         28
correlation between expected inflation and real rates into a positive correlation. The effect of
persistence is also stronger than the effect of the price of risk λf (sπt ). Making the price of risk
more negative naturally increases the inflation risk premium, but this would cause the model to
grossly over-estimate the nominal term spread.
   The time variation of the inflation risk premium is correlated with the time variation of the
price of risk factor, qt , but the correlation of the inflation risk premium with qt is small, at 9.5%
for a 20-quarter maturity. To calculate the proportion of the variance of ϕt,20 due to regime
changes, we compare the unconditional variance of ϕt,20 varying across all four regimes with
the variance of ϕt,20 if the model never switched from st = 1. We find that a significant fraction,
namely 40%, of the variation of ϕt,20 is due to regime changes.
   Figure 7 graphs the 20-quarter inflation risk premium over time and shows that the inflation
risk premium decreased in every recession. During the 1981-83 recession, the inflation premium
is very volatile, increasing and decreasing by over 75 basis points. The general trend is that the
premium rose very gradually from the 1950s until the late 1970s before entering a very volatile
period during the monetary targeting period from 1979 to the early 1980s. It is then that the
premium reached a peak of 2.04%. While the trend since then has been downward, there have
been large swings in the premium. From a temporary low of 50 basis points in the mid-1980s
it shot above 1%, coinciding with the halting of the large dollar appreciation of the early 1980s.
The inflation premium dropped back to around 50 basis points after the 1987 stock market crash
and reached a low of 0.38% in 1993. The sharp drops in the inflation risk premium coincide
with transitions to regimes with high real short rates. During 1994, the premium shot back up
to 1.37% at the same time the Federal Reserve started to raise interest rates. During the late
1990s bull market inflation risk premiums were fairly stable and declined to 0.15% after the
2001 recession when there were fears of deflation. At the end of the sample in December 2005,
the inflation risk premium started to increase again edging close to 1%.


4.3    Nominal Term Structure
Figure 8 graphs the average nominal yield curve. The unconditional yield curve is upward
sloping, with the slope flattening out for longer maturities. The benchmark model produces a
nominal term spread of yt20 − yt1 = 1.21%, well inside a one standard error bound of the 1.00%
term spread in data. Strikingly, in no regime does the benchmark model generate a conditional
downward sloping nominal yield curve. In regimes st = 2 and st = 4, the real rate term
structure is downward sloping, but the upward sloping term structure of inflation risk premiums
completely counteracts this effect. Thus, regimes are important for the shape of the real, not


                                                 29
nominal yield curve.
   The first regime (low real rate-normal inflation regime) displays a nominal yield curve that
almost matches the unconditional term structure. In the second regime, the yield curve is shifted
downwards but is more steep because rates are lower than in the first regime due to lower
expected inflation and inflation risk. In the third regime, the term structure is steeply upward
sloping at the short end but then becomes flat and slightly downward sloping for maturities
extending beyond 10 quarters. Nominal interest rates are the highest in this regime because in
this regime, expected inflation is high and the level of real rates is about the same as in regime
1. In regime 4, the real interest rate curve is downward sloping starting at a high level. Inflation
compensation, however, is low in this regime (resulting in nominal yields of an average level),
and is upward sloping, making the nominal yield curve upward sloping on average. Yet, in
both regimes 2 and 4, a slight J-curve effect is visible at short maturities with nominal rates
decreasing slightly before starting to increase.
   Interest rates are often associated with the business cycle. The business cycle dates reported
by the NBER are regarded as benchmark dates by both academics and practitioners. According
to the conventional wisdom, interest rates are pro-cyclical and spreads counter-cyclical (see,
for example, Fama (1990)). Table 9 shows that this is incorrect when measuring business
cycles using NBER recessions and expansions. Interest rates are overall larger during NBER
recessions. However, when we focus on real rates, the conventional story is right:
Claim 5 Nominal interest rates do not behave pro-cyclically across NBER business cycles but
our model-implied real rates do.
This can only be the case if expected inflation is counter-cyclical. The table shows that this is
indeed the case, with inflation compensation being strongly counter-cyclically, averaging 4.73%
in recessions but only 3.57% in expansions. Veronesi and Yared (1999) also find that real rates
are pro-cyclical in a RS model. In contrast, the real rates implied by model Iw are actually
counter-cyclical, averaging 1.58% (1.80%) across NBER expansions (recessions). Thus, the
presence of the regimes helps to induce the pro-cyclical behavior of real rates. Finally, Table 9
also illustrates that recessions are characterized by more volatility in real rates, nominal rates,
and inflation.


4.4    Variance Decompositions
Table 10 reports the population variance decomposition of the nominal yield into real and
inflation compensation. The conditional variance decompositions are very similar across the
regimes and so are not reported. The results show that

                                                   30
Claim 6 The decompositions of nominal yields into real yields and inflation components at
various horizons indicate that variation in inflation compensation (expected inflation and
inflation risk premia) explains about 80% of the variation in nominal rates at both short and
long maturities.

This is at odds with the folklore wisdom that expected inflation primarily affects long-term
bonds (see, among others, Fama (1975) and Mishkin (1981)). The single-regime model Iw
attributes even less of the variance of long-term yields to inflation components: at a 20-quarter
maturity variation in real yields account for 37% of movements in nominal rates compared to
28% at a 1-quarter maturity. This may be caused by the poor match of inflation dynamics
using an affine model calibrated to inflation data. Pennachi’s (1991) affine model identifies
expected inflation from survey data and finds that expected inflation and inflation risk shows
little variation across horizons. Table 10 also reports that the inflation risk premium accounts
for 10% of the variance of a 20-quarter maturity nominal yield.
   In Table 11, we decompose the variation of nominal term spreads into real rate, expected
inflation, and inflation risk premium components.        Unconditionally, inflation components
account for 49% of the 4-quarter term spread and 80% of the 20-quarter term spread variance.
For term spreads, inflation shocks only dominate at the long-end of the yield curve. In the
regimes with relatively stable real rates (regimes 1 and 2), inflation components acount for over
100% of the variance of long-term spreads. In regimes 3 and 4, real rates are more volatile, and
expected inflation accounts for approximately 35% of the variation in the 4-quarter term spread,
increasing to over 70% for the 20-quarter term spread. Hence, the conventional wisdom that
inflation is more important for the long end of the yield curve holds, not for the level of yields,
but for term spreads:

Claim 7 Inflation compensation is the main determinant of nominal interest rate spreads at
long horizons.

   The intuition behind this result is that the long and short end of nominal yields have large
exposure to common factors, including the factors driving inflation and inflation risk. It is only
after controlling for an average effect, or by computing a term spread, that we can observe
relative differences at different parts of the yield curve. Thus, only after computing the term
spread do we isolate the factors differentially affecting long yields controlling for the short
rate exposure. The finding that inflation components are the main driver of term spreads is
not dependent on having regimes in the term structure model. Mishkin (1990, 1992) finds
consistent evidence with simple regressions using inflation changes and term spreads, as do

                                                31
Ang, Dong and Piazzesi (2006) in a single-regime affine model. In model Iw , the attribution of
the unconditional variance the 20-quarter term spread to the variation in inflation compensation
is also close to 100%.


5    Conclusion
In this article, we develop a term structure model that embeds regime switches in both real and
nominal factors, and incorporates time-varying prices of risk. The model that provides the best
fit with the data has correlated regimes coming from separate real factor and inflation sources.
    We find that the real rate curve is fairly flat but slightly humped, with an average real
rate of around 1.3%. The real short rate has an unconditional variability of 1.46% and has
an autocorrelation of 60%. In some regimes, the real rate curve is downward sloping. In
these regimes, expected inflation is low. The term structure of inflation compensation, the
difference between nominal and real yields, is upward sloping. This is due to an upward sloping
inflation risk premium, which is unconditionally 1.14% on average. We find that expected
inflation and inflation risk account for 80% of the variation in nominal yields at both short and
long maturities. However, nominal term spreads are primarily driven by changes in expected
inflation, particularly during normal times.
    It is interesting to note that our results are qualitatively consistent with Roll’s (2004) analysis
on TIPS data, over the very short sample period since TIPS began trading. Consistent with our
results, Roll also finds that the nominal yield curve is more steeply sloped than the real curve,
which is also mostly fairly flat over our over-lapping sample periods. Roll also shows direct
evidence of an inflation premium that increases with maturity.
    Our work here is only the beginning of a research agenda. In future work, we could
use our model to link the often discussed deviations from the Expectations Hypothesis (see,
for example, Campbell and Shiller (1991)) to deviations from the Fisher hypothesis (Mishkin
(1992)). Although we have made one step in the direction of identifying the economic sources of
regime switches in interest rates, more could be done. In particular, a more explicit examination
of the role of business cycle variation and changes in monetary policy as sources of the regime
switches is an interesting topic for further research.




                                                  32
Appendix

A Modeling Separate f and π Regimes: Case B
For completeness, we first state the case of independent regimes for sft and sπt as Case A. In this case,

          P r(sft+1 = j, sπt+1 = k|sft = m, sπt = n) = P r(sft+1 = j|sft = m) × P r(sπt+1 = k|sπt = n).          (A-1)

Denoting P r(sft+1 = 1|sft+1 = 1) = pf , P r(sπt+1 = 1|sπt+1 = 1) = pπ , P r(sft+1 = 2|sft+1 = 2) = q f , and
P r(sπt+1 = 2|sπt+1 = 2) = q π gives rise to a restricted transition probability matrix Π:

                          [st+1 = 1]             [st+1 = 2]            ¡[st+1 =  ¢ 3]       ¡ [st+1 ¢ = 4]
   [st   = 1]                pf pπ              pf (1 − pπ )        ¡   1  − ¢p f pπ         1−
                                                                                              ¡  p f (1 − pπ )
                                                                                                        ¢
   [st   = 2]              f        π               pf¢ q π          1 − pf (1 − q π )         1 − pf q π
                         ¡p (1 −f ¢q π)       ¡     f          π
                                                                                                                 (A-2)
   [st   = 3]         ¡ 1−    ¢q p             1−
                                                ¡ q (1     ¢−πp )          q f pπ             q f (1 − pπ )
   [st   = 4]          1 − q f (1 − q π )         1−q q  f             q (1 − q π )
                                                                         f                         qf qπ

    In Case B of Section 2.2, sft and sπt are correlated and we decompose the joint transition probability of f and
π regimes as:

                      P r(sft+1 = j, sπt+1 = k|sft = m, sπt = n)
                         = P r(sft+1 = j|sπt+1 = k, sft = m, sπt = n) × P r(sπt+1 = k|sft = m, sπt = n)
                         = P r(sft+1 = j|sπt+1 = k, sft = m) × P r(sπt+1 = k|sπt = n)                            (A-3)

In the last line, we assume that the past inflation regime does not determine the contemporaneous correlation of the
ft and the πt regime. Mathematically, we assume that P r(sft+1 = j|sπt+1 = k, sft = m, sπt = n) = P r(sft+1 =
j|sπt+1 = k, sft = m). We also assume that P r(sπt+1 = k|sπt = n, srt = m) = P r(sπt+1 = k|sπt = n), or that the
past real rate ft factor regime does not influence future inflation regime realizations.
     In equation (A-3), we parameterize P r(sft+1 = j|sπt+1 = k, sft = m) as p“j”,“m” , where:
                                                 (
                                                      A if sft+1 = sπt+1 = 1
                                            j=
                                                      B if sft+1 = sπt+1 = 2
                                                 (
                                                      A if sft = 1
                                           m=
                                                      B if sft = 2.

    With this notation, the transition probability matrix Π assumes the form:

                         [st+1 = 1]         ¡ [sBAt+1¢= 2]            ¡ [st+1AA= ¢3]          [st+1 = 4]
         [st   = 1]        pAA pπ            1−
                                              ¡ p     (1¢− pπ )     ¡  1 −  p¢ p π
                                                                                     π       pBA (1 − pπ )
         [st   = 2]     p (1 − q π )
                         AA
                                            ¡ 1−    p¢ q π
                                                     BA              1−   AA
                                                                      ¡ p AB   (1¢− q )         pBA q π          (A-4)
         [st   = 3]        pAB pπ            1−  BB (1 − pπ )
                                              ¡ p BB    ¢ π         ¡ 1−    p ¢ pπ           pBB (1 − pπ )
         [st   = 4]     p (1 − q π )
                         AB                    1−p       q           1−p  AB   (1 − q π )       pBB q π

This model has four additional parameters relative to the benchmark model. We can test the null of independent
real rate and inflation regimes versus correlated regimes by:

                                            H0 : pBA = 1 − pAA and pBB = 1 − pAB .

In our estimation, we reject the null of independent regimes in equation (A-1) against the alternative of Case B,
but this model provides a worse fit to the data than Case C.



                                                              33
B        Real Bond Prices
Let N1 be the number of unobserved state variables in the model (N1 = 3 for the stochastic inflation model,
N1 = 2 otherwise) and N = N1 + 1 be the total number of factors including inflation. The following proposition
describes how our model implies closed-form real bond prices.

Proposition B.1 Let Xt = (qt ft πt )0 or Xt = (qt ft wt πt )0 follow (2), with the real short rate (4) and real
pricing kernel (5) with prices of risk (6). The regimes st follow a Markov chain with transition probability matrix
Π = {pij }. Then the real zero coupon bond price for period n conditional on regime i, Pbtn (st = i), is given by:

                                            Pbtn (i) = exp(A
                                                           bn (i) + B
                                                                    bn Xt ).                                 (B-1)

The scalar Abn (i) is dependent on regime st = i and Bbn is a 1 × N vector that is partitioned as B
                                                                                                  bn = [B
                                                                                                        bnq B
                                                                                                            bnx ],
       b                                       b                                                            b
where Bnq corresponds to the q variable and Bnx corresponds to the other variables in Xt . The coefficients An (i)
and Bbn are given by:
                                     ³               ´        X         µ
                        b                   b 0
                       An+1 (i) = − δ0 + Bnq σq γ0 + log         pij exp Abn (j) + B bn µ (j)
                                                                 j
                                                                                       ¶
                                     −B  bnx Σx (j) λ (j) + 1 B  bn Σ (j) Σ (j)0 B
                                                                                 bn0
                                                             2
                          bn+1
                          B                bn Φ − B
                                 = − δ10 + B        bnq σq γ1 e01 ,                                          (B-2)

where ei denotes a vector of zero’s with a 1 in the ith place and Σx (i) refers to the lower N1 × N1 matrix of of
                                                                           bn (i) and B
Σ(i) corresponding to the non-qt variables in Xt . The starting values for A           bn are:

                                                    b1 (i) = −δ0
                                                    A
                                                       b1 = −δ10 .
                                                       B                                                     (B-3)


Proof:

We first derive the initial values in (B-3):
                                        X          h                i
                          Pt1 (i) =          pij Et Mct+1 |St+1 = j
                                        j
                                       X           µ                                  ¶
                                                         1      0               0
                                  =         pij exp −rt − λt (j) λt (j) − λt (j) εt+1
                                        j
                                                         2
                                  = exp (−δ0 − δ10 Xt )                                                      (B-4)

Hence:
                                            Pbt1 (i) = exp(A
                                                           b1 (i) + B
                                                                    b1 Xt ),
where A1 (i) and B1 take the form in (B-3).
   We prove the recursion (B-2) by induction. We assume that (B-1) holds for maturity n and examine Pbtn+1 (i):
                          X             ·                                                       ¸
                                               1
             Pbtn+1 (i) =                                                       bn (j) + B
                                                                                         bn Xt+1 ,
                                                       0              0
                              pij Et exp −rt − λt (j) λt (j) − λt (j) εt+1 + A
                           j
                                               2
                          X             ·
                                                         1    0               0         bn (j)
                        =     pij Et exp −δ0 − δ10 Xt − λt (j) λt (j) − λt (j) εt+1 + A
                           j
                                                         2
                                                           i
                          +B bn (µ (j) + ΦXt + Σ (j) εt+1 )                                              (B-5)




                                                          34
Evaluating the expectation, we have:
                         X           ·
             b n+1                                    1      0           bn (j) + Bbn µ (j)
             Pt    (i) =     pij exp −δ0 − δ10 Xt − λt (j) λt (j) + A
                          j
                                                      2
                                         ³                   ´³                     ´0 ¸
                         +B bn ΦXt + 1 B   bn Σ (j) − λt (j)0 B  bn Σ (j) − λt (j)0
                                       2
                             h        ³           ´ i
                       = exp −δ0 + B    bn Φ − δ10 Xt
                            X           ·                                                        ¸
                                          b         b          b                 1b          b 0
                         ×      pij exp An (j) + Bn µ (j) − Bn Σ (j) λt (j) + Bn Σ (j) Σ (j) Bn              (B-6)
                             j
                                                                                 2

But, we can write:
                                                            ·                           ¸
                             bn Σ (j) λt (j) = [B
                                                bnq B
                                                    bnx ]        σq (γ0 + γ1 e01 Xt )
                             B
                                                                    Σx (j) λ (j)
                                             bnq σq (γ0 + γ1 e01 Xt ) + B
                                            =B                          bnx Σx (j) λ (j) .                   (B-7)

Then, expanding and collecting terms, we can write:

                                           Pbtn (i) = exp(A
                                                          bn (i) + B
                                                                   bn Xt ),

      bn (i) and B
where A          bn take the form of (B-2). ¥


C      Nominal Bond Prices
Following the notation of Appendix B, let N1 be the number of unobserved state variables in the model (N1 = 3
for the stochastic inflation model, N1 = 2 otherwise) and N = N1 + 1 be the total number of factors including
inflation. The following proposition describes how our model implies closed-form nominal bond prices.

Proposition C.1 Let Xt = (qt ft πt )0 or Xt = (qt ft wt πt )0 follow (2), with the real short rate (4) and real
pricing kernel (5) with prices of risk (6). The regimes st follow a Markov chain with transition probability matrix
Π = {pij }. Then the nominal zero coupon bond price for period n conditional on regime i, Ptn (st = i), is given
by:
                                            Ptn (i) = exp(An (i) + Bn Xt ),                                   (C-1)
where the scalar An (i) is dependent on regime st = i and Bn is an N × 1 vector:
                                                    X          µ
                              ¡       0
                                             ¢
               An+1 (i) = − δ0 + Bnq    σq γ0 + log     pij exp An (j) + (Bn − e0N ) µ (j)
                                                        j
                                                                                                 ¶
                                ¡           ¢                 1                              0
                              − Bnx − e0N1 Σx (j) λ (j) + (Bn − e0N ) Σ (j) Σ (j) (Bn − e0N )
                                                              2
                     Bn+1   = − δ10 + (Bn − e0N ) Φ − Bnq σq γ1 e01 ,                                        (C-2)

where ei denotes a vector of zero’s with a 1 in the ith place, A(i) is a scalar dependent on regime st = i, Bn is a
row vector, which is partitioned as Bn = [Bnq Bnx ], where Bnq corresponds to the q variable and Σx (i) refers to
the lower N1 × N1 matrix of of Σ(i) corresponding to the non-qt variables in Xt . The starting values for An (i)
and Bn are:
                                  X           µ                                                     ¶
                                                   0          1 0             0       0
             A1 (i) = −δ0 + log      pij exp −eN µ (j) + eN Σ (j) Σ (j) eN + eN1 Σx (j) λ (j)
                                   j
                                                              2
                B1 = − (δ10 + e0N Φ) .                                                                       (C-3)




                                                            35
Proof:

We first derive the initial values (C-3) by directly evaluating:
                   X           h                i
         Pt1 (i) =      pij Et M ct+1 |St+1 = j
                      j
                     X           µ                                                                  ¶
                                       1      0               0        0
                 =        pij exp −rt − λt (j) λt (j) − λt (j) εt+1 − eN (µ (j) + ΦXt + Σ (j) εt+1 )
                      j
                                       2
                 = exp (−δ0 − δ10 Xt − e0N ΦXt )
                        X          µ                                                         ¶
                                                                1      0               0
                     ×     pij exp −e0N µ (j) − e0N Σ (j) εt+1 − λt (j) λt (j) − λt (j) εt+1
                         j
                                                                2
                 = exp (−δ0 − δ10 Xt − e0N ΦXt )
                        X          µ                                                 ¶
                                                 1             0
                     ×     pij exp −e0N µ (j) + e0N Σ (j) Σ (j) eN + e0N Σ (j) λt (j) .                      (C-4)
                         j
                                                 2

Note that e0N Σ(j)λt (j) = e0N1 Σx (j)λ(j). Hence:
                                             Pt1 (i) = exp (A1 (i) + B1 Xt )
where A1 (i) and B1 are given by (C-3).
   To prove the general recursion we use proof by induction:
                   X        ·     µ                                           ¶
       n+1                                1      0              0       0
      Pt     (i) =    pij Et exp −rt − λt (j) λt (j) − λt (j) εt+1 − eN Xt+1
                   j
                                          2
                                             ¸
                     exp (An (j) + Bn Xt+1 )
                   X        ·     µ
                                                   1     0            0
                 =    pij Et exp −δ0 − δ10 Xt − λt (j) λt (j) − λt (j) εt+1 + An (j)
                   j
                                                   2
                                                              ¶¸
                                0
                     + (Bn − eN ) (µ (j) + ΦXt + Σ (j) εt+1 )
                   X          µ
                                               1     0
                 =    pij exp −δ0 − δ10 Xt − λt (j) λt (j) + An (j) + (Bn − e0N ) µ (j)
                   j
                                               2
                                                                                                         ¶
                                           1¡                          0¢ ¡                       0 ¢0
                          + (Bn − e0N ) ΦXt +(Bn − e0N ) Σ (j) − λt (j) (Bn − e0N ) Σ (j) − λt (j)
                                           2
                                                          X        µ
                 = exp (−δ0 + ((Bn − e0N ) Φ − δ10 ) Xt )   pij exp An (j) + (Bn − e0N ) µ (j)
                                                             j
                                                                                              ¶
                                                      1                                   0
                          − (Bn − e0N ) Σ (j) λt (j) + (Bn − e0N ) Σ (j) Σ (j) (Bn − e0N )                   (C-5)
                                                      2
Now note that:
                                                            ·                        ¸
                                                              σq (γ0 + γ1 e01 Xt )
                     (Bn − e0N ) Σ (j) λt (j) = (Bn − e0N )
                                                                  Σx (j) λ(j)
                                                ·              ¸·                          ¸
                                                     Bnq             σq (γ0 + γ1 e01 Xt )
                                              = B −        0
                                                          eN1
                                                    nx                   Σx (j) λ(j)
                                                                           ¡              ¢
                                              = Bnq σq (γ0 + γ1 e01 Xt ) + Bnx − e0N1 Σx (j) λ(j)            (C-6)
where Bn = [Bnq Bnx ].
   Hence, collecting terms and substituting (C-6) into (C-5), we have:
                                        Ptn+1 (i) = exp [An+1 (i) + Bn+1 Xt ] ,
where: An (i) and Bn are given by (C-2). ¥

                                                           36
D Likelihood Function and Identification

Likelihood Function
We specify the set of nominal yields without measurement error as Y1t (N1 × 1) and the remaining yields as Y2t
(N2 × 1). There are as many yields measured without error as there are latent factors in Xt . The complete set of
yields are denoted as Yt = (Y1t0 Y2t0 )0 with dimension M × 1, where M = N1 + N2 . Note that the total number of
factors in Xt is N = N1 + 1, since the last factor, inflation, is observable.
     Given the expression for nominal yields in (11), the yields observed without error and inflation, Zt = (Y1t0 πt )0 ,
take the form:
                                                 Zt = A1 (st ) + B1 Xt ,                                         (D-1)
where:                                                  ·           ¸               ·    ¸
                                                            An (st )                 Bn
                                          A1 (st ) =                        B1 =           ,                       (D-2)
                                                              0                      e0N
where An (st ) is the N1 × 1 vector stacking the −An (st )/n terms for the N1 yields observed without error, and
Bn is a N1 × N matrix which stacks the −Bn /n vectors for the two yields observed without error. Then we can
invert for the unobservable factors:
                                            Xt = B−1 (Zt − A1 (st ))                                      (D-3)
Substituting this into (D-1) and using the dynamics of Xt in (2), we can write:

                                          Zt = c(st , st−1 ) + ΨZt−1 + Ω(st )²t ,                                  (D-4)

where:

                                 c(st , st−1 ) = A1 (st ) + B1 µ(st ) − B1 ΦB1−1 A1 (st−1 )
                                           Ψ = B1 ΦB1−1
                                        Ω(st ) = B1 Σ(st )

Note that our model implies a RS-VAR for the observable variables with complex cross-equation restrictions.
    The yields Y2t observed with error have the form:

                                                 Y2t = A2 (st ) + B2 Xt + ut ,                                     (D-5)

where A2 and B2 (st ) follow from Proposition C.1 and u is the measurement error, ut ∼ N (0, V ), where V is a
diagonal matrix. We can solve for ut in equation (D-5) using the inverted factor process (D-3). We assume that ut
is uncorrelated with the errors εt in (2).
     Following Hamilton (1994), we redefine the states s∗t to count all combinations of st and st−1 , with the
corresponding re-defined transition probabilities p∗ij = p(s∗t+1 = i|s∗t = j). We re-write (D-4) and (D-5) as:

                                               Zt = c(s∗t ) + ΨZt−1 + Ω(s∗t )²t ,                                  (D-6)
                                              Y2t = A2 (s∗t ) + B2 Xt + ut .

    Now the standard Hamilton (1989, 1994) and Gray (1996) algorithms can be used to estimate the likelihood
function. Since (D-6) gives us the conditional distribution f (πt , Yt1 |s∗t = i, It−1 ), we can write the likelihood as:
                                 YX
                       L =              f (πt , Y1t , Y2t |s∗t , It−1 )P r(s∗t |It−1 )
                                    t    s∗
                                          t
                                   YX
                             =                f (Zt |s∗t , It−1 )f (Y2t |πt , Y1t , s∗t , It−1 )P r(s∗t |It−1 )    (D-7)
                                    t    s∗
                                          t


where:

  f (Zt |s∗t , It−1 ) = (2π)−(N1 +1)/2 |Ω(s∗t )Ω(s∗t )0 |−1/2
                                          µ                                                               ¶
                                                1             ∗   0    ∗     ∗ 0 −1          ∗
                                      exp − (Zt − c(st ) − ΨZt−1 ) [Ω(st )Ω(st ) ] (Y2t − c(st ) − ΨZt−1 )
                                                2


                                                                  37
is the probability density function of Zt conditional on s∗t and

  f (Y2t |πt , Y1t , s∗t , It−1 ) =
                                                       µ                                                            ¶
                                                         1
                                (2π)−N2 /2 |V |−1/2 exp − (Y2t − A2 (s∗t ) − B2 Xt )0 V −1 (Y2t − A2 (s∗t ) − B2 Xt
                                                         2

is the probability density function of the measurement errors conditional on s∗t .
     The ex-ante probability P r(s∗t = i|It−1 ) is given by:
                                                        X
                                   P r(s∗t = i|It−1 ) =     p∗ji P r(s∗t−1 = j|It−1 ),                              (D-8)
                                                            j

which is updated using:

                                                 f (Zt , s∗t = j|It−1 )
                                 P r(s∗t = j|It ) =
                                                      f (Zt |It−1 )
                                                    f (Zt |s∗t = j, It−1 )P r(s∗t = j|It−1 )
                                                =P             ∗                  ∗
                                                    k f (Zt |st = k, It−1 )P r(st = k|It−1 )

     An alternative way to derive the likelihood function is to substitute (D-3) into (D-5). We then obtain a RS-VAR
with complex cross-equation restrictions for all variables in the system (Zt0 Y2t0 )0 . Note that unlike a standard affine
model, the likelihood is not simply the likelihood of the yields measured without error multiplied by the likelihood
of the measurement errors. Instead, the regime variables must be integrated out of the likelihood function.

Identification
There are two identification problems. First, there are the usual identification conditions that must be imposed to
estimate a model with latent variables, which have been derived for affine models by Dai and Singleton (2000).
In a single-regime Gaussian model, Dai and Singleton show that identification can be accomplished by setting the
conditional covariance to be a diagonal matrix and letting the correlations enter through the feedback matrix (Φ),
which is parameterized to be lower triangular, which we do here.
     The RS model complicates identification relative to an affine model. The parameterization in equations (2)-
(7) already imposes some of the Dai and Singleton (200) conditions, but some further restrictions are necessary.
Since qt and ft are latent variables, they can be arbitrarily scaled. We set δ1 = (δq δf δπ )0 = (1 1 δπ )0 in (4).
Setting δq and δf to be constants allows σq and σf (st+1 ) to be estimated. Because qt is an unobserved variable,
estimating µq in (3) is equivalent to allowing γ0 in (6) or δ0 in (4) to be non-zero. Hence, qt must have zero mean
for identification. Therefore, we set µq = 0, since qt does not switch regimes. Similarly, because we estimate
λf (st+1 ), we constrain ft to have zero mean.
     The resulting model is theoretically identified from the data, but it is well known that some parameters that
are identified in theory can be very hard to estimate in small samples. This is especially true for price of risk
parameters. Because we using four nominal yields, we should be able to identify all three prices of risk. However,
Dai and Singleton (2000) note that it is typically difficult to identify more than one constant price of risk. Hence,
we set γ0 = 0 in (6) and instead estimate the RS price of risk λf (st+1 ).
     We also set Φf q = 0 in equation (3). With this restriction, there are, in addition to inflation factors, two
separate and easily identifiable sources of variation in interest rates: a RS factor and a time-varying price of risk
factor. Identifying their relative contribution to interest rate dynamics becomes easy with this restriction and it is
not immediately clear how a non-zero coefficient would help enrich the model.
     As qt and ft are zero mean, the mean level of the real short rate in (4) is determined by the mean level of
inflation multiplied by δπ and the constant term δ0 . We set δ0 to match the mean of the nominal short rate in the
data, similar to Ang, Dong and Piazzesi (2006) and Dai, Singleton and Yang (2006).
     Finally, we set the one-period price of inflation risk equal to zero, λπ (st+1 ) = 0. Theoretically, this parameter
is uniquely identified, but in practice the average level of real rates and the premium is largely indeterminate
without further restrictions. It turns out that the first-order effect of λπ on real rates and the inflation risk premium
is similar and of opposite sign. Because of this, the parameter is not only hard to pin down, but also essentially
prevents the identification of the average level of real rates and the average level of the inflation risk premium.
Models with a positive one-period inflation risk premium will imply lower real rates and higher inflation premiums
than the results we report.



                                                             38
E      A Regime-Switching Model with Stochastic Expected In-
       flation
In a final extension, motivated by the ARMA-model literature (see Fama and Gibbons, 1982; Hamilton, 1985), we
allow inflation to be composed of a stochastic expected inflation term plus a random shock:
                                                  πt+1 = wt + σπ επt+1 ,

where wt = Et [πt+1 ] is the one-period-ahead expectation of future inflation. This can be accomplished in our
framework by expanding the state variables to Xt = (qt ft wt πt )0 which follow the dynamics of equation (2),
except now:                                                                     
                                     µq                 Φqq     0       0      0
                                 µ (s )            Φ        Φf f     0      0 
                       µ(st ) =  f t  , Φ =  f q                                  ,
                                                        Φwq Φwf Φww Φwπ 
                                                                                                         (E-9)
                                   µw (st )
                                      0                  0      0       1      0
and Σ(st ) is a diagonal matrix with (σq σf (st ) σw (st ) σπ (st ))0 on the diagonal. Note that both the variance of
inflation and the process of expected inflation are regime dependent. Moreover, past inflation affects current
expected inflation through Φwπ .
     The real short rate and the regime transition probabilities are the same as in the benchmark model. The real
pricing kernel also takes the same form as (5) with one difference. The regime-dependent part of the prices of risk
in equation (6) is now given by:
                                           λ(i) = (λf (i) λw (i) λπ (i))0 ,
but we set λw (i) = 0 for identification.


F      Specification Tests
Moment Tests
To enable comparison across several non-nested models of how the moments implied from various models compare
to the data, we introduce the point statistic:

                                               H = (h − h̄)0 Σ−1
                                                              h (h − h̄),                                        (F-1)

where h̄ are sample estimates of unconditional moments, h are the unconditional moments from the estimated
model, and Σh is the covariance matrix of the sample estimates of the unconditional moments, estimated by GMM
with four Newey-West (1987) lags. In this comparison, the moments implied by various models are compared
to the data, with the data sampling error Σh held constant across the models. The moments we consider are
the first and second moments of term spreads and long yields; the first and second moments of inflation; the
autocorrelogram of term spreads; and the autocorrelogram of inflation.
     Equation (F-1) ignores the sampling error of the moments of the model, implied by the uncertainty in the
parameter estimates, making our moment test informal. However, this allows the same weighting matrix, computed
from the data, to be used across different models. If parameter uncertainty is also taken into account, we might
fail to reject, not because the model accurately pins down the moments, but because of the large uncertainty in
estimating the model parameters.

Residual Tests
We report two tests on in-sample scaled residuals ²t of yields and inflation. The scaled residuals p     ²t are not the
same as the shocks εt in (2). For a variable xt , the scaled residual is given by ²t = (xt − Et−1 (xt ))/ vart−1 (xt ),
where xt are yields or inflation. The conditional moments are computed using our RS model and involve ex-ante
probabilities p(st = i|It−1 ). Following Bekaert and Harvey (1997), we use a GMM test for serial correlation in
scaled residuals ²t :
                                                     E[²t ²t−1 ] = 0.                                             (F-2)
We also test for serial correlation in the second moments of the scaled residuals:
                                            E[((²t )2 − 1) ((²t−1 )2 − 1)] = 0.                                  (F-3)


                                                           39
G Computing Moments of the Regime-Switching Model
The formulae given here assume that there are K regimes st = 1, . . . K. Timmermann (2000) provides explicit
formulae for a similar formulation of (2), except that the conditional mean of Xt+1 depends on µ(st+1 ) + Φ(Xt −
µ(st )) rather than on µ(st+1 ) + ΦXt . In Timmermann’s set-up, E(Xt |st ) is trivially µ(st ), whereas in our model
the computation is more complex.

Conditional First Moments E(Xt |st )
Starting from (2), and taking expectations conditional on st+1 , we have:

                               E(Xt+1 |st+1 ) = E(µ(st+1 )|st+1 ) + ΦE(Xt |st+1 )                               (G-1)

    To evaluate E(Xt |st+1 ) we use Bayes Rule:
                                                  K
                                                  X
                           E(Xt |st+1 = i) =            E(Xt |st = j)P r(st = j|st+1 = i).                      (G-2)
                                                  j=1

The probability P r(st = j|st+1 = i) is the transition probability of the ‘time-reversed’ Markov chain that moves
backward in time. These backward transition probabilities are given by:
                                                                       µ ¶
                                                                          πj
                                  P r(st = j|st+1 = i) , bij = pji             ,
                                                                          πi

where pji = P r(st+1 = i|st = j) are the forward transition probabilities and πi = P r(st = i) is the stable
probability of regime i. Denote the backward transition probability matrix as B = {bij }
    Using the backward transition probabilities, (G-1) can be rewritten:
                                                                  K
                                                                  X
                               E(Xt+1 |st+1 = i) = µ(i) + Φ             E(Xt |st = j)bji .                      (G-3)
                                                                  j=1

Assuming stationarity, that is E(Xt+1 |st+1 = i) = E(Xt |st = i), and defining the K × 1 vectors:
                                                                                   
                                         E(Xt |st = 1)                           µ(1)
                           ~ t |st ) = 
                           E(X                 ..                    ~ (st ) =  ...  ,
                                                                  and µ
                                                .
                                        E(Xt |st = K)                            µ(K)

we can write:
                                          ~ t |st ) = µ
                                          E(X                    ~ t |st )B 0 .
                                                      ~ (st ) + ΦE(X
                        ~ t |st ) as:
Hence, we can solve for E(X

                                          ~ t |st )] = (I − B ⊗ Φ)−1 vec[~
                                      vec[E(X                            µ(st )]                                (G-4)


Conditional Second Moments E(Xt Xt0 |st )
Starting from (2), we can write:
                      0
                Xt+1 Xt+1 = (µ(st+1 ) + ΦXt + Σ(st+1 )εt+1 )(µ(st+1 ) + ΦXt + Σ(st+1 )εt+1 )0 ,                 (G-5)

and taking expectations conditional on st+1 , we have:
          0
  E(Xt+1 Xt+1 |st+1 ) = µ(st+1 )µ(st+1 )0 + Σ(st+1 )Σ(st+1 )0
                                   + µ(st+1 )E(Xt |st+1 )0 Φ0 + ΦE(Xt |st+1 )µ(st+1 )0 + ΦE(Xt Xt |st+1 )Φ0 .   (G-6)


                                                            40
We can evaluate the term E(Xt |st+1 ) from (G-2). Hence, we can define an N × N matrix G(i):

               G(i) = µ(i)µ(i)0 + Σ(i)Σ(i)0 + µ(i)E(Xt |st+1 = i)0 Φ0 + ΦE(Xt |st+1 = i)µ(i)0 .                    (G-7)

Substituting (G-7) into (G-6) and using Bayes’ Rule, we have:
                                                        K
                                                        X
                     0
             E(Xt+1 Xt+1 |st+1 = i) =          G(i) +         Φ[E(Xt Xt0 |st = j)P r(st = j|st+1 = i)]Φ0
                                                        j=1
                                                        K
                                                        X
                                           =   G(i) +         bij ΦE(Xt Xt0 |st = j)Φ0
                                                        j=1

Taking vec’s of both sides, we obtain:
                                                                           K
                                                                           X
                       0                                                                     0
           vec(E(Xt+1 Xt+1 |st+1 = i)) = vec(G(i)) + (Φ ⊗ Φ)                     vec(E(Xt+1 Xt+1 |st+1 = i))bij    (G-8)
                                                                           j=1


    If we define the KN 2 × 1 vectors:
                                                 0
                                                                                                  
                                    vec(E(Xt+1 Xt+1  |st+1 = 1))                          vec(G(1))
                  ~ t Xt0 |st ) = 
                  E(X             
                                                 ..              
                                                                                    ~ =
                                                                                 and G        ..    
                                                  .                                            .
                                                0
                                   vec(E(Xt+1 Xt+1  |st+1 = K))                          vec(G(K))

we can write (G-8) as:
                                    ~ t Xt0 |st ) = G
                                    E(X             ~ + (Φ ⊗ Φ)E(X
                                                               ~ t Xt0 |st )B 0 .
                        ~ t Xt0 |st ) as:
Hence, we can solve for E(X

                             vec[E(X                                          ~
                                 ~ t Xt0 |st )] = (IKN 2 − B ⊗ (Φ ⊗ Φ))−1 vec[G].                                  (G-9)


Unconditional Moments
The first unconditional moment E(Xt ) is solved simply by taking unconditional expectations of (2), giving
                                                                     K
                                                                     X
                                                                −1
                                            E(Xt ) = (I − Φ)               πi µ(i).                               (G-10)
                                                                     i=1

To solve the second unconditional moment var(Xt ), we use:

             var(Xt ) = E(Xt Xt0 ) − E(Xt )E(Xt )0
                      = E(E(Xt Xt0 |st )) − E(Xt )E(Xt )0
                             K
                             X       ©                                             ª
                         =         πi var(Xt |st = i) + E(Xt |st = i)E(Xt |st = i)0 − E(Xt )E(Xt )0               (G-11)
                             i=1




Moments of Yields
Bond yields are affine functions of Xt , from Propositions B.1 and C.1. Hence, they can be written as Yt =
A(St ) + BXt for some choice of A(St ) and B. Then, regime-dependent moments of Yt are given by:

                                          E(Yt |st ) =    A(St ) + BE(Xt |st )
                                         var(Yt |st ) =   Bvar(Xt |st )B 0 ,                                      (G-12)


                                                          41
and the unconditional moments of Yt are:
                                   K
                                   X
                     E(Yt )    =         πi E(Yt |st = i)
                                   i=1
                    var(Yt )   = E(Yt Yt0 ) − E(Yt )E(Yt )0
                               = E(E(Yt Yt0 |St )) − E(Yt )E(Yt )0
                                   K
                                   X       ©                                    ª
                               =         πi var(Yt |St ) + E(Yt |St )E(Yt |St )0 − E(Yt )E(Yt )0   (G-13)
                                   i=1




                                                            42
References
Aı̈t-Sahalia, Yacine, 1996, Testing continuous-time models of the spot interest rate, Review of Financial Studies 9,
    385-426.
Ang, Andrew, and Geert Bekaert, 2002a, Regime switches in interest rates, Journal of Business and Economic
  Statistics 20, 163-182.
Ang, Andrew, and Geert Bekaert, 2002b, Short rate nonlinearities and regime switches, Journal of Economic
  Dynamics and Control 26, 1243-1274.
Ang, Andrew, Sen Dong, and Monika Piazzesi, 2006, No-arbitrage Taylor rules, Working paper, Columbia
  Business School.
Bansal, Ravi, and Hao Zhou, 2002, Term structure of interest rates with regime shifts,” Journal of Finance, 57, 5,
  1997-2043.
Bansal, Ravi, George Tauchen, and Hao Zhou, 2004, Regime-shifts, risk premiums in the term structure, and the
  business cycle, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 22, 396-409.
Barr, David G., and John Y. Campbell, 1997, Inflation, real interest rates, and the bond market: A study of U.K.
  nominal and index-linked government bond prices, Journal of Monetary Economics 39, 361-383.
Bekaert, Geert, and Campbell R. Harvey, 1997, Emerging equity market volatility, Journal of Financial
  Economics 43, 29-77.
Bekaert, Geert, Robert J. Hodrick, and David Marshall, 1997, On biases in tests of the Expectations Hypothesis of
  the term structure of interest Rates, Journal of Financial Economics 44, 309-48.
Bekaert, G., Robert J. Hodrick, and David Marshall, 2001, Peso problem explanations for term structure
  anomalies, Journal of Monetary Economics 48, 241-270.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Ilian Mihov, 1998, Measuring monetary policy, Quarterly Journal of Economics 113,
  869-902.
Bikbov, Ruslan, 2005, Monetary policy regimes and the term structure of interest rates, Working paper, Columbia
   University.
Boivin, Jean, 2006, Has U.S. monetary policy changed? Evidence from drifting coefficients and real-time data,
  Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 38, 1149-73.
Boudoukh, Jacob, 1993, An equilibrium-model of nominal bond prices with inflation-output correlation and
  stochastic volatility, Journal of Money Credit and Banking 25, 636-665.
Boudoukh, Jacob, Matthew Richardson, Tom Smith and Robert F. Whitelaw, 1999, Regime shifts and bond
  returns, Working paper, NYU.
Buraschi, Andrea, and Alexei Jiltsov, 2005, Time-varying inflation risk premia and the Expectations Hypothesis:
  A monetary model of the treasury yield curve, Journal of Financial Economics 75, 429-490.
Burmeister, Edwin, Kent D. Wall, and James D. Hamilton, 1986, Estimation of unobserved expected monthly
  inflation using Kalman filtering, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 4, 147-160.
Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller, 1991, Yield spreads and interest rate movements: A bird’s eye view,
  Review of Economic Studies 58, 495-514.
Campbell, John Y., and Luis M. Viceira, 2001, Who should buy long-term bonds? American Economic Review
  91, 99-127.
Chen, Ren-Raw, and Louis Scott, 1993, Maximum likelihood estimation for a multi-factor equilibrium model of
  the term structure of interest rates, Journal of Fixed Income 3, 14-31.
Cho, Seonghoon, and Antonio Moreno, 2006, A small-sample study of the new-Keynesian macro model,
  forthcoming Journal of Money, Credit and Banking.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galı́, and Mark Gertler, 2000, Monetary policy rules and macroeconomic stability:
   Evidence and some theory, Quarterly Journal of Economics 115, 147-180.
Cochrane, John, and Monika Piazzesi, 2005, Bond risk premia, American Economic Review 95, 138-160.



                                                        43
Cogley, Timothy, and Thomas J. Sargent, 2001, Evolving post-World War II U.S. inflation dynamics, in
  Bernanke, Ben S., and Kenneth S. Rogoff, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001 (MIT Press), pp331-373.
Cogley, Timothy, and Thomas J. Sargent, 2005, Drifts and volatilities: Monetary policies and outcomes in the
  post WWII U.S., Review of Economic Dynamics 8, 263-302.
Dai, Qiang, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 2000, Specification analysis of affine term structure models, Journal of
  Finance 55, 1943-1978.
Dai, Qiang, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 2002, Expectation puzzles, time-varying risk premia, and affine models of
  the term structure, Journal of Financial Economics 63, 415-41.
Dai, Qiang, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 2003, Term structure dynamics in theory and reality, Review of Financial
  Studies 16, 631-678.
Dai, Qiang, Kenneth J. Singleton, and Wei Yang, 2006, Are regime shifts priced in U.S. treasury markets?
  forthcoming Review of Financial Studies.
Evans, Martin D. D., 1998, Real rates, expected inflation, and inflation risk premia, Journal of Finance 53,
  187-218.
Evans, Martin D. D., 2003, Real risk, inflation risk, and the term structure, Economic Journal 113, 345-389.
Evans, Martin D. D., and Karen Lewis, 1995, Do expected shifts in inflation affect estimates of the long-run
  Fisher relation, Journal of Finance 50, 225-253.
Evans, Martin D. D., and Paul Wachtel, 1993, Inflation regimes and the sources of inflation uncertainty, Journal
  of Money, Credit and Banking 25, 1993.
Fama, Eugene F., 1975, Short-term interest rates as predictors of inflation, American Economic Review 65,
  269-282.
Fama. Eugene F., 1990, Term-structure forecasts of interest rates, inflation and real returns, Journal of Monetary
  Economics 25, 59-76.
Fama, Eugene F., and Bliss, Robert R., 1987, The information in long-maturity forward rates, American
  Economic Review 77, 680-92.
Fama, Eugene F., and Michael R. Gibbons, 1982, Inflation, real returns and capital investment, Journal of
  Monetary Economics 9, 297-323.
Fama, Eugene F., and G. William Schwert, 1977, Asset returns and inflation, Journal of Financial Economics 5,
  115-146.
Garcia, Rene, and Pierre Perron, 1996, An analysis of the real interest rate under regime shifts, Review of
  Economics and Statistics 78, 111-125.
Gavin, William T., and Finn E. Kydland, 2000, The nominal facts and the October 1979 policy change, Federal
  Reserve Bank of St Louis Review 82, 39-61.
Goto, Shingo, and Walter N. Torous, 2003, The conquest of U.S. inflation: Its implications for the Fisher
  Hypothesis and the term structure of nominal interest rates, Working Paper, University of South Carolina.
Gray, Stephen F., 1996, Modeling the conditional distribution of interest rates as a regime-switching process,
  Journal of Financial Economics 42, 27-62.
Hamilton, James D., 1985, Uncovering financial market expectations of inflation, Journal of Political Economy
  93, 1224-1241.
Hamilton, James D., 1988, Rational-expectations econometric analysis of changes in regime: An investigation of
  the term structure of interest rates, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 12, 385-423.
Hamilton, James D., 1989, A new approach to the economic analysis of nonstationary time series and the
  business cycle, Econometrica 57, 357-384.
Hamilton, James D., 1994, Time Series Analysis (Princeton University Press).
Huizinga, John, and Frederic S. Mishkin, 1986, Monetary policy regime shifts and the unusual behavior of real
  interest rates, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 24, 231-74.
Landén, C., 2000, Bond pricing in a hidden Markov model of the short rate, Finance and Stochastics 4, 371-389.


                                                        44
Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams, 2003, Measuring the natural rate of interest, Review of Economics and
  Statistics 85, 1063-1070.
Meltzer, Allan H., 2005, From inflation to more inflation, disinflation and low inflation, Keynote Address,
  Conference on Price Stability, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Mishkin, Frederic S., 1981, The real rate of interest: An empirical investigation, Carnegie-Rochester Conference
  Series on Public Policy 15, 151-200.
Mishkin, Frederic, S., 1990, The information in the longer maturity term structure about future inflation,
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 105, 815-828.
Mishkin, Frederic S., 1992, Is the Fisher effect for real? Journal of Monetary Economics 30, 195-215.
Mundell, Robert, 1963, Inflation and real interest, Journal of Political Economy 71, 280-283.
Naik, Vasant, and Moon-Ho Lee, 1994, The yield curve and bond option prices with discrete shifts in economic
  regimes, Working paper, University of British Columbia.
Nelson, Edward, 2004, The great inflation of the seventies: What really happened? Federal Reserve Bank of St.
  Louis Working Paper 2004-001.
Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A simple positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity and
  autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica 55, 703-8.
Pennacchi, George, 1991, Identifying the dynamics of real interest rates and inflation: Evidence using survey
  data, Review of Financial Studies 1, 53-86.
Roll, Richard, 2004, Empirical TIPS, Financial Analysts Journal 60, 31-53.
Rose, Andrew, 1988, Is the real interest rate stable? Journal of Finance 43, 1095-1112.
Sims, Christopher A., 1999, Drifts and Breaks in Monetary Policy, Working Paper, Yale University.
Sims, Christopher A., 2001, Comment on Sargent and Cogley’s ‘Evolving post World War II U.S. inflation
  dynamics,’ in Bernanke, Ben S., and Kenneth S. Rogoff, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001 (MIT
  Press), pp373-379.
Sola, Martin, and John Driffill, 1994, Testing the term structure of interest rates using a vector autoregression with
   regime switching, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 18, 601-628.
Stockton, David J., and James E. Glassman, 1987, An evaluation of the forecast performance of alternative
   models of inflation, Review of Economics and Statistics 69, 108-117.
Taylor, John B., 1993, Discretion versus policy rules in practice, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
  Policy 39, 195-214.
Timmermann, Allan, 2000, Moments of Markov switching models, Journal of Econometrics 96, 1, 75-111.
Tobin, James, 1965, Money and economic growth, Econometrica 33, 671-684.
Veronesi, Pietro, and Francis B. Yared, 1999, Short and long horizon term and inflation risk premia in the U.S.
  term structure: Evidence from an integrated model for nominal and real bond prices under regime shifts, CRSP
  Working Paper 508.




                                                         45
                                   Table 1: Nomenclature of Models

                                                         Regime-Switching Models

                          Affine    Two Regimes      Three Regimes        Four Regimes       Six Regimes

      3-Factor Models        I           II                III          IV A ,IV B , IV C         VI

      4-Factor Models       Iw           IIw                –           IVwA , IVwB , IVwC         –



This table summarizes the models estimated. The affine models are single regime models. In the two and three
regime models, the real rate factor and inflation share the same regimes, so st = sft = sπt , which take values
from {1, 2} or {1, 2, 3}, respectively. In the four and six regime models, the regimes st reflect switches in
both sft and sπt . In the four-regime model, sft ∈ {1, 2} and sπt ∈ {1, 2}, and the probability transition matrix
can be one of three cases, independent (Case A) and correlated cases B and C, which are outlined in Section
2.4. In the six-regime model, sft ∈ {1, 2} and sπt ∈ {1, 2, 3}, and sft and sπt are independent. The three-factor
models contain the factors Xt = (qt ft πt )0 with qt a time-varying price of risk factor, ft is a latent RS term
structure factor, and πt is inflation. The dynamics of Xt are outlined in Section 2.2. The models denoted with
w subscripts also contain an additional factor representing expected inflation. These models are described in
Appendix E.




                                                      46
      Table 2: Specification Tests
Panel A: Matching Inflation Dynamics

                 Moment Tests

          Mean/       Auto-         Residual
Model     Variance    correlogram   Tests

I         0.00**      0.02*         0.00**
                                    0.08

Iw        0.08        0.00**        0.02*
                                    0.09

II        0.00**      0.01*         0.10
                                    0.17

IIw       0.00**      0.16          0.03*
                                    0.31

III       0.02*       0.02*         0.67
                                    0.22

IV A      0.15        0.04*         0.16
                                    0.12

IV B      0.09        0.03*         0.01*
                                    0.01*

IV C      0.60        0.08          0.21
                                    0.10

IVwA      0.00**      0.27          0.26
                                    0.26

IVwB      0.00**      0.17          0.01**
                                    0.36

IVwC      0.00**      0.18          0.22
                                    0.27

VI        0.50        0.13          0.00**
                                    0.00**




                     47
                                            Table 2 Continued
                                      Panel B: Matching Yield Dynamics

                                          Moment Tests                       Residual Tests

                             Mean/Var              Spread                  Short
                   Model     Long Rate/Spread      Autocorrelogram         Rate       Spread

                   I         0.78                  0.14                    0.19       0.14
                                                                           0.27       0.22

                   Iw        0.00**                0.26                    0.47       0.34
                                                                           0.15       0.29

                   II        0.61                  0.01**                  0.05       0.65
                                                                           0.02*      0.15

                   IIw       0.00**                0.01*                   0.52       0.48
                                                                           0.01**     0.34

                   III       0.12                  0.09                    0.05       0.05
                                                                           0.04*      0.05

                   IV A      0.37                  0.33                    0.02*      0.96
                                                                           0.04*      0.08

                   IV B      0.00**                0.00**                  0.01**     0.00**
                                                                           0.00**     0.00**

                   IV C      0.63                  0.39                    0.02*      0.34
                                                                           0.04*      0.03*

                   IVwA      0.00**                0.06                    0.31       0.11
                                                                           0.08       0.35

                   IVwB      0.00**                0.10                    0.81       0.56
                                                                           0.16       0.12

                   IVwC      0.00**                0.24                    0.33       0.07
                                                                           0.12       0.30

                   VI        0.04*                 0.00**                  0.01**     0.01*
                                                                           0.01**     0.00**



This table reports moment and residual tests of inflation (Panel A) and of yields (Panel B), which are outlined
in Appendix F. In the columns titled “Moment Tests,” we report the p-values of goodness-of-fit χ2 tests for
various moments implied by the different models. In Panel A, the first moment test matches the mean and
variance of inflation, whereas in Panel B, the first moment test matches the mean and variance of the long
rate and the spread jointly. The long rate refers to the 20-quarter nominal rate yt20 and the spread refers to
yt20 − yt1 , for yt1 the 3-month short rate. The second autocorrelogram moment test matches autocorrelations at
lags 1, 5, and 10. The columns titled “Residual Tests” report p-values of scaled residual tests for the different
models. The first entry reports the p-value of a test of E(²t ²t−1 ) = 0 and the second row reports the p-value
of a GMM-based test of E[(²2t − 1)(²2t−1 − 1)] = 0, where ²t is a scaled residual. P-values less than 0.05
(0.01) are denoted by * (**). Table 1 contains a nomenclature of the various models.



                                                      48
  Table 3: Benchmark Model IV C Parameter Estimates

Short Rate Equation rt = δ0 + δ10 Xt
                                                       δ1

                     δ0           q                f               π

                   0.008       1.000            1.000           -0.488
                  (0.001)        –                –             (0.056)


Companion Form Φ
                                  q                f               π

                     q         0.975           0.000             0.000
                              (0.014)            –                 –
                     f         0.000           0.762             0.000
                                 –            (0.012)              –
                     π         0.618           0.954             0.538
                              (0.164)         (0.516)           (0.064)



Conditional Means and Volatilities
                                                                P-value
                             Regime 1        Regime 2       Test of Equality

µf (sft ) × 100                -0.010       0.034                0.037
                              (0.005)      (0.016)
µπ (sπt ) × 100                 0.473       0.248                0.002
                              (0.082)      (0.110)
σq × 100                              0.094                        –
                                     (0.011)
σf (sft ) × 100                 0.078       0.175                0.000
                              (0.019)      (0.047)
σπ (sπt ) × 100                 0.498       0.573                0.249
                              (0.028)      (0.063)



Prices of Risk λ(sπt ) = (γ1 qt λf (sπt ) 0)0

                                       λf (sπt )

                                                                P-value
                     γ1      Regime 1        Regime 2       Test of Equality

                    -17.1      -0.613          0.504             0.000
                   (15.7)     (0.097)         (0.151)




                                      49
                                           Table 3 Continued

                        Transition Probabilities Π

                                      st+1 = 1    st+1 = 2     st+1 = 3   st+1 = 4

                            st = 1      0.930         0.000     0.065       0.005
                                       (0.025)       (0.008)   (0.020)     (0.002)
                            st = 2      0.125         0.804     0.019       0.052
                                       (0.030)       (0.029)   (0.007)     (0.016)
                            st = 3      0.228         0.000     0.716       0.056
                                       (0.047)       (0.002)   (0.045)     (0.024)
                            st = 4      0.031         0.197     0.205       0.567
                                       (0.010)       (0.041)   (0.039)     (0.064)

                              pf        0.930          qf       0.772
                                       (0.021)                 (0.047)

                             pAA        1.000         pAB       0.135
                                       (0.009)                 (0.031)

                             pAB        0.865         pBB       0.735
                                       (0.031)                 (0.055)


                        Std Dev ×100 of Measurement Errors

                              yt4        yt12

                            0.050       0.024
                           (0.003)     (0.001)



The table reports estimates of the benchmark RS model IV C with correlated sft and sπt regimes outlined in
Section 2. The stable probabilities of regime 1 to 4 are 0.725, 0.039, 0.197, and 0.038, with standard errors
of 0.081, 0.029, 0.052, and 0.018, respectively. We reject the null of independent regimes (Case A) with a
p-value of 0.033 using a likelihood ratio test.




                                                      50
                                             Table 4: Factor Behavior

                                               Panel A: Moments of Factors

                                                                                        Correlation with

                                                      Contribution
                                      Contribution    to Expected                 Nominal                  Real
                                      to Real Rate      Inflation                  Short       Nominal     Short     Real
              Stdev        Auto         Variance        Variance      Inflation    Rate         Spread     Rate     Spread

q              1.70        0.98           0.51            0.28          0.61         0.90       -0.20       0.44     -0.09
              (0.55)      (0.01)         (0.35)          (0.08)        (0.11)       (0.05)      (0.07)     (0.21)    (0.02)
f              0.68        0.74           0.09            0.09          0.24         0.43       -0.99       0.19     -0.24
              (0.20)      (0.02)         (0.10)          (0.05)        (0.07)       (0.11)      (0.02)     (0.17)    (0.17)
π              3.50        0.76           0.40            0.62          1.00         0.69       -0.44      -0.34      0.59
              (0.42)      (0.05)         (0.36)          (0.08)          –          (0.08)      (0.06)     (0.29)    (0.12)

Data π         3.16        0.72                                                     0.68        -0.37

                                  Panel B: Projection of Inflation on Lagged Instruments

                         Nominal
                          Short         Nominal
             Inflation    Rate           Spread

Model          0.52        0.39           -0.08
              (0.06)      (0.07)         (0.17)
Data           0.49        0.29           -0.39
              (0.06)      (0.07)         (0.15)


    The table reports various unconditional moments of the three factors: the time-varying price of risk factor qt ,
    the RS factor ft and inflation πt , from the benchmark model IV C . The short rate refers to the 1-quarter
    nominal yield and the spread refers to the 20-quarter nominal term spread. The row labelled ‘Data π’
    refers to actual inflation data. The numbers between parentheses are standard errors reflecting parameter
    uncertainty from the estimation, computed using the delta method. The variance decomposition of the real
    rate is computed as cov(rt , zt )/var(rt ), with zt respectively qt , ft and δπ πt . The variance decomposition of
    expected inflation is computed as cov(Et [πt+1 ], zt )/var(Et [πt+1 ]), with zt respectively Φπq qt , Φπf ft , and
    Φππ πt . Panel B reports multivariate projection coefficients of inflation on the lagged short rate, spread and
    inflation implied by the model and in the data. Standard errors in parenthesis are computed using the delta
    method for the model-implied coefficients and are computed using GMM for the data coefficients.




                                                           51
     Table 5: Real Rates, Inflation Compensation, and Nominal Rates Across Regimes


                                                                           Regime

                                                            st = 1    st = 2    st = 3    st = 4

                Real Short Rate r̂t             Mean         1.14      1.98       1.34      1.97
                                                            (0.39)    (0.53)     (0.35)    (0.45)
                                                Std Dev      1.40      1.55       1.55      1.68
                                                            (0.22)    (0.29)     (0.25)    (0.29)

                Real Term Spread ŷt20 − r̂t    Mean         0.15      -0.39      -0.03     -0.45
                                                            (0.31)    (0.21)     (0.28)    (0.16)
                                                Std Dev      1.12      1.26       1.31       1.42
                                                            (0.17)    (0.25)     (0.22)    (0.25)
                                        e
                Inflation Compensation πt,1     Mean         3.92      2.46       4.43      3.20
                                                            (0.38)    (0.79)     (0.39)    (0.67)
                                                Std Dev      2.75      2.95       3.01      3.13
                                                            (0.50)    (0.51)     (0.48)    (0.49)

                Nominal Short rate rt           Mean         5.06      4.45       5.77      5.17
                                                            (0.08)    (0.38)     (0.17)    (0.34)
                                                Std Dev      3.04      3.12       3.47      3.50
                                                            (0.74)    (0.73)     (0.65)    (0.65)



We report means and standard deviations for real short rates, r̂t ; the 20-quarter real term spread, ŷt20 − r̂t ,
                                          e
1-quarter ahead inflation compensation, πt,1 ; and nominal short rates, rt , implied by model IV C across each
of the four regimes. The regime st = 1 corresponds to (sft = 1, sπt = 1), st = 2 to (sft = 1, sπt = 2), st = 3
to (sft = 2, sπt = 1) and st = 4 to (sft = 2, sπt = 2). Standard errors reported in parentheses are computed
using the delta method.




                                                       52
                                              Table 6: Characteristics of Real Rates
                                                   Panel A: Conditional Moments

                    Regime st = 1           Regime st = 2          Regime st = 3         Regime st = 4
     Maturity
     Qtrs          Mean      Stdev        Mean      Stdev        Mean      Stdev        Mean       Stdev

     1              1.14      1.40         1.98      1.55         1.34      1.55         1.97       1.68
                   (0.39)    (0.22)       (0.53)    (0.29)       (0.35)    (0.25)       (0.45)     (0.29)
     4              1.33      0.86         1.85      0.93         1.54      0.89         1.83       0.94
                   (0.38)    (0.25)       (0.54)    (0.25)       (0.40)    (0.25)       (0.48)     (0.25)
     20             1.29      0.55         1.59      0.56         1.31      0.55         1.52       0.56
                   (0.39)    (0.32)       (0.42)    (0.32)       (0.44)    (0.32)       (0.41)     (0.49)

                                                   Panel B: Unconditional Moments

     Maturity
     Qtrs          Mean      Stdev         Auto

     1              1.24      1.46         0.60
                   (0.38)    (0.23)       (0.08)




53
     4              1.41      0.88         0.73
                   (0.38)    (0.25)       (0.13)
     20             1.32      0.55         0.94
                   (0.40)    (0.32)       (0.05)

     Spread 20-1    0.07      1.19         0.52
                   (0.28)    (0.18)       (0.06)

                                       Panel C: Correlations with Actual and Expected Inflation

                    Regime st = 1           Regime st = 2          Regime st = 3         Regime st = 4         Unconditional
     Maturity
     Qtrs          Actual   Expected      Actual   Expected      Actual   Expected      Actual    Expected   Actual   Expected

     1             -0.34     -0.02         -0.47    -0.12         -0.40     0.03         -0.49     -0.06      -0.34    -0.03
                   (0.31)    (0.24)       (0.31)    (0.25)       (0.37)    (0.28)       (0.35)     (0.29)    (0.29)    (0.31)
     4             -0.11      0.14         -0.26     0.02         -0.17     0.16         -0.29      0.06      -0.13     0.16
                   (0.43)    (0.32)       (0.45)    (0.36)       (0.56)    (0.44)       (0.55)     (0.46)    (0.43)    (0.44)
     20             0.41      0.46         0.30      0.38         0.46      0.54         0.34       0.45      0.37      0.57
                   (0.26)    (0.20)       (0.33)    (0.26)       (0.36)    (0.29)       (0.41)     (0.35)    (0.29)    (0.28)
Note to Table 6
The table reports various moments of the real rate, implied from model IV C . Panel A reports the conditional
mean and standard deviation of real rates of various maturities in quarters across regimes. Panel B reports the
unconditional mean, standard deviation and autocorrelation of real yields. Panel C reports the correlation
of real yields with actual and unexpected inflation implied from the model. We report the conditional
                                                        n
correlation of real yields with actual inflation corr(ŷt+1 , πt+1 |st ), and the conditional correlation of real
                                      n
yields with expected inflation corr(ŷt+1 , Et+1 (πt+1+n,n )|st ). Standard errors reported in parentheses are
computed using the delta method.




                                                     54
                                   Table 7: Effect of Regimes on Real Rates

                                          Panel A: Real Yield Characteristics

                                                                      Model Iw      Model IV C

                      Real Short Rate r̂t                  Mean          1.42           1.24
                                                                        (0.31)         (0.38)
                                                           St Dev        1.59           1.46
                                                                        (0.29)         (0.23)
                                                           Auto          0.72           0.60
                                                                        (0.09)         (0.08)

                      Real Long Rate ŷt20                 Mean          1.69           1.32
                                                                        (0.30)         (0.40)
                                                           St Dev        1.04           0.55
                                                                        (0.34)         (0.32)
                                                           Auto          0.96           0.94
                                                                        (0.02)         (0.05)

                      Correlation r̂t , ŷt20                            0.79           0.64
                                                                        (0.08)         (0.06)

                              Panel B: Comparisons of Iw and IV C over the Sample

                      Real Short Rate r̂t Differences      Std Dev          1.40
                                                           Min             -2.61
                                                           Max              6.01

                      Real Long Rate ŷt20 Differences     Std Dev          0.54
                                                           Min             -1.06
                                                           Max              1.85




The table reports various characteristics of real yields from model Iw , an affine model similar to Campbell
and Viceira (2001), and our model IV C . In Panel A, we report population means, standard deviations, and
autocorrelations of real one-quarter short rates and real 20-quarter long yields, together with their correlation.
Standard errors reported in parentheses are computed using the delta method. In Panel B, we report statistics
on the differences between the real yields implied by model Iw and model IV C over the sample.




                                                          55
       Table 8: Inflation Compensation, Expected Inflation, and Inflation Risk Premiums

                                                                          Uncondi-
                            Qtrs    st = 1   st = 2    st = 3   st = 4     tional
                                                    e
                            Inflation Compensation πt,n

                            1        3.92     2.46      4.43     3.20       3.94
                                    (0.38)   (0.78)    (0.39)   (0.67)     (0.38)
                            4        4.20     2.49      4.95     3.34       4.25
                                    (0.34)   (0.70)    (0.39)   (0.59)     (0.35)
                            20       5.09     3.80      5.45     4.36       5.08
                                    (0.41)   (0.45)    (0.43)   (0.42)     (0.38)

                            Expected Inflation Et (πt+n,n )

                            1        3.93     2.47      4.44     3.21       3.94
                                    (0.38)   (0.79)    (0.39)   (0.67)     (0.38)
                            4        3.89     2.63      4.48     3.47       3.94
                                    (0.38)   (0.73)    (0.41)   (0.65)     (0.38)
                            20       3.91     3.39      4.20     3.82       3.94
                                    (0.38)   (0.49)    (0.39)   (0.46)     (0.38)

                            Inflation Risk Premium ϕt,n

                            4        0.31     -0.14     0.47    -0.13       0.31
                                    (0.09)   (0.06)    (0.15)   (0.09)     (0.10)
                            20       1.18      0.42     1.25     0.55       1.14
                                    (0.36)   (0.23)    (0.42)   (0.31)     (0.36)




The table reports means of inflation compensation, the difference between nominal and real yields; expected
inflation; and the inflation risk premium implied from the benchmark model IV C . Standard errors reported
in parentheses are computed using the delta method.




                                                      56
                    Table 9: Conditional Moments Across NBER Business Cycles

                                                                         Mean                           Std Dev

                                              Maturity
                                              Qtrs         Expansion           Recession       Expansion    Recession

        Real Rates ŷtn                       1                  1.45            1.23             1.30         2.06
                                                                (0.20)          (0.20)           (0.04)       (0.08)
                                              20                 1.33            1.43             0.65         0.87
                                                                (0.38)          (0.38)           (0.18)       (0.25)

        Nominal Rates ytn                     1                  5.03            5.95             2.59         4.07
                                                                (0.09)          (0.14)           (0.27)       (0.41)
                                              20                 6.05            6.85             2.46         3.71
                                                                (0.20)          (0.22)           (0.26)       (0.38)
                                e
        Inflation Compensation πt,n           1                  3.57            4.73             2.23         3.62
                                                                (0.19)          (0.17)           (0.18)       (0.28)
                                              20                 4.72            5.42             1.89         2.93
                                                                (0.37)          (0.39)           (0.38)       (0.57)




The table reports various sample moments of real rates, nominal rates and inflation compensation from the
benchmark model IV C , conditional on expansions and recessions as defined by the NBER. Standard errors
reported in parentheses are computed using the delta method on sample moments.




                Table 10: Unconditional Variance Decomposition of Nominal Yields

                                         Maturity      Real       Expected        Inflation
                                         Qtrs          Rates      Inflation         Risk

                                         1              0.20           0.80         0.00
                                                       (0.09)         (0.09)       (0.00)
                                         20             0.20           0.71         0.10
                                                       (0.09)         (0.09)       (0.08)




The table reports unconditional variance decompositions of nominal yields, ytn , into real rate, expected
inflation, and inflation risk premium components, denoted by ŷtn , Et (πt,n ), and ϕt,n , respectively, implied
by model IV C . This is done using the equation:

                          var(ytn , ytn )   cov(ŷtn , ytn ) + cov(Et (πt,n ), ytn ) + cov(ϕt,n , ytn )
                   1=              n      =                                                             .
                            var(yt )                                var(ytn )

Standard errors reported in parentheses are computed using the delta method on population moments.



                                                                 57
           Table 11: Unconditional Variance Decomposition of Nominal Yield Spreads

                                                Panel A: Unconditional

                  Maturity      Real      Expected      Inflation
                  Qtrs          Rates     Inflation       Risk

                  4              0.38        0.49         -0.01
                                (0.14)      (0.14)        (0.00)
                  20             0.20        0.88         -0.05
                                (0.19)      (0.19)        (0.02)

                                           Panel B: Conditional on Regime

                  Maturity      Real      Expected      Inflation        Real      Expected       Inflation
                  Qtrs          Rates     Inflation       Risk           Rates     Inflation        Risk

                                         Regime st = 1                            Regime st = 2

                  4              0.14        0.87         -0.01           0.08        0.93          -0.01
                                (0.19)      (0.19)        (0.00)         (0.22)      (0.22)        (0.00)
                  20             0.04        1.03         -0.08          -0.02        1.07          -0.05
                                (0.20)      (0.20)        (0.03)         (0.22)      (0.22)        (0.03)

                                         Regime st = 3                            Regime st = 4

                  4              0.69        0.32         -0.00           0.64        0.36          -0.00
                                (0.12)      (0.12)        (0.00)         (0.13)      (0.13)        (0.00)
                  20             0.31        0.71         -0.02           0.29        0.73          -0.02
                                (0.16)      (0.16)        (0.01)         (0.17)      (0.17)        (0.01)




The table reports unconditional variance decompositions of nominal yield spreads, ytn − yt1 , into real rate,
expected inflation, and inflation risk premium components, denoted by ŷtn − r̂t , Et (πt,n ) − Et (πt+1 ), and
ϕt,n , respectively, implied by model IV C . This is done using the equation:

                var(ytn − yt1 , ytn − yt1 )
       1   =
                    var(ytn − yt1 )
                cov(ŷtn − r̂t , ytn − yt1 ) + cov(Et (πt,n ) − Et (πt+1 ), ytn − yt1 ) + cov(ϕt,n , ytn − yt1 )
           =                                                                                                     .
                                                        var(ytn − yt1 )

Standard errors reported in parentheses are computed using the delta method on population moments.




                                                             58
                     Figure 1: Smoothed Regime Probabilities: All Regimes

                                                     Data

               Short Rate
 16
               Long Rate
               Inflation
 14


 12


 10


  8


  6


  4


  2


  0


 −2

       1955     1960        1965   1970      1975      1980     1985      1990     1995      2000     2005




                                                    Regimes
                                                    Pr(st=1)
   1

 0.5

   0
       1955      1960       1965    1970     1975       1980    1985      1990     1995      2000     2005
                                                    Pr(st=2)
   1

 0.5

   0
       1955      1960       1965    1970     1975       1980    1985      1990     1995      2000     2005
                                                    Pr(st=3)
   1

 0.5

   0
       1955      1960       1965    1970     1975       1980    1985      1990     1995      2000     2005
                                                    Pr(st=4)
   1

 0.5

   0
       1955      1960       1965    1970     1975      1980     1985      1990     1995      2000     2005



The top graph plots the nominal short rate (1-quarter yield) and nominal long rate (20-quarter yield) together
with quarter-on-quarter inflation. The top panel’s y-axis units are annualized and are in percentages. In the
bottom graph, we plot the smoothed probabilities of each of the four regimes, P r(st = i|IT ), conditioning
on data over the entire sample, from the benchmark model IV C . NBER recessions are indicated by shaded
bars.



                                                      59
                              Figure 2: Smoothed Regime Probabilities

                Real Short Rate
 12             Real Long Rate
                Expected Inflation
                Inflation Compensation
 10



   8



   6



   4



   2



   0



 −2


       1955      1960      1965      1970      1975       1980      1985     1990      1995      2000      2005


                                                      Pr(sft = 1)
   1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

   0
       1955      1960      1965      1970      1975        1980     1985     1990      1995      2000      2005


                                                          π
                                                      Pr(st = 1)
   1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

   0
       1955      1960      1965      1970      1975        1980     1985     1990      1995      2000      2005




The top panel graphs the real short rate, r̂t ; real long rate, ŷt20 ; one-quarter expected inflation, Et (πt+1 );
                                           e
and long-term inflation compensation, πt,20    , implied from model IV C . The top panel’s y-axis units are
annualized and are in percentages. The middle and bottom panels plot smoothed regime probabilities using
information from the whole sample. The middle panel shows the smoothed probabilities P r(sft = 1|IT ) of
the f factor regimes, sft . The bottom panel graphs the smoothed probabilities P r(sπt = 1|IT ) of the inflation
factor regime, sπt . NBER recessions are indicated by shaded bars.




                                                         60
                                     Figure 3: Real Term Structure

   2
                                                                                          Regime 1
                                                                                          Regime 2
 1.9                                                                                      Regime 3
                                                                                          Regime 4
                                                                                          Unconditional

 1.8


 1.7


 1.6


 1.5


 1.4


 1.3


 1.2


 1.1
       0      2         4        6         8        10       12        14        16       18        20



We graph the real yield curve, conditional on each regime and the unconditional real yield curve implied from
model IV C . The x-axis displays maturities in quarters of a year. The y-axis units are annualized and are in
percentages.




                                                    61
                                          Figure 4: Impulse Responses of Real Yields

                       1q real yield to q shocks                             1q real yield to f shocks                              1q real yield to π shocks
                0.12                                              0.15                                                        0.1

                 0.1
                                                                   0.1                                                         0
                0.08
  Percentage




                                                    Percentage




                                                                                                                Percentage
                0.06                                              0.05                                                       −0.1

                0.04                                                0                                                        −0.2
                0.02
                                                                 −0.05                                                       −0.3
                  0

               −0.02                                              −0.1                                                       −0.4
                       0         10            20                        0            10             20                             0         10            20
                               Quarters                                             Quarters                                                Quarters

                       20q real yield to q shocks                        20q real yield to f shocks                                 20q real yield to π shocks
                0.08                                              0.02                                                       0.01

                0.06                                              0.01                                                         0

                                                                                                                         −0.01
  Percentage




                                                    Percentage




                                                                                                          Percentage




                0.04                                                0
                                                                                                                         −0.02
                0.02                                             −0.01
                                                                                                                         −0.03
                  0                                              −0.02                                                   −0.04

               −0.02                                             −0.03                                                   −0.05
                       0         10            20                        0            10             20                             0         10            20
                               Quarters                                             Quarters                                                Quarters



The figure plots impulse responses (IRs) of 1- and 20-quarter real yields (solid lines), together with two
standard errors bands (dashed lines), as implied by model IV C . All IRs are computed using a one standard
deviation shock. The units on the y-axis are in annualized percent.




                                                                                   62
         Figure 5: Comparing Benchmark Model IV C Real Yields with Model Iw

                                             Real Short Rate
  8
                                                                                          Model Iw

  7                                                                                       Model IVC


  6


  5


  4


  3


  2


  1


  0


 −1


 −2


 −3
      1955      1960     1965     1970     1975     1980       1985    1990     1995     2000     2005


                                             Real Long Rate
  5
                                                                                          Model Iw

                                                                                          Model IVC

  4




  3




  2




  1




  0




 −1
      1955      1960     1965     1970     1975     1980       1985    1990     1995     2000     2005




The figure compares the 1-quarter real short rate (5-year real long yield) of the benchmark model IV C and
model Iw in the top (bottom) panel over the sample period.




                                                   63
          Figure 6: Comparative Statics of the Long-Term Inflation Risk Premium

              Φ                                    Φ                                    Φ
               πq                                   πf                                   ππ
  6                                    6                                    6

  5                                    5                                    5

  4                                    4                                    4

  3                                    3                                    3

  2                                    2                                    2

  1                                    1                                    1

  0                                    0                                    0

 −1                                   −1                                  −1
  −4     −2        0     2      4      −4     −2         0     2    4      −4      −2       0       2    4


              δπ                                   λf(sπ =1)                            λf(sπ =2)
                                                       t                                    t
  6                                    6                                    6

  5                                    5                                    5

  4                                    4                                    4

  3                                    3                                    3

  2                                    2                                    2

  1                                    1                                    1

  0                                    0                                    0

 −1                                   −1                                  −1
  −4     −2        0     2      4      −4     −2         0     2    4      −4      −2       0       2    4


In each plot, we show the unconditional 20-quarter inflation risk premium, ϕt,20 , as a function of various
parameters of the benchmark model IV C . The units on the y-axis are annualized and are in percentage
terms, and we alter the value of each parameter on the x-axis by up to ±4 standard errors of the estimates of
each parameter. The circle represents the baseline case at the estimated parameter value, of 1.14%.




                                                       64
                                 Figure 7: Inflation Risk Premiums

    4


  3.5


    3


  2.5


    2


  1.5


    1


  0.5


    0


 −0.5


   −1
        1955     1960     1965      1970     1975     1980     1985     1990     1995     2000     2005


The figure graphs the time-series of the 20-quarter inflation risk premium, ϕt,20 , with two standard error
bounds, implied from model IV C . NBER recessions are indicated by shaded bars.




                                                    65
                                 Figure 8: Nominal Term Structure

   7




 6.5




   6




 5.5




   5




 4.5                                                                                     Regime 1
                                                                                         Regime 2
                                                                                         Regime 3
                                                                                         Regime 4
                                                                                         Unconditional
   4
       0      2        4         6        8        10        12       14        16        18       20


The figure graphs the nominal yield curve, conditional on each regime and the unconditional nominal yield
curve from the benchmark model IV C . The x-axis displays maturities in quarters of a year. The y-axis units
are annualized and are in percentages. Average yields from data are represented by ’x’, with 95% confidence
intervals represented by vertical bars.




                                                    66
