                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              BRANCH BANKING AS A DEVICE FOR DISCIPLINE:
    COMPETITION AND BANK SURVIVORSHIP DURING THE GREAT DEPRESSION

                                             Mark Carlson
                                         Kris James Mitchener

                                         Working Paper 12938
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12938


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2007




We thank Ngoc Ngo, Julie Van Tighem, and Tai Yu Chen for excellent research assistance; the Leavey
and Dean Witter Foundations for financial support; Cydney Hill for assistance with supplemental information
on Bank of America's branches; and Charles Riggs of Wells Fargo for assistance with archival material.
We also thank seminar and conference participants at UC Davis, NBER (DAE Program), the Bank
of Japan, Northwestern University, University of Tokyo, and the ASSA, BHC, WEA, and SSHA annual
meetings as well as Joe Mason, Charles Calomiris, Eugene White, Dick Sylla, and Fred Smith for
useful comments and suggestions. The views presented in this paper are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve System or its staff. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2007 by Mark Carlson and Kris James Mitchener. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Branch Banking as a Device for Discipline: Competition and Bank Survivorship During the
Great Depression
Mark Carlson and Kris James Mitchener
NBER Working Paper No. 12938
February 2007
JEL No. E44,G21,L1,N22

                                              ABSTRACT

Because California was a pioneer in the development of intrastate branching, we use its experience
during the 1920s and 1930s to assess the effects of the expansion of large-scale, branch-banking networks
on competition and the stability of banking systems. Using a new database of individual bank balance
sheets, income statements, and branch establishment, we examine the characteristics that made a bank
a more likely target of a takeover by a large branching network, how incumbent unit banks responded
to the entry of branch banks, and how branching networks affected the probability of survival of banks
during the Great Depression. We find no evidence that branching networks expanded by acquiring
"lemons"; rather those displaying characteristics of more profitable institutions were more likely targets
for acquisition. We show that incumbent, unit banks responded to increased competition from branch
banks by changing their operations in ways consistent with efforts to increase efficiency and profitability.
Results from survivorship analysis suggest that unit banks competing with branch bank networks,
especially with the Bank of America, were more likely to survive the Great Depression than unit banks
that did not face competition from branching networks. Our statistical findings thus support the hypothesis
that branch banking produces an externality in that it improves the stability of banking systems by
increasing competition and forcing incumbent banks to become more efficient.

Mark Carlson
Federal Reserve Board
20th and Constitution Ave., NW
Washington, DC 20551
mark.a.carlson@frb.gov

Kris James Mitchener
Department of Economics
Leavey School of Business
Santa Clara University
Santa Clara, CA 95053
and NBER
kmitchener@scu.edu
                 BRANCH BANKING AS A DEVICE FOR DISCIPLINE:
                    COMPETITION AND BANK SURVIVORSHIP
                       DURING THE GREAT DEPRESSION


I. Introduction

        The deregulation of interstate branching in the United States, due to interstate
agreements and the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of
1994, unleashed a flurry of bank mergers and acquisitions as banks sought to expand
their scale and scope. The dramatic changes in the banking landscape have renewed
interest in understanding how branch-banking networks affect competition among banks
and the stability of the nation’s banking system (Berger, Demsetz, and Strahan (1999)
provide a detailed survey). Researchers have examined the characteristics that make
banks targets for merger and acquisition as well as how such consolidation influences the
behavior of competing banks. To a more limited extent, the literature has also explored
how the wave of consolidation and the creation of larger banking networks affect
systemic stability. Policymakers have recognized the importance of issues affecting
financial stability, citing the large costs associated with instability.1 Nonetheless, it is
difficult to assess the long-run effect of branching networks on the stability of the U.S.
banking system, especially on the viability of smaller banks, using data from a
consolidation process that is still underway. Moreover, a problem of observational
equivalence exists: the recent dearth of bank failures may simply be due to the fact that
there have been no large macroeconomic shocks to test how the emerging interstate
branch-banking system performs when it is stressed.2
        The current wave of bank mergers in the U.S. is not without historical precedent.
The 1920s were also a period of banking consolidation and rapid expansion in branching
(Alston, Grove, and Wheelock 1994, Wheelock 1993, and White 1985). Most notably,
branch banking expanded dramatically in California as large banks purchased numerous
smaller banks to create branching networks. By 1929, 48 percent of the banks in


1
  Hoggarth and Saporta (2001) suggest that the fiscal costs of banking crisis resolution have recently
averaged 16% of GDP.
2
  According to NBER business cycle data, the most recent business cycle downturn was among the shortest
and least severe in the postwar period.


                                                   1
California that existed in 1922 had been absorbed by other banks. This is comparable in
scope to the recent period, during which 32 percent of the banks that existed in the United
States in 1997 were purchased by other banks by 2004.3 The expansion of branching in
California was due largely to A.P. Giannini, founder of Bank of America, whose
branching policies made California the unrivaled leader in the branch banking movement
of the 1920s. As Bank of America’s branches blanketed the state, several other large
banks were compelled to respond to Giannini’s competitive threat and set up their own
branching networks. California’s branching networks thus developed more quickly and
more extensively than those of any other state during this decade.
         Using a new historical data set containing information about earnings and balance
sheets of individual commercial banks as well as bank mergers and branch establishment,
we assess the effects of the expansion of branching in California on the competitive
environment and on financial stability. This data set provides an excellent opportunity to
examine these effects because we are able to follow developments at individual banks as
they are exposed to competition, and which are then subjected to a large macroeconomic
shock (the Great Depression). We first identify which characteristics of banks, and the
communities in which they resided, made them attractive targets for acquisition. We then
examine how banks responded to increased competition from the large branch-banking
networks. Finally, we test how the expansion of branching affected the survivability of
California banks during the Great Depression.
         Our study has several important implications for the literature on competition and
stability in banking systems. As Allen and Gale (2004) have argued, it is not necessarily
the case that there is a negative tradeoff between competition and financial stability. Our
paper offers new empirical evidence on this issue. We are able to monitor changes in the
competitive environment for individual banks in the California banking system during the
1920s and into the Great Depression. Our analysis of how changes in competition affect
bank behavior and failure offers a unique test of how the removal of geographical
restrictions on banking and the spread of branch banking affect financial stability.


3
  In California, the acquired banks represented about 35 percent of the banking systems assets in the 1920s
whereas those that were taken over more recently represented around 40 percent of the assets of the US
banking system in 1997. The amount of consolidation during the recent period may be overstated as these
figures include some consolidation within holding companies.


                                                     2
       The paper also relates to the recent industrial organization literature on how the
behavior of firms depends on the level of competition for customers. Looking at the
cement industry, Syverson (2004) finds that barriers to substitution across producers can
permit less productive or efficient plants or firms to survive, but as these barriers fall,
“competition breeds efficiency.” Our data on California banks provides us with a detailed
dynamic panel, which includes information on balance sheet and income statement data
on individual firms as well as the level of competition. Using these data, we are able to
assess whether changes in competition, induced by the expansion of branch banking,
changed incumbent bank behavior. We are also able to compare our results to those of
recent research analyzing the current wave of U.S. consolidation and branch bank
expansion, which provides an interesting perspective on how consolidation, induced by
branch banking, has affected bank competition during different periods.
       Finally, our analysis also sheds light on notable debates regarding the Great
Depression. It has long been argued that the United States banking system was especially
exposed to the shock of the Great Depression because of its unit-banking structure
(Friedman and Schwartz 1963, Calomiris 2000). The empirical evidence on the effects of
branch banking on financial stability, however, has presented somewhat of a puzzle.
Studies using state- and county-level data find that states allowing branching had lower
failure rates (Mitchener 2005, Wheelock 1995), while studies of individual banks find
that branch banks were more likely to fail than other banks (Calomiris and Mason 2003,
Carlson 2004). These findings suggest that the system-wide benefits of branching during
the Depression most likely accrued as a result of something other than geographical
diversification. In order to provide some resolution to this empirical puzzle, this study
focuses on an alternative channel through which the expansion of branch banking in the
1920s may have affected financial stability: competition. We utilize a dynamic panel data
set to test how increased competition, induced by branch banking, affected bank
survivorship during the Great Depression.
       In this paper, we find little evidence that branching networks expanded by
purchasing “lemons.” Rather, we find evidence that branch banks avoided taking over
banks with problem assets and find some evidence that banks with either more interest-
earning to total assets or more demand deposits to total deposits (balance sheet positions



                                            3
consistent with higher profitability) were more likely to be acquired. These results are
similar to those examining bank merger patterns in the recent period of industry
consolidation.4 We also find that large branch banking institutions tended to establish
branches in large towns and in towns with higher ratios of banks per capita.
        Since our results suggest that weak banks were not pruned from the system by the
expanding branching networks, the subsequent sections of the paper focus on whether
unit banks, competing with branching networks, changed their behavior in response to
increased competition and whether this, in turn, improved systemic stability. We find that
banks that began competing with branch banks, especially with multiple branch
networks, took measures to improve their profitability, likely in response to a change in
the competitive environment. Unit banks shifted their portfolios away from other assets
and towards loans, which typically earned higher returns. They also increased the share
of demand deposits, relative to savings deposits, since these paid lower rates of interest to
depositors. Further, we find that unit banks reduced administrative costs relative to other
expenses. Changes in balance sheets and cost control measures appear to have been
effective as the return on assets increased by a greater extent for unit banks that had to
start competing with branching networks compared to banks where the competitive
environment was little changed. These findings mirror those of studies examining recent
bank behavior (such as Jayaratne and Strahan 1998 and DeYoung, Hasan, and Kirchhoff
1998), which find that reductions in bank-entry restrictions eventually lead to increased
efficiency. In particular, they are similar to Evanoff and Ors (2002), which also focuses
on incumbent banks and finds improved efficiency in response to the removal of barriers
to entry on banking.
        Perhaps our most interesting result relates to systemic stability. Estimates from
survival analysis suggest that that unit banks located in cities or towns where large branch
banks established offices were more likely to survive the Depression. Thus, we find that
the same banks that became more efficient also became more financially stable. Our
result appears especially relevant for very large branching networks, such as the Bank of
America, which had the widest geographic scope and appeared to prompt the largest


4
 Stiroh and Strahan (2003) suggest that banks entered markets by buying good banks and competing
against poor performers.


                                                  4
changes in balance-sheet positioning, and also for competition from multiple branching
networks. Giannini’s assault on local geographic monopolies appears to have transformed
California’s banking system and produced an externality: unit banks improved their
efficiency in ways that enabled them to better cope with the macroeconomic shock of the
Great Depression.
       As there may be some concern that there is selection bias based on unobservable
factors that leads to both the decision to establish a branch in a town and also improves
survival, we conduct several robustness checks. Using instrumental variable estimates,
we find that the benefits from competition (in terms of increasing the survivability of unit
banks) are robust to accounting for the possibility of selection bias in our econometric
model. Since there can be problems with instrument choice, we also employ the
methodology of Altonji, Elder, and Taber (2005), and compute a measure of how large
the bias due to selection on unobservable factors, as opposed to selection based on factors
that we can observe and control for, would have to be in order to eliminate the impact of
branching. We find that selection on unobservables would have to be between 2.1 and 2.9
times stronger than selection on observables to explain away the entire branch banking
effect, which seems highly unlikely.
       The existence of a competition externality is important for several reasons. First,
it suggests that the banking system of the United States would have been less fragile in
the 1930s had states allowed more branching, not necessarily because the branch banks
would have been more diversified, but because the system would have consisted of more
efficient banks. Second, it allows us to conjecture that, following the current shakeout,
the wave of consolidation will improve the stability of the banking system for both large
and small banks.
       The paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses the rapid growth of branch
banking in California in the 1920s. Section III presents an analysis of the factors that led
to the establishment of branches in municipalities and made unit banks desirable targets
for acquisition by branch banking networks. Section IV analyzes the external effect –
changes in unit bank behavior in response to the entry of branch banks. Section V
estimates the impact of branching on the stability of the banking system during the Great




                                             5
Depression, considers whether the survivorship results are robust to selection bias, and
provides an estimate of the degree of selection bias. Section VI concludes.


II. Branch Banking in the 1920s


    A. California’s leading role


         Although branching had occurred on an ad hoc basis in California for some time,
the banking act of 1909 prescribed a formal process by which banks could establish
branches throughout the state, subject to the approval of the state bank superintendent.5
The use of branching started slowly and then increased rapidly in the 1920s (Figure 1).6
Two decades later, on the eve of the Depression, branch-banking activity was more
extensive in California than in any other state in the country (Table 1). The impact of
branching was felt statewide: unlike some other well-branched states, like New York and
Michigan, the majority of the branches were established outside the city of the bank’s
parent institution or home office. By the end of the decade, California was the only state
to have more branch offices than banks. California’s rapid expansion of branching piqued
regulators’ interest in the 1920s, and fueled a debate over the merits of branch banking.7
         California’s growth in branching relative to other states benefited from
entrepreneurial talent and leadership as well as from an initially hospitable regulatory
environment. State regulators saw it as their legal duty to enforce the banking act by
defending the rights of any state bank interested in establishing branches. Moreover, an




5
  Section 9 of the 1909 act stated that “No bank in this State…shall hereafter open or keep an office other
than its principal place of business, without first having obtained the written approval of the superintendent
of banks to the opening of such branch office, which written approval may be given or withheld in his
discretion, and shall not be given by him until he has ascertained to his satisfaction that the public
convenience and advantage will be promoted by the opening of such a branch office.” House of
Representatives, (1930, Volume 2, Part 2, pp.1342).
6
  Since statewide branching was without precedent, Bank of America, the first to expand its branching
network significantly, deemed it “prudent to ‘make haste slowly’,” and had only opened 23 branches by
1919. House of Representatives, (1930, Volume 1, p.18).
7
  “This makes us interested in seeing how branch banking has actually been working under American
conditions, and California is supposed to be the field of greatest experience thus far.” (House of
Representatives 1930, Volume 2, Part 2, p.1342).


                                                      6
amendment to the act facilitated branching by enabling mergers to occur with no
additional capital.8
         Another feature that made California particularly ripe for the expansion of
branching in the 1920s was its diversity of crops and industrial production. Unlike many
Midwestern states, agricultural cycles were not coincident in timing in California. With
harvests and plantings for various crops occurring at different times of the year,
geographically-dispersed branching systems were well-suited to shifting funds from one
area or region to another in order to maximize the utilization of existing bank capital.9


B. California’s large branch-bank networks


         A.P. Giannini, founder of the Bank of America, was at the forefront of the
California branching movement. Through purchase and de novo branch creation, he
established the largest branching network in the state and the largest bank on the Pacific
Coast by 1929.10 Some competing branching networks began to emerge in 1921 when
Giannini’s pioneering efforts to establish branches were adopted by other leading bankers
in the state: Henry Robinson, P.E. Bowles, J.F. Sartori, and Edward Elliot. However, the
branching network of the Bank of America was larger in scale than those of the other
institutions (Table 2). More importantly, the scope of the Bank of America’s branching
network was much broader, and covered almost the entire state (Figures 2-5). The next
largest bank, Security-First National, expanded around Los Angeles and into the central
valley, while the American Trust Bank and the California Bank were clustered around

8
  Minimum capital requirements for banks with branches were higher than those without branches and each
additional branch raised the required minimum. However, if a bank already had the minimum required
amount of capital, no additional capital needed to be posted. In many cases, the absorbed unit bank’s
capital, while it functioned as a unit bank, was higher than what was required to operate it as a branch.
9
  Some also argued that important agricultural centers like the San Joaquin and Imperial Valleys had
seasonal demand for funds that exceeded what could be supplied by local banks. For a discussion of these
points, see “Branch Banking is a Live Wire Subject,” Los Angeles Times, July 1, 1922, p.I7, “Branch
Banking,” Los Angeles Times, December 4, 1922, p.I14, “California Bank Merger with $200,000,000 in
Resources,” Wall Street Journal, July 3, 1922, p.4, and “Branch Banking in California,” Wall Street
Journal, September 22, 1923, p.4.
10
   Giannini’s original bank was the Bank of Italy, founded in 1904. In the 1920s, he established other
institutions, such as Bank of America and Liberty Bank. These were consolidated into Bank of America in
1927, which was in turn part of the Transamerica holding company. For ease of exposition, we use the
name Bank of America to refer to all Giannini institutions collectively unless it is necessary to refer to a
specific one.


                                                     7
San Francisco and Los Angeles, respectively.11 The willingness of the Bank of America
to enter smaller towns can also be seen by looking at the distribution of its branches by
town size (Table 3).
        As the Bank of America was the only institution to establish a truly statewide
presence, it may have had a more pervasive influence on the state’s banking environment.
For example, the anecdotal evidence suggests that the expansion of the Bank of America
significantly impacted the California banking system by introducing competition to
localities that were previously geographic monopolies. James and James (1954) report
that the Bank of America was able to offer lower loan rates than the smaller banks of the
central valley. Bonadio (1994) indicates that the average rate of interest in towns would
decline following the establishment of a Bank of America branch.


C. Response of unit bankers


        The growth in branching was not without its opponents. Worried by the
competitive threat of an expanding number of branching networks in the state, unit
bankers formed the California League of Independent Bankers (CLIB) in 1922 as a
lobbying organization aimed at the “preservation of unit banking.” Declaring branch
banking the “menace of the hour,” they regularly canvassed the state legislature to
abolish all non-home-office-city branches.12 According to Bonadio (1994, p.86) nearly all
of the state’s more than 500 independent bankers had joined this group by 1922, with
league members taking vows to “never sell out to Giannini.” They argued that the growth
of branch banking was leading to a monopoly of the moneyed interests: “Branch banking
emanates from the minds of a few city bankers. It enables a few city men to control the
banking assets of the state.”13



11
   The Security First-National and American Trust Bank were formed through the mergers of moderate-
sized branch networks during the 1920s. There were a few other banks with a modest number of branches;
however, these branches were almost exclusively within the city of Los Angeles.
12
   The first two articles of association of CLIB stated, “We believe that branch banking is economically
wrong, monopolistic in nature, and un-American in principle...We view with alarm the growth of branch
banking in California as permitted under our present law.” (Chapin Hall, “Daily Trade Talk,” Los Angeles
Times, November 28, 1922, p.I10.
13
   Quote of Carlos Hardy, Los Angeles attorney, appearing in Coast Banker, Nov. 1922, p. 501.


                                                   8
         Although CLIB did not succeed in their ultimate goal, the state-banking
department adopted several rulings aimed at limiting the growth in branching. Most
notable was the “de novo rule,” which went into effect in 1921 under Superintendent
Jonathan Dodge. It limited the establishment of a new branch outside the “principal place
of business,” except by discretion of the state superintendent of banks.14 This restricted
Giannini’s plans for expansion of his San Francisco-based banks into the southern half of
the state. Between 1923 and June 1925, the Superintendent issued 103 permits to Los
Angeles banks for de novo banks in Los Angeles, but only one was granted to the Bank
of Italy (headquartered in northern California), and this branch was already being
processed when the ruling was announced. The de novo rule was favored by most of the
southern California branch bankers, who wanted to keep Giannini’s network from
expanding into the southern California market and competing head-to-head.15 Bankers
like Giannini thus pursued growth through an aggressive merger and acquisition strategy.
Giannini began to use the Bancitaly Corporation (headquartered in Los Angeles) and a
second, newly-formed bank holding company, Americommercial, to purchase Los
Angeles-based banks and build a branching empire in Southern California.16


III. The Expansion of Branching


A. Acquisition versus de novo expansion

         During the 1920s there was a massive consolidation of California banks through
merger and acquisition. As noted earlier, roughly one-half of the banks in existence in
1922 had been purchased or had merged with another bank by the end of 1929.
Moreover, most of the expansion of branching networks outside the city of the bank’s


14
   Another ruling was that no branch could be established outside the home-office city via consolidation or
purchase unless both banks were at least three years old and the Superintendent found the branch to be for
public convenience and advantage.
15
   See “Giannini Arouses Bankers,” Earle E. Crowe, Los Angeles Times, March 14, 1925, p.15.
16
   After two additional applications to establish branches were denied, the Bank of Italy filed suit in 1926 to
overturn the “de novo rule,” arguing that the California Banking Act did not permit the superintendent of
banking to restrict branch location (Westerfield, 1939). Although the rule was not changed, new personnel
in the California banking department after the suit was filed enforced this rule less rigidly for the rest of the
decade, and Bank of Italy (along with the related companies of Transamerica and Bank of America) was
able to further expand in Southern California.


                                                       9
home office (typically San Francisco or Los Angeles) was done through acquisition
(Table 4). The number of mergers was spread relatively evenly over time, although there
was a spike in mergers during 1927. Acquisitions of banks by town size also tended to
reflect the distribution of banks at the start of the period (Table 5).
           Legal restrictions on de novo branching played a significant role in pushing banks
to expand through merger and acquisition. Even though these restrictions could
sometimes be circumvented, there were reasons why banks may have preferred to expand
through a strategy of merger and acquisition. First, it was cheaper (in terms of fixed
costs) to acquire an existing facility than to build a branch from scratch. Second, by
taking over an existing bank, the acquiring bank was able to draw on the managerial
experience and long-term lending relationships of the existing bank. The Bank of
America recognized these advantages and explicitly based its branch-expansion strategy
on acquisition rather than establishing de novo branches. Giannini believed that rural
communities would be more willing to accept an outside bank if it took over the
operations of an existing bank. Explaining the strategy of Bank of America to Congress
in 1930, James Bacigalupi, Vice Chairman of the holding company, stated:
           It was reasoned that the prudent way to enter an outside community was to
           purchase an established bank, because otherwise it could only be hoped, at
           the outset, to attract a few disgruntled depositors and before sufficient
           good business could be worked into, principally that which theretofore
           could find no accommodation there on account of the smaller capital and
           limited resources of the local banks, it would be years. Then, again, the
           bank would inevitably be confronted with the necessity of building a
           brand new local staff for the branch office – not the easiest thing in
           modern banking. Subsequent experience of the Bank of Italy demonstrated
           the soundness of this reasoning. By purchasing a good bank – and, almost
           without exception, such have been the banks which it has purchased – it
           acquired a staff, an advisory board, and local stockholders who were
           interested in the locality and familiar with local people, values, and
           conditions.17

           Bacigalupi further testified that Bank of America consistently established
branches through the purchase of existing banks in every community it entered, with only
one notable exception, Sacramento, where “it was found impossible to purchase a bank
and, as result of popular petition, led by the chamber of commerce of that city, the then

17
     House of Representatives (1930, Volume 2, Part 2, p.1341).


                                                     10
superintendent of banks granted Bank of Italy a permit to open a brand new office, a so-
called de novo branch.”18 The Bank of America’s decision to purchase banks rather than
create de novo branches and its policy of retaining the existing management to run the
newly formed branch may have been aimed at ensuring better-quality local lending.19 As
Berger and Udell (2002) emphasize, small local banks may be inherently better at
resolving agency problems associated with relationship lending. Relationship lending
requires that banks gather information beyond what is readily available in financial
statements of firms; such information is gathered through repeated contact with the firm
and by observing its behavior on past loans and business with the bank. By employing the
key executives of the former independent unit bank as branch managers and loan
directors, Bank of America and other branching networks that pursued a similar strategy
may have been attempting to reduce the oversight problems a large bank would otherwise
face in relationship lending and better manage the “soft” data associated with the
character and reliability of its borrowers.20
        Banks were purchased either by acquiring their assets or by establishing holding
companies that were organized with the explicit purpose of buying other banks. Bank of
America frequently employed the latter method and created the Stockholders Auxiliary
Corporation (a holding company wholly owned by the shareholders of the bank) to
acquire banks for its branching system.21



18
   House of Representatives (1930, Volume 2, Part 2, p.1341).
19
   For example, BankItaly Life (1921, volume 5, p.11), the magazine of the Bank of Italy, wrote, “In
mapping out his campaign he [Giannini] determined to depart sharply in one particular area from foreign
precedent. Instead of starting a new bank in any given community, he planned always to purchase a going
concern – a bank that had won the reputation as a moneymaker and that enjoyed the confidence of the
community. The most important change would be the change in name. He would retain all the old officers;
and the former board of directors, augmented by new blood, would function as a local advisory board.”
See also the comments by Giannini (House of Representatives 1930, Volume 2, Part 2, p.1544).
20
   For evidence that large banks typically face a disadvantage in relationship lending aimed at small,
opaque firms, see Berger, Kashyap, and Scalise (1995). For evidence that non-Bank of America branching
networks also retained management, see “New Bank Merger is Announced,” Los Angeles Times, March 11,
1922, p.I13 and “Porterville Bank Merger Effective,” Los Angeles Times, January 5, 1924, p.16, and
“California Bank Merger,” Wall Street Journal, September 11, 1926.
21
   The banking act of California did not permit banks to purchase the stock of another bank directly, but
Section 31 permitted banks to purchase the assets of another bank. This was the method of direct
consolidation employed by Bank of America and other branching networks in California. The bank holding
company was a convenient corporate entity used to maneuver around regulatory restrictions on banking
activities; for example, the Stockholders Auxiliary Corporation was used as an insurance agent and broker
and to dispense of “problem” assets of banks (House of Representatives (1930, Volume 2, Part 2, p.1343).


                                                   11
       As Table 4 further elucidates, the growth in branches outside the home-office city
took place largely by purchasing existing banks. De novo branches were largely confined
to the largest cities, especially San Francisco and Los Angeles, where the large branch
networks already had substantial operations and merely expanded into areas where they
recognized new business activities. Over two-thirds of the new branches in small towns
were created through acquisition of an existing bank rather than by constructing new
branch offices. Presented in a different way, Table 6 shows banks and mergers by year
across locations that differed by the presence of large branching banks. Mergers were
most common in cities where the large branch banks did not yet have offices, although
these mergers often resulted in the establishment of a branch. (Hence, the remaining
banks migrated to the columns in the table that display towns with branches). Our
empirical research thus focuses on understanding the decisions related to bank acquisition
rather than the establishment of de novo branches.


B. Analysis of branch location decisions


       To understand which banks were more likely to be subjected to competition from
branching networks, we first examine whether various city and county characteristics
influenced the choice of where to establish new branches. All else equal, banks may have
preferred communities where business opportunities, indicated here by city size and
county income, were plentiful. With the boom in California agriculture during this
period, banks may have sought out locations that would facilitate loans to farms and
growing agri-businesses. Competition from other banks, as indicated by the number of
financial institutions per capita and whether the town was served by only a single bank,
may have affected expansion decisions. Proximity to a major city may have been
preferred, as it would have facilitated contact with the bank’s headquarters, or banks may
have sought to diversify their activities geographically by expanding away from the large
cities. Finally, branch banks may have sought to locate in the southern part of the state




                                           12
since this was the fastest growing region and the non-coincident nature of crop harvests
(noted earlier as well suited to branch banking) was more pronounced.22
        We test these hypotheses by looking at whether different city and county
characteristics affected whether a bank was purchased and a branch established within a
city during the period from June 30, 1922 to June 30, 1929.23 (Since widespread networks
did not emerge until 1921 for banks other than the Bank of America, we use 1922 as the
departure date for this study.) We separately consider: (1) whether the Bank of America
bought a bank in the town; (2) whether a large branching network other than the Bank of
America bought a bank (those shown in Figures 3-5); and (3) whether a small branch
bank network (defined as any other branching network) bought a bank. Since the decision
to buy a bank has only two outcomes, we use logistic analysis.
        Data on mergers and branch location were primarily collected from Comptroller
of Currency Annual Report and Statements of Conditions and the Annual Report of the
Superintendent of Banks of the State of California; however, we supplemented this
information with data from Rand McNally (various years) as well as with internal records
from the Bank of America’s archives. All cities that were incorporated as of 1920 and
had population information reported in the 1920 Census were included in the analysis.
Data on city attributes, such as size and county seat status, were collected from Rand
McNally (1922), U.S. Department of Commerce (1920), and California State Department
of Finance (2004). Proximity to a major metropolitan area (Los Angeles or San
Francisco) was collected using “as the crow flies” distances based on programming and
data from the U.S. Geological Survey.24 Other county characteristics (such as population,
income, industry mix) are from U.S. Department of Commerce (1910, 1920). We use the
June 29, 1922 values of the city banking variables. All other city and county
characteristics, with the exception of the population growth rate, are 1920 values. For
municipality m, we estimate the following equation:

22
   See Chapin Hall, “Business, Financial Markets, Investment – Daily trade talk,” Los Angeles Times,
August 5, 1922, p.I6.
23
   We exclude cities in which a branch existed before June 30, 1922, since different factors may have
mattered. Alternatively, we examined the time until the branch bank established a branch in the town either
through purchase or by establishing a de novo branch. Results (not reported) were nearly identical.
Regressions using duration analysis yielded comparable results.
24
   We use information from http://www.indo.com/distance/, which is based on the “geod” program – a part
of the “PROJ” system available from the U.S. Geological Survey.


                                                    13
(1) Whether a bank is purchasedm = f{ β1 Banking institutions per capitam + β2 One banking institutionm
         β3 National bank in citym + β4 Log populationm + β5 Distance to nearest large citym +
         β6 Distance to nearest large city squaredm + β7 County seatm +
         β8 Share of county income from agriculturem + β9 County income per capitam +
         β10 Share county population that are immigrantsm +
         β11 County population growth rate( 1910-1920) m + β12 County in the Northern part of the statem }.


         As Table 7 shows, we find that larger municipalities were more desirable
locations, possibly because these offered more business opportunities. 25 (Larger cities
were preferred even if we restrict the sample to cities with less than 20,000 people.)
Municipalities with more banks per capita were also attractive places to buy banks and
establish branches, while those with only one bank were less attractive. Distance from the
major population centers appears to have played little role in location decisions made by
the Bank of America. For other large branch banking networks, distance and distance
squared have opposite signs, indicating that distance deterred acquisition but that the
effect diminished further out (with the effects canceling at about the distance between
Los Angeles and Fresno). Consistent with statements from contemporaneous trade
publications (and Figures 3-5), large branching networks, other than the Bank of
America, branched more in the southern part of the state.26 Somewhat surprisingly, fast-
growing counties (measured by population change) do not seem to have been particularly
successful at attracting branch banks. Small branch banking networks appear to have
been the only type of bank to show a propensity to buy banks in faster growing
communities.




25
   Regression coefficients can be transformed so that the value 100*(exp(β) - 1) indicates the percentage
change in the probability of an event for each one-unit increase in the independent variable. For example,
the regression coefficient on town banking institutions per capita, which has a value of 0.12, implies that a
one-unit increase in this independent variable increases the likelihood of the event by 13 percent. Note that
negatively-signed coefficients indicate a reduction in the likelihood of an event.
26
   The Coast Banker, February 1925, p.202, suggests that branch banks in Los Angeles were purchasing
banks in order to further “consolidate the banking resources of large institutions in Los Angeles with those
of outlying communities in Southern California.” And the Los Angeles times reported in 1922 that branch
bank expansion was now “at a flood tide,” with seventeen new branches being added by Los Angeles Trust
& Savings Bank, Citizens Trust and Savings Bank, and Security Trust and Savings Bank (“Extension of
Branch Bank Idea,” Los Angeles Times, May 7, 1922, p.I12.)


                                                     14
C. Analysis of bank characteristics


       We also examine which characteristics of banks made them more or less attractive
for acquisition by branching networks. We explore this issue in some depth because it
helps distinguish between competing hypotheses concerning how competition might have
influenced systemic stability. That is, branch banking networks, on average, may have
purchased high-performing banks, average banks, or "lemons" in the 1920s. If they
purchased lemons, this might indicate that banking stability improved in California
because weak banks were removed from the system (assuming the weak banks could be
absorbed without indigestion by the branching networks). On the other hand, if branch
banking networks purchased average or high-performing banks, then a theory about why
competition from branch banks improved stability would instead need to focus on the
behavior of the remaining unit banks that competed head-to-head with the branching
networks. For example, the introduction of branches into local markets might have
induced changes in the performance or behavior of the incumbent, unit banks. We
therefore pay particular attention to bank characteristics to see if branch banking systems
acquired lemons. If they did not, then we will proceed by considering the effects that
competition, induced by branch banking, had on the remaining unit banks.
       We collected balance sheet data on all California commercial banks in 1922,
1924, and 1926 using information for National banks contained in the Comptroller of
Currency Annual Report and Statements of Conditions and information on state banks
from the Annual Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of California. (State
banks constitute roughly half our sample of banks.) We also collected income and
expense data for Federal Reserve member banks from the Treasury Department and
Federal Reserve Reports of Earnings, Expenses, and Dividends for 1922 and 1926. There
are trade-offs to using income as opposed to balance sheet data. The income data allow us
to get at profitability directly, but it is available for a more limited sample of banks. We
thus conduct separate analyses using these two data sets. In general, the data are similar
to those used in other studies examining bank failures in the 1930s (Calomiris and Mason
2003, Carlson 2004).




                                            15
         From the sources listed above and the Bank of America’s archives, we also
gathered data on all changes in the competitive environment for California banks between
1922 and 1933 – bank openings, mergers, acquisitions, de novo branches, voluntary
liquidations, and bank failures. These data enable us to examine the effects of branching
in towns, cities, counties, and across the state, and to draw inferences on how its growth
reshaped the competitive landscape and the stability of California banks during the Great
Depression.
         To analyze acquisitions by branch banks, we focus on the balance-sheet and
income ratios that affect the profitability, soundness, and liquidity of banks. However, we
also include a variety of other attributes that might affect whether a bank was a desirable
target for acquisition. These other variables are the age of the bank (as older banks might
be more loathe to give up an established reputation or may have developed better
relationship-banking skills), the bank’s charter status (which might affect the ease of
regulatory approval), and whether the bank operates a trust department.27 We also include
some of the geographical factors that we found to have mattered in regressions on the
decision of where to locate a new branch. (Summary statistics are provided in Appendix
Table 1.)
         To fully utilize information about the order banks were acquired, we use duration
analysis. This framework also allows us to update banks’ balance sheet information in
1924 and 1926, earnings information in 1926, and changes in the competitive
environment of the town as they occur. Our estimation procedure parallels recent work
analyzing the factors that contributed to the failure of banks during the Depression
(Calomiris and Mason 2003, Carlson 2004), which also uses duration analysis.


i. Analysis using balance sheet data


27
   There were regulatory differences that affected the attributes of the banks beyond what is immediately
obvious from the top line balance sheet numbers. For instance, California’s banking law was also
relatively unique in that it required state banks to completely segregate commercial, savings, and trust
departments. State bankers aggressively advertised this difference in organizational structure in an attempt
to gain a competitive advantage over national banks in the state and attract more deposits. They publicized
the idea that savings depositors would be safer in their banking system if runs occurred because they would
not have to line up alongside commercial depositors to withdraw their deposited funds. Consequently,




                                                    16
         All else equal, one might expect acquiring banks to prefer to take over sound and
profitable banks. However, some historians writing on California’s consolidation in the
1920s (Bonadio 1994) have suggested that regulators may have encouraged the large
branch networks to take over failing banks. We initially examine which hypothesis is
correct by using balance sheet data, which are available for all commercial banks in the
state of California and which provide information about capital adequacy, liquidity, and,
indirectly, about profitability. To examine the soundness of the bank, we examine the
capital-asset and surplus-asset ratios as well as measures of excess capital and excess
surplus.28 Our measure of the liquidity of the bank is the cash-to-deposit ratio. The ratios
we use that are indicative of bank profitability are interest-earning assets to total assets
(suggestive of earnings potential) and demand deposits to total deposits (reflecting cost
structure). Thus, for bank i, we estimate the equation:


(2) Time until mergeri = f{ β1Log assetsit + β2Interest bearing assets to total assetsit +
         β3Capital to assetsit + β4Surplus to assetsit + β5Excess capital ratioit + β6Excess surplus ratioit +
         β7Cash to depositsit + β8Demand deposits to total depositsit + β9State bank indicatorit +
         β10Log age of bankit + β11Trust Departmentit + β12Log town populationi +
         β13One bank in townit + β14Banks in town per capitait },


where t denotes an independent variable that changes over time. We estimate equation (2)
using three different definitions of the dependent variable: (1) the time until the Bank of
America acquired a bank, (2) the time until a large branching network other than the
Bank of America acquired a bank, and (3) the time until a small branching network made
an acquisition. These events, in the duration framework, are defined as bank acquisitions
that took place between June 30, 1922 and June 30, 1929.29 Balance sheet and banks



California had a higher percentage of savings deposits relative to total deposits than the nation as a whole:
64% versus 44% in 1925 (Westerfield, 1939).
28
   Excess capital is capital held by the bank beyond what it is legally required to hold. Surplus reflects
retained earnings held at the bank. Excess surplus is therefore the amount of the bank’s surplus fund
exceeding the legal requirement. We compute measures that are the excess of capital or surplus as a share
of the total capital or surplus.
29
   In the estimation, we assume a log-logistic distribution. With this distribution, the hazard rate is zero
when t equals zero, rises to a peak over the sample period, then declines back to zero as t goes toward
infinity. Likelihood ratio tests suggest that this distribution provides the best fit. Similar tests are used to
determine the best distribution each time duration analysis is used.


                                                       17
characteristics are updated from their 1922 values in 1924 and 1926. Town characteristics
are updated as they change.
         Table 8 indicates several factors were important in determining which banks were
targeted for acquisition during the 1920s. (In reporting our coefficients, a negative sign
indicates that an increase in the independent variable is associated with reduced time until
merger and is thus a more desirable bank attribute).30 First, the results show that Bank of
America (column 1) preferred to take over banks with more interest-earning assets as a
share of total assets. A one percentage-point increase in this measure (one-tenth of a
standard deviation) would decrease the expected time until the bank was purchased by
1.7 percent. This finding is consistent with the notion that more profitable banks were
preferred targets of acquisition, since interest income is one of the principal sources of
bank income. The Bank of America also tended to purchase banks with higher capital-
asset ratios, which is consistent with a preference for acquiring more solvent banks.
Large branching networks, other than the Bank of America, appear to have sought banks
with a lower cost structure (and thus potentially more profitable banks) as suggested by
the coefficient on the ratio of demand deposits to total deposits displayed in column 2.
The importance of a bank’s capital position for other large branching networks is more
difficult to ascertain as the higher surplus-asset ratios made the bank less attractive, while
higher ratios of surplus beyond the legal requirements appear to have been more
attractive. All large branching networks appear to have been more interested in taking
over state banks. Smaller branching networks avoided taking over unit banks with higher
shares of interest earning assets, but did purchase banks with higher capital ratios.


ii. Analysis using earnings data


         Using income and earnings data, we are able to directly measure profitability and
asset quality, but are limited to the smaller sample of Federal Reserve member banks.

30
  In our tables using duration analysis, the reported coefficients can be transformed to indicate the
percentage change in the expected time until the even occurs for each one-unit increase in the independent
variable. For a given coefficient β, the transformed value is 100*(exp(β) - 1). Thus, the regression
coefficient for interest-bearing assets to total assets, which has a value of -0.017, can be transformed to 1.7,
which shows that a one-unit decrease in this ratio increases the expected time until the event occurs by a bit
less than 2 percent.


                                                      18
Indicators of profitability are the return on equity, which is defined as the ratio of net
earnings after accounting for net loan losses (loan losses minus recoveries) to capital, and
the ratio of administrative costs to total expenses. Asset quality is measured by net losses
on assets – the ratio of net loan losses to assets. We also include a few additional balance
sheet items in the analysis. Here, for each bank i, we estimate the equation:


(3) Time until mergeri = f{ β1Log assetsit + β2Net worth to assetsit + β3Cash to depositsit +
         β4Demand to total depositsit + β5Return on equityit + β6Net losses on assetsit +
         + β7Administrative costs to total expensessit + β8State bank indicatorit +
         Β9Log age of bankit + β10Trust departmentit + β11Log town populationi +
         Β12One bank in townit + β13Banks in town per capitait },


where t denotes an independent variable that changes over time. Given the smaller
number of mergers in the Fed member sample of banks, we estimate equation (3) only for
the time until the bank is taken over by one of the four large branch banking networks. As
in the balance sheet regressions, the events in the duration framework are defined as bank
acquisitions that took place between June 30, 1922 and June 30, 1929. Balance sheet,
earnings data, and banks characteristics are updated from their 1922 values in 1926.
Town characteristics are updated as they change.
         Table 9 shows how measures of earnings and asset quality affect the decision to
acquire a bank. Banks with a higher return on equity were taken over later than other
banks, with a one percentage point increase in the return on equity (one-eighth of a
standard deviation) increased the expected time until the bank is purchased by 2 percent.
Higher net losses on assets also increased the time until the bank was purchased with a
one-percentage point increase in this measure (two standard deviations) delaying the
expected time until acquisition by 32 percent. Hence, for the income statement data of the
more limited sample of Federal Reserve member banks, the results suggest that the large
branch banking networks tended to buy middle of the road banks—that is they did not
take over banks with exceptionally strong performances nor did they take over banks
where there were notable asset problems.




                                                      19
iii. Discussion


         In general, we find no evidence that large branching networks preferred to take
over poorly performing banks.31 That they may have preferred to avoid taking over banks
that displayed financial weakness is not surprising since these would be the most difficult
banks to digest or absorb into an existing network of branches. Our findings are not
inconsistent with the conclusions of contemporaneous policymakers and analysts
examining California’s experience. As Ostrolenk (1930, p.177) explained, “Branch bank
organizations, however, sought for purchase mostly stronger banks, nor were they so
improvident of the welfare of their own depositors as to incorporate into their own totals
the slow loans and forfeited real estate of the selling institutions.” In its examination of
branching in the 1920s, the Federal Reserve concluded that, “There is, of course, every
reason to believe that the great majority of the unit banks absorbed by the branch
operating banks of California were in sound condition when taken over. Those in
financial difficulty were undoubtedly the exception rather than the rule (1931, Vol. 8,
p.103).” Although newspaper accounts often played on the drama of taking over troubled
banks during the 1920s (for example, Bank of Italy and Pacific Southwest Trust and
Saving’s bank purchase of troubled Valley Bank of Fresno), there are nevertheless just as
many accounts from the period suggesting that, in general, branching networks preferred
strong banks.32
         Our findings regarding the takeover behavior of expanding banks during the
1920s are similar to those of studies of more recent times. In particular, our results are not
inconsistent with those of Stiroh and Strahan (2003), which find that banks enter markets
by buying good banks. Since we do not find evidence that the stability of the system
allowing branch banking was improved through the removal of weak banks, we now turn
to examining the effects of branching on the remaining, rival unit banks.

31
   Although the sample is much smaller (49 bank purchases), we also examined whether a different pattern
was observed for acquisitions occurring during the Great Depression. The only balance sheet characteristic
that mattered for 1929-33 was the capital-asset ratio; higher values reduced the time it took to be acquired.
32
   For example, when the Bank of America entered the Imperial Valley, the Los Angeles Times reported
that its first acquisition was the First Bank of El Centro, “one of the strongest financial institutions in the
rapidly developing Imperial Valley.” (“Business News of Busy Marts,” Los Angeles Times, February 25,
1923, p.II10). When moving into Kern county, the bank acquired “one of the substantial institutions of San
Joaquin Valley.” (“Bank of Italy Invades Kern,” Los Angeles Times, August 26, 1921, p.I18)


                                                      20
IV. Changes in Bank Behavior Resulting from Consolidation


         We first examine how incumbent banks reacted to the change in the competitive
environment in local banking markets – an issue that has been of interest to economists
analyzing the recent transformation of the U.S. banking industry and those examining
how banking markets in developing countries are affected by foreign bank entry.33 In
particular, we examine whether banks in towns where a branch was established changed
their behavior in response to the fact that they now faced competition from a branch-
banking institution – what is often called the external-market effect. The banking
literature suggests that the dynamics of banking ought to change with the introduction of
branching as it increases competition and breaks down local monopolies. The increase in
competition generated by branching networks occurs over both quantity (customers) and
price: a bank with many branches offers a bundle of services to its customers, including
different types of accounts, different lending products, and additional services. The
remaining unit banks may respond by changing their behavior and improving the
efficiency of their operations.
         Branching networks had a number of advantages that allowed them to compete on
price and offer loans at lower rates than existing unit banks. As noted earlier, branch
banking networks in California generally combined the advantages of small banks
(retaining local management and maintaining lending relationships) with the scale
economies of larger banks (additional expertise from the central office, standardization of
accounting and auditing methods, and reduced overhead costs). Further, branch networks
could shift deposits between branches to take advantage of favorable lending
opportunities.
         Newspaper accounts from the period indicate that large branching institutions,
especially the Bank of America, actively competed on price by offering lower loan rates
than competing unit banks; Giannini argued that he had reduced loan rates in small towns


33
  In this section, our approach is similar to Evanoff and Ors (2002) in that we focus on how entry affects
the behavior of incumbent banks rather than the condition of the acquiring bank. For literature on how
incumbents in developing countries responded to foreign competition see, for example, Claessens,
Demirguc-Kunt, and Huizinga (2001), Denizer (2000), and Martinez, Soledad, and Mody (2004).


                                                    21
to 7 percent, which was anywhere from two to five percentage points lower than what
had previously prevailed. 34 James and James (1954) provide specific examples of
agricultural communities in the San Joaquin Valley where Giannini lowered interest
rates. Analysts writing in the 1920s also argued that entry by branching networks reduced
rates. Preston (1922) stated that, in California, the “immediate effect of the establishment
of branch has been to reduce interest rates for the better class of loans.” Somewhat more
recently, Martin (1952) has suggested that, in addition to lowering interest rates on loans,
the Bank of America paid higher rates of interest to depositors. These practices are
similar to recent bank behavior as noted by Berger, Rosen, and Udell (2001), which finds
lower loan rates in markets dominated by large banks.
         Branching networks also competed on quantity. The legal limits of the 1920s,
which were based on capital and surplus, likely restricted the ability of smaller banks to
lend to larger customers. All else equal, since branched banks were generally much larger
in size than unit banks, they could move into a location and capture the business of large
customers who may have otherwise gone to a bank outside of the municipality to borrow.
This advantage was well known by regulators and bankers during the period.35 Finally,
branch banks also carried out campaigns to lure depositors from other institution; one
way of luring customers was by offering additional products, such as selling securities
and trust services, which smaller banks did not necessarily provide.36


A. Estimates of an External Market Effect


         Competition over price, quantity, and products may have elicited rival firms to
change their management or organizational practices, reduce costs, increase revenues, or
improve their product mix in response to the presence of branching networks. We analyze

34
   House of Representatives (1930, Volume 2, Part 2, pp.1547, 1556). See also “Future Fields of Branch
Banking,” Coast Banker, February 1924, p.153.
35
   For example, see the comments of Will C. Wood, Superintendent of California State Banking, Coast
Banker, August 20, 1927, “Mr. Wood Analyzes McFadden Act” and comments and data from James
Balcigalupi’s testimony to the House of Representatives (1930, Volume 2, Part 2, p.1392).
36
   Bankers from the 1920s referred to the additional services a parent institution could provide through its
branch banks as “equipment services.” These included the purchase and sale of exchange, bonds and
commercial paper, acceptances, credit departments, letters of credit, collection of drafts, and research and
specialists for advising on real estate and commodity markets. See John E. Barber, “Branch Banking in
California,” Los Angeles Times, October 5, 1922, p.IV7.


                                                     22
the external effects of consolidation and branch expansion by testing whether various
balance sheet ratios and earnings measures changed more between 1922 and 1929 for
banks that began competing with branch banks than for banks that either did not face
such competition or that already faced it at the beginning of the sample period (and thus
had already altered their behavior).37 We control for the initial characteristics of the unit
banks (as of 1922), city and county characteristics (such as the population growth rate
over the period, the share of 1920 county income in agriculture, and distance from a large
city), and changes in the banking environment in the city (including whether there was
any unit bank entry between 1922 and 1929). We examine the effects of competing with
the Bank of America, other large branch bank networks, and small branch banks. For
non-branching bank i, we estimate the following equation using ordinary least squares:


(4) Change in the balance sheet or income measurei =
           f{ β1-3 Indicators of changes in competition from branchingi + β4 New unit bank enters towni
           β5 State banki + β6 Log age of banki + β7 Trust departmenti +
           β8 Population growth rate in town 1922-1929i + β9 Distance to large cityi +
           β10 Distance to large city squaredi + β11 Share of county income from agriculturei }.


           When analyzing changes in balance sheet variables for incumbent banks, we use
two specifications of the indicators that capture competition from branch banking. The
first includes indicators for whether the Bank of America, the other three large branching
networks, and small branching banks established branches; the second specification uses
indicators of whether the bank started to compete with one large branch bank or with
multiple large branch banks. The results of the regressions (shown respectively in Tables
10 and 11) present some evidence that incumbent banks, which faced new competition
from branch banks, made changes that were consistent with efforts to increase their
profitability. In several specifications, we find that banks competing with large branch
banking networks increased loans relative to assets more than those not facing branching
competition (loans typically earned a higher rate of return than other assets). This change
may not be surprising if the interest rate banks were able to charge on loans decreased
following the entrance of a branch bank, as reported in contemporary accounts from the

37
     We thank Charles Calomiris and Joseph Mason for providing profit data for 1929.


                                                       23
1920s. To support their earnings, banks might have responded by rebalancing their
portfolios to increase loans. (Another possible explanation is that the growth in loans at
banks starting to face competition from large branch banks occurred as the remaining unit
banks hired former loan officers of purchased banks. However, as we indicated earlier,
historical evidence from the period indicates that the large branching networks were
adept at maintaining the management of banks they purchased in order to continue
lending relationships. 38 ) Our analysis suggests that the increase in loans occurred as
securities as a share of assets declined. Since the growth rate of interest-earning assets
does not appear to have been significantly affected by changes in competition, the
increase in loans and decrease in securities appear to be consistent with a rebalancing of
unit-bank portfolios. We also find that banks entering into competition with multiple
large, branch-banking networks (or the Bank of America) increased the share of demand
deposits relative to total deposits. Demand deposits were generally lower cost deposits
(Secrist 1930), so this further change in behavior is also consistent with efforts to
increase efficiency and profitability. (These position changes also increase the potential
loss and liquidity risks to the bank, so the impact on survival is unclear.)
         When analyzing changes in earnings ratios for incumbent banks, the branching
variable we use is whether the bank started to compete with any of the four large branch
banks (i.e., the bank went from not competing with any of the four large branch banks to


38
   We verified this by examining detailed records of Security Trust and Savings Bank and the Bank of
America reported in the Annual Reports of the Superintendent of Banks of California, the Federal Reserve
Reports of Condition (call reports) and court documents (United States Court of Appeals for the Third
Circuit No. 10768 Transamerica Corporation v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 1952,
Volume 10, Board Exhibit 27). These documents provided information on whether management was
retained at banks purchased between the years 1922-1926. Security Trust and Savings Bank, which also
provided information on advisory board participation, had an extremely high retention rate; it retained key
management (officers or directors) of the formerly independent unit bank to run branches or serve on the
advisory board of the newly created branch office in 85 percent of the banks it acquired. For Bank of
America, we can only examine whether management was retained to actively run the bank rather than serve
on the advisory board. Even in this more limited capacity, we find that roughly 25 percent of Bank of
America’s bank purchases during this period employed former key management as either branch managers
or vice presidents of the branch. Additional officers of the purchased bank were often transferred within the
larger Bank of America organization to achieve cost savings at the bank while retaining local expertise
(Martin, 1952, p.184). On the other hand, according to calculations based on data from the Annual Reports
of the Superintendent of Banks of California of 1922-28, unit banks competing with these newly opened
branches were much less successful at luring away the management of formerly independent banks. Only
11 percent of rival unit banks succeeded in hiring the former management of an independent bank located
in their town in the three years following the purchase of a unit bank by one of the branching networks.
(This calculation excludes those bank purchased in the very largest California cities.)


                                                     24
competing with at least one of them).39 As Table 12 shows, banks facing new competition
from one of the four large, branch-banking networks had greater declines in
administrative costs relative to expense than other banks. This finding is consistent with
efforts to increase efficiency. Further, we look at profitability directly by examining the
return on equity and on assets.40 While we do not find a statistically significant impact for
return on equity, we do find a positive effect on banks’ return on assets, which provides
some evidence that profitability increased more at banks that began competing with a
large branching network than at banks which did not face such competition. (Comparing
the average changes for the groups—not shown in tables—the return on assets fell 28
basis points at banks where the level of competition was unchanged, but rose slightly at
banks where competition increased.)


B. Accounting for Selection Bias


            It is possible that branching networks only chose to expand into areas or towns
that were more stable or profitable. If this were the case, we would be attributing the
changes in balance sheets to changes induced by competition rather than the branching
network’s ability to enter markets in a selective fashion.
            The historical record suggests that branch-banking systems were not particularly
selective with respect to location. For example, Giannini commented in 1927 that he
wanted a truly comprehensive branching network, and “he set himself the goal of having
at least one of his branches in every California town” (Nash, 1992, p.72). According to
the official biographers of Bank of America, to fulfill this goal, Giannini pushed his
branching empire into “the remote high country of California – the timberlands, the cattle
domains, the fishing and hunting areas, the mining centers” (James and James, 1954,
p.225). They describe his efforts to establish branches in the remote mountain regions of
the state, including at the base of Mt. Shasta in Dunsmuir and in the Sierras, as well as in
desert communities, such as Owens Valley, which had been left without a bank after a
prominent bank failure (James and James, 1954, p.226-8). Giannini’s goal of blanketing


39
     We are not able to use more disaggregated measures due to the reduced sample size.
40
     Return on assets is the ratio of net earnings after accounting for net loan losses to assets.


                                                         25
the state with branches is also reflected by the extent of his branching empire as of 1929,
as shown in Figure 2.
         In addition to evidence from the historical record, we also address the issue of
selection bias with instrumental variables (IV) regressions. Tables 13 and 14 report the
first-stage results and IV estimates when the external effect on unit banks is considered
for balance sheet characteristics (as in Table 10). For our instrumental variables, we
employ characteristics of towns or cities that are correlated with the branch location
decision of the four large branch bank networks, but unlikely to be correlated with the
changes in unit bank balance sheets. These include the town or city’s population in 1922,
whether it is city in north of state, the county’s population in 1910, and an interaction
variable of city population and the north of state indicator.41 As shown in Table 14, the
reported coefficients on the branching variables (defined as at least one large branch
banking network in the town) do not appear sensitive to controlling for selection bias; the
results are similar to what we reported in Table 10. The coefficient on branching is
statistically significant and positive when the dependent variable is the loan to assets ratio
and statistically significant and negative when the dependent variable is the securities to
assets ratio. Similar results to those presented in Table 11 are found when we examined
the profitability measures (not reported).
         Thus, our analysis using balance sheet characteristics and profitability measures
provides a consistent story, and mirrors reports from contemporaries that banks took
steps to increase profitability in response to competition from branch networks. The
Coast Banker, a newspaper covering banking on the Pacific Coast, reported that:
         Cooperation is strengthening the independent banks in their competition
         with chain and branch banking systems was the view expressed by T.C.
         Scroggs, vice president, National Bank of Commerce, Los
         Angeles…speakers stressed the point that the rivalry between the two
         systems was resulting in more efficient management of independent banks
         (Vol. 44, Feb 20, 1930, p.97).


41
  Overidentification tests from the first-stage regressions based suggest that the instruments are orthogonal
to the dependent variable; the p values for Sargan’s test statistic for the four balance sheet characteristics
shown in columns 1-4 of Table 12 are 0.72, 0.90, 0.40, 0.39, respectively. As might be expected (given the
results of Section III, the F statistic on the first stage is large (15.3) and the instruments are statistically
significant at standard confidence levels; this suggests that the instruments are correlated with the branch
location decision. Following Angrist and Krueger (2001) and Kelejian (1971) we use a linear model to
generate first-stage predicted values in order to avoid misspecification.


                                                      26
These results are also similar to findings of research analyzing recent changes in the
banking system following consolidation. Some studies (such as Berger and Hannan 1998;
Dick 2006; and Deyoung, Hasan, and Kirschoff 1998) find that in the 1990s, banks
facing less competition were less efficient, and that when competition was introduced,
efficiency eventually improved. Berger, Dick, Goldberg, and White (2005) find that
competing with a large multi-market bank boosted small bank profitability in the 1980s,
but reduced it during the 1990s.42


V. How did Competition with Branches Affect the Stability of the Banking System?


         We have thus far verified that the wave of branch banking that occurred in
California in the 1920s is broadly similar, in terms of the effects of competition and entry,
to what researchers have identified for the recent wave of consolidation. We now turn to
analyzing the long-run effects of bank stability and assessing how competition from a
branching institution affected the survival of banks following the onset of the Great
Depression. A priori, the effect of competition on stability is ambiguous. Competition
could decrease stability by depriving banks of monopoly profits that might support them
during difficult times.43 Alternatively, and consistent with the evidence from Section IV,
the increased efficiency brought about by competition could better enable smaller banks
to deal with economic difficulties and thereby increase stability. We test these competing
hypotheses by examining whether the establishment of a branch in the town is associated
with an increase or decrease in the expected survival time of a bank. Since there were few
bank failures in California before 1930, we focus on bank failures in the interval from
June 30, 1929 and March 1, 1933 (prior to the government-mandated bank holiday).


A. Estimating Bank Survivorship during the Great Depression



42
   Our results are also qualitatively similar to literature on foreign bank penetration into developing country
banking markets; several studies (Claessens, Demigurc-Kunt, and Huizinga 2001; Claessens and Laeven
2003; and Sturm and Williams 2002) find that greater foreign bank entry and fewer restrictions on entry are
associated with more competitive national banking markets.
43
   Further, loans are riskier than many other assets. Thus, if competition prompted banks to increase the
ratio of loans to other assets, then competition may have increased the risk level of these banks.


                                                      27
         We test our hypothesis using duration analysis. This framework allows us to
update our competition variables as they change between 1929 and 1933. We consider
how time to failure was affected by (1) the presence of a Bank of America branch, (2) the
presence of other large branch banks, (3) or the presence of small branch banks. We also
add a variety of balance sheet and location characteristics (including new unit bank entry)
that previous research has found to affect survival time of banks. The location-specific
variables include ones that are similar to those used previously as well as the county
unemployment rate in 1930 (to control for the severity of economic distress at the start of
the period) and the share of county income from agriculture (1929). Balance sheet
characteristics and other bank-specific attributes are initial 1929 values. For each non-
branch bank i, we estimate the equation:


(5) Time until failurei = f {β1Branch of the Bank of America in townit +
         β2Branch of other large branch banks in townit + β3Branch of a small bank in townit +
         β4Log assetsi + β5Loans to assetsi + β6Securities to assetsi + β7Capital to assetsi +
         β8Surplus to assetsi + β9Excess capital ratioi + β10Excess surplus ratioi + β11Cash to depositsi +
         β12Demand deposits to total depositsi + β12State bank indicatori + β13Log age of banki +
         β15Trust Depti + β16Log city populationi + β17Distance to large cityi +
         β18Distance to large city squaredi + β19Banks per capitait +
         β20One bank in townit + β21New unit bank enters towni +
         β22Share of county income from agriculturei + β22County unemployment ratei},
where t indicates that the characteristic changes over time. Failure indicates unit banks
failing between June 30, 1929 and March 1, 1933.
         The results shown in Table 15 are consistent with the notion that competition
increases stability. We find that banks facing competition from the Bank of America had
an expected survival time about 86 percent longer than banks not facing similar
competition. For banks that failed, the average time until failure was 632 days, so the
impact of competing with the Bank of America would seem quite notable. Thus, it
appears that the benefits of increased efficiency exceeded any loss of monopoly profits or
risk associated with the changes in balance sheet positions. Somewhat surprisingly, we do
not find a similar effect from competition from other banks. This may reflect the impact
of the Bank of America on more banks, as its branching network was larger and had
greater geographical coverage than those of other banks. We also examined the effects of


                                                     28
competing with multiple large banks by replacing the previous branching variables with
indicators for whether the bank competed with one or more large branching networks.
Unit banks competing with multiple large branching networks had an expected survival
time about double that of banks not competing with any large branch bank while those
competing with a single large branch bank increased their expected survival time by 50
percent (the coefficients for competing with one large branch network and multiple
branch networks are not statistically different). These results are also consistent with the
simple counts of failures displayed in Table 6, which shows more bank failures during
the Depression in cities lacking one of the large branch banking networks.44
        We find statistically significant effects on survival for a few other factors included
in our model. State banks performed worse than national banks (their expected survival
time was 33 percent shorter), and banks with a larger surplus survived longer. 45
(Curiously, we find reduced survivability for banks with higher capital-to-asset ratios.)
As would be predicted, there is also some evidence that banks in areas with more
unemployment failed sooner. The branching results also appear robust to including
county-level fixed effects to control for unobserved characteristics that may be driving
differences in bank failures (Table 16).


B. Accounting for Selection Bias in the Survival Analysis


        As was the case with our empirical estimates of the external effect of branch
competition on balance sheet characteristics, it is possible that the empirical estimates of
survivorship for unit banks, exposed to competition from branching networks, are
overstated due to selection bias. That is, branching networks may have chosen to expand
in cities or towns that were inherently more stable. If this were the case, we would be
attributing greater survivorship for unit banks during the Great Depression in these areas
to changes induced by competition rather than the branching network’s ability to enter

44
  As one banking analyst writing in 1930 concluded, “It is not meant to imply here that branch banks
loaned wisely and unit banks unwisely. As in any other economic situation, there were sheep and goats on
both sides. Yet the sounder policies of branch banks had wider influence and frequently affected the unit
banks (Ostrolenk, 1930, p.177).”




                                                   29
markets in a selective fashion. As we discussed in Section IV, the historical record
provides suggestive evidence that selection bias may not be a significant problem for
estimating the effects of branching on bank survivorship during our sample period.
Nevertheless, since the empirical estimates of the effects of branching on bank failures
are of fundamental interest, we also provide some econometric evidence. We first report
on IV regressions for unit bank survivorship and then provide an estimate of the degree
of selection bias.
         In order to control for selection bias, we instrument for the branching variable
using a similar set of instruments for the branch location decision as were used in the IV
regressions shown in Section IV: the town or city’s population in 1922, whether the city
is a county seat, whether it is city in north of state, distance to a large city, distance to a
large city (squared), and interactions of distance from a large city and city size. Since
two-stage duration estimates are inconsistent (Cameron and Trivedi 2005), we rely on IV
probit regressions to provide suggestive evidence whether our results are sensitive to
selection bias. The first-stage results are reported in Table 17; branching is defined as one
large branching network in the town.46 Because the definition of branching is slightly
different from what we reported in Tables 15 and 16, Table 18 reports both standard
probit estimates (first two columns) and the IV probit estimates (last two columns).47 As
the first row shows, the coefficient on at least one large branch banking network in the
town is positive and statistically significant in both the probit and the IV probit models.
The IV results are thus consistent with our earlier findings: that competition from
branching networks improved the survivability of unit banks during the Great
Depression.48


45
   We also tried including a dummy for whether the bank was a Federal Reserve member; however, there
were too few state member banks in the sample to get an accurate assessment of the effect of Federal
Reserve membership.
46
   The F statistic on the first stage is very large (26.2) and the t statistics on the instruments are large,
suggesting that the instruments are correlated with the branch location decision. To implement the IV
procedure, we also need to hold the branching competition variable constant at its 1929 value rather than
updating it as in the preceding analysis.
47
   We use this definition of branching for the IV estimates so that branching is defined in the same way
when estimating the amount of selection bias. Since the strategy for measuring selection bias is based on a
single treatment effect (Altonji, Elder, and Taber 2005), this required us to simplify the definition from
what was used in Tables 14 and 15.
48
   We also considered a Heckman selection model where we estimated a two-stage treatment-effect model
similar to Maddala (1983). In the first stage, we estimated a logit model examining whether a variety of


                                                     30
         Because IV estimates depend on both the plausibility (that the instruments affect
the branch location decision but not bank survivorship) and “power” (that they are not
“too weak” in an overidentified model), we present an alternative approach for dealing
with the issue of selection bias. We construct an estimate of the degree of selection bias
in our baseline regressions following the methodology of Altonji, Elder, and Taber
(2005). Although we cannot directly observe how much influence unobserved city
characteristics have on our estimated effect of branching on bank survivability, we can
conduct the following thought experiment: how much selection on unobservable
characteristics would be required to eliminate the estimated positive effect that branching
has on survivability.
         Intuitively, we use the degree of selection on observables to provide information
about how much selection there is on unobservables. We start by considering the formula
for omitted variables bias in an OLS equation of the variable of interest (survival) on the
city observables (X), the predicted value of branching based on observables from a first
stage regression, and the value of branching not based on the observables (BR*):


(6) plimαˆ ≅ α + [Var ( BR ) / Var ( BR*)][Ε(ε | BR = 1) − Ε(ε | BR = 0)]


where α is the effect of the branching variable on the variable of interest, BR is an
indicator variable for the presence of a branching network in the town, BR* is the part of
BR that is orthogonal to the observables, and ε is the regression residual. The term
[Var(BR)/Var(BR*)][E(ε | BR=1) – E(ε | BR=0)] represents the bias. Under the null
hypothesis of no effect from branching, the entire estimated “treatment effect” results


city and county characteristics affected whether any large branch bank network established a branch in the
town between 1922 and 1929; this is similar to the regression shown in equation (1). Using the coefficients
from the first stage, we determined a treatment effect, which is related to the latent desirability of the
municipality as a branch location. We estimated the second stage with this treatment effect. Standard errors
of this procedure are determined by bootstrapping the entire procedure. In our first stage regression, we
also include the growth of deposits between 1924 and 1928 (Data on branch deposits by city are from
United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit No. 10768 Transamerica Corporation v. Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System 1952.) Including deposit growth allows us to capture (to some
extent) whether the growth potential of the city is influenced the branch decision. The results are similar to
those presented earlier in the paper: competing with either the Bank of America or with multiple large
branch banks increases the expected survival time; however, the statistical significance for competing with
a single branch bank is somewhat weaker compared to the results presented in Section V. Results are
available from the authors upon request.


                                                     31
from unobservable characteristics. In the limit, equation (6) also holds when a probit
regression is used. In order to determine [E(ε | BR=1) – E(ε | BR=0)] for the probit
regression, we rely on the following condition:


(7) [Ε(ε | BR = 1) − Ε(ε | BR = 0)] / Var(ε ) = [Ε( X ' γ | BR = 1) − Ε( X ' γ | BR = 0)] / Var( X ' γ )
where γ represents the coefficients relating the city observables to the variable of interest.
Thus we are able to create an upper bound in the bias in a bivariate probit model. The
ratio [αˆ / bias ] describes how much larger the selection on unobservables would have to
be relative to the selection on observables to eliminate the treatment effect.
        To construct the estimated amount of bias described above, we estimate three
models: (1) a model where branching is included and defined similarly to the IV
specifications shown in the paper (Y=αBR+γX+ε in the notation above); (2) an
equivalent model to the first, but where the branching variable is set equal to zero
(Y=γX+ε in the notation above); and (3) a model similar to that shown in Table 7, where
branching is the dependent variable and is a function of observables (BR=βX+BR* in the
notation above). Table 19 shows our computations where the first two regressions are
specified either as probits or duration models. The first column of Table 19 uses
regression model (2) and computes the average predicted values subject to the branching
effect and the average predicted values not subject to branching and normalizes these by
the variance of the predicted values. Larger values suggest there are more notable
differences in observables between these two groups. Column 2 shows the variance of the
errors from the second regression model (and in the case of the probit is defined to be
equal to 1). Column 3, the product of the first two columns, shows the differences in the
error terms for the branching and non-branching cities. Column 4 provides the estimate of
the magnitude of the bias while column 5 is the estimated "treatment effect" – the effect
of branching from model (1). The last column, labeled implied ratio, shows how large the
selection problem would have to be in order to reduce the branching effect to zero, and is
column 5 divided by column 4. As this column indicates, selection on the unobservables
would have to be either 2.1 or 2.9 times as strong as selection on the observables
(depending on whether we use the probit or duration model) in order to explain away the
entire effect that branch-banking has on unit bank failure rates during the Great


                                                  32
Depression. As this degree of selection bias seems unlikely, these results suggest that
there is indeed a positive effect from competition with branch banks on survival.

VI. Conclusions


       This paper has examined the 20th century’s first episode of the development of
large-scale branch banking networks in the United States and has shown how these
networks transformed the banking system in California. Because our sample tracks a
large number of banks over time as they are exposed to increased competition and then to
a large macroeconomic shock, we are able to provide a thorough assessment of the
relationship between competition and stability. Our empirical approach enables us to
show that the unit banks competing with large branch banking networks were the ones
that became more efficient, and were also subsequently more resistant to the shocks of
the Great Depression (even when we control for selection bias).
       Similar to the recent wave of bank mergers in the United States, we show that
consolidation in California in the 1920s occurred as branching networks expanded.
Moreover, we find evidence of an external effect: remaining banks changed their
behavior in response to large branching networks in ways that are consistent with
increased efficiency. These results are similar to what has been found in Syverson (2004)
and the structural dynamic panel IO literature, which emphasizes how a reduction in
barriers can breed efficiency. We then find that branching affects stability. Banks
competing with these large branch banks, especially the Bank of America, were better
able to survive the Great Depression, likely because they were forced to become more
efficient. These results provide a coherent story about why U.S. states that allowed
branching in the 1930s fared better during the Great Depression. In doing so, we show
that an important benefit of branch banking, and an important reason why states
permitting it fared better in the 1930s, was that the expansion of branch banking
unleashes the disciplinary powers of competition. By emphasizing the competitive effects
of branching (rather than diversification benefits), we are able to reconcile the seemingly
disparate empirical findings regarding the effects of branching at the aggregate level
(Mitchener 2005 and Wheelock 1995) and at the bank level (Calomiris and Mason 2003



                                            33
and Carlson 2004). The results allow us to speculate that the removal of branching
restrictions and the wave of consolidation in the U.S. today may lead to a banking system
that is more resistant to financial shocks.




                                              34
References
Allen, Douglas and William Gale. (2004). “Competition and Financial Stability.” Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking, Part 2, June, pp. 453-80.

Alston, Lee, Wayne Grove, and David Wheelock. (1994). “Why Do Banks Fail?
Evidence from the 1920s.” Explorations in Economic History, Vol. 31, pp. 409-31.

Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber. (2005). “Selection on
Observed and Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools.”
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 113(1), pp.151-84.

Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B.Krueger. (2001). “Instrumental Variables and the Search
for Identification: From Supply and Demand to Natural Experiments.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 15(4), pp. 69-85.

Berger, Allen, Rebecca Demsetz, and Phillip Strahan. (1999). “The Consolidation of the
Financial Services Industry: Causes, Consequences, and Implications for the Future.”
Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol. 23, pp. 135-194.

Berger, Allen, Astrid Dick, Lawrence Goldberg, and Lawrence White. (2005). “The
Effects of Competition from Large, Multimarket Firms on the Performance of Small
Single-market Firms: Evidence from the Banking Industry.” FEDS Working Paper Series
2005-15.

Berger, Allen and Timothy Hannan. (1998). “The Efficiency Cost of Market Power in the
Banking Industry: A Test of the ‘Quiet Life’ and Related Hypotheses.” The Review of
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 80(3), pp. 454-65.

Berger, Allen, Anil Kashyap, and Joseph Scalise. (1995). “The Transformation of the
U.S. Banking Industry: What a Long, Strange Trip It’s Been.” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, Issue 2, pp. 55-218.

Berger, Allen, Richard J. Rosen, and Gregory Udell. (2002). “The Effect of Market Size
Structure on Competition: the Case of Small Business Lending.” Federal Reserve Bank
of Chicago Working Paper WP 2001-10.

Berger, Allen and Gregory Udell. (2002). “Small Business Credit Availability and
Related Lending: The Importance of Bank Organizational Structure.” Economic Journal,
Vol. 112 (477), pp. F32-F35.

Bonadio, Felice A. (1994) A.P. Giannini, Banker of America. Berkeley: University of
California Press.

California State Department of Finance. (2004). “Historical Census Populations of
California State, Counties, Cities, Places, and Towns, 1850 – 2000.”



                                          35
http://www.dof.ca.gov/HTML/DEMOGRAP/Histtext.htm. Demographic Research Unit.
Sacramento, CA (Available August 2004).

Calomiris, Charles. (2000). U.S. Bank Deregulation in Historical Perspective.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Calomiris, Charles and Joseph Mason. (2003). “Fundamentals, Panics, and Bank Distress
During the Depression.” American Economic Review Vol. 93(5), pp. 1615-1647.

Cameron, A. Colin and Pravi K. Trivedi. (2005). Microeconometrics: Methods and
Applications. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Carlson, Mark. (2004). “Are Branch Banks Better Survivors? Evidence from the
Depression Era.” Economic Inquiry Vol. 42(1), pp. 111-126.

Claessens, Stijn, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Harry Huizinga. (2001). “How Does Foreign
Entry Affect the Domestic Banking Market?” Journal of Banking and Finance 25(5), pp.
891-911.

Claessens, Stijn and L. Laeven. (2003). “What Drives Bank Competition? Some
International Evidence.” World Bank, Policy Research Working Paper Series 3113.

Comptroller of the Currency. (various years). Annual Report. Washington, DC: United
States Government Printing Office.

Comptroller of the Currency. (various years). Statements of Condition. Washington, DC:
United States Government Printing Office.

Denizer, C. (2000). “Foreign Entry in Turkey’s Banking Sector, 1980–1997.” In Stijn
Claessens and Marion Jansen, eds., The Internationalization of Financial Services: Issues
and Lessons for Developing Countries. Boston: Kluwer Academic.

DeYoung, Robert, Iftekhar Hasan, and Bruce Kirchhoff. (1998). “The Impact of Out-of-
State Entry on the Cost Efficiency of Local Commercial Banks.” Journal of Economics
and Business, Vol. 22(5), pp. 191-203.

Dick, Astrid. (2006). “Nationwide Branch Banking and Its Impact on Market Structure,
Quality and Bank Performance.” Journal of Business, Vol. 79(2), pp. 567-592.

Evanoff, Douglas D. and Ors, Evren. (2002). “Local Market Consolidation and Bank
Productive Efficiency.” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper WP 2002-25.

Federal Reserve Board of Governors. (1931). Report of the Branch, Chain, and Group
Banking Committee. Washington, DC: Board of Governors.

Friedman, Milton and Anna Schwartz. (1963). A Monetary History of the United States,
1867-1960. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.


                                           36
Hoggarth, G. and V. Saporta (2001). “Costs of Banking System Instability: Some
Empirical Evidence,” Financial Stability Review, pp.148-165.

House of Representatitives. (1930). Branch, Chain, and Group Banking. Hearings before
the Committee on Banking and Currency., 71st Congress, under H.R. 141, May 6-8.

James, Marquis and Bessie Rowland James. (1954). Biography of a Bank; the Story of
Bank of America N.T. & S.A. New York, NY: Harper Press.

Jayaratne, Jith, and Philip E. Strahan. (1998). “Entry Restrictions, Industry Evolution,
and Dynamic Efficiency: Evidence from Commercial Banking.” Journal of Law and
Economics, Vol.41, pp. 239-73.

Kelejian, H. H. (1971). “Two-Stage Least Squares and Econometric Systems Linear in
Parameters but Nonlinear in the Endogenous Variables.” Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 66, pp.373-74.

Maddala, G. S. (1983). Limited Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Economics.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Martin, George Preston. (1952). A Comparison of the Economic Roles of Multiple Outlet
Banking and Unit Banking in California, 1920-1950. Ph.D. Dissertation, Indiana
University.

Martinez Peria, Maria Soledad and Ashoka Mody. (2004). “How Foreign Participation
and Market Concentration Impact Bank Spreads: Evidence From Latin America,”
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Part 2, June, pp. 511-37.

Mitchener, Kris. (2005). “Bank Supervision, Regulation, and Instability During the Great
Depression.” Journal of Economic History 65(1), pp. 152-85.

Nash, Gerald D. (1992). A.P. Giannini and the Bank of America. Norman, OK:
University of Oklahoma Press.

Ostrolenk, Bernhard. (1930). The Economics of Branch Banking. New York: Harper &
Brothers.

Preston, Howard H. (1922). “Branch Banking with Special Reference to California
Conditions.” Journal of Political Economy 30(4), pp. 494-517.

Rand McNally. (various years). Rand McNally Bankers Directory and the Bankers
Registry. Chicago: Rand McNally & Co.

Secrist, Horace. (1930). Banking Ratios. Stanford University: Stanford University Press.




                                            37
Stiroh, Kevin J. and Philip E. Strahan. (2003). “Competitive Dynamics of Deregulation:
Evidence from U.S. Banking.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Vol. 35, pp. 801-
28.

Sturm, Jan-Egbert and Barry Williams. (2002). “Deregulation, Entry or Foreign Banks
and Bank Efficiency in Australia.” CESifo Working Paper No. 816.

Superintendent of Banks of the State of California. (various years). Annual Report.
Sacramento: California State Printing Office.

Syverson, Chad. (2004). “Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete Example.”
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 112(6), pp. 1181-1222.

U.S. Department of Commerce. (1910, 1920, 1930). Census of the United States.
Washington, DC: Department of Commerce.

Westerfield, Ray B. (1939). Historical Survey of Branch Banking in the United States.
New York: American Economists Council for the Study of Branch Banking.

Wheelock, David. (1993). “Government Policy and Banking Market Structure in the
1920s.” Journal of Economic History, Vol. 53(4), pp. 857-879.

Wheelock, David. (1995). “Regulation, Market Structure, and the Bank Failures
of the Great Depression.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 77, pp. 27-
38.

White, Eugene. (1985). “The Merger Movement in Banking, 1919-33.” Journal of
Economic History, Vol. 45(2), pp. 285-91.




                                           38
                                    Figure 1
                         Number of Branches in California


  800

  700

  600

  500

  400

  300

  200

  100

    0
        1900      1905        1910      1915     1920       1925   1930

Source: Federal Reserve (1931).




                                       39
                                          Figure 2
                       Extent of Branching by Bank of America in 1929




Source: Annual Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of California (various years), Rand
McNally (various years), Comptroller of Currency Annual Report and Statements of Conditions (various
years), and internal records of the Bank of America.

                                         Figure 3
                Extent of Branching by Security-First National Bank in 1929




Source: Annual Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of CA (various years), Rand McNally
(various years), Comptroller of Currency Annual Report and Statements of Conditions (various years).



                                                  40
                                         Figure 4
                    Extent of Branching by American Trust Bank in 1929




Source: Annual Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of CA (various years), Rand McNally
(various years), Comptroller of Currency Annual Report and Statements of Conditions (various years).


                                           Figure 5
                        Extent of Branching by California Bank in 1929




Source: Annual Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of CA (various years), Rand McNally
(various years), Comptroller of Currency Annual Report and Statements of Conditions (various years).




                                                  41
                                                 Table 1
                                  Branches in the United States in 1929
                                       New                        North        Rest of the        United
                          California              Michigan
                                       York                     Carolina      United States     States Total

Branches in the bank’s
                             314         662          434           11             872              2293
home office city
Branches outside the
bank’s home office           538           0              0         66             452              1056
city
Total branches               852         662          434           77            1324              3349

Notes and sources: New York and Michigan have the most total branches after California. North Carolina
has the most branches outside the city of the bank’s home office after California. Federal Reserve (1931).


                                                Table 2
                                     Branches in California in 1929
                             Bank of     Security American California All other   Total
                             America      Trust       Bank        Bank banks    California

      Home Office               56             58             34     32          78           258
      Outside                   387             79            63     13          53           595
      Total Branches            443            137            97     45         131           853

Notes and sources: Annual Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of California (various years),
Rand McNally (various years), Comptroller of Currency Annual Report and Statements of Conditions
(various years), and internal records of the Bank of America. The Bank of America had head offices in two
cities; the nationally chartered Bank of Italy was headquartered in San Francisco and the state-chartered
Bank of America was headquartered in Los Angeles.

                                                Table 3
             Branches by Size of Municipality for the Four Largest Branching Banks in 1929
                     Bank of America         Security Trust        American Bank       California Bank
                               Percent of        Percent of        Percent of        Percent of
 Town Population     Number      Total    Number   Total    Number   Total    Number   Total
Under 500              22         5.0       2       1.5       2       2.1       1       2.2
500-1,000              31         7.0       4       3.0       2       2.1       1       2.2
1,000-2,500            52        11.8       14     10.4        7      7.4       2       4.4
2,500-5,000            45        10.2        4      3.0       8       8.4       1       2.2
5,000-10,000           50        11.4       16     11.9       10     10.5        3      6.7
10,000-25,000          24         5.5       15     11.2        5      5.3       1       2.2
25,000-50,000          28         6.4        5      3.7        3      3.2       2       4.4
50,000-100,000         24         5.5       11      8.2        9      9.5       2       4.4
100,000+              164        37.3       63     47.0       49     51.6       32     71.1

Total                    440         100      134         100         95        100        45         100
Sources: Annual Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of California (various years), Rand
McNally (various years), Comptroller of Currency Annual Report and Statements of Conditions (various
years), and internal records of the Bank of America. The four largest branching networks are those shown
in table 2.


                                                     42
                                                 Table 4
                     Branch Establishment: De Novo versus Merger or Acquisition (M&A)


          Los Angeles         San Francisco          Other Large City     Other Small City       California

Year    De Novo Merger De Novo          Merger       De Novo Merger De Novo        Merger     De Novo   Merger
1923       27     2       6               3             16     6       19           29           68      40
1924       30     2       6               1             10     3       10           21           56      27
1925       17     3        7              0              2     5        7           32           33      40
1926       21     4        4              0              6     2        2           14           33      20
1927       24     6       21              3             21    13       24           59           90      81
1928        4     2       5               3             10     4       18           22           37      31
1929        5     5        2              1              2     1        3           12           12      19
1930        2     0       0               0              0     0        7            6            9       6
1931        2     0       0               0              3     0        1            1            6       1
1932        1     1       0               0              0     0        2            0            3       1

Total     133        25        51         11           70          34      93        196        347          266

  Notes and sources: Large cities are defined a population greater than or equal to 20,000 in 1922. Annual
  Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of California (various years), Rand McNally (various
  years), Comptroller of Currency Annual Report and Statements of Conditions (various years), internal
  records of the Bank of America, and California State Department of Finance (2004).



                                                    Table 5
                Distribution of Banks by Town Size (1922) and M&A Activity from 1922 to 1929
                                                                      Mergers &
                                                  Banks             Acquisitions
                                                         Percent of              Percent of
                      Town Population      Number          Total        Number     Total
                     Under 500               59             8.5           26        5.8
                     500-1,000               88            12.7           40        8.9
                     1,000-2,500            163            23.6           83       18.6
                     2,500-5,000            118            17.1           62       13.9
                     5,000-10,000            72            10.4           69       15.4
                     10,000-25,000           55             8.0           40        8.9
                     25,000-50,000           37             5.4           25        5.6
                     50,000-100,000          32             4.6           28        6.3
                     100,000+                67             9.7           74       16.6

                     Total                     691           100         447        100

  Sources: Annual Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of California (various years), Rand
  McNally (various years), Comptroller of Currency Annual Report and Statements of Conditions (various
  years), and internal records of the Bank of America, and California State Department of Finance (2004).




                                                        43
                                                   Table 6
                         Bank Activity over Time by the Extent of Branching in the City

         No large branching networks        One large branching network        Multiple large branching networks
                new                                new                                  new
year   banks         mergers failures banks                 mergers failures banks              mergers failures
               banks                              banks                                banks
1922 583          25       41         2      29       7        7         0       110       6           5     0
1923 530          35       39         1      80      16        7         0       107       7          16     0
1924 474          12       29         0      98       2        2         0       125       3           6     0
1925 427          14       36         2     113      10       13         0       134       7           3     0
1926 384          14       18         2     135      11       13         0       148       8           6     1
1927 320          11       59         4     115      10       36         0       130       9          33     0
1928 254           5       32         1     131       5       13         0       130       11         25     0
1929 218          3        14         2     145       7        9         0       135       6           7     1
1930 208          3         4         5     144       4        5         1       131       1           7     1
1931 189          0         5        10     141       0        3         2       129       1           2     3
1932 171           0        4        14     125       1        4        13       119       0          5      5
    Sources: Annual Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of California (various years), Rand
    McNally (various years), Comptroller of Currency Annual Report and Statements of Conditions (various
    years), and internal records of the Bank of America.




                                                       44
                                                 Table 7
                   City and County Characteristics and the Selection of Branch Location
                                           (Logistic analysis)

Dependent Variable: Whether a bank was acquired and a branch was established in the municipality
between June 30, 1922 and June 30, 1929 by:
                                                      Other Large Branching
                                Bank of America                                 Small Branching Network
                                                             Network

Constant                        -56.84       ( 85.28 )      79.58        ( 89.89 )    -57.09       ( 148.30 )
Town banking institutions
                                  0.12 *** ( 0.04     )      0.18 ***    ( 0.06   )     0.03       ( 0.06        )
per capita
One institution in town          -1.06 *** ( 0.39     )     -0.57        ( 0.54   )     -0.86 *    ( 0.53        )

National bank in town            -0.38       ( 0.39   )      0.09        ( 0.57   )     -0.93 *    ( 0.48        )

Log town population               1.01 *** ( 0.22     )      0.97 ***    ( 0.23   )     0.37       ( 0.27        )

Distance to a large city         -0.93       ( 0.80   )     -2.51 **     ( 1.16   )     0.27       ( 1.10        )
Distance to a large city
                                  0.29       ( 0.30   )      0.92 *      ( 0.47   )     -0.10      ( 0.43        )
squared
County seat                       0.62       ( 0.52   )     -0.43        ( 0.56   )     -1.30 *    ( 0.72        )
Share county income from
                                  0.49       ( 0.85   )     -0.89        ( 0.90   )     0.54       ( 1.48        )
agriculture
County income per capita          0.06       ( 0.07   )      0.13        ( 0.11   )     0.08       ( 0.08        )
Share county population
                                  0.07       ( 0.04   )      0.06        ( 0.05   )     -0.07      ( 0.06        )
from immigrants
County population growth
                                 -0.01 **    ( 0.00   )      0.00        ( 0.00   )     0.01 **    ( 0.00        )
rate (1910-1920)
County in the north of the
                                  0.78 **    ( 0.40   )     -0.98 **     ( 0.50   )     -0.02      ( 0.46        )
state

Observations                               301                        314                          281
Events                                     124                         58                           40
Log-likelihood                           -298.1                      -218.7                      -209.2
Likelihood Ratio Chi2                     109.8                       81.7                         20.8
Tau-a                                      0.32                       0.21                         0.10
Notes and Sources: Estimated using logistic analysis. Coefficients, β, can be transformed by 100*(exp(β) -
1) to indicate the percentage change in the expected time until the even occurs for each one-unit increase in
the independent variable (see footnote 25). The symbols (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance
at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses. Data on mergers as well
as branch and bank activity are from Annual Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of
California (various years), Rand McNally (various years), Comptroller of Currency Annual Report and
Statements of Conditions (various years). Banking competition variables are for 1922. City populations are
from the California State Department of Finance (2004). County-level information is from U.S. Department
of Commerce (1920). Large city is defined as either San Francisco or Los Angeles, whichever is nearer.
Large branch bank network refers to Security-First National Bank, American Trust Bank, and California
Bank. Observations are all cities or towns in California without a branch of the bank group being
investigated as of June 30, 1922. Hence, bank characteristics of cities are taken as of this date. Other city
and county characteristics (with the exception of the population growth rate) use 1920 values.



                                                      45
                                                         Table 8
                      Factors Affecting the Desirability of Individual Banks as Acquisition Targets
                                                   (Duration analysis)

     Dependent Variable: Time from June 30, 1922 until the bank is taken over by:
                                                                Other Large Branching                    Small Branching
                                       Bank of America
                                                                        Network                            Network
Log assets t                                -0.031            ( 0.128 )   0.876             ( 0.555 )   -0.360      ( 0.266 )
Interest-bearing assets to total assets t   -0.017 *          ( 0.009 )   -0.026            ( 0.047 )   0.041 *** ( 0.016 )
Capital to assets t                         -0.034 **         ( 0.014 )   0.190 **          ( 0.094 )   -0.062 **   ( 0.026 )
Surplus to assets t                         -0.008            ( 0.020 )   0.690 ***         ( 0.213 )   -0.042      ( 0.045 )
Excess capital ratio t                      -0.001            ( 0.003 )   -0.001            ( 0.014 )   0.006       ( 0.007 )
Excess surplus ratio t                      -0.003            ( 0.003 )   -0.033 *          ( 0.019 )   0.004       ( 0.007 )
Cash to deposits t                          -0.004            ( 0.002 )   0.045             ( 0.035 )   0.004       ( 0.004 )
Demand deposits to total deposits t         -0.001            ( 0.003 )   -0.053 ***        ( 0.014 )   0.005       ( 0.005 )
State bank t                                -0.309 **         ( 0.130 )   -1.671 **         ( 0.698 )   -0.239      ( 0.299 )
Log age of bank t                           0.112             ( 0.088 )   0.013             ( 0.419 )   -0.076      ( 0.196 )
Trust t                                     0.014             ( 0.303 )   0.336             ( 1.888 )   0.805       ( 0.842 )
Log town population                         -0.035            ( 0.063 )   -0.559 **         ( 0.241 )   -0.008      ( 0.128 )
One bank in town t                          0.118             ( 0.142 )   0.911             ( 0.765 )   0.195       ( 0.357 )
Banks in town per capita t                  0.005             ( 0.021 )   -0.107 **         ( 0.051 )   -0.035      ( 0.027 )
Constant                                    10.89 ***         ( 1.69 )      6.22            ( 7.24 )    11.21 *** ( 3.25 )

Observations                                          488                           488                        488
Events                                                124                            51                         47
Log-likelihood                                       -289.1                        -216.9                     -178.3
Likelihood Ratio Chi-squared                          33.9                          53.2                       19.0

     Notes and Sources: Estimated using survival analysis and employing a log-logistic distribution.
     Coefficients, β, can be transformed by 100*(exp(β) - 1) to indicate the percentage change in the expected
     time until the even occurs for each one-unit increase in the independent variable (see footnote 30). The
     symbols (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.
     Standard errors are in parentheses. Variables denoted with a subscript t are updated over the sample period
     if they change. Balance sheet and banks characteristics are updated from their 1922 values in 1924 and
     1926. Town characteristics are updated as they change. Data on mergers, branches, bank activity, and
     balance sheet characteristics are from the Annual Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of
     California (various years), Rand McNally (various years), Comptroller of Currency Annual Report and
     Statements of Conditions (various years). City populations are from the California State Department of
     Finance (2004). Large branch bank network refers to Security-First National Bank, American Trust Bank,
     and California Bank. Observations are the number of unit banks in existence as of June 30, 1922. Events
     are acquisitions that took place between June 30, 1922 and June 30, 1929.




                                                                46
                                                  Table 9
               Factors Affecting the Desirability of Individual Banks as Acquisition Targets
                                            (Duration analysis)
Dependent Variable: Time from June 30, 1922 until the bank is taken over by a large branching network:

                                                                   Large Branch Bank

                     Log assetst                                    0.01       ( 0.08 )
                     Net worth to assetst                          -1.10       ( 1.05 )
                     Cash to depositst                             -0.11       ( 0.07 )
                     Demand to total depositst                      0.03       ( 0.28 )
                     Return on equityt                              0.02 **    ( 0.01 )
                     Net losses on assetst                          0.28 **    ( 0.12 )
                     Administrative costs to total expensest        0.05       ( 0.58 )
                     State bank                                    -0.04       ( 0.16 )
                     Log age of bank                                0.02       ( 0.07 )
                     Trust department                              -0.10       ( 0.20 )
                     Log town population                           -0.01       ( 0.05 )
                     One bank in town                               1.26       ( 67    )
                     Banks in town per capita                       0.03       ( 0.03 )
                     Constant                                        7.9 *** ( 0.94 )


                     Observations                                           188
                     Events                                                  42
                     Log-likelihood                                        -68.3
                     Likelihood Ratio Chi2                                  16.5


Notes and Sources: Estimated using survival analysis and employing a log-normal distribution.
Coefficients, β, can be transformed by 100*(exp(β) - 1) to indicate the percentage change in the expected
time until the even occurs for each one-unit increase in the independent variable (see footnote 30). The
symbols (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.
Standard errors are in parentheses. Variables denoted with a subscript t are updated over the sample period
if they change. Balance sheet, profitability measures, and banks characteristics are updated from their 1922
values in 1926. Town characteristics are updated as they change. Data on mergers, branches, bank activity,
and balance sheet characteristics are from the Annual Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of
California (various years), Rand McNally (various years), Comptroller of Currency Annual Report and
Statements of Conditions (various years). Profit data are from the Treasury and Federal Reserve “Reports of
Earnings, Expenses, and Dividends.” City populations are from the California State Department of Finance
(2004). Large branch bank network refers to Security-First National Bank, American Trust Bank, and
California Bank. Observations are the number of unit banks in existence as of June 30, 1922. Events are
acquisitions that took place between June 30, 1922 and June 30, 1929.




                                                      47
                                                 Table 10
                         The Effects of Branch-Bank Entry on Rival Bank Behavior
                                         (Ordinary Least Squares)

Dependent Variable: Change in balance-sheet characteristics between 1922 and 1929 listed in column
heading
                                                                    Demand deposits to      Growth in interest-
                        Loans to assets       Securities to assets
                                                                       total deposits         earning assets

Intercept                 0.14        ( 0.15 )   0.09          ( 0.13   )   -0.04        ( 0.16 )   573.8        ( 460.1 )

B of A adds a branch      0.04 *      ( 0.02 )   -0.03         ( 0.02   )   0.04         ( 0.02 )    -36.4       ( 70.0   )

Other large branching
                          0.04        ( 0.03 )   -0.06 **      ( 0.03   )   0.01         ( 0.03 )    10.7        ( 101.7 )
network adds a branch
Small bank adds a
                          0.06        ( 0.04 )   -0.01         ( 0.04   )   0.03         ( 0.04 )    41.6        ( 130.3 )
branch
New unit bank enters
                          0.05 **     ( 0.02 )   -0.05 **      ( 0.02   )   -0.04        ( 0.03 )    -21.5       ( 75.0   )
town

State bank                0.05 *** ( 0.02 )      0.00          ( 0.02   )   0.04 *       ( 0.02 )   106.1 *      ( 57.6   )

Log age of bank          -0.03 *** ( 0.01 )      0.00          ( 0.01   )   0.01         ( 0.01 )   -159.7       ( 31.6   )

One bank in town         -0.02        ( 0.02 )   0.00          ( 0.02   )   -0.01        ( 0.02 )   -105.3       ( 67.1   )

Population growth rate
                       -0.03 **       ( 0.01 )   0.03 ***      ( 0.01   )   -0.02 *      ( 0.01 )    26.2        ( 32.6   )
1922-1929 (city)

Distance to large city   -0.05        ( 0.05 )   0.01          ( 0.04   )   0.09 *       ( 0.05 )   -207.9       ( 154.5 )

Distance to large city
                          0.00        ( 0.02 )   0.01          ( 0.02   )   -0.04 **     ( 0.02 )    71.4        ( 62.0   )
squared
Share of county
income from              -0.10        ( 0.14 )   -0.04         ( 0.13   )   -0.14        ( 0.16 )    28.9        ( 456.9 )
agriculture

Observations                       244                      244                       244                     244
F-Statistic                        5.0                      3.8                       2.3                     3.5
Adjusted R-squared                 0.15                     0.11                      0.06                    0.10

Notes and Sources: The symbols (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10
percent level, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses. Data on balance sheets, trust status, and
branching activity are from the Annual Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of California
(various years) and Comptroller of Currency Annual Report and Statements of Conditions (various years),
with information on branching activity supplemented using internal records of the Bank of America. Age of
bank is from Rand McNally (1922). City population is from the California State Department of Finance
(2004) supplemented by data from Rand-McNally. Income shares are from U.S. Department of Commerce
(1920). Observations are California unit banks in existence in 1922 and 1929. Large branch banking
networks refer to those shown in Figures 2-5.Initial characteristics of the unit banks are as of 1922, share of
county income in agriculture is the 1920 value, and changes in the banking environment in the city
(including whether there was any unit bank entry between 1922 and 1929) are those that occurred between
1922 and 1929.



                                                      48
                                                 Table 11
                     The Effects of Multiple Branch Networks on Rival Bank Behavior
                                         (Ordinary Least Squares)

Dependent Variable: Change in balance-sheet characteristics between 1922 and 1929 listed in column
heading
                                                                     Demand deposits to       Growth in interest-
                        Loans to assets       Securities to assets
                                                                        total deposits          earning assets

Intercept                  0.13       ( 0.15 )    0.09        ( 0.13   )   -0.05      ( 0.16 )    560.3       ( 458.8 )
One large bank
branching network          0.04 *     ( 0.02 )   -0.02        ( 0.02   )   0.01       ( 0.02 )      -2.7      ( 70.4   )
adds a branch
More than one large
branching network          0.04       ( 0.03 )   -0.05 **     ( 0.02   )   0.06 **    ( 0.03 )    -65.3       ( 84.8   )
adds a branch
New unit bank enters
                           0.05 **    ( 0.02 )   -0.05 **     ( 0.02   )   -0.04      ( 0.03 )    -14.2       ( 74.7   )
town

State bank                 0.05 *** ( 0.02 )      0.00        ( 0.02   )   0.04 *     ( 0.02 )    106.2 *     ( 57.4   )

Log age of bank           -0.03 *** ( 0.01 )     -0.01        ( 0.01   )   0.02       ( 0.01 )   -160.8       ( 31.6   )

One bank in town          -0.02       ( 0.02 )    0.00        ( 0.02   )   -0.01      ( 0.02 )   -102.8       ( 66.7   )

Population growth rate
                          -0.03 **    ( 0.01 )    0.03 ***    ( 0.01   )   -0.02 *    ( 0.01 )     26.7       ( 32.5   )
1922-1929 (city)

Distance to large city    -0.04       ( 0.05 )    0.00        ( 0.05   )   0.12 **    ( 0.05 )   -227.3       ( 157.0 )

Distance to large city
                          -0.01       ( 0.02 )    0.02        ( 0.02   )   -0.05 **   ( 0.02 )     78.9       ( 62.8   )
squared
Share of county income
                       -0.09          ( 0.14 )   -0.03        ( 0.13   )   -0.14      ( 0.16 )     48.7       ( 456.0 )
from agriculture

Observations                       244                     244                     244                      244
F-Statistic                        5.2                     4.1                      2.7                     4.1
Adjusted R-squared                0.15                     0.11                    0.07                    0.11
Notes and Sources: The symbols (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10
percent level, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses. Data on balance sheets, trust status, and
branching activity are from the Annual Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of California
(various years) and Comptroller of Currency Annual Report and Statements of Conditions (various years),
with information on branching activity supplemented using internal records of the Bank of America. Age of
bank is from Rand McNally (1922). City population is from the California State Department of Finance
(2004) supplemented by data from Rand-McNally. Income shares are from U.S. Department of Commerce
(1920). Observations are California unit banks in existence in 1922 and 1929. Large branch banking
networks refer to those shown in Figures 2-5.Initial characteristics of the unit banks are as of 1922, share of
county income in agriculture is the 1920 value, and changes in the banking environment in the city
(including whether there was any unit bank entry between 1922 and 1929) are those that occurred between
1922 and 1929.




                                                     49
                                                 Table 12
                     The Effects of Multiple Branch Networks on Rival Bank Behavior
                                         (Ordinary Least Squares)

Dependent Variable: Change in profitability measures between 1922 and 1929 listed in column heading
                      Administrative costs to
                                                     Return on equity         Return on assets
                           total expense

Intercept                 -13.13      ( 13.31   )   11.11        ( 16.52   )     0.37       ( 1.10   )
At least one large
branching network          -2.81 *    ( 1.67    )     2.19       ( 2.11    )     0.24 *     ( 0.14   )
adds a branch
Log age of bank             1.97      ( 1.34    )    -2.23       ( 1.70    )     0.03       ( 0.11   )

New unit bank enters
                           -2.89      ( 1.98    )     0.72       ( 2.50    )    -0.17       ( 0.16   )
town

One bank in town           -1.89      ( 1.84    )    -2.89       ( 2.38    )    -0.25 *     ( 0.15   )

Distance to large city     -3.79      ( 4.83    )     0.65       ( 6.04    )     0.07       ( 0.39   )

Distance to large city
                            0.83      ( 2.13    )    -1.33       ( 2.70    )    -0.06       ( 0.17   )
squared
Share of county
income from               11.85       ( 12.17   )    -3.56       ( 14.95   )    -0.65       ( 1.01   )
agriculture

Observations                        120                         120                        120
F-Statistic                         1.24                        1.31                      1.73
Adjusted R-squared                  0.03                        0.02                      0.04
Notes and Sources: The symbols (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10
percent level, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses. Data on branching activity are from the
Annual Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of California (various years), Comptroller of
Currency Annual Report and Statements of Conditions (various years), and the internal records of the Bank
of America. Age of bank is from Rand McNally (1922). Profit data are from the Treasury and Federal
Reserve “Reports of Earnings, Expenses, and Dividends.” City population is from the California State
Department of Finance (2004) supplemented by data from Rand-McNally. Income shares are from U.S.
Department of Commerce (1920). Observations are California unit banks in existence in 1922 and 1929.
Large branch banking networks refer to those shown in Figures 2-5. Initial characteristics of the unit banks
are as of 1922, share of county income in agriculture is the 1920 value, and changes in the banking
environment in the city (including whether there was any unit bank entry between 1922 and 1929) are those
that occurred between 1922 and 1929.




                                                    50
                                                 Table 13
           First-Stage Regressions for IV Estimates of Changes in Balance Sheet Characteristics
                                         (Ordinary Least Squares)

                 Dependent variable: Variable indicating whether one of the four large branching
                 banks adds a branch in the town.

                                                             First stage regression

                      Constant                                -1.06 *** ( 0.21      )

                      City population (1922)                   0.19 *** ( 0.03      )

                      City in the north of the state           0.67 **     ( 0.30   )

                      Interaction of city population and
                                                              -0.08 **     ( 0.04   )
                      north of state

                      County population (1910)                -0.04 *      ( 0.02   )


                      Observations                                      194
                      Adjusted R-squared                                0.23
                      F-statistic                                       15.3

Notes and Sources: The symbols (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10
percent level, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses. Data on branch and bank activity are from
Annual Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of California (various years), Rand McNally
(various years), Comptroller of Currency Annual Report and Statements of Conditions (various years). City
populations are from the California State Department of Finance (2004). County-level information is from
U.S. Department of Commerce (1910). Large branch bank network refers to Bank of America, Security-
First National Bank, American Trust Bank, and California Bank.




                                                       51
                                                     Table 14
                          Comparing OLS and Instrumental Variable Estimates for the
                             Effects of Branch-Bank Entry on Rival Bank Behavior
     Dependent Variable: Balance-sheet characteristics listed in column heading
                                                                           Demand deposits to               Growth in interest-
OLS Estimates                 Loans to assets        Securities to assets
                                                                              total deposits                  earning assets
Intercept                    0.13       ( 0.14 )     0.11         ( 0.13 ) -0.08       ( 0.16 )             644.1      ( 463    )
At least one large
branching network adds a     0.07 *** ( 0.02 ) -0.06 *** ( 0.02 ) 0.02                 ( 0.02 )              -23.8       ( 68.4        )
branch
State bank                   0.05 *** ( 0.02 )       0.00         ( 0.02 ) 0.04 ** ( 0.02 )                  102.3 *     ( 57.5        )
Log age of bank             -0.03 *** ( 0.01 )       0.00         ( 0.01 ) 0.01        ( 0.01 )             -161.8 ***   ( 31.6        )
One bank in town            -0.01       ( 0.02 ) -0.02            ( 0.02 ) -0.01       ( 0.02 )             -112.2 *     ( 68.0        )
New unit bank enters town    0.06 ** ( 0.02 ) -0.07 *** ( 0.02 ) -0.02                 ( 0.03 )              -62.2       ( 78.2        )
Population growth rate
                              -0.03 *** ( 0.01 )      0.03 *** ( 0.01 )         -0.02 *      ( 0.01 )        28.2        ( 32.6        )
1922-1929 (city)
Distance to large city        -0.05      ( 0.05 )     0.01       ( 0.04 )       0.11 **      ( 0.05 )       -226.4       ( 152.8       )
Distance to large city
                              0.00       ( 0.02 )     0.01       ( 0.02 )       -0.05 **     ( 0.02 )        77.4        ( 61.8        )
squared
Share county income from
                              -0.10      ( 0.14 )    -0.05       ( 0.13 )       -0.11        ( 0.16 )        -17.6       ( 457         )
agriculture

Observations                          242                     242               242                                242
F-statistic                            6.5                     4.8              2.4                                 4.3
R-squared                             0.17                    0.12             0.05                                0.11
Instrumental Variables                                                 Demand deposits to                   Growth in interest-
                                Loans to assets   Securities to assets
Estimates                                                                 total deposits                      earning assets
Intercept                     -0.01      ( 0.83 ) 0.22        ( 0.66 ) -0.12        ( 0.26 )                 623        (    464 )
At least one large
branching network adds a      0.17    ** ( 0.06 ) -0.13 *** ( 0.04 ) 0.03                    ( 0.06 )          83        (       101 )
branch
State bank                     0.05 *** ( 0.01 ) 0.00            (   0.01   )    0.04        (   0.05   )     103        (       132       )
Log age of bank               -0.03     ( 0.03 ) 0.00            (   0.02   )    0.02        (   0.01   )    -167        (       137       )
One bank in town               0.00     ( 0.06 ) -0.02           (   0.05   )   -0.01        (   0.03   )     -81        (       146       )
New unit bank enters town      0.01     ( 0.03 ) -0.03           (   0.03   )   -0.03        (   0.04   )     -89        (        97       )
Population growth rate
                              -0.01      ( 0.02 )     0.02       ( 0.01 ) -0.02            * ( 0.01 )          32        (        25 )
1922-1929 (city)
Distance to large city        -0.02      ( 0.04 ) -0.01          ( 0.07 ) 0.12               ( 0.09 )        -224    *(          118 )
Distance to large city
                              -0.01      ( 0.01 )     0.02       ( 0.03 ) -0.05              ( 0.04 )          76    *(           44 )
squared
Share county income from
                              -0.01      ( 0.80 ) -0.12          ( 0.67 ) -0.08              ( 0.26 )         -35        (       452 )
agriculture

Bootstrap Repetitions                 500                     500                    500                      500
   Notes and Sources: The symbols (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10
   percent level, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses. Data on balance sheets, trust status, and
   branching activity are from the Annual Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of California
   (various years) and Comptroller of Currency Annual Report and Statements of Conditions (various years),
   with information on branching activity supplemented using internal records of the Bank of America. Age of
   bank is from Rand McNally (1922). City population is from the California State Department of Finance
   (2004) supplemented by data from Rand-McNally. Income shares are from U.S. Department of Commerce
   (1920). Observations are California unit banks in existence in 1922 and 1929.



                                                         52
                                                Table 15
                          The Effect of Branch Banks on Bank Failures, 1929-33
                                           (Duration Analysis)

Dependent variable: Time from June 30, 1929 until failure
                                                                         By number of branch
                                              By branch bank group
                                                                               banks
Bank of America in city t                      0.62 **    ( 0.25    )
Other large branching network in city t        0.05       ( 0.26    )
Small branching network in city t             -0.03       ( 0.28    )
Branch of one large network t                                             0.43 *      ( 0.25   )
Branch of multiple large networks t                                       0.71 *      ( 0.41   )
Log assets                                    -0.32 *     ( 0.20    )    -0.26        ( 0.20   )
Loans to assets                               -0.02       ( 0.02    )    -0.02        ( 0.02   )
Securities to assets                          -0.03       ( 0.02    )    -0.03        ( 0.02   )
Capital to assets                             -0.06 **    ( 0.03    )    -0.05 **     ( 0.03   )
Surplus to assets                              0.10 **    ( 0.04    )     0.09 **     ( 0.04   )
Excess capital                                 0.72 *     ( 0.43    )     0.66        ( 0.43   )
Excess surplus                                 0.36       ( 0.24    )     0.36        ( 0.26   )
Cash to deposits                              -0.02       ( 0.02    )    -0.02        ( 0.02   )
Demand to total deposits                       0.00       ( 0.00    )     0.00        ( 0.00   )
State bank                                    -0.41 **    ( 0.19    )    -0.39 **     ( 0.19   )
Log age of bank                               -0.06       ( 0.12    )    -0.05        ( 0.12   )
Trust department                               0.11       ( 0.59    )     0.04        ( 0.60   )
New unit bank enters town t                    0.26       ( 0.22    )     0.19        ( 0.22   )
Log city population                           -0.08       ( 0.09    )    -0.08        ( 0.08   )
Distance to large city                         0.73       ( 0.50    )     0.86 *      ( 0.50   )
Distance to large city squared                -0.26       ( 0.19    )    -0.32 *      ( 0.19   )
Banks per capita t                            -0.01       ( 0.05    )    -0.01        ( 0.05   )
One bank in town t                            -0.17       ( 0.20    )    -0.21        ( 0.20   )
Agricultural income share                     -0.19       ( 0.20    )    -0.16        ( 0.20   )
Unemployment rate                             -0.08 *     ( 0.05    )    -0.09 *      ( 0.05   )
Constant                                      34.75 *     ( 20.4    )    30.92        ( 20.1   )

Observations                                              292                        292
Failures                                                  60                          60
Log Likelihood                                          -148.1                      -149.6
Notes and Sources: Estimated using survival analysis and employing a log-logistic distribution.
Coefficients, β, can be transformed by 100*(exp(β) - 1) to indicate the percentage change in the expected
time until the even occurs for each one-unit increase in the independent variable. Standard errors are in
parentheses. The symbols (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent
level, respectively. Data on balance sheets, trust status, and branching activity are from the Annual Report
of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of California (various years) and Comptroller of Currency
Annual Report and Statements of Conditions (various years), with information on branching activity
supplemented using internal records of the Bank of America. Age of bank is from Rand McNally (1922).
1929 city populations are from the California State Department of Finance (2004) supplemented by data
from Rand McNally’s. The unemployment rate in 1930 and other county-level characteristics (1929 values)
are from U.S. Department of Commerce (1930). Observations are the number of banks in existence as of
June 30, 1929. Failures indicate banks failing between June 30, 1929 and March 1, 1933. Balance sheet and
other bank characteristics are held at their 1929 values.


                                                    53
                                                Table 16
               Robustness Check for the Effect of Branch Banks on Bank Failures, 1929-33

Dependent variable: Time from June 30, 1929 until failure
                                                     By branch bank              By number of branch banks
Bank of America in city t                           0.65 **         ( 0.28   )
Other large branching network in city t             0.06            ( 0.28   )
Small branching network in city t                   0.22            ( 0.33   )
Branch of one large network t                                                       0.44       ( 0.28   )
Branch of multiple large networks t                                                 0.72 *     ( 0.43   )
Log assets                                         -0.53 **         ( 0.23   )     -0.45 **    ( 0.23   )
Loans to assets                                    -0.01            ( 0.02   )     -0.02       ( 0.03   )
Securities to assets                               -0.03            ( 0.02   )     -0.03       ( 0.02   )
Capital to assets                                  -0.07 **         ( 0.03   )     -0.06 **    ( 0.03   )
Surplus to assets                                   0.11 **         ( 0.05   )      0.10 **    ( 0.05   )
Excess capital                                      0.94 *          ( 0.49   )      0.84 *     ( 0.49   )
Excess surplus                                      0.36 *          ( 0.20   )      0.36 *     ( 0.22   )
Cash to deposits                                   -0.02            ( 0.02   )     -0.02       ( 0.02   )
Demand to total deposits                            0.00            ( 0.00   )      0.00       ( 0.00   )
State Bank                                         -0.54 **         ( 0.22   )     -0.51 **    ( 0.22   )
Log age of bank                                    -0.05            ( 0.13   )     -0.03       ( 0.14   )
Trust department                                    0.08            ( 0.68   )      0.04       ( 0.69   )
New unit bank enters town t                         0.31            ( 0.26   )      0.24       ( 0.25   )
Log city population                                -0.11            ( 0.10   )     -0.08       ( 0.09   )
Distance to large city                              0.23            ( 1.21   )      0.35       ( 1.23   )
Distance to large city squared                     -0.18            ( 0.43   )     -0.20       ( 0.44   )
Banks per capita t                                 -0.02            ( 0.05   )     -0.01       ( 0.05   )
One bank in town t                                 -0.30            ( 0.23   )     -0.38       ( 0.23   )

County fixed effects                                        Yes                             Yes
Observations                                                293                             293
Failures                                                     60                              60
Log Likelihood                                             -126.6                          -128.4

Notes and Sources: Estimated using survival analysis and employing a log-logistic distribution.
Coefficients, β, can be transformed by 100*(exp(β) - 1) to indicate the percentage change in the expected
time until the even occurs for each one-unit increase in the independent variable. Standard errors are in
parentheses. The symbols (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent
level, respectively. Data on balance sheets, trust status, and branching activity are from the Annual Report
of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of California (various years) and Comptroller of Currency
Annual Report and Statements of Conditions (various years), with information on branching activity
supplemented using internal records of the Bank of America. Age of bank is from Rand McNally (1922).
1929 city populations are from the California State Department of Finance (2004) supplemented by data
from Rand McNally’s. The unemployment rate in 1930 and other county-level characteristics (1929 values)
are from U.S. Department of Commerce (1930). Observations are the number of banks in existence as of
June 30, 1929. Failures indicate banks failing between June 30, 1929 and March 1, 1933. Balance sheet and
other bank characteristics are held at their 1929 values.



                                                    54
                                                 Table 17
                        First-Stage Regressions for IV Estimates of Bank Failures
                                        (Ordinary Least Squares)

                 Dependent variable: Variable indicating whether one of the four large branching
                 banks has a branch in the town.


                                                             First stage regression

                     Constant                                 -0.62 **   ( 0.26       )

                     Log city population (1922)               0.13 *** ( 0.03         )

                     City in the north of the state           0.11 **    ( 0.05       )

                     Distance to a large city                 -1.54 **   ( 0.63       )

                     Distance to a large city squared         0.67 **    ( 0.29       )

                     Interaction of city population and
                                                              0.23 *** ( 0.09         )
                     distance
                     Interaction of city population and
                                                               -0.1 **   ( 0.04       )
                     distance squared

                     City is a county seat                      0.1      ( 0.09       )


                     Observations                                     214
                     Adjusted R2                                      0.45
                     F-statistic                                      26.2

Notes and Sources: The symbols (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10
percent level, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses. Data on branch and bank activity are from
Annual Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of California (various years), Rand McNally
(various years), Comptroller of Currency Annual Report and Statements of Conditions (various years). City
populations are from the California State Department of Finance (2004). County-level information is from
U.S. Department of Commerce (1920). Large city is defined as either San Francisco or Los Angeles,
whichever is nearer. Large branch bank network refers to Bank of America, Security-First National Bank,
American Trust Bank, and California Bank.




                                                      55
                                                    Table 18
                         Comparing Probit and Instrumental Variables Probit Estimates
                          for the Effects of Branch Banks on Bank Failures (1929-33)

             (Probit Analysis, standard errors for the second stage are from bootstrapped results)


                                                    Probit Estimate              IV Probit Estimate

Branch of at least one large bank                   0.51*           (0.30   )    1.82**        ( 0.86    )
New unit banks to bank enters town                  0.27            (0.27   )    0.33          ( 0.32    )
Log assets                                         -0.21            (0.23   )   -0.30          ( 0.28    )
Loans to assets                                    -0.04            (0.03   )   -0.03          ( 0.04    )
Securities to assets                               -0.05            (0.03   )   -0.04          ( 0.04    )
Capital to assets                                  -0.03            (0.03   )   -0.05          ( 0.05    )
Surplus to assets                                   0.09*           (0.06   )    0.11          ( 0.09    )
Excess capital to total capital                     0.66            (0.56   )    1.01          ( 0.72    )
Excess surplus to total surplus                     0.63            (0.59   )    0.30          ( 0.72    )
Cash to deposits                                   -0.03            (0.02   )   -0.02          ( 0.04    )
Demand to total deposits                            0.00            (0.01   )    0.00          ( 0.01    )
State bank                                         -0.57**          (0.24   )   -0.65**        ( 0.29    )
Log age of bank                                    -0.08            (0.15   )   -0.10          ( 0.17    )
Trust                                               0.44            (0.71   )    0.62          ( 2.15    )
Log city population (1929)                          0.00            (0.08   )   -0.20          ( 0.19    )
Distance to large city                              1.05*           (0.63   )    0.63          ( 0.89    )
Distance to large city squared                     -0.42*           (0.25   )   -0.24          ( 0.36    )
Agricultural income share                          -0.26            (0.24   )   -0.29          ( 0.26    )
Unemployment rate                                  -0.15**          (0.06   )   -0.16*         ( 0.09    )
Constant                                           33.53            (24.89 )    38.44          ( 27.65   )
Failures                                                    60                            60
Observations                                                292
Log Likelihood                                             -124.1
Bootstrap Repetitions                                                                      500
Notes and Sources: The symbols (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10
percent level, respectively. Data on balance sheets, trust status, and branching activity are from the Annual
Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of California (various years) and Comptroller of
Currency Annual Report and Statements of Conditions (various years), with information on branching
activity supplemented using internal records of the Bank of America. Age of bank is from Rand McNally
(1922). 1929 city populations are from the California State Department of Finance (2004) supplemented by
data from Rand McNally’s. The unemployment rate in 1930 and other county-level characteristics (1929
values) are from U.S. Department of Commerce (1930). Observations are the number of banks in existence
as of June 30, 1929. Failures indicate banks failing between June 30, 1929 and March 1, 1933. Balance
sheet and other bank characteristics are held at their 1929 values.




                                                     56
                             Table 19. Estimating the Amount of Selection Bias for Branching


Outcome           Eˆ ( X i′ γˆ | BRi = 1) − Eˆ ( X i′ γˆ | BRi = 0)   Var (εˆ )   E (ε i | BRi = 1) − E (ε i | BRi = 0)   Cov (ε i BRi* )
                                                                                                                                            α̂     Implied
                  Var ( X i′ γˆ )                                                                                         Var ( BRi* )             Ratio


Probit Model:

Branch of                             0.11                               1                      0.11                         0.24           0.70    2.92
large branch
bank in city
   Duration
    Model:
                                      0.08                             1.87                     0.14                         0.31           0.65    2.10
Branch of
large branch
bank in city

   Note: Computations are based on the methodology reported in Altonji, Elder, and Taber (2005). The last
   column of the table reports how large the selection on unobservables relative to observables would
   hypothetically have to be in order to reduce the branching effect to zero. See the text for further discussion
   of this table.




                                                                              57
Appendix Table 1. Summary Statistics

 Average across banks                                 Summary Characteristics
1922 balance sheets                                  N   Mean        S.E.
Log assets                                          506  13.53     ( 1.20       )
Interest-earning assets to total assets (percent)   506  81.01     ( 9.83       )
Capital to assets (percent)                         506  11.43     ( 8.17       )
Surplus to assets (percent)                         506   4.84     ( 3.43       )
Excess capital to total capital (percent)           506  35.67     ( 31.35      )
Excess surplus to total surplus (percent)           506  56.49     ( 35.92      )
Cash to total deposits (percent)                    506  15.71     ( 11.71      )
Demand to demand plus total deposits (percent)      505  64.47     ( 22.51      )
Log age                                             506   2.31     ( 1.08       )

Return on assets (1921)                             278    0.54     ( 0.66      )
Return on equity (1921)                             280    7.47     ( 7.74      )
Net losses to assets (1921)                         281     0.31    ( 0.48      )
Administrative costs to total expenses (1921)       279    39.80    ( 11.16     )

1929 balance sheets                                  N     Mean       S.E.
Log assets                                          351    13.77    ( 1.19      )
Interest-earning assets to total assets (percent)   351    81.82    ( 6.91      )
Capital to assets (percent)                         351     9.40    ( 4.90      )
Surplus to assets (percent)                         351     4.48    ( 3.11      )
Excess capital to total capital (percent)           351    33.05    ( 30.87     )
Excess surplus to total surplus (percent)           351    55.94    ( 35.78     )
Cash to total deposits (percent)                    351    20.21    ( 8.34      )
Demand to demand plus total deposits (percent)      351    55.12    ( 19.20     )
Log age                                             351     2.50    ( 1.00      )

Return on assets                                    180    0.39     ( 0.83      )
Return on equity                                    180    6.24     ( 11.47     )
Net losses to assets                                180     0.41    ( 0.70      )
Administrative costs to total expenses              184    39.47    ( 9.06      )




                                                    58
                            Appendix Table 1 (continued). Summary Statistics


         Average across cities                                    Summary Characteristics
         1922 values                                             N   Mean        S.E.
         Banking entities per 1000 city residents               391   2.02     ( 3.71         )
         One bank in city                                       396   0.44     ( 0.50         )
         National bank in city                                  396   0.55     ( 0.50         )
         Log city population                                    391   7.23     ( 1.37         )
         Share county income from agriculture (1920)            393   0.99     ( 0.03         )
         Income per county population (1920)                    393   289      ( 242          )
         Percent change in county population 1910-1920          393  49.08     ( 41.13        )

         1929 values                                             N      Mean         S.E.
         Banking entities per 1000 city residents               413      1.52      ( 2.01     )
         One bank in city                                       424     0.40       ( 0.49     )
         National bank in city                                  424     0.37       ( 0.48     )
         Log city population                                    413     7.47       ( 1.47     )
         Share county income from agriculture (1930)            422     0.98       ( 0.04     )
         Income per county population (1930)                    422      172       ( 154      )
         Percent change in county population (1920-1930)        422     59.91      ( 43.47    )

Sources: Data on branch and bank activity are from Annual Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the
State of California (various years), Rand McNally (various years), Comptroller of Currency Annual Report
and Statements of Conditions (various years). City populations are from the California State Department of
Finance (2004). County-level information is from U.S. Department of Commerce (1920 and 1930).




                                                   59
