                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                MONEY IN MOTION:
                      DYNAMIC PORTFOLIO CHOICE IN RETIREMENT

                                          Wolfram J. Horneff
                                          Raimond H. Maurer
                                           Olivia S. Mitchell
                                          Michael Z. Stamos

                                         Working Paper 12942
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12942


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2007




This research was conducted with support from the US Social Security Administration via the Michigan
Retirement Research Center at the University of Michigan. Additional research support was provided
by the German Investment and Asset Management Association (BVI), the German Research Foundation
(DFG), the Fritz-Thyssen Foundation, the Observatoire de l'Epargne Europeenne (OEE), and the Pension
Research Council (PRC) at The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. We are grateful
for useful comments from John Ameriks, Jeffrey Brown, and Christian Gollier.The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research or the other institutions with which the authors are affiliated. This is part of the NBER Program
on the Economics of Aging.

© 2007 by Wolfram J. Horneff, Raimond H. Maurer, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Michael Z. Stamos. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Money in Motion: Dynamic Portfolio Choice in Retirement
Wolfram J. Horneff, Raimond H. Maurer, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Michael Z. Stamos
NBER Working Paper No. 12942
February 2007
JEL No. D14,G11,G22,G23,H55,J26

                                              ABSTRACT

Retirees confront the difficult problem of how to manage their money in retirement so as to not outlive
their funds while continuing to invest in capital markets. We posit a dynamic utility maximizer who
makes both asset location and allocation decisions when managing her retirement financial wealth
and annuities, and we prove that she can benefit from both the equity premium and longevity insurance
in her retirement portfolio. Even without bequests, she will not fully annuitize; rather, her optimal
stock allocation amounts initially to more than half of her financial wealth and declines with age. Welfare
gains from this strategy can amount to 40 percent of financial wealth (depending on risk parameters
and other resources). In practice, it turns out that many retirees will do almost as well by purchasing
a variable annuity invested 60/40 in stocks/bonds.

Wolfram J. Horneff                                   Olivia S. Mitchell
Finance Department, Goethe University                Department of Insurance & Risk Management
Kettenhofweg 139 (Uni-PF. 58)                        University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School
Frankfurt am Main                                    3620 Locust Walk, St 3000 SH-DH
Germany                                              Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
horneff@finance.uni-frankfurt.de                     and NBER
                                                     mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu
Raimond H. Maurer
Finance Department, Goethe University                Michael Z. Stamos
Kettenhofweg 139 (Uni-PF. 58)                        Finance Department, Goethe University
Frankfurt am Main, Germany                           Kettenhofweg 139 (Uni-PF. 58)
rmaurer@wiwi.uni-frankfurt.de                        Frankfurt am Main
                                                     Germany
                                                     stamos@finance.uni-frankfurt.de
                                   Money in Motion:
                          Dynamic Portfolio Choice in Retirement


       As Baby Boomers move into their 60s, increasing attention is being devoted to the

prospect of $15 trillion in assets that retirees will be required to manage over what promises to

be a very long period (McKinsey, 2006). A financial product that offers some promise in this

regard is the lifetime payout annuity, which represents a promise by an insurer to pay benefits

over the retiree’s remaining lifetime, no matter how long she lives. Lifetime annuities can

augment retirement security, as they allow the retiree to protect against outliving her assets while

enhancing expected returns through the “mortality credit.”1 Most annuities currently sold in the

United States are of the variable type where purchasers can invest in capital market assets, yet

these have been little studied by researchers. Instead, the bulk of previous studies have focused

on “fixed payout annuities,” or annuities that pay a flat benefit.2 Also, little prior analysis has

explored optimal dynamic portfolio choices in retirement involving variable payout annuities.3

       Our paper fills this research gap by exploring how variable payout annuities can help a

retiree access stock markets during the decumulation phase of her lifecycle, while still permitting

her to take advantage of the additional expected returns and hedge mortality risk using annuity

products. Specifically, we derive an optimal endogenous gradual annuitization strategy and asset

allocation pattern for a risk-averse retiree facing stochastic lifetime and endowed with pension

1
  The mortality credit refers to the extra income received by surviving annuity buyers resulting from sharing in the
committed assets of decedents; c.f. Brown et al. (2001), Feldstein and Ranguelova (2001), and Mitchell et al. (1999).
2
  For instance, Dus, Maurer, and Mitchell (2005); Gerrard, Haberman, and Vigna (2004); Horneff, Maurer, Mitchell,
and Dus (2006); Kaplan (2006)’ Kapur and Orszag (1999); Kingston and Thorp (2005; Milevsky (1998); Milevsky
and Young (2002); Milevsky, Moore, and Young (2006); Mitchell, Poterba, Warshawsky, and Brown (1999); and
Stabile (2003).
3
  Several papers have explored variable annuities but adopt restrictive annuitization and asset allocation patterns; c.f.
Blake, Cairns and Dowd (2003); Browne, Milevsky and Salisbury (2001); Brown, Mitchell and Poterba (2001);
Charupat and Milevsky (2002); Feldstein and Ranguelova (2001); Koijen, Nijman, and Werker (2006); Milevsky
(2002);and Milevsky and Young (2006a and b).
                                                                                                      2




income. She must make both an asset location choice, regarding how much of her funds to hold

in liquid financial wealth versus variable payout annuities, and also an asset allocation decision,

where she elects how much of her portfolio to hold in risky stocks versus riskless bonds. Adding

a variable annuity to the retirement portfolio can be preferred to direct investments, since the

annuity pays superior expected returns due to the fact that surviving annuitants receive the

distributed funds of those who die prematurely. On the other hand, once the retiree buys an

annuity, the annuity principal can no longer be recovered.

       In contrast to previous studies, we show that the retiree will not fully annuitize

immediately on retirement, even if she lacks a bequest motive. Rather, she will initially, partially

annuitize and hold 50-100 percent of her remaining financial assets in stocks. As she ages, she

will gradually buy more annuities and optimally replace stocks with bonds in the portfolio. Next,

we show how these choices respond to capital market shocks: in particular, the retiree’s stock

fraction varies countercyclically, a finding that diverges from other studies which favor a

procyclical buy-and-hold strategy. Our welfare analysis indicates that restricting retirees to

simple phased withdrawal plans is distinctly suboptimal, such that they would have to be given

up to 40 percent more initial wealth, to leave them as well off as with variable payout annuities.

       The fact that variable annuities can substantially enhance retirement security is

particularly relevant to policymakers, including those in the US who seek to implement funded

Personal Retirement Accounts (PRAs) in a revamped Social Security system. For instance

Feldstein and Ranguelova (2001) note that retirees who purchase immediate annuities invested

60/40 in stocks/bonds could be anticipated to fare better than under the current Social Security

system rules. Our analysis takes this a step further by evaluating the potential for welfare gains
                                                                                                                3




from endogenous optimal gradual annuitization and dynamic asset management over the entire

retirement period.

       In what follows, we first offer a brief literature overview and discussion of the mechanics

of variable payout annuities. Next we derive and discuss the optimal annuitization and asset

allocation strategy for a base case.4 Subsequently, we examine the welfare gains from expanding

the asset space using variable annuities. A final section concludes.



Prior Studies

       Yaari’s (1965) important study on how to protect against outliving one’s money suggested

that a rational retiree lacking a bequest motive would annuitize all her assets. In his framework,

the investor is exposed only to mortality risk and all annuities are fairly priced from an actuarial

standpoint (other sources of risk due to interest rates, stocks, and inflation are omitted). In an

important recent extension of that work, Davidoff, Brown, and Diamond (2005) conclude that a

retiree will still fully annuitize financial wealth in the presence of a complete market if there is

no bequest motive, when the net return on the annuity is greater than that of the reference asset.

Partial annuitization could be optimal if the assumption about complete markets is relaxed, or if

the investor has a bequest motive.

       The complete markets assumption requires that there will be term life annuities available

for purchase that pay out at each future date. But since real-world annuity providers tend to offer

fixed payouts, several researchers have formulated more realistic dynamic portfolio choice

models that incorporate mainly fixed payout annuities. Initially, this literature assumed a

restricted annuitization strategy, where all wealth must be either fully annuitized immediately on


4
 There is no analytic solution for this problem in either discrete or continuous time, so we employ numerical
dynamic optimization techniques in what follows.
                                                                                                                4




retirement or later; more recent studies have endogenized the annuitization decision, allowing

retirees to gradually annuitize at any age and repeatedly.5

       Less well studied is the proposition that annuity purchasers may do better if they turn to

variable payout annuities, instead of merely fixed payout products. Some research compares

variable payout annuities to other asset classes on an “either-or” basis: for instance Blake,

Cairns, and Dowd (2003) show that equity-linked variable annuities should appeal to many

retirees (across a range of risk preferences), compared to either a phased withdrawal plan or a

fixed payout annuity. Brown, Mitchell, and Poterba (2001) show that variable payout annuities

can hedge inflation risk better than equity-linked annuities, by investing the underlying funds in

inflation-indexed bonds. At the same time, though, they find that pure equity-linked annuities

can generate greater utility than real annuities for a broad range of risk aversion parameters.

Using Monte Carlo simulation, Milevsky (2002) compares risk/return characteristics of variable

payout annuity payout streams with fixed and escalating annuities, and he argues that variable

payout annuities may hedge inflation better than escalating annuities.

       While these studies analyze portfolio choice problems which include variable payout

annuities, they are still restrictive in important ways. For instance, with respect to the asset

location decision, they all require that financial wealth must be fully annuitized, yet this is

unlikely in practice. Regarding the annuitization timing decision, most prior studies require that

annuities be bought immediately on retirement; for instance Milevsky and Young (2002, 2006b)

endogenize the timing of the annuity purchase but they do not allow for partial and gradual

annuitization. Also, few studies have endogenized the optimal asset allocation of the annuity

portfolio, and the ones that do, restrict the retiree to a so-called “money mix” plan, which is a


5
 For studies analyzing portfolio choice problems with gradual annuitization we refer the interested reader to
Milevsky and Young (2003), and Horneff, Maurer, and Stamos (2006a, 2006b).
                                                                                                                  5




one-time irreversible buy and hold portfolio of fixed and fully equity-linked annuities. 6

       In what follows, we extend prior literature in several ways. First, we endogenize the

retiree’s annuitization (or asset location) decision, permitting her to dynamically and gradually

buy variable payout annuities by drawing down her financial wealth during retirement.

Accordingly, we do not force full annuitization, but rather we allow both partial and gradual

annuitization and model variable payout annuities on an equal footing with stocks and bonds.

Second, we optimize the asset allocation decision asset endogenously and dynamically, in both

the non-annuitized financial portfolio and the variable payout annuity. Consequently, the retiree

may rebalance her asset mix within the variable payout annuity optimally according to state

variables, whereas prior work optimized only the initial buy and hold mix between equity-linked

and constant annuities.7 Third, we contribute to the literature by incorporating a bequest motive

explicitly, to characterize the tradeoff between the annuity mortality credit and the bequest

potential of non-annuitized financial wealth. Finally, we examine the sensitivity of key decisions

to the retiree’s risk aversion and starting levels of wealth.



The Mechanics of Variable Payout Annuities

       Our work focuses on variable payout annuities which are financial contracts between a

retiree and an insurer. In return for the initial annuity premium PR0 , the annuity buyer receives a

pre-specified number of fund units nt in each period t ∈ {1,2,...,τ } . Here T is assumed to be the

retiree’s maximum possible survival age, and τ ∈ {1,...,T } is her stochastic date of death,


6
  See Charupat and Milevsky (2002), Koijen, Nijman, and Werker (2006), Browne, Milevsky, and Salisbury (2003),
and Milevsky and Young (2006a). None of these endogenizes the asset location and allocation decisions
dynamically, as we do below. Browne et al. (2003) assess welfare losses from a stylized case where only
fixed/equity linked annuities can be exchanged for each other.
7
  By optimizing the portfolio within the underlying annuity fund we bypass the stylized assumption of Browne et al.
(2003) in which only fixed and equity-linked annuities are exchanged.
                                                                                                                                          6




distributed according to                              x +t   p xa which refers to the cumulative survival probability that an

individual of age x survives to age x + t . In this setup, the payment POt paid to the annuitant in

year t, conditional on her being alive, is POta = Z ta nt , where Z ta is the price of one annuity fund

unit at time t which evolves according to Z ta+1 = Z ta Rta+1 , and Rta+1 is the gross return on

investment of the annuity fund in period t + 1 . The gross return can be stochastic when the

underlying funds inside the annuity wrapper are held in risky assets. Thus, while the number of

fund units received is deterministic, the payout in monetary terms is stochastic when the annuity

is invested in risky assets. If the insurance pool is sufficiently large, the premium for the payout

process (1) can be calculated according to the actuarial principle of equivalence:

                                                              PR0 = N 0 Z 0                                                       (1)

                             T
where N 0 = ∑ x +t p xa nt is the number of fund units needed to back the expected future payout
                         t =1



stream nt , for t ∈ {1,2,...,τ } . Then the premium paid for a variable payout annuity only depends

on the current price of the annuity fund, the fund unit stream, and survival probabilities.

                                                                     T
                                                                               p xa POta
          Simple algebra yields PR0 = ∑                                     x+t
                                                                                         , where R(0, t ) = Z ta Z 0a is the cumulative
                                                                     t =1     R (0, t )

return of the annuity fund. In other words, the premium can be interpreted as the sum of

discounted and survival probability-weighted payouts. Rearranging the premium function yields

            T
                                     POta
PR0 = ∑                                                  .8 This expression shows that the discount rate is higher than the pure
           t =1   (   x +t       p   x ) R(0, t )
                                     a −1




8
    If the annuity funds were invested only in riskless bonds, we would obtain the classical result for constant payout
                                     T
                                                   p xa POta
annuities: PR0 =                     ∑
                                     t =1
                                            x +t

                                                   R tf
                                                             , where R f is the riskless growth rate.
                                                                                                                       7




market return since    (   x +t   p xa   )
                                         −1
                                              > 1 ; this mortality credit is attributable to the assets shared among

surviving members of the insurance pool when members die. Accordingly, variable payout

annuities cannot be replicated through direct investments in stocks and bonds.

The Assumed Interest Rate (AIR) and Payouts. Pricing variable payout annuities does not

require any assumption about the functional form in general, insofar as the process for the fund

units nt is concerned. But in practice, it is convenient to introduce a functional form for nt which

relies on the Assumed Interest Rate (AIR), a term conventionally found in insurance pricing. It is

also useful to derive how the AIR influences the distribution of payouts over time.9

          In insurance terminology, the assumed interest rate refers to the “shrinkage rate” of the

                                                                    −1
                                           ⎛n ⎞
number of fund units over time: 1 + AIR = ⎜⎜ t +1 ⎟⎟ . Then the recursive evolution of payouts is
                                           ⎝ nt ⎠

given by:

                                                                     Rta+1
                                                    POt +1 = POt           .                                  (2)
                                                                   1 + AIR

It is natural to refer the AIR as the “assumed interest rate” because the conditional expected

                    ⎡ PO ⎤ E R a                [ ]
payout growth is Et ⎢ t +1 ⎥ = t t +1 . To produce a payout stream constant in expectation, the
                    ⎣ POt ⎦ 1 + AIR

AIR must be set exactly equal to the expected return on the assets of the annuity fund

    [ ]
E Rta+1 − 1 . When this is the case, the reduction in the number of fund units due to payouts

exactly offsets their expected price increase due to investment return. Having a fixed AIR

implies that the number of fund units evolves exponentially (increasing or decreasing) according



9
 A 4 percent AIR is common in the US industry (c.f. the Vanguard and TIAA-CREF variable payout annuity
websites); the US National Association of Insurance Commissioners requires that the AIR not exceed a nominal 5
percent.
                                                                                                                                        8



                                                t −1
                    ⎛     1      ⎞
to the rule nt = n1 ⎜            ⎟                     . The premium PR is then:
                    ⎝ (1 + AIR ) ⎠

                                                                       T
                                                                                        p xa
                                                        PR0 = Z 0 n1 ∑           x +t
                                                                                               ,                      (3)
                                                                       t =1   (1 + AIR )t −1
         T
                        p xa
where   ∑ (1 + AIR )
         t =1
                 x +t
                               t −1
                                       is similar to the usual fixed annuity factor, but the riskless discount factor


is now replaced by the AIR in the case of the variable payout annuity.

        Following the standard approach, the probability distribution for annuity payouts over time

may be specified in assuming that prices of the annuity fund units evolve according to a
                                                                                                                      a
                                                                                                                          +σ aε t
multiplicative random walk with log-normal returns; in other words, Z ta = Z ta−1 Rta+1 = Z ta−1e μ                                 ,

with Z 0a = 1 , where μ a is the annuity fund’s mean log-return, σ a is the standard deviation of the

fund’s log-returns, and ε t is an i.i.d. standard normal distributed shock. These assumptions

allow us to derive the probability distribution for annuity payouts over time. Specifically, from

                                                                            t
                                                                n1
(2), the payout at t is equal to POt =                                    ∏ Rsa . Hence, POt is log-normally distributed
                                                           (1 + AIR )t −1 s =1

with the mean and standard deviation:

                                                            1
                                           n1          μ a t + (σ a ) 2 t
                E [POt ] =                                                , and STD[POt ] = E [POt ] e (σ ) t − 1 .
                                                                                                         a 2

                                                t −1
                                                     e        2
                                                                                                                               (4)
                                      (1 + AIR)

The α -percentile of the payout distribution in t is then:

                                                                     n1           a     −1    a
                                               Pα ( POt ) =               t −1
                                                                               e μ t + N (α )σ t ,                             (5)
                                                                (1 + AIR)

where N −1 (α ) is the inverse of the normal distribution function.

        To illustrate how variable annuity payments can vary given alternative asset allocations,

we refer to Figure 1. Here Panel (a) traces the 10th/90th percentiles of payment outcomes for a
                                                                                                                 9




$100,000 immediate variable annuity, given three alternative stock allocations of 0, 60, and 100

percent, respectively. We assume that the expected real portfolio return with 100 (60) percent

stocks is 6 (4.4) percent with a standard deviation of 18 (10.8) percent;10 the AIR is 4 percent and

the riskless rate 2 percent, respectively. 11 (The variable annuity with 0 percent stocks and the

AIR set to 4 percent is equivalent to a riskless annuity with shrinking payouts.) The annuity

stream can be seen to fall over time, because the AIR exceeds the return of the underlying

portfolio. The two equity-linked annuity streams have a distribution skewed toward higher

benefits over time, because setting the AIR low compared to the expected annuity fund returns

produces low payments initially, with higher benefits later on.

Figure 1 here

          Panel (b) of Figure 1 illustrates how annuity payments would vary over time under

alternative AIRs of 2, 4, and 6 percent, assuming that the annuity fund is invested 60 percent in

equities. It is clear that the higher the AIR, the larger is the initial payment and the lower is the

later payout. For example, after age 75, the variable annuity payment using the lowest AIR

exceeds the benefit paid using the highest AIR. Accordingly, the retiree seeking high payouts

early in the retirement period would select an annuity with an AIR higher than the expected fund

return, and vice versa. It is also interesting that selecting a low AIR results in a much higher

dispersion of payments; nevertheless, this dispersion is reflected mainly in the upside potential




     The portfolio growth rate is log-normal with E [ R ] = πE [ R ] + (1 − π ) R f and STD[ R ] = πSTD[ R ]. From
10                                                   a                                     a


the log-normality assumptions follows that   μ a = ln(E[ R a ]) − 0.5(σ a )2   and

σ a = ln (1 + STD[ R a ]2 E[ R a ]2 ) .
11
  Milevsky and Young (2003) and Koijen, Nijman, and Werker (2006) use a constant AIR of 4 percent; this
conforms to Brown et al. (2001) who note that observed AIRs fall between 3 and 4 percent. Bodie and Pesando
(1983) use an AIR equal to the expected return of the annuity fund while Milevsky (2002) provides results for
variable payout annuities with AIRs ranging from 2 to 8 percent.
                                                                                                                     10




for payments, while the downside risk is limited.12



The Investor’s Optimization Problem

         Having introduced terminology, we now turn to a description of the retiree’s dynamic

portfolio choice problem when it includes stocks, bonds, and variable life annuities. We assume

the investor is endowed with initial financial assets S0 , and she is also entitled to constant real

lifelong pension income of Yt = Y (e.g. a Social Security and/or company pension). We posit that

her preferences can be characterized using a constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) utility

function defined over a single non-durable consumption good. The retiree’s subjective survival

probability that she will survive to date t + 1 , given she is alive at t, is denoted pts . In this case,

the retiree’s preference function is then recursively defined by:


                              Vt =
                                     Ct1− ρ        ⎡
                                                              (      )   (B )1− ρ ⎤ ,
                                            + β Et ⎢ ptsVt +1 + 1 − pts k t +1    ⎥                                 (6)
                                     1− ρ          ⎣⎢                     1 − ρ ⎦⎥


                                              Ct1− ρ        ⎡ (B )1− ρ ⎤
         with terminal utility         VT =          + β ET ⎢ k T +1   ⎥.
                                              1− ρ          ⎣⎢ 1 − ρ ⎦⎥

Here Ct is her consumption level at time t; ρ is her coefficient of relative risk aversion and also

reflects her willingness to engage in intertemporal consumption substitution; β reflects her time

preference; and Bt represents her remaining financial wealth at death. The strength of her

bequest motive is represented by the parameter k. In this framework, each year the retiree must

decide how to allocate her current cash on hand, Wt , between consumption Ct , financial wealth

St (which are her direct stock and bond investments), and new purchases of variable life annuities

PRt. Hence the budget constraint at time t is given by:

12
  As will become apparent, the AIR has implications for the timing of the annuitization and the asset allocation;
below we explore how changes in the AIR influence results.
                                                                                                                       11




                                                Wt = S t + PRt + C t .                                          (7)

In the next period, cash on hand is then:

                                            (              (               ))
                                 Wt +1 = S t R f + π ts Rt +1 − R f + Lt +1 + Y ,                               (8)

where π ts denotes the share of financial wealth S t invested in risky stocks, R f denotes the real

bond growth rate, and Rt +1 the risky stock return (assumed to be i.i.d. log-normally

distributed).13 The sum of annual annuity payouts which the retiree gets from all previously

purchased annuities is Lt +1 . If the retiree were to die at t + 1, the remaining estate is given by

            (          (            ))
Bt +1 = S t R f + π ts Rt +1 − R f . We note that neither the annuity nor the pension income Y are

available for bequests.

       When the retiree purchases a variable payout life annuity in period t = u, her immediate

single premium is defined as:14

                                                                                        a
                                                                 T
                                                                                      p 65
                                   PRu = Z ua (u )nu +1 (u ) ∑           65 + u + s        +u
                                                                                                .                     (9)
                                                               s =u +1   (1 + AIR )u −1
In return for the premium paid at t = u, she receives for t > u and until she dies, the annuity

payment stream represented by Z ta (u )nt (u ) . Thus the value of all annuity payments received at

time t + 1 from all annuities purchased previously u ∈ {0,..., t} is given by:

                                                      t
                                           Lt +1 = ∑ Z ta+1 (u )nt +1 (u ) .                                       (10)
                                                    u =0



In order to derive the stochastic evolution of Lt +1 , we note that the price of one annuity fund unit

13
   It would be interesting to incorporate stochastic interest rates and inflation in our analysis, as in Koijen, Nijman,
and Werker (2006). However that study assured model tractability by making annuitization exogenous, while our
model endogenizes the annuitization strategy. Since we believe stock market risk and longevity risk are the most
important risk factors in the retiree’s optimal portfolio choice, and our model already includes three state variables,
to reduce the curse of dimensionality we do not build in a risky term structure and/or inflation.
14
   Loads and administration fees for variable payout annuities in the US can vary widely and may be rather low. For
example, Vanguard’s website notes annual administration costs of about 0.5 percent with no commission or front
loads for their variable payout annuities. We omit modeling explicit administration costs without loss of generality.
                                                                                                                             12




of the annuity purchased at time u evolves as:

                                               (              (                       ))
                          Z ta+1 (u ) = Z ta (u ) R f + π ta Rt +1 − R f , with Z ua (u ) = 1 ,                            (11)

where π ta is the stock fraction at time t inside the variable annuities. Thus, in effect, the

individual invests directly in two financial assets, riskless bonds and risky stocks, as well as

indirectly through the annuity wrapper. By substituting (9) and (11) into (10), one may verify

that the recursive evolution of Lt +1 is given by:

                           ⎡ L                  ⎛ T 65+t + s p65         ⎞ ⎤
                                                                           −1

                                                                                           (       (       ))
                                                                  a
                   Lt +1 = ⎢       t
                                         + PRt ⎜⎜ ∑                 +t
                                                                         ⎟ ⎥ R f + π ta Rt +1 − R f .
                                                                    t −1 ⎟
                                                                                                                           (12)
                           ⎢⎣ (1 + AIR )        ⎝ s =t +1 (1 + AIR ) ⎠ ⎥⎦

Finally, the recursive intertemporal budget restriction can then be derived by substituting

equations (7) and (12) into (8):

                ⎧⎪                  ⎡ L                    ⎛ T 65+t + s p65     a
                                                                                        ⎞ ⎤ ⎫⎪
                                                                                          −1

      Wt +1   = ⎨(Wt − Ct − PRt ) + ⎢          t
                                                    + PRt ⎜⎜ ∑                    +t
                                                                                  t −1 ⎟
                                                                                        ⎟ ⎥ ⎬R f
                 ⎪⎩                 ⎢⎣ (1 + AIR )          ⎝ s =t +1(1 + AIR ) ⎠ ⎥⎦ ⎪⎭
                                                                                                                           (13)
                  ⎧⎪                      ⎡ L                     ⎛ T 65+t + s p65            ⎞ ⎤ a ⎫⎪
                                                                                                −1

                                                                                                       (         )
                                                                                      a
              + ⎨(Wt − Ct − PRt )π t + ⎢
                                    s             t
                                                        + PRt ⎜⎜ ∑                       +t
                                                                                              ⎟ ⎥π t ⎬ Rt +1 − R f + Y .
                                                                                         t −1 ⎟
                   ⎪⎩                     ⎢⎣ (1 + AIR )           ⎝ s =t +1(1 + AIR ) ⎠ ⎥⎦ ⎪⎭

Besides the intertemporal budget restriction, the retiree is restricted from borrowing against

future pension income and annuity payouts, as well as from selling short positions in annuities:

                                                      (               ) (
                                      S t , PRt , π ta , 1 − π ta , π ts , 1 − π ts ≥ 0.       )                           (14)

Her optimization problem is then summarized by:

                                                          max                  V0 ,                                        (15)
                                                    {C ,PR ,π ,π }
                                                      t   t
                                                                  s
                                                                  t
                                                                      a T
                                                                      t t =0




subject to restrictions (13) and (14).

Numerical Solution. Analytical solutions to this type of problem do not exist, so we solve it by

backward induction through a three-dimensional state space {W , L, t}. Although we assume
                                                                                                               13




CRRA preferences, cash on hand W cannot be omitted as a state variable because illiquid

annuities are included in the analysis. It is also necessary to include the sum of current annuity

payouts L as a state variable, because once purchased, annuities can no longer be sold. Finally,

the optimal policy depends on the retiree’s age, because the price of newly purchased life

annuities as well as the present value of her remaining pension income – which below we refer to

as pension wealth – vary with her age.

       Without loss of generality, we normalize the retiree’s pension benefit Y to 1, and then we

express all other cash flow variables as multiples of Y. There are three state variables, two of

which – cash on hand W and annuity payouts L – are continuous, leaving age as the only

discrete state variable. For each grid point, we calculate the optimal policy and the value of the

value function. Thereby, we compute the integral of the expectation operator in (6):

          ⎡
                    (       )   (B )1− ρ ⎤ = ⎡ p sV + 1 − p s k (Bt +1 )1− ρ ⎤ p( R )dR
                                                         (      )
                                 1 − ρ ⎦⎥ ∫ ⎢⎣
       Et ⎢ ptsVt +1 + 1 − pts k t +1    ⎥   ⎢ t t +1                        ⎥     t +1 t +1
                                                                                                            (16)
                                                                 1 − ρ ⎦⎥
                                                           t
          ⎣⎢

using Gaussian quadrature integration. The optimization is done by numerical constrained

maximization. We estimate the policy functions C (W , L, t ) , PR(W , L, t ) , π s (W , L, t ) , π a (W , L, t )

and the value function V (W , L, t ) by cubic spline interpolation.



Optimal Policies for a Range of Base Cases

       To illustrate the range of asset location and allocation strategies, we graph the optimal

positions for hypothetical retirees of different ages and different initial financial wealth values

(represented as a multiple of pension income). In Figure 2, for instance, the retiree has moderate

relative risk aversion ( ρ = 5 ), a reasonable rate of time preference ( β = 0.96 ), no bequest
                                                                                                                     14




motive (k = 0), and no income from preexisting annuities (L = 0).15 Panels (a) and (b) show that

all consumers will partially annuitize immediately, but even without a bequest motive, most will

keep up to 13 percent of their initial assets in financial wealth. Also, most retirees will postpone

full annuitization until later in life, until around age 88. The reason for partial annuitization is

that our analysis permits retirees to purchase only annuities with lifelong payouts.16

Accordingly, as we demonstrate below, full initial annuitization as imposed in earlier studies is

suboptimal when assuming reasonable parameters. 17

Figure 2 here

       The reason that the consumer holds on to her non-annuitized wealth early in retirement is

that annuity payouts are low initially and rise later in life, because the expected annuity return

exceeds the AIR. Due to her time preference, the retiree who seeks to smooth consumption will

keep some liquid financial wealth from which she can withdraw cash flexibly to compensate for

the low initial annuity payments. Of course, while keeping some financial wealth is optimal, it is

also worth noting that the mortality credit in the annuity largely compensates for the rigidity of

the annuity payout pattern.18

       Figure 2 also reveals that the retiree initially holds a substantial fraction of her annuity in

stocks, and in some cases as much as 100 percent (Panels c-d). In most cases, the share of her


15
   Survival probabilities are taken from the US 1996 Annuity 2000 female mortality table to price annuities, and
from the corresponding population mortality table to calculate utility. To reduce computation times, we restrict the
maximum age to 100. The riskless rate is set to 2 percent and the AIR to 4 percent, respectively. Further, we assume
that risky stock has an expected return of 6 percent and volatility of 18 percent.
16
   This assumption creates market incompleteness as annuities that pay out only in one specific year, as in Davidoff
et al. (2005) and Kapur and Orszag (1999), are not available. Our approach to modeling annuity markets is more
consistent with real world annuity products.
17
   For example, studies by Browne, Milevsky, and Salisbury (2003); Charupat and Milevsky (2002); and Koijen,
Nijman, and Werker (2006) assume incomplete annuity markets but exogenously impose immediate full
annuitization at the point of retirement .
18
   Milevsky and Young (2006a) derive the optimal timing to switch to what they call an optimal money mix plan.
This is a full annuitization strategy where at retirement, the consumer selects a given fraction of fixed and equity-
linked payout annuities. Postponing annuitization is optimal in this setting because the retiree is restricted to full
annuitization and cannot later rebalance the fraction of fixed and equity-linked payout annuities.
                                                                                                              15




financial wealth in stocks is also high early in retirement, and then falls for older retirees. The

optimal stock fraction in the variable annuity declines at older ages, as well as in the financial

portfolio. The reason is that the retiree’s pension wealth has bond-like traits, and it declines (in

present value) over time. Accordingly, the retiree phases down her stock allocation (taking into

account both financial and variable annuity assets), so as to maintain a total stock fraction when

a bond-like pension wealth shrinks over age. Also, the higher her financial wealth compared to

pension wealth, the higher is her desired bond exposure as a percent of her financial wealth if she

is to reach her optimum investment mix. This result is similar to those suggested by recent life-

cycle asset allocation studies which omit annuities (Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout, 2005), and it

also conforms to financial advice recommending that stock fractions be decreased for older

individuals (Young, 2004).

       Figure 3 provides illustrative optimal stock fractions in the combined annuity and financial

wealth portfolios, depicted as a function of the retiree’s age and cash on hand (W). Panel (a)

confirms that the retiree’s overall fraction in stock declines with age. In Panel (b), the optimal

stock fraction varies according to the retiree’s initial wealth, and once again it falls with age,

more rapidly for higher levels of initial wealth. It is interesting that this pattern implies the

retiree will follow a counter-cyclical investment strategy, boosting her stock fraction after a bear

market and decreasing it in a bull market.19 This stands in sharp contrast with conventional buy-

and-hold pro-cyclical “money mix” strategies,20 since in the latter, the stock fraction rises when

the stock market outperforms the bond market, and falls if the stock market dives.

Figure 3 here


19
   In many countries, insurance contracts include a guarantee which leads to a procyclical investment policy on
behalf of the insured person; we find the opposite to be optimal for the CRRA investor.
20
   See Charupat and Milevsky (2002), Koijen, Nijman, and Werker (2006), Browne et al. (2003), and Milevsky and
Young (2003).
                                                                                                   16




Stochastic Analysis. Next we undertake stochastic analysis to evaluate how the retiree’s annuity

purchases, stock fraction, and consumption, would be expected to evolve assuming she followed

the policy functions derived above. These computations are based on Monte Carlo simulations of

100,000 life cycles, and they all begin by assuming that her financial wealth at age 65 amounts to

5 times her pension income; accordingly, total cash on hand (including pension income) is 6

times pension income (W = 6). Further, we assume that she holds no initial variable payout

annuities (L = 0).

      The range of simulated possibilities appears in Figure 4, taking into account the

consumer’s optimal portfolio rebalancing. The median path (50th percentile) in Panel (a)

indicates that the retiree will purchase the bulk of her annuities at age 65 and continue to add

additional units thereafter; accordingly, her annuity wealth rises with age and after age 80 she is

fully annuitized. Yet because outcomes are stochastic, the 10-90th percentiles illustrate likely

variability. In Panel (b), we see that the retiree permitted to rebalance her variable payout annuity

asset allocation as she ages will reduce her stock fraction along the median path. In addition, the

dispersion in the fraction of stock held rises over time, ranging between 50 and 100 percent.

Figure 4 here

      Panel (c) of Figure 4 traces the dispersion of consumption paths with age, where

consumption is measured as a multiple of pension income. At the median, the optimizing retiree

boosts consumption by 40 percent over her pension income for the rest of her life. The payouts

could be substantially higher, doubling her consumption, if the stock market behaves extremely

well when she is in her 90s; conversely the annuity would only boost consumption by 10-20

percent, if the assets in the variable annuity perform very poorly (represented in the figure by the

10 percentile probable minimum consumption level). In other words, with variable payout
                                                                                                      17




annuities, the retiree may deplete her financial assets not because of longevity risk, but because

of stock market risk.

Impact of the AIR. Above we noted that the AIR selected by the insurer may have a

considerable influence on the annuity payout pattern, as well as the retiree’s asset location and

allocation decisions. This because the retiree who buys an annuity is restricted to receiving a

certain payout pattern determined by the AIR. When the AIR is low, annuity cash flows are

initially low but rise later in life; conversely, a high AIR produces higher initial cash flows

which can be optimally reinvested according to the realized state of nature, but this comes at the

cost of lower benefits late in life. It is therefore of interest to explore how changing the AIR

shapes the investor’s optimal asset allocation, and to determine how sensitive the optimal

outcomes are to changes in the AIR.

      To this end, we reoptimize the retiree’s asset allocation policy for AIRs set to 2, 4, and 6

percent and compare the Monte Carlo simulations based on the optimal policies resulting in each

case. Figure 5 reports results, with Panel (a) providing expected financial wealth holdings. When

the AIR is low, the retiree retains a large financial wealth position early in retirement; for

instance, given an AIR of 2 percent, she holds 25 percent of her total wealth in nonannuitized

form. As the AIR rises, the portion held in annuities also increases; thus if the AIR is 6 percent,

all wealth will be immediately annuitized at age 65. This is because annuity payments are low

when the AIR is low, and to smooth consumption, the retiree will retain more financial wealth.

Conversely, for higher AIRs, the annuity benefits will be high, and she can invest a portion of the

benefit in newly purchased annuities, if she does not need the income.

Figure 5 here

      Raising the AIR also produces a twist in the term structure of the retiree’s stock holdings as
                                                                                                     18




a fraction of combined financial and annuity wealth (Panel b). At retirement, she holds all of her

assets in stock, independently of the AIR; thereafter, the expected stock fraction falls with age.

Furthermore, if the AIR is low, this decline in the stock fraction is slightly smaller early in

retirement, compared to higher AIRs. After the retiree reaches her mid-70’s, the rate of decline is

greater for a lower AIR. This is because a low AIR requires the retiree to reduce her stock

fraction more over time as the payout volatility rises faster than with a high AIR (see Figure 1).

Finally, a higher AIR also gives the retiree a smoother consumption profile (Panel c), as she need

not miss out on the mortality credit by maintaining high levels of liquid financial wealth early in

her retirement period.



Utility Gains from Variable Payout Annuities

       Thus far, we have shown that the retiree will optimally devote a dominant portion of her

portfolio to variable payout annuities, and she also will hold substantial equities. To evaluate

how consequential variable payout annuities are for the retiree’s wellbeing, we next compare the

retiree’s utility from having access to variable annuities, with those achievable from a phased

withdrawal strategy. We compare these alternatives by computing the additional amount of

financial wealth the retiree would need in the restricted scenario, that would make her as well off

(provide the same expected utility) as in the unrestricted scenario. Technically, this is

accomplished by equating the expected utility in the unrestricted case with that of the restricted

case but with more initial financial wealth.

       In particular, we examine two phased withdrawal strategies, namely (1) a Pure Bond

Strategy with no Annuities, and (2) a Stock/Bond Strategy with no Annuities. The first assumes

that the investor follows a dynamic optimal phased withdrawal plan, but she can hold no
                                                                                                      19




annuities and may invest only in bonds. This calculation offers insight into welfare gains

associated with access to both the equity premium offered by the stock market and the mortality

credit offered by the annuity market. In the second case, the investor is assumed to optimally

invest her assets in stocks and bonds, but she cannot buy annuities. This second scenario isolates

the utility value of access to annuity markets alone.

      The left-hand panel of Table 1 summarizes results for a moderately risk-averse individual

such as that depicted in Figure 2, for varying initial wealth levels. We also allow a bequest

motive in the last panel. It is unequivocally clear that annuities enhance retiree wellbeing

irrespective of risk aversion. Previously, we had showed that the moderately risk averse retiree

with moderate initial wealth (ρ = 5 and S0 = 5) will initially invest all her financial and annuity

funds in stocks. By contrast, Column 2 indicates what happens if that retiree were constrained to

a phased withdrawal strategy and could invest only in bonds. Specifically, row 3 shows that she

would need to be given 34 percent more initial financial wealth to make her indifferent between

the pure bond phased withdrawal approach, versus having an unconstrained menu. This utility

change is substantial, and it is comparable to values reported by Brown et al. (2001) where their

benchmark involved only immediate and full annuitization. Values for other levels of risk

aversion are similar (rows 1 and 5).

Table 1 here

      A retiree who lacks a variable annuity but has access to both stock and bond markets is

relatively better off. Column 2, row 4, for instance, shows that our moderately risk-averse retiree

still allocates her funds suboptimally, but since she can now benefit from the equity premium,

she requires only 13 percent of her initial financial wealth to be as well off as she would with

access to a variable annuity. In fact, the difference between rows 3 and 4 measures the value of
                                                                                                                   20




equity premium which, in this case, exceeds 20 percent of initial wealth. More generally, the

higher are initial wealth and risk aversion levels, the more the retiree will value access to the

variable annuity market. For example, the very risk-averse retiree (ρ = 10) with a high level of

initial financial wealth (S0 = 10) who can only invest in bonds, would require a 41 percent

increase in her initial wealth to make her as well off as with the full range of portfolio choices.

Of course, if there is a positive bequest motive, the relative appeal of annuities is lower. But even

here, the value of access to variable annuity markets still rises with initial wealth.

       The right-hand panel of Table 1 provides results for alternative AIRs at varying levels of

risk aversion, assuming the initial financial wealth is fixed (S0 = 5). The overall conclusion is

that higher AIRs are appealing to more risk averse individuals having access to variable

annuities. By contrast, a lower AIR is preferred by the more risk tolerant. The case with

bequests (rows 7 and 8) is comparable to the no-bequest scenario: the retiree will select a high

AIR. In any event, changes in utility are small which suggests that offering retirees choice over

AIRs (within reason) is unlikely to be consequential.21

       The welfare gains from this complex process of dynamic portfolio reoptimization can be

compared to simpler one-time annuitization and portfolio investment decisions such as the

constant 60/40 stock/bond mix mentioned by Feldstein and Ranguelova (2001). It is interesting

that relatively small levels of incremental financial wealth would leave the retiree indifferent

between our optimally dynamic retirement strategy and a simple, fixed 60/40 investment mix.

For retirees with the risk aversion and initial financial wealth levels considered above, the

simpler rule produces utility losses equivalent to no more than 8 percent of initial financial

21
  Dellinger (2006) notes that some variable payout annuities providers let the annuitant select an AIR from a certain
range at the time the annuity is purchased. But as suggested by Jeffrey Brown (personal communication), permitting
annuity purchasers to freely choose their preferred AIR may foster adverse selection: thus retirees believing they
have inside information about their own mortality prospects might select their AIR strategically. It would be
interesting to examine this hypothesis empirically.
                                                                                                         21




wealth. Nevertheless, other simple rules (such as holding 100 percent of the annuity in stock) are

much less attractive.



Discussion and Conclusions

      Those working to manage their money effectively in retirement seek to benefit from

capital market returns while not outliving their funds. This paper shows how variable payout

annuities can enhance the retiree portfolio choice set taking into account both stochastic

mortality and risky stock returns, particularly if variable annuities can be bought endogenously.

Our work advances prior studies by allowing the investor to annuitize gradually; endogenizing

the annuitization decision means she holds annuities and financial wealth simultaneously and can

buy annuities incrementally in retirement. We also endogenize the asset allocation decision both

inside and outside the variable payout annuities. And finally, we assess how pre-retirement

saving, income, and bequest motives affect the analysis.

      Regarding the asset location decision, we find that the utility maximizing retiree will not

annuitize all her funds at retirement, even if she has no bequest motive. This result contrasts

with prior studies which suggest that retirees lacking a bequest motive will annuitize all their

wealth. For example, a moderately risk averse and moderately endowed investor will hold up to

one-quarter of her initial wealth in financial assets at retirement; thereafter, she will draw from

this fund over time to smooth her consumption time path. Full annuitization is deferred to around

age 80 at the latest. Regarding her asset allocation decision, it is interesting that the retiree will

optimally invest a majority of her combined annuity and financial wealth in stock, with the stock

fraction falling over the retirement period. We also show that the investor will react

countercyclically with respect to stock market trends, so as to rebalance her asset allocation. By
                                                                                                    22




contrast, prior studies advocating a buy-and-hold approach to annuities tell retirees to follow a

procyclical investment strategy. Changes in the AIR (within a reasonable range) have a relatively

small impact. Last, our welfare analysis indicates that a retiree who can access variable annuities

or stocks values this considerably, for a wealth equivalent amounting to as much as 40 percent of

initial financial wealth.

        Our findings are consequential for retirees as well as insurers and financial planners,

since we have identified a substantial degree of improvement in consumer wellbeing resulting

from access to variable annuities and equities in the retirement portfolio. Policymakers and

designers of defined contribution pensions and Individual Retirement Accounts can incorporate

variable payout annuities in the retirement mix as an appealing compromise between the

extremes of a pure withdrawal plan, on the one hand, and a fixed annuity, on the other. It is

worth noting that the US Congress recently recommended that life cycle funds become the

default for pension participant’s accumulation phase, but it offered no guidance on how the

funds should be managed after retirement (Purcell 2006). Likewise, the President’s

Commission to Strengthen Social Security focused on ways to help workers accumulate assets,

but it remained silent regarding ways to help retirees manage the asset decumulation process

(Cogan and Mitchell, 2003). Our analysis implies that integrated methods to finance retirement

offer enormous potential for both investment managers and insurance companies to capture the

$15 trillion of Baby Boomer money in motion.
                                                                                                        23




References

Blake D., A. Cairns and K. Dowd, 2003, Pensionmetrics 2: Stochastic Pension Plan Design during the
       Distribution Phase, Insurance: Mathematics and Economics, Vol. 33, Issue 1, p.29–47.
Bodie, Z., and J. Pesando, 1983, Retirement Annuity Design in an Inflationary Climate, in Z. Bodie and J.
        Shoven, eds., Financial Aspects of the U.S. Pension System, University of Chicago Press:
        Chicago, IL.
Brown, J.R., O.S. Mitchell, and J.M. Poterba, 2001, The Role of Real Annuities and Indexed Bonds in an
       Individual Accounts Retirement Program, in J.Y. Campbell and M. Feldstein, eds., Risk Aspects
       of Investment-Based Social Security Reform, University of Chicago Press: Chicago, IL, p.321–
       360.
Browne, S., M.A. Milevsky, T.S. Salisbury, 2003, Asset Allocation and the Liquidity Premium for
      Illiquid Annuities, Journal of Risk & Insurance,Vol. 70, Issue 3, p.509–526.
Charupat, N., and M.A. Milevsky, 2002, Optimal asset allocation in life annuities: a note, Insurance:
       Mathematics and Economics, Vol. 30, Issue 2, p.199–209.
Cocco, J.F., F.J. Gomes, and P.J. Maenhout, 2005, Consumption and Portfolio Choice over the Life
        Cycle, Review of Financial Studies, 18, p.491–533.
Cogan, J.and O. S. Mitchell. 2003. “Perspectives from the President’s Commission on Social Security
       Reform.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 17(2). Spring.
Davidoff T., J. Brown and P. Diamond, 2005, Annuities and Individual Welfare, American Economic
       Review, 95 (5), p.1573–1590.
Dellinger, J.K., 2006, The Handbook of Variable Income Annuities, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken,
        New Jersey, USA.
Dus, I., R. Maurer, and O.S. Mitchell, 2005, Betting on Death and Capital Markets in Retirement: A
         Shortfall Risk Analysis of Life Annuities versus Phased Withdrawal Plans, Financial Services
         Review 14, 2005, p.169–196.
Feldstein, M. and E. Ranguelova. 2001. Individual Risk in an Investment-Based Social Security System.
        American Economic Review 91(4): 1116-1125.
Gerrard, R., S. Haberman, and E. Vigna, 2004, Optimal Investment Choices Post-retirement in a Defined
        Contribution Pension Scheme, Insurance: Mathematics and Economics, Volume 35, Issue 2,
        p.321-342.
Horneff, W.J., R. Maurer, O.S. Mitchell, and I. Dus, 2006, Optimizing the Retirement Portfolio: Asset
       Allocation, Annuitization, and Risk Aversion, NBER Working Paper 12392.
Horneff, W.J., R. Maurer, and M. Stamos, 2006a, Life-Cycle Asset Allocation with Annuity Markets: Is
       Longevity Insurance a Good Deal?, Working Paper, Goethe University, Frankfurt.
Horneff, W.J., R. Maurer, and M. Stamos, 2006b, Optimal Gradual Annuitization: Quantifying the Costs
       of Switching to Annuities, Working Paper, Goethe University, Frankfurt.
Kaplan, P.D., 2006, Asset Allocation with Annuities for Retirement Income Management, Journal of
        Wealth Managament, Vol. 8, No. 4, (Spring 2006), p.27–40.
Kapur, S. and J. Orszag, 1999, A Portfolio Approach to Investments and Annuitization During
       Retirement, Working Paper, Birbeck College, University of London, UK.
                                                                                                           24



Kingston, G. and S. Thorp, 2005, Annuitization and Asset Allocation with HARA Utility, Journal of
       Pension Economics and Finance, 4, p.225–248.
Koijen, R.S., T. Nijman, and B.J.M. Werker, 2006, Optimal Portfolio Choice with Annuitization,
        Working Paper, Tilburg University - Center for Economic Research.
McKinsey, 2006, Cracking the Consumer Retirement Code. McKinsey & Co.

Milevsky, M.A., 1998, Optimal asset allocation towards the end of the life cycle: To annuitize or not to
       annuitize?, Journal of Risk & Insurance, Vol. 65, Issue 3, p.401–426.
Milevsky, M.A., 2002, How to Completely Avoid Outliving Your Money: An Introduction to Variable
       Payout Annuities for Retiring Canadians, Working Paper, IFID Centre, The Schulich School of
       Business, York University, Toronto, Canada.
Milevsky, M.A. and V. Young, 2002, Optimal Asset Allocation and the Real Option to Delay
       Annuitization, Working Paper, IFID Centre, Schulich School of Business, York University,
       Toronto, Canada.
Milevsky, M.A. and V. Young, 2006a, Annuitization and Asset Allocation, in Journal of Economic
       Dynamics and Control forthcoming.
Milevsky, M.A. and V. Young, 2006b, The Timing of Annuitization: Investment Dominance and
       Mortality Risk, Insurance: Mathematics and Economics, forthcoming.
Milevsky, M.A., K.S. Moore, and V. Young, Asset Allocation and Annuity-Purchases Strategies to
       Minimize the Probability of Financial Ruin, Mathematical Finance, 16, (4), 647-671.
Mitchell, O., J. Poterba, M. Warshawsky, and J. Brown, 1999, New Evidence on the Money’s Worth of
        Individual Annuities, American Economic Review, 89, p.1299–1318.
Purcell, Patrick, 2006, Summary of the Pension Protection Act of 2006. Congressional Research Service,
         Domestic Social Policy Division. Working Paper. US Congress.
Stabile G., 2003, Optimal Timing of the Annuity Purchases: A Combined Stochastic Control and Optimal
        Stopping Problem, Working Paper, Universita degli Studi ”La Sapienza” di Roma, Rome, Italy.
Yaari M., 1965, Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the Consumer, Review of
       Economic Studies, 32, p.137–150.
Young, L., 2004, “Funds That Adjust As The Years Go By.” Business Week, July 26.
                                                                                                                                                                        25




                                                        Panel (a)                                                                     Panel (b)

                                    30                                                                                25




                                                                                      10%/90% Percentiles ($000) of
                                    25
  10th/90th Percentile of Annuity




                                                                                                                      20




                                                                                           Annuity Payments
                                    20
          Payments ($000)




                                                                                                                      15
                                    15

                                    10                                                                                10

                                     5                                                                                5

                                     0
                                         65   70   75     80     85   90   95   100                                   0
                                                                                                                           65   70     75   80    85   90   95    100
                                                           Age
                                         0% Stocks                    60% Stocks                                                     AIR = 2% Age      AIR = 4%
                                         100% Stocks                                                                                 AIR = 6%


Figure 1: Payment Percentiles for Alternative Asset Allocations in the Annuity and
Varying                                                                                     AIRs.
This illustration assumes an initial premium of $100,000 and survival probabilities from the US
1996 Annuity 2000 mortality table for females; computations are based on equation (5). Panel a:
Yearly real annuity fund returns for the 60 (100) percent stock allocation are i.i.d. log-normal
with mean 4.4 (6) percent and standard deviation 10.8 (18) percent. The real riskless rate and the
AIR are set to 2 and 4 percent, respectively. Panel b: The annuity fund is assumed to be invested
in a 60/40 stock bond portfolio with the mean 4.4 percent and standard deviation 10.8 percent;
the AIR is set to 2, 4, and 6 percent, respectively.
                                                                                                               26




               Annuity Wealth                                  Financial Wealth
(a)                                                   (b)




(c)                                                  (d)




Figure 2: Illustrative Optimal Dynamic Asset Location and Allocation given Stocks, Bonds, and
Variable Payout Annuities: Variations by Age and Cash on Hand. These figures represent optimal
policies which vary as a function of cash on hand (W) and age; in all panels, no prior annuitization is
assumed (L=0). In Panel (a), the age-65 retiree with cash on hand W = 6 would spend 90 percent of her
cash on annuities and the rest to financial investments (Panel b). Her optimal stock fraction is 100 percent
within the variable annuity (Panel c) as well as in financial wealth (Panel d).
Note: Calculations are based on backward optimization of the value function given in (15). The retiree has
CRRA utility with ρ = 5, β = 0.96, and no bequest motive (k = 0). Survival probabilities are from the US
1996 Annuity 2000 mortality table for females to price annuities and from the corresponding population
mortality table to calculate utility. Yearly real stock returns are i.i.d. log-normal distributed with the mean 6
percent and standard deviation 18 percent. The real interest rate and the AIR are set to 2 and 4 percent,
respectively.
                                                                                                                    27




    (a) How Optimal Stock Holdings as a Fraction of Combined Annuity and Financial Wealth
        Portfolios Vary by Age and Cash on Hand: No Prior Annuity Assumed (i.e. L = 0)




(b) How Optimal Stock Holdings as a Fraction of Combined Annuity and Financial Wealth Portfolios
Vary by Age and Initial Wealth: Single Level of Cash on Hand Assumed (W = 6)




Figure 3: Illustrative Optimal Stock Fractions in the Combined Annuity and Financial Wealth
Portfolios. These figures represent the relationship between the retiree’s age and the optimal stock fraction
in her combined annuity and financial asset holdings. The latter is defined as the stock fraction of her
expected annuity wealth PV (the present value of remaining expected annuity payouts ) plus the stock
fraction of her financial wealth S, as a percent of financial plus annuity wealth (π s S + π a PV ) ( S + PV ) . Panel
(a) shows how this stock fraction varies with age and cash on hand W; Panel (b) shows how it varies with
age and pre-existing annuity payments L. In both panels, no prior annuitization is assumed (L=0).
Note: See Figure 2 for calculation details.
                                                                                                              28




  (a)




  (b)




  (c)




Figure 4: Dispersion of Annuity, Total Stock, and Consumption Paths: Base Case. Panel (a) depicts the
dispersion of the annuitized fraction of wealth PV/(S + PV) as it varies with age; Panel (b) reports similar
age-dispersion percentiles for the stock fraction of the combined annuity and financial wealth portfolios
[= (π s S + π a PV ) ( S + PV ) ]. Panel (c) shows similar dispersion for consumption, measured as a multiple of
pension income.
Note: See Figure 2 for details. Computations are based on 100,000 Monte Carlo simulations using the
optimal policies from Figure 3 and initial wealth of 5 times pension income (S0 = 5).
                                                                                                      29



(a)




(b)




(c)




Figure 5: Impact of Changing the AIR on (a) the Expected Share of Financial Wealth, (b)Total Stock
Share, and (c)Consumption. This figure depicts the results from solving the optimization problem in (15)
for AIRs of 2, 4, and 6 percent respectively. Note: See Figure 4 for details.
                                                                                                                                                                  30



Table 1: Required Increase in Financial Wealth (%) to Make Retiree Indifferent Between the Specified Phased Withdrawal Strategy
versus Gaining Access to Variable Payout Annuities: Impact of Different Preferences, Initial Financial Wealth, and AIR.

                                                                                Initial Financial Wealth                                   AIR
                                                                            Low         Moderate          High             Low           Moderate         High
                                                                          (S0 = 2)      (S0 = 5)        (S0 = 10)       (AIR = 2%)      (AIR = 4%)     (AIR = 6%)
                Preferences                   Investible Assets              (1)          (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)            (6)

            (a) Low Risk Aversion              (1) Bonds                    19.8           30.5           36.8              38.1            30.5           31.4
                (ρ = 2, k = 0)                 (2) Bonds, Stocks             6.3            9.6           12.5              15.7             9.6           10.3


            (b) Moderate Risk Aversion         (3) Bonds                    24.8           34.0           37.8              32.6            34.0           34.9
                (ρ = 5, k = 0)                 (4) Bonds, Stocks             7.9           13.1           18.3              11.9            13.1           13.8


            (c) High Risk Aversion             (5) Bonds                    29.1           36.1           40.6              34.6            36.1           37.7
                (ρ = 10, k = 0)                (6) Bonds, Stocks            12.1           19.8           27.6              18.5            19.8           20.4

            (d) Moderate Bequest Motive        (7) Bonds                    24.3           27.8           31.2              27.7            27.8           28.2
                (ρ = 5, k = 2)                 (8) Bonds, Stocks             4.2            7.0           12.5               6.8             7.0            7.7

Note: The table entries indicate the amount of financial wealth the retiree would have to be given to make her indifferent between having access to variable
annuities as well as stocks and bonds, versus having a restricted choice set as indicated in the Table. For example, the investor with relative risk aversion ρ = 5,
no bequest motive (k = 0), and an initial financial wealth of S0 = 5, who can invest just in bonds, would be indifferent between having access to the variable
annuity market, versus being compensated with an additional 34 percent of financial wealth (row b3, col. 2). The impact of financial wealth is evaluated fixing
the AIR of the variable annuity to AIR = 4%. The impact of the AIR is calculated fixing initial financial wealth at S0 = 5.
