                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 ACCOUNTING FOR GROWTH:
                                COMPARING CHINA AND INDIA

                                          Barry Bosworth
                                          Susan M. Collins

                                        Working Paper 12943
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12943


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2007




We are very indebted to Anthony Liu and Gabriel Chodorow-Reich for extensive assistance in understanding
the data and constructing the growth accounts. This paper was presented at the annual conference
of the Tokyo Club Foundation for Global Studies, December 6-7, 2006. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2007 by Barry Bosworth and Susan M. Collins. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Accounting for Growth: Comparing China and India
Barry Bosworth and Susan M. Collins
NBER Working Paper No. 12943
February 2007
JEL No. F43,O1,O4

                                               ABSTRACT

We compare the recent economic performances of China and India using a simple growth accounting
framework that produces estimates of the contribution of labor, capital, education, and total factor
productivity for the three sectors of agriculture, industry, and services as well as for the aggregate
economy. Our analysis incorporates recent data revisions in both countries and includes extensive
discussion of the underlying data series. The growth accounts show a roughly equal division in each
country between the contributions of capital accumulation and TFP to growth in output per worker
over the period 1978-2004, and an acceleration of growth when the period is divided at 1993. However,
the magnitude of output growth in China is roughly double that of India at the aggregate level, and
also higher in each of the three sectors in both sub-periods. In China the post-1993 acceleration was
concentrated mostly in industry, which contributed nearly 60 percent of Chinas aggregate productivity
growth. In contrast, 45 percent of the growth in India in the second sub-period came in services. Reallocation
of workers from agriculture to industry and services has contributed 1.2 percentage points to productivity
growth in each country.

Barry Bosworth
Senior Fellow
The Brookings Institution
1775 Massachusetts Avenue
Washington, DC 20036
bbosworth@brookings.edu

Susan M. Collins
Professor of Economics
Georgetown University & Senior Fellow,
The Brookings Institution
1775 Massachusetts Avenue, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20036
and NBER
scollins@brookings.edu
                    Accounting for Growth: Comparing China and India
                                               by
                         Barry Bosworth, the Brookings Institution, and
              Susan M. Collins, the Brookings Institution and Georgetown University


        The emergence of China and India as major forces in the global economy is one of the

most significant economic developments of the past quarter century. Their continued growth is

likely to dominate the course of the world economy for the next several decades. Up to now,

only a small fraction of the world’s population has enjoyed the fruits of economic well-being,

with high-income industrial countries accounting for less than a fifth of the world’s population.

However, China and India together comprise over a third of the world’s population; and since

1980, they have achieved remarkable rates of economic growth and poverty reduction.

        The purpose of this paper is to examine sources of economic growth in the two countries

and to compare and contrast their experiences over the past 25 years. In many respects, China

and India seem similar. Both are geographically large countries with enormous populations that

remain very poor. In 1980, roughly the beginning of our analysis, both had extremely low per

capita incomes, although we note that there is some controversy in the literature about their

relative income levels. 1 Since then, GDP per capita has more than doubled in India and has

increased a remarkable 7-fold in China. However, the details of their economic growth are in

fact quite different. While initially both were largely autarkic countries, isolated from the global

economy, China acted more quickly and aggressively to lower trade barriers, and attract foreign


1
  China has not participated in past rounds of the international comparison project, and measures of GDP at
purchasing power parity are quite speculative. India last participated in 1985. Maddison (2001) shows them with
nearly equal levels of income per capita of about $1000 in 1980, but he obtained those values from a 1987
comparison of China to the United States, combined with a lower rate of growth between 1980 and 1987 than
indicated by the official Chinese statistics. The World Bank and the Penn World Tables show GDP per capita for
China at about two thirds of the estimate for India in 1980.
direct investment inflows. In addition, as discussed more fully in later sections, China has

experienced explosive growth in its industrial sector, whereas India’s growth has been fueled by

the expansion of service-producing industries.

       In this paper, we investigate the patterns of economic growth for China and India by

constructing a set of growth accounts for each that uncover the supply side sources of output

change. In addition to aggregate output, the accounts are constructed for the three major

economic sectors: primary (agriculture, forestry and fisheries), industry (manufacturing, mining,

construction, and utilities), and services. This level of detail enables us to assess the magnitude

of efficiency gains associated with the movement of workers out of agriculture, where they are

frequently under-employed, into higher productivity jobs in industry and services.



                              Construction of the Growth Accounts

       Growth accounting provides a means of allocating changes in a country’s observed

output into the contributions from changes in factor inputs (capital and labor) and a residual,

typically called total factor productivity (TFP). The latter is best interpreted as a measure of

gains in the efficiency with which inputs are used, including technical progress as well as myriad

other determinants. While highlighting proximate, not fundamental causes of growth, the

approach provides extremely useful benchmarks for analyzing economic performance.

       As discussed in more detail in Bosworth and Collins (2003), we essentially assume a

Cobb-Douglas production function with fixed factor shares:

       (1)             Y = AK α (LH )1−α .

Y, K, A and α are measures of output, physical capital services, TFP and capital’s share,

respectively. L is labor, which is adjusted for improvements in educational attainment (H) as a



                                                  2
proxy for skills. The capital share, α, is assumed equal to 0.40 for both countries with a modest

change in the case of agriculture to allow for the role of land.2 We report our results in a form

that decomposes the growth in output per worker (y/l) into the contributions of growth in capital

per worker (k/l), increases in education per worker (h), and a residual measure of the

contribution of improvements in TFP (a):

         (2)               y
                               l
                                     ( l )+ (1 − α )h + a .
                                   =α k

We specify that the growth of capital services is proportionate to that of the capital stock. We

measure the gains in educational attainment with average years of schooling, s, assuming a

constant (7%) return to each additional year:

         (3)               H = (1.07) s .



Data Sources

         Issues of data availability and quality are always of great concern in the construction of

growth accounts, and the problems are often more severe for emerging markets. We provide a

detailed discussion of the data sources and issues for India in a prior publication (Bosworth and

others, forthcoming). Thus, the discussion of data sources here focuses on China. However, it is

important to highlight that the data concerns we encounter in the two countries are quite

different. India has a very large informal sector, where output and employment are concentrated

in small enterprises. Thus, construction of India’s national accounts is centered around large

periodic surveys of households, rather than relying on reports from major enterprises. China, in


2
 It would be preferable to rely on a more general formulation of the production process and use the income shares
of each factor to infer its contribution. However, the large numbers of self-employed persons in developing
countries, with their mixture of income from both capital and their own labor makes it difficult to obtain meaningful
measures of the income shares. As discussed in Bosworth and Collins (2003), we believe that the simplifying
assumption of a constant share has minimal effects on the conclusions.



                                                          3
contrast, can make greater use of reports from large enterprises for the industrial sector, but must

still rely on household surveys to obtain high quality information on some service-producing

industries. We have a wealth of information on the methods that India uses to construct its

statistical accounts, but lack important details for China.

       China’s transition from a command economy to one based on markets raises some

additional concerns about its economic statistics. One set relates to the major problems of

adjusting values for significant changes in quality. In addition, China is still in the process of

converting its statistical reporting system over to one more closely aligned with international

standards. In particular, the conversion from the Soviet Material Product System (MPS) to the

system of Standard National Accounts (SNA) raises concerns about the comparability of the data

over time. Such concerns are less relevant for India, which has had a coherent statistical system

for a longer period of time, and for which a larger amount of methodological information is

available in English.

       Output. The national accounts of each country provide our basic source for data on

output for the total economy and the three major sectors (primary, secondary, and tertiary).

While India’s national accounts data are used without modification, the Chinese data are often

claimed to overstate the rate of real growth. The most extensive criticisms are those of

Maddison (1998) who reduced the growth of China’s GDP by an average of 2.4 percent per year

for the 1952-95 period. However, his adjustments were severely criticized by Holz (2006a), and

in contrast to the downward adjustments, the official estimates were recently revised up to

correct for an underestimation of the services sector over the period of 1993-2004. However,

others continue to argue that the estimates of real growth are overstated because of an

underestimate of price inflation. The real output data come from asking firms to report the




                                                  4
change in their production based on prices of the prior year. The difficulty of making that

calculation may lead many enterprises to report equal rates of nominal and real change (Woo,

1998). Thus, some researchers have sought to construct alternative price indexes that could be

used to deflate the nominal values (Young, 2002, and Dekle and Vandenbrouck, 2006).

        We experimented with using the price indexes suggested by Young (2002). The

alternative output measure for agriculture has a very similar growth rate to that reported in the

official national account statistics. Woo’s argument seems most applicable to the large

enterprises of the industrial sector, where the alternative price indexes do indicate substantially

more rapid inflation than the implicit price deflators embedded in the official data. We find that

the alternative index for the secondary (industry) sector does indicate a significantly slower rate

of output growth.

       Finally, the only available price indexes for services are those in the services component

of the consumer price index. However, the items included in that index are far from

representative of the product mix of the tertiary sector, where the major activities are

transportation, communications, finance, and trade. The rate of increase for the services price

index seems implausible in comparison with increases in wage rates (the primary input), and

prices of industrial goods. This is probably because the consumer price index for services has

been dominated by the elimination of a large array of subsidies and price controls for the services

provided to households, particularly with regard to housing.

       While we computed the growth accounts using both the official output measures and

those based on the alternative price deflators, our preferred set uses the official output data for

the primary and tertiary sectors and the alternative only for the secondary sector. We also note

that, although much of the discussion of China’s data has focused on the potential




                                                  5
understatement of inflation implying an over estimate of output growth, research on other

countries has highlighted equally severe problems in the construction of price indexes that result

in an overestimate of inflation. The two major problems are the failure to incorporate

substitution effects and inadequate allowances for quality change, which are both likely to be of

substantial importance in China. While we agree that the current estimates of output growth

leave substantial room for error, the evidence for significant bias seems unproven.

        Employment. For India, employment estimates are only available from the quinquennial

household surveys, and values for intervening years must be interpolated. Estimates of the

workforce follow international standards of including wage earners, the self-employed and

unpaid family members. As a result, they include a substantial number of underemployed

workers. We use a measure based on a worker’s primary activity (employed, unemployed, out of

the labor force) in the prior year.

        The data for China have more complex origins, reflecting the results of both the

population censuses and administrative reports from enterprises. However, only limited

information is available on the methods used to generate these series. At the level of the three

sectors, we have two alternative measures of employment. The first, derived from administrative

data from the employment reporting system, extends back to 1952. The primary problem with

these data is that in the years prior to 1998, they include workers who were effectively laid off

(Holz, 2006b). It is difficult to judge the magnitude of the break in these data because layoffs

were largely unknown prior to the 1990s. A second set of data, adjusted to be consistent with the

population censuses, begins in 1990; and consistent estimates for the earlier years were obtained

from Holz (2006b). This series is conceptually most comparable to the data for India, and is

significantly higher in levels than the first. However, it has also been subject to frequent




                                                 6
revision, and little is known about the precise methods used to compute it. We use both series in

computing the growth accounts and discuss their impact on the conclusions below.3

         Capital. The data on fixed capital are taken directly from the national accounts of the

two countries. India produces its own estimates of the capital stock by major sector, which we

adopted. In the case of China, information from the provincial reports must be used to allocate

the national data on gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) among the three major sectors (Hsueh

and Li, 1999).4 We constructed our own perpetual-inventory estimates of the capital stock

assuming a geometric rate of depreciation of 0.06.

         Land. Our growth accounts include land as well as capital and labor as factor inputs to

produce agriculture. For India, an estimate of the volume of land used in agricultural production

is available annually. We use an estimate of total cropped land that adjusts for irrigated lands,

which are sown more than once per year. For China we used a measure of total sown land area.5

These two measures of land use show a growth over the past quarter century of about 9 percent

for India and 3 percent for China. In both countries, there are no available estimates of current

market value of the land that would enable us to construct measures of the annual flow of capital

services. Thus, we simply focus on the growth in the aggregate amount of land.

         Educational Attainment. We constructed an index of educational attainment for each

sector of the Indian economy using information from the quinquennial household surveys

(Bosworth and others, forthcoming). For China, we relied on prior estimates that we had

3
 Both employment series are published in the Chinese statistical yearbook. In the 2005 edition, the first series,
sector totals from on establishment reports is shown in table 5-6. The series that is closer to a census concept is
shown in table 5-2.
4
  In addition, the expenditure-side estimates of GDP have not yet incorporated the revisions that resulted from the
last economic census and that are included in the output data. Thus, the data may be subject to revision in the near
future.
5
 The data were available online from the China Data Center are included in a table entitled “Production Condition
for Agriculture of China.”



                                                           7
assembled from census data (Bosworth and Collins, 2003). In this case, we are unable to

distinguish among the three sectors and use a common education index.



Growth Accounts

       We have constructed growth accounts covering the period of 1978 to 2004 for India and

China for both the aggregate economy and the three major sectors. The results confirm many of

the now standard themes that have emerged from the prior literature on the economic

development of the two countries. However, some new findings emerge as well.

       Table 1 provides a basic summary of the results. We first report the results for the full

26-year period that corresponds to China’s economic reform period. This works as well for

India, which also experienced an acceleration of its rate of economic growth in the early part of

this period, though the precise dating of the change is controversial. We divide the period at

1993 for three reasons: it is a benchmark year for the Indian national accounts, it avoids the 1991

economic crisis, and the second sub-period can be identified with India post-reform. The table is

based on our preferred measures of output for China, in which an alternative price deflator is

used to convert output of the industrial sector to constant price values. Official national data are

used to measure output for the primary and tertiary sectors. This change lowers industrial sector

output growth by an average of 1.3 percentage points and that of the total economy by 0.8

percentage points. In addition, the estimates reported in the table are based on the employment

series most comparable to the census concept.

       Aggregate Economy. Focusing first on the full period, China’s extraordinary

performance is clearly evident, with output growing at an average annual rate of 9.2 percent.

India’s rate of growth is substantially lower, at 5.4 percent, but still well above the economy’s




                                                 8
3.4 percent growth rate of the prior two decades. Both countries show almost identical rates of

employment change, but at the level of the total economy, this is largely determined by growth in

the population of labor force age since unemployment is not a realistic alternative. Finally, the

growth in output per worker in both countries is equally split between increased capital per

worker and gains in TFP, although the values for China are twice those of India.

       Second, both countries show an acceleration of the rate of economic growth between the

first and second sub-periods. This is most significant for India, but because Chinese employment

growth slowed substantially, the acceleration of its labor productivity growth after 1993 is very

rapid. The marked slowing of employment growth in China is also evident in the estimates of

the population of labor force age, and reflects the sharp decline in the birth rate during the 1970s.

       Both China and India have had serious deficiencies in their educational institutions that

have limited the contribution of improvements in educational attainment relative to the norm of

other Asian countries. The measures of educational attainment for India and their contribution to

labor quality are discussed more fully in Bosworth and others (forthcoming), which cites a

number of studies of the Indian educational system. As those studies highlight, the problems are

most evident in India’s high continuing rate of illiteracy. In China, the process of formal

education was greatly disrupted by the cultural revolution of the late 1960s and early 1970s. In

later years, an unusually large number of adults took advantage of remedial programs to raise

their recorded educational levels, but the value of those programs is controversial. Young (2003)

provides a useful overview of Chinese statistics on educational attainment that confirm the

evidence of limited gains in educational attainment for the adult labor force. In particular, his

analysis of the relationship between earnings and years of schooling finds surprising low returns.

Knight and Shi (1996) also document a large divide in the educational attainment of rural and




                                                  9
urban workers in China. In contrast to India, however, China does appear to have largely

eliminated illiteracy. For example, UNESCO reports a literacy rate of 99 percent among youth

aged 15-24 in China, compared with just 76 percent for India. It has also succeeded in sharply

raising the educational attainment of today’s youth. Equivalent improvements have not been

achieved in India. In addition, our own investigation found surprisingly low returns to primary

education in India, and a rising return to tertiary (presumably implying an increasing shortage of

the highly educated).

       In the bottom of table 1, we also report similar growth accounts for the East Asian

economies, excluding China (Bosworth and Collins, 2003). Their performance is of particular

interest in the present context because it has been so frequently cited as a model for remarkable

economic performance. These countries are also notable for the extent to which their growth

appears to have been the result of extremely rapid gains in both physical capital and educational

attainment. The comparison highlights the extent to which China’s growth performance has

exceeded prior norms. It is also evident that China’s gains are coming from both the

contribution of a very high rate of capital accumulation and from gains in TFP. There are other

historical examples of countries that have achieved growth rates comparable to China’s growth.

This short list includes Germany and Japan in their recoveries from WWII, and Taiwan and

Korea more recently. However, China’s rapid growth has now lasted more than a quarter

century, while none of these countries were able to sustain such rapid growth for as long.

       India’s performance also compares favorable with that of East Asia prior to the financial

crisis of 1997-98. Its strong growth is overshadowed only by the even more remarkable

performance of China. However, India achieved its growth with relatively little emphasis on




                                                10
capital accumulation and more substantial gains in TFP. In that mix of gains, it differs from the

rest of Asia, where capital accumulation was so important.

           While our growth accounts for India accord closely with prior research, the results for

China differ in important respects from some of the prior studies. To begin with, a number of

studies have expressed concern about what they perceive to be a slowing of the rate of TFP

growth in recent years.6 They, in turn, attribute the slowdown to excessive and inefficient rates

of capital accumulation that have lead to widespread waste (Zheng and others, 2006, and Kwan,

2006). Our analysis finds no such slowing. We believe that the differences can be traced to two

factors.

           First, several studies report a slowing of overall output growth after 1993 that falls

through to the residual calculation of TFP. Our study incorporates the recent revisions in the

national accounts that raised the level and growth of output in the services sector. The official

GDP statistics report a 10 percent growth rate for both the 1978-93 and 1993-04 periods; but as

discussed above, we used an alternative price deflator that lowered the overall rate of growth of

industrial sector output for the full post-1978 period. However, it has a bigger impact on the

estimate of growth in the early years and raises the rate of growth after 1993 relative to the

earlier period. Thus, we show a modest acceleration of GDP growth of 0.8 percentage points

after 1993, compared to a 0.7 percent deceleration, for example, in the Kuijs and Wang study.

           Second, several studies use a greater elasticity of output with respect to capital than our

assumption of 0.4. In the case of India, this does not matter greatly because capital and labor

inputs grow at relatively similar rates. In China, however, the rate of growth of the capital input

is far in excess of that for labor, and this difference accelerates in the second sub-period. Thus, a


6
    A slowing of TFP growth is reported in Kuijs and Wang (2006), OECD (2005), and Zheng and others (2006).



                                                        11
high weight assigned to the capital input will produce an index of inputs that rises rapidly

relative to output, leaving little room for improvement in TFP.7 Our estimates, like those of

Young (2003) and the IMF (2006) that also use a capital elasticity near 0.4, obtain a larger

estimate of the contribution of TFP.

         Finally, our preferred estimates are based on the census definition of employment

(discussed above) with an adustment for the data break in 1990. If we use the alternative report-

based series, it implies about the same rate of employment growth for the full 1978-2004 period,

but a larger portion of the growth occurs before 1993. Thus, we find that using the census-based

series reduces the average annual growth in output per worker by about 0.4 percentage points in

1978-93 and raises it by an equivalent amount over the 1993-2004 period.

         We turn next to an analysis of the sources of growth in each of the three major sectors.

         Primary Sector. Both China and India benefited from the Green Revolution, but

improvements in the Chinese agricultural sector were also aided by major institutional reforms

and the emergence of the household responsibility system. Thus, we find that the output of

China’s agricultural sector has grown at a very rapid pace, 4.6 percent per year since 1978,

compared to a strong but less spectacular 2.5 percent growth rate in India. Although both

countries exhibit a slowing in the years after 1993, the primary sector continues to be a major

contributor to growth of the aggregate economy.8 China’s growth is particularly impressive


7
  Kujis and Wang (2006) use a capital share of 0.5, Zheng and others (2006) use the three alternatives 0.4, 0.5 and
0.6, and OECD (2005) uses 0.53. Heytens and Zebreg (2003) use both 0.56 and 0.63, however their study does not
include the post-1998 period in which the others find a TFP slow-down. We are surprised by the frequent
assumption of a capital elasticity of 0.5 or higher in the growth accounting studies of China. Perhaps it can be
traced to econometric studies, such as Chow and Li (2002), that obtain large coefficients on capital in regression
estimates of an aggregate production function. A high rate of growth of output and capital relative to labor can
generate a strong correlation between the first two, and a high capital elasticity without being indicative of the
underlying production process. We believe that the low quality of the data makes any estimate of the aggregate
production function a bit dubious.
8
 There is some evidence that the official statistics may overstate the growth of output in Chinese agriculture (Fan
and Zhang , 1997), but not by an amount that would greatly alter our finding of strong productivity growth. We


                                                         12
because it occurred against the backdrop of declining employment after 1993. Thus, output per

worker continued to expand at a very strong 4.3 percent annual rate. China achieved its gains

through both substantial increases in capital per worker and rates of TFP growth more than

double those for India.

         Rawski and Mead (1998) argue that the administrative employment data greatly overstate

the share of China’s workforce that is employed in agriculture and that as many as 100 million

workers should be reclassified as actually working in nonagricultural jobs. They based their

estimates on information on labor input requirements and acreage for various crops. We have

not incorporated their adjustment in our measures of employment by sector. We use the

alternative census-based series, and it is not clear how to adjust for workers who may be

employed in both agriculture and non-agriculture. In any case, the adjustment has the greatest

effect on the relative growth of the labor input in the years prior to the mid-1980s, when it would

sharply raise the growth of labor productivity in agriculture and lower it for the nonagricultural

sectors. However, it matters little for post-1993 growth rates.

         While India’s labor productivity growth is not nearly as impressive, we note that annual

increases of more than one percent represent a significant improvement relative to the previous

two decades in which there were little or no gains in agricultural productivity. (See Bosworth

and others, forthcoming). What is striking for India, however, is that employment in the primary

sector continued to grow, albeit at a somewhat slower rate in the second sub-period than in the

first. As we shall discuss below, the primary sector continues to employ a surprisingly large




believe that the reliance on household surveys of food consumption to challenge the official production data is itself
questionable. In other countries, household surveys are notorious for their underestimation of consumption. In
addition, while Fan and Zhang are correct to point out that Laspeyres indexes overstate growth, the reliance on such
indexes is not unique to China.



                                                         13
share of India’s labor force. We attribute this to an insufficient rate of expansion of employment

opportunities in industry and services relative to India’s population growth.

        Industry. The industrial sector (composed of mining, manufacturing, construction and

public utilities) differs dramatically in size between China and India. In China it has consistently

accounted for about half of the GDP, whereas in India it has remained below 30 percent. During

the 1978-93 period, the sector grew rapidly in both countries, with large increases in

employment. Both also had similar rates of gain in capital per worker. However, China

experienced a much faster rate of TFP improvement.

        In the period since 1993, China has achieved spectacular rates of growth in industrial

output per worker. Employment growth slowed to only a little more than one percent per year,

while output per worker has averaged nearly 10 percent annually. This has been achieved by a

doubling of the growth in both the contribution of increased capital per worker and TFP.9                   India

has also witnessed an acceleration of output growth in its industrial sector, but the magnitude has

been much smaller and about half of the growth is attributable to increased employment. The

rate of gain in India’s labor productivity has been only about one-third that for China, the

contribution of increased capital per worker much smaller, and the gains in TFP have averaged a

very modest one percent per year.

        Services. India has attracted considerable attention for the rapid expansion of its service

industries; yet, it is striking that the expansion of this sector has also been very strong in China.

As shown in table 2, China’s services sector has grown as rapidly as its industrial sector, and

accounts for most of the growth in employment. Furthermore, output per worker has grown at a

steady 5 percent annually over the full 26-year period. Since 1993, China has also had an
9
 These gains are based on our use of the alternative price deflator suggested by Young (2003). The acceleration of
output growth and TFP would be less if we used the official data. The alternative price deflator has the greatest
impact on lowering the estimated growth of industrial output in the first sub-period.



                                                        14
increase in the contribution of capital per worker in services that is as large as that for industry.

Where the sector has performed less well is in its weak rate of TFP improvement.

       Services is the sector in which India comes closest to matching China’s performance.

Output growth accelerated after 1993, and the rate of improvement in value added per worker

exceeds 5 percent annually. It is also remarkable that India has achieved those gains with only a

very modest contribution from increased capital per worker. Unlike for China, India’s

impressive performance in services is largely reflected in a rapid improvement of TFP.



Sector Shares

       The top panel of table 3 shows the distributions of value-added at the beginning of each

sub-period as well as for the last year in our sample. In 1978, China and India had quite different

sectoral distributions of value added, and these differences have magnified in subsequent years.

In 1978, agriculture and services each accounted for roughly one-quarter of China’s value added,

with industrial activities accounting for the remaining half. In contrast, agriculture was the

largest share of India’s value added, with services and industry accounting for one-third and just

one-quarter respectively.

       By 2004, the value added share of agriculture had declined by 20 percent in both

economies. For China, this was split equally between increases in the secondary and tertiary

sectors. In contrast, India has seen only a small increase in the value added share of its already

relatively small industrial sector, with most of the expansion concentrated in services.

       In contrast, as shown in the bottom panel of table 3, the initial sector distributions of

employment for China and India were quite similar in 1978. Both reported about 70 percent of

their workers as being in the agricultural sector. Since then, workers have moved out of




                                                  15
agriculture, but the decline in the share of employment in agriculture has been much larger for

China: only 47 percent are still in agriculture, compared to 57 percent for India. In addition,

China now has a larger portion of its workforce in services than does India.

       Are these sectoral distributions unusual relative to those for other similar economies? A

recent IMF study (IMF 2006) compares actual value added and employment shares with

predicted shares, using a regression analysis to control for country characteristics such as output

per capita (PPP), population and geographic size. For both China and India, the authors find that

agriculture’s share of value added is about what one would expect, but that this sector continues

to employ a surprisingly large share of the labor force. In both economies, this is offset by a

significantly smaller than predicted labor force share in the service sector. For India, however,

the actual value added shares for industry and services are also quite similar to predicted shares.

In contrast, the industrial sector in China accounts for an unusually large share of value added,

while value added in services is unexpectedly small.



Reallocation Effects

       Output growth can be generated from the reallocation of resources into higher

productivity activities as well as from productivity gains within sectors. Indeed, this reallocation

effect is potentially a very important source of growth for economies in which a large share of

labor is initially underutilized in agriculture. In the discussion below, we contrast this dimension

of the sources of growth for China and India. Our first step is to examine sectoral differences in

labor productivity. We then decompose aggregate growth in output per worker into the

contributions from each sector and a residual, which can be interpreted as the effects from

resource reallocation.




                                                 16
           Figure 1 shows the evolution of output per worker by sector from 1978 to 2004. We use

PPP exchange rates from the World Bank and constant 2004 prices to construct indicators that

are comparable for the two countries.10 First, the chart provides an alternative look at each

country’s growth in output per worker, already presented in Tables 1 and 2. As shown, the level

Chinese labor productivity in each sector was only about seventy percent that for India at the

beginning of the period. However, by 2004, Chinese output per worker in services, primary

activities and industry had risen to 110, 130 and 220 percent of the Indian levels respectively.

           Second, the chart highlights the substantial and growing sectoral differences in labor

productivity for both economies. In 1978 and for both India and China, output per worker was

nearly identical in the secondary and tertiary sectors, and roughly three times that for the primary

sector. Since then, India has experienced relatively slow productivity growth in the primary

sector, combined with an acceleration for services beginning in the mid 1990s. By 2004, Indian

labor productivity in industry and services had risen somewhat to four and five times that for

primary activities, respectively. Due to the rapid and sustained labor productivity in industry,

the productivity differences are even larger for China. In 2004 the levels of value added per

worker were seven times (secondary) and five times (tertiary) that for the primary sector. 11

           How much of the aggregate economic growth in each country can be attributed to

sectoral gains in output per worker? A simple measure of the contribution from each sector is

simply the sector’s growth rate (from table 2) weighted by the sector’s share in value added at

the outset of each sub-period (from table 3). The difference between total growth and the sum of

the sectoral contributions provides a (residual) measure of the effects due to resource

10
     The results are quite similar if market exchange rates are used instead.
11
  A recent study notes that “for the world as a whole, labor productivity in nonagricultural sectors is about three
times higher than in agriculture.” IMF (2006, p. 11). Thus, the sectoral productivity gaps that have emerged in
India and especially China appear quite large.



                                                             17
reallocation. Table 4 shows the resulting decompositions by period, for each country as well as

the cross-country differences in each component. During the first sub-period, 1978-93, Indian

growth can be attributed in roughly four equal proportions to gains in each of the three sectors

and gains from resource reallocation. In the more recent period the main difference has been a

tripling of the contribution from services, and a doubling of the contribution from resource

reallocations. As expected given the previous discussion, the Chinese performance is dominated

by the industrial sector, which accounts for more than a third of aggregate growth during the first

period, and more than half during the second. However, the magnitude of the reallocation is

larger than that for India in the first period and of equal size in the second. With a higher rate of

overall growth, the reallocation effect falls from roughly one-fourth of the total before 1993 to

just fifteen percent more recently.12

        The table also highlights a striking shift in the sources of the difference in economic

growth between the two countries. During both 1978-93 and 1993-2004, China’s average annual

growth in output per worker exceeded that for India by nearly four percent. While strong

Chinese industrial sector performance is the most important factor in the earlier period, relatively

strong growth in China’s primary and tertiary sectors and a larger reallocation effect all

contributed to the overall growth differential. In contrast, after 1993, all of the difference

between China and India’s labor productivity growth rates can be explained by the much larger

contribution from China’s industrial sector. India’s services sector now shows a slightly higher

contribution to total growth and the reallocation effects are of equal magnitude.



Future Prospects

12
   The magnitude of these reallocation effects is comparable to those found by Bloom and others (2006) for an
earlier sample period, and by IMF (2006).



                                                       18
       Even if we use PPP exchange rates, China and India are still very poor countries relative

to the United States. At 15 and 8 percent of the U.S. level of GNI per capita, catch-up will

continue to be a major source of growth. China is faced with a slowing of the increase in the

population of labor force age, but it should be able to sustain its economic growth in future years

by continuing to shift workers out of agriculture to higher productivity jobs in industry and

services. India is faced with an even more favorable demographic situation of continued growth

in its labor force and an even larger share of its workforce still in agriculture.

       However, China has made much greater progress in raising the educational skills of

younger workers. According to the OECD (2005), illiteracy has essentially been eliminated

among new entrants to the workforce. Enrollment rates are rising rapidly at every educational

level, and 98 percent of primary school enrollees reach the 5th grade compared to 60 percent for

India. Despite an external reputation for having a large pool of highly educated persons, India

faces serious deficiencies in the education of the bulk of its youth population.

       With respect to capital accumulation, China is actually faced with an excess that threatens

to disrupt growth through over-investment in some sectors. In addition to a national saving rate

above 40 percent, the country is the recipient of private capital inflows equal to ten percent of the

GDP. A continued rate of growth near 10 percent annually seems easily warranted from the

supply side of the economy. India faces a more constrained situation. While the private saving

rate has increased substantially over the past decade, much of this is drained off into the

financing of a large public sector deficit. Similarly, private capital inflows have increased; but as

a share of GDP, the flow is about half that of China. Current rates of capital accumulation are




                                                  19
consistent with a GDP growth rate near 7 percent, but higher rates would require reductions in

the public sector deficit or increased capital inflows from abroad.13

         Overall, we conclude that the supply-side prospects for continued rapid growth in China

and India are very good. Future problems of sustaining growth are more likely to occur in other

areas, such as inefficiencies in the financial sector for China, and the lack of an adequate

infrastructure in India.

         Both countries will also need the stimulus of access to global markets to deepen and

sustain their growth. In this respect, China has had extraordinary achievements in raising the

ratio of total trade to GDP to 65 percent in 2004 compared to 14 percent in 1978. India was at

the same 14 percent of GDP in 1978 and for many years lagged far behind. Recently, however,

India’s trade has also expanded rapidly and reached 42 percent of GDP in 2004. In the first part

of this decade, China’s trade has expanded at a 24 percent annual rate, but India has also had

extremely rapid growth, 17 percent per year (table 5). However, the composition of the trade

has been much different. Just as with the sector composition of GDP, China’s exports are

concentrated in goods exports whereas India’s trade has a much larger services component. The

extent of China’s lead in goods trade is also evident in table 6, which shows the commodity

composition of exports. China’s trade has grown 7-fold since 1993 compared with 3 ½ for India,

and the volume of India’s merchandise exports is similar to that of China a decade earlier.

         Finally, the two countries differ substantially in terms of another measure of integration

with the global economy--foreign direct investment inflows. In recent years, the inflows into

China have exceeded $50 billion per year, and a few years ago they represented over 4 percent of


13
  The differences in the structure of the public sector finances between China and India are not as great as they may
appear. India borrows funds directly to finance its expenditures. China does not report a similar public sector
deficit, but only because it covers the losses of state enterprises with loans that are unlikely to be repaid. At some
future date, the Chinese government will need to assume the debt directly.



                                                         20
GDP. The inflows into India have been about $5 billion and less than one percent of GDP. FDI

can be important in promoting access to global markets, and accumulation of technology and

management skills, all of which have been significant in China’s growth.



Conclusions

       Our constructed growth accounts for China and India provide empirical documentation

for much of the prior discussion of their growth performance. In international comparisons,

China’s achievements have truly been extraordinary, but India has also grown at a rate that

matches the other industrializing economies of East Asia. Key differences between the two

economies also stand out, with China’s concentration of growth in industry while India’s growth

has been strongest in various service-producing industries; but China’s growth is remarkably

broad across agriculture, industry and services. Overall, the growth of services in China actually

exceeds that of India. Thus, juxtaposing the experiences of China and India offers a valuable

perspective on each country’s individual performance.

       Our work also extends the growth accounting literature for these economies in a number

of ways. First, it incorporates all of the recent data revisions, some of which are quite large.

Second, the analysis disaggregates by major economic sector. This provides new estimates of

the contributions to overall labor productivity growth from growth within sectors versus from the

gains due to reallocation of labor and capital among sectors. In China, we document the strong

contribution to growth that is provided by both increases in capital per worker and TFP.

Surprisingly, we find no support for some of the recent arguments that China is experiencing a

significant deceleration of growth in TFP due to wasteful and excessive expansions of capital




                                                 21
investment. The comparison of China and India highlights the weak performance of India’s

manufacturing sector as much as the strong growth of services.

        Looking forward, supply-side factors suggest that both economies should be able to

sustain their growth. They have plentiful supplies of underutilized labor, though India faces

greater challenges of raising educational attainment. Both have high rates of private saving,

although again China stands out. India currently devotes much of its saving to finance the large

fiscal deficit.

        The growth prospects for both depend upon continued integration with global economy,

including trade in goods and services, and investment flows. India in particular will need to

broaden its trade beyond the current emphasis on services. Only an expansion of goods

production and trade can provide employment opportunities for the current pool of

underemployed and undereducated workers. China has done well in the international dimension

and now needs to focus on development of domestic markets and a more balanced trade position.




                                                22
                                                References

Bloom, David, David Canning, Linlin Hu, Yuanli Liu, Ajay Mahal, and Winnie Yip. 2006. “Why Has
      China’ Economy Taken Off Faster Than India’s?” presented at the 2006 Pan Asia Conference,
      available at: http://scid.stanford.edu/events/PanAsia/Papers/papersonly.html

Bosworth, Barry, and Susan M. Collins.2003. “The Empirics of Growth: An Update.” Brookings Papers
      on Economic Activity 2003, no. 2: 113-206.

Bosworth, Barry, Susan M. Collins, and Arvind Virmani. 2007. “Sources of Growth in the Indian
      Economy.” India Policy Forum 3, forthcoming.

China Data Center. University of Michigan. Available at:
      http://chinadatacenter.org/newcdc/bookmainpage.htm

Chow, Gregory C. 1993. “Capital Formation and Economic Growth in China.” Quarterly Journal of
      Economics 108, no. 3 (August): 809-842.

Chow, Gregory C. and Li, Kui-Wai,. 2002. “China's Economic Growth: 1952-2010,” Economic
      Development and Cultural Change, v. 51, no. 1: 247-56

Dekle, Robert, and Guillaume Vandenbroucke. 2006. “A Quantitative Analysis of China’s Structural
       Transformation.” Mimeo. University of Southern California.

Fan, Shenggen, and Xiaobo Zhang. 2002. “Production and Productivity Growth in Chinese Agriculture:
       New National and Regional Measures,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 50 :819-
       838.

Heytens, Paul and Harm Zebregs. 2003. “How Fast Can China Grow?” in Wanda Tseng and Marjus
      Rodlauer (editors), China Competing in the Global Economy. International Monetary Fund,
      Washington, 2003.

Holtz, Carsten A. 2006a. “China’s Reform Period Economic Growth: How Reliable Are Angus
       Maddison’s Estimates?” Review of Income and Wealth 52, no. 1, (March): 85-119.

______. 2006b. “Measuring Chinese Productivity Growth, 1952-2005.” Mimeo. Social Science
      Division, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.

Hsueh, T. and Q. Li (eds.). 1999. China’s National Income, 1952-1995. Boulder, CO: Westview.

IMF. 2006. “Asia rising: Patterns of Economic Development and Growth,” Chapter 3 of World
      Economic Outlook (September): 1-30.




                                                    23
Knight, John, and Li Shi. 1996. “Educational Attainment and the Rural-Urban Divide in China.” Oxford
       Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 58, no. 1: 83-117.

Kuijs, Louis, and Tao Wang. 2005. “China’s Pattern of Growth: Moving to Sustainability and Reducing
        Inequality,” China and the World Economy, Volume 14, Issue 1, January- February 2006.

Kwan, C.H. 2006. "Improving Investment Efficiency in China through Privatization and Financial
      Reform" . Nomura Capital Market Review, Vol. 9, no. 2: 33-43.

Maddison, Angus. 1998. Chinese Economic Performance in the Long Run. Paris: Development Centre
      of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development.

______. 2001. The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective. Paris: Development Centre of the
      Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development.

National Bureau of Statistics of China (various issues), China Statistical Yearbook (Zhongguo tongli
       nianjian). Beijing: China Statistical Publishing House.

OECD. 2005. OECD Economic Surveys: China. (Paris).

Rawski, Thomas G., and Robert Mead. 1998. “On the Trail of China’s Phantom Farmers.” World
      Development 26, no 5: 767-81.

Woo, Wing Thye. 1998. “Chinese Economic Growth: Sources And Prospects.” in Michel Fouquin and
      Francoise Lemoine (eds.), The Chinese Economy, Economica, London.

Young, Alwyn. 2003. “Gold into Base Metal: Productivity Growth in the People’s Republic
of China During Reform.” Journal of Political Economy 111, no. 6: 1220-1261.

Zeng, Jinghai, Arne Bigsten, and Angang HU. 2006. “Can China’s Growth Be Sustained? A
       Productivity Perspective,” Mimeo, China Center for Economic Research.




                                                      24
Table 1. Sources of Growth: China, India, and East Asia 1978-2004
Annual percentage rate of change
                                                                                Contribution of:
                        Output      Employment     Output per    Physical                             Factor
  Period                                            Worker       Capital      Land     Education   Productivity

Total Economy
1978-04    China          9.3           2.0            7.3         3.2        0.0         0.2           3.8
           India          5.4           2.0            3.3         1.3        0.0         0.4           1.6
1978-93    China          8.9           2.5            6.4         2.5        -0.1        0.2           3.6
           India          4.5           2.1            2.4         1.0        -0.1        0.3           1.1
1993-04    China          9.7           1.2            8.5         4.2        0.0         0.2           4.0
           India          6.5           1.9            4.6         1.8        0.0         0.4           2.3


East Asia Excluding China
1960-80               7.0               3.0            4.0         2.2                    0.5           1.2
1980-03               6.1               2.4            3.7         2.2                    0.5           0.9
1980-93               7.3               2.7            4.6         2.6                    0.6           1.4
1993-03               4.5               2.0            2.5         1.8                    0.5           0.3

Source: Authors' estimates as described in text; Bosworth and Collins (2003). The employnment series is a census
comparable concept for both China and India.
Table 2. Sources of Growth by Major Sector, 1978-2004
Annual percentage rate of change
                                                                                         Contribution of:
                           Output      Employment      Output per      Physical                                    Factor
  Period                                                Worker         Capital         Land       Education     Productivity

Agriculture
1978-04     China            4.6            0.3            4.3           2.3           0.0            0.2            1.8
            India            2.5            1.1            1.4           0.4           -0.1           0.3            0.8
1978-93     China            5.2            0.9            4.3           2.5           -0.2           0.2            1.8
            India            2.7            1.4            1.3           0.2           -0.1           0.2            1.0
1993-04     China            3.7            -0.6           4.3           2.1           0.2            0.1            1.8
            India            2.2            0.7            1.5           0.7           -0.1           0.3            0.5

Industry
1978-04       China         10.0            3.1            7.0           2.2                          0.2            4.4
              India         5.9             3.4            2.5           1.5                          0.3            0.6
1978-93       China         9.3             4.4            4.9           1.5                          0.2            3.1
              India         5.4             3.3            2.1           1.4                          0.4            0.3
1993-04       China         11.0            1.2            9.8           3.2                          0.2            6.2
              India         6.7             3.6            3.1           1.7                          0.3            1.1

Services
1978-04       China         10.7            5.8             4.9           2.7                         0.2            1.9
               India         7.2            3.8             3.5           0.6                         0.4            2.4
1978-93       China         11.3            6.5             4.7           1.8                         0.2            2.7
               India         5.9            3.8             2.1           0.3                         0.4            1.4
1993-04       China          9.8            4.7             5.1           3.9                         0.2            0.9
               India         9.1            3.7             5.4           1.1                         0.4            3.9
Source: Authors' estimates as described in text. For China, the output data are the official series of the the national
accounts for agriculture and services, and the series for industry is based on the alternative price deflator discussed in the
text.
Figure 1. Output per Worker by Sector, China and India, 1978-2004
International dollars of 2004

                                           China
 25,000

                                                                            Secondary
 20,000


 15,000

                                                                                Tertiary
 10,000


  5,000
                                                            Primary
       0
       1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004


                                            India
 25,000


 20,000


 15,000
                                                                              Tertiary
 10,000
                                                                          Secondary

  5,000
                                                  Primary
      0
       1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004

Source: China Data Center and CSY; India National Accounts; India NSSO.
Table 3. Value-Added and Employment by Industry as Share of Total
Percent
                            Primary       Secondary       Tertiary        Total

                                         Value added
               China           28             48             24           100
   1978
               India           44             24             32           100

               China           17             51             33           100
   1993
               India           33             28             39           100

               China            9             58             33           100
   2004
               India           22             28             50           100

                                         Employment
               China           71             17             12           100
   1978
               India           71             13             16           100

               China           56             22             21           100
   1993
               India           64             15             21           100

               China           47              23             31          100
   2004
                India          57              18             25          100
Source: China Data Center and CSY; India National Accounts; India NSSO.
 Table 4. Sectoral Growth in Ouput per Worker, 1978-2004
 Percentage Contribution to Growth

                              Total        Primary     Secondary       Tertiary    Reallocation
  1978-93 China                6.4           1.2          2.4            1.1           1.7
          India                2.4           0.6          0.5            0.7           0.6
          Difference           4.0           0.6          1.9            0.5           1.0

  1993-04 China                8.5           0.7           5.0            1.7          1.2
            India              4.6           0.5           0.9            2.1          1.2
            Difference         3.9           0.2           4.1           -0.4          0.0
 Source: authors calculations as explained in text.




         Growth in Output per Worker, Sector and Reallocation Effects,
 Percent                         1978-2004
9.00
8.00
7.00
6.00
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
               China                   India                 China                  India
                        1978-1993                                      1993-2004
                            Agriculture     Industry   Services    Reallocation
Table 5. Annual Growth in Exports, China and India, 1995-2004
Percent

                               1995-04          1995-00   2000-04
China
Total Exports                   18.1              13.7     23.8
  Goods                         18.6              14.2     24.2
  Services                      14.0               9.7     19.7

India
Total Exports                   12.6               9.5     16.6
   Goods                        10.1               6.7     14.5
   Services                     20.6              19.8     21.6

 Memo: Share of Goods in Total Exports
                                  1995           2000      2004
China                             87.0            89.1     90.5
India                             82.2            72.2     67.1
Source. World Bank. 2006. World Development Indicators.
Table 6. Exports by Commodity Type, China and India, 1993-2004
USD Millions

                                            China                 India
Commodity                                    1993      2004       1993     2004
Food and live animals                       8,381    18,844      3,384    6,843
Beverages and obacco                         901      1,214       159      303

Crude materials, inedible, except fuels     3,041     5,753      1,299    5,514
Mineral fuels, lubricants and related
materials                                   4,112    14,497      496      6,895
Animal and vegetable oils, fats and
waxes                                        205      148         101      349
Chemicals and related products              4,590    25,995      1,539    9,106
Manufactured goods, classified chiefly by
material                                    16,803   101,713     9,096    28,924
Machinery and transport equipment           15,222   268,218     1,513     7,763
 Office machines and computers               1,647    87,101      116       388
 Telecommunications and sound-
recording equipment                         4,522    68,497       48       236
 Electrical machinery, apparatus and
appliances                                  4,437    61,137      228      1,546

Miscellaneous manufactured articles         38,093   155,813     4,287    13,285

Clothing, footwear and travel goods         25,308   82,908      3,456    7,752
Other                                        395      1,131       363      864
Source: United Nations, Comtrade
