                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   INTERNATIONAL EVIDENCE ON FISCAL SOLVENCY:
                         IS FISCAL POLICY "RESPONSIBLE"?

                                          Enrique G. Mendoza
                                           Jonathan D. Ostry

                                         Working Paper 12947
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12947


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2007




We thank Henning Bohn and Marco Terrones for helpful comments and suggestions, and Eric Bang
for superb research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Enrique G. Mendoza and Jonathan D. Ostry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
International Evidence on Fiscal Solvency: Is Fiscal Policy "Responsible"?
Enrique G. Mendoza and Jonathan D. Ostry
NBER Working Paper No. 12947
March 2007
JEL No. E62,F34,F41,H6,H68

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper looks at fiscal solvency and public debt sustainability in both emerging market and advanced
countries. Evidence of fiscal solvency, in the form of a robust positive conditional relationship between
public debt and the primary fiscal balance, is established in both groups of countries, as well as in
the sample as a whole. Evidence of fiscal solvency is much weaker, however, at high debt levels. The
debt-primary balance relationship weakens considerably in emerging economies as debt rises above
50 percent of GDP. Moreover, the relationship vanishes in high-debt countries when the countries
are split into high- and low-debt groups relative to sample means and medians, and this holds for industrial
countries, emerging economies, and in the combined sample. These findings suggest that many industrial
and emerging economies, including several where fiscal solvency has been the subject of recent debates,
appear to conduct fiscal policy responsibly. Yet our results cannot reject the hypothesis of fiscal insolvency
in groups of countries with high debt ratios, where the response of the primary balance to increases
in debt is not statistically significant.

Enrique G. Mendoza
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
mendozae@econ.umd.edu

Jonathan D. Ostry
Deputy Director
Research Department, IMF
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20431
jostry@imf.org
                                                1


                                           I. INTRODUCTION

       The degree to which the evolution of fiscal policy in a country is consistent with

intertemporal solvency—the requirement that public debt not explode in the long run—is a

key issue for both industrial and emerging market countries. In the case of the former, the

ongoing/looming demographic transition is focusing the attention of policy makers on the

need to avoid excessive buildup of public debt, while in the case of middle-income countries

with unstable access to global capital markets, the painful economic adjustments associated

with debt crises are an important incentive to keep public debt within tolerable bounds.

       At one level of course, intertemporal solvency is an extremely weak criterion—since

it requires only that adjustments to bring policy back on track occur at some point in the

future. And given the sovereign’s right to tax and (not) spend, credible changes in these

variables can always be assumed to make the problem of insolvency disappear. But markets

are unlikely to be impressed by promises that are unsupported by the track record of policy

makers, so there is merit in actually examining whether—in a particular country—that track

record is consistent with behavior that satisfies an intertemporal budget constraint, or not.

       Fiscal policy, however, is subject to a whole host of heterogeneous, often transitory,

influences that would appear to make disentangling the systematic effect of policy makers’

efforts to adhere to an intertemporal budget constraint very difficult. For example, according

to Barro’s (1986) classic tax-smoothing model, temporary increases in government spending

(for example due to wars) should be financed by a higher budgetary deficit, while business

cycle fluctuations should also be accommodated in a similar way. There may be keen interest

therefore in knowing whether movements in budgetary balances that occur alongside these

various “shocks” are nevertheless operating in a systematic way to offset the impact of
                                                          2

transitory factors, and thereby preventing the debt from getting on to a divergent path.

Fortunately, the “Model-based Sustainability” (MBS) approach proposed by Bohn (1998),

(2005) provides just such a rigorous framework in which to make judgments about how

“responsible” fiscal policy is.

         The essence of the MBS test is to determine whether increases in public debt elicit

increases in the government’s primary fiscal balance (i.e. the balance net of interest payments

on the debt), controlling for other determinants of the primary balance. The intuition is that a

positive conditional correlation between the debt/GDP ratio and the primary surplus/GDP

ratio means that, given the structure of shocks occurring in the background, the fiscal

authority reacts to positive changes in the public debt ratio by systematically raising the

primary surplus/GDP ratio. Bohn proved that in a regression of the primary surplus against

public debt, a measure of the cyclical position of the economy, and the transitory component

of government spending, a positive regression coefficient on the debt variable is sufficient to

establish that fiscal policy is responsible, i.e., run so as to satisfy the government’s

intertemporal budget constraint.

         Applications of Bohn’s MBS test have focused almost exclusively on running such a

test on data for the United States (see Bohn (1998), (2005)).2 The issue, however, is of much

broader interest given the greater systemic importance of a number of industrial and

2
  An exception is IMF (2003), which reports results from applying Bohn’s test to a panel of advanced and
emerging market countries. However, this application used ad-hoc country exclusion restrictions and did not
correct for significant serial autocorrelation in the data. In contrast, our analysis uses a sample that is larger in
country and time coverage without exclusions and controls for serial autocorrelation. These adjustments reverse
the result in IMF (2003) suggesting that industrial countries with high debt respond with larger increases in the
primary balance. In addition, we produce new results showing that the fiscal solvency test fails for high-debt
countries in general, and we study the connection between fiscal solvency and the cyclical behavior of fiscal
policies (particularly the pattern of procyclical primary balances in industrial countries vis-à-vis acyclical or
countercyclical primary balances in emerging economies).
                                                 3

emerging market countries than even a few years ago, and the need to view progress in

addressing problematic levels of public debt in some countries against the backdrop of the

buoyant conditions prevailing in financial markets in recent years and the robust growth of

the world economy. Indeed, whether countries are in fact acting in ways that will make debt

crises/defaults less likely in the future, or merely riding a wave of benign growth and

financing conditions, is a key question that can be addressed using the MBS framework.

       A further issue that is central to whether countries are fiscally responsible is the

degree to which the responsiveness of fiscal policy to debt changes itself depends on the

level of the debt. Does responsiveness diminish, or possibly become perverse, as the debt

ratio nears very high levels? At what levels of debt does one detect a change in behavior,

perhaps reflecting the limits of political tolerance for fiscal stringency in the face of

mounting debt? Does evidence of “tipping points” in fiscal responsibility vary between

industrial and emerging market countries? Does such evidence point to heightened default

risk in one group of countries but not the other?

       This paper looks at these issues for a large panel of both industrial and emerging

market countries. Drawing on a dataset that generally covers the broad public sector (as

opposed to the central government) for 34 emerging market and 21 industrial countries over

the period 1990-2005, we explore a number of different specifications of the MBS test.

Robustness of the conditional relationship between primary surpluses and debt is established

across a broad range of possible specifications that allow for nonlinearities in the relation,

transitory effects of government purchases and the business cycle, as well as country fixed

effects and country-specific serial autocorrelation of error terms. Thus, our main conclusion

is that there is indeed strong empirical evidence of a robust positive conditional relationship
                                               4

between primary surpluses and public debt for both emerging market and advanced

economies (as well as in a sample that combines the two). This relationship is encouraging

from a policy perspective, since it suggests that, far from being prone to excessive default,

fiscal policy in many industrial and emerging market countries on the whole operates in a

“responsible” manner.

       Our empirical analysis also suggests that the MBS test is a useful tool for separating

countries in which fiscal solvency holds from those where it fails. In particular, we find that

the conditional positive relationship between debt and primary balances is much weaker in

emerging market countries with debt ratios in excess of 50 percent of GDP. Moreover, we

sort the countries in each of our three groups of industrial, emerging market, and combined

set of countries into high- and low-debt countries relative to the mean and median of each

group, and find that the MBS test always rejects fiscal solvency in the high-debt countries.

       The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The next section summarizes the

analytical framework behind Bohn’s MBS test. Section III presents the results of our

empirical analysis. The final section presents the main conclusions.

                           II. MODEL-BASED SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS

       This section reviews the main elements of Bohn’s (2005) model-based sustainability

framework for testing fiscal solvency. Many empirical studies of fiscal solvency (or public

debt sustainability) are based on what he defines as “ad hoc sustainability:” testing whether

the time-series properties of fiscal data are consistent with the hypothesis that the expected

present value of primary balances, discounted at the interest rate on public debt, equals
                                                                     5

initial debt.3 In contrast, model-based sustainability requires sustainable fiscal policies to be

consistent with the general equilibrium conditions that link the government and the private

sector in debt markets. Seen from this perspective, ad hoc sustainability turns out to be a

mistaken definition of fiscal solvency because the interest rates on public debt are not the

correct discount factor for evaluating the expected present value of primary balances.

           The above argument can be illustrated as follows:4 Consider an economy where

output (y) and government purchases (g) follow a well-behaved stochastic process such that

the state st at date t is given by a pair of realizations st = (yt,gt) and the probability of moving

from a state st to a state st+1 is given by a Markov transition density function f(st+1,st). The

equilibrium prices of state-contingent assets in this economy are given by the j-periods-ahead

pricing kernel Qj(st+j|st) that satisfies a standard optimal asset demand condition:5

                                                      β j u′( y ( st + j ) − g ( st + j ))
                              Q j ( st + j | st ) =                                          f j ( st + j , st ).   (1)
                                                          u′( y ( st ) − g ( st ))

where u′(.) is the marginal utility of consumption, with consumption given by the economy’s

resource constraint c(st+j) = y(st+j) - g(st+j). Similarly, the interest rate on public debt j-

periods ahead of t, Rjt, satisfies the following optimality condition:

                                                     −1        ⎡ u ′( yt + j − g t + j ) ⎤
                                           ⎡⎣ R jt ⎤⎦ = β j Et ⎢                         ⎥                          (2)
                                                               ⎣ u ′( yt − g t ) ⎦

3
 Several studies have tested for fiscal solvency following this approach by examining the unit-root and co-
integration features of fiscal data. A typical test of ad hoc sustainability would be to determine if there are unit
roots in real government revenues, expenditures and debt, and at the same time the deficit inclusive of debt
service is stationary. See Bohn (2005) for a good review of the literature on this class of fiscal solvency tests.
4
    See Ljungvist and Sargent (2004) for details.
5
 This condition follows from the standard Euler equation that sets the marginal utility cost of giving up a unit
of consumption at date t, state st equal to the marginal utility benefit of re-allocating that consumption to date
t+1, state st+1 using state-contingent assets.
                                                                  6

       Using (1) and the standard budget constraints of infinitely-lived private agents and the

government, it is straightforward to show that the government’s solvency condition is:

                                                      ∞ ⎡ β j u ′( yt + j − gt + j )                      ⎤
                         bt −1 ( st ) = τ t − gt + ∑ Et ⎢                            (τ t + j − g t + j ) ⎥,                       (3)
                                                   j =1 ⎢⎣ u ′( yt − gt )                                 ⎥⎦

where τ represents government revenues, b is government debt, and the notation has been

simplified to use time subscripts only, instead of functions of s. Using condition (2), the

solvency condition (3) can be rewritten as follows:

                                    ∞
                                        ⎪⎧ −1                                 ⎡ β j u′( yt + j − gt + j )                   ⎤ ⎪⎫
        bt −1 ( st ) = τ t − g t + ∑ ⎨ R jt Et ⎡⎣τ t + j − g t + j ⎤⎦ + cov t ⎢                           ,τ t + j − gt + j ⎥ ⎬.   (4)
                                   j =1 ⎪⎩                                    ⎣ u′( yt − gt )                               ⎦ ⎪⎭

       Condition (4) makes it clear that ad hoc sustainability tests (i.e., testing if initial debt

matches the expected present value of the primary balance discounted using the interest rate

on public debt) are valid only if all the covariance terms in the right-side-of the expression

are zero. This requires at least one of the following assumptions to hold: (a) there is no

uncertainty; (b) private agents are risk neutral; or (c) future government surpluses are

uncorrelated with future marginal utilities of consumption.

       Assumptions (a) and (b) are unrealistic, and assumption (c) is sharply at odds with the

evidence from many empirical studies on the cyclical co-movements of fiscal variables in

industrial and developing countries (e.g., Alesina and Tabellini (2005), Catao and Sutton

(2002), Gavin and Perotti (1997), Kaminsky, Reinhart, and Vegh (2004), Talvi and Vegh

(2005)). These studies document that primary balances are clearly procyclical in industrial

countries, and range from acyclical to countercyclical in developing countries. Interestingly,

condition (4) suggests that, for the same sequence of expected primary balances, countries
                                                      7

with countercyclical primary balances (i.e. positive covariances between the marginal utility

of consumption and the primary balance) can borrow more and still maintain fiscal solvency.

        The implications of the finding that the interest rates on public debt cannot be used to

discount primary balances to establish fiscal solvency go beyond a seemingly innocuous

technical point about which rate to use when discounting fiscal flows. Ignoring the result in

(4) can actually lead to serious errors in evaluating fiscal sustainability. For instance, Bohn

(1995) shows that, in a stable balanced-growth economy where output growth is an i.i.d.

process, policy rules that maintain government purchases and public debt constant as ratios

of GDP violate ad hoc sustainability if mean output growth is greater than or equal to the

interest rate on public debt, and yet they satisfy the correct solvency condition (3).

        Given the result that ad hoc sustainability tests are not a reliable method to evaluate

fiscal solvency, Proposition 1 in Bohn (2005) provides the basis for an alternative test that

follows from model-based sustainability: If the primary balance-GDP ratio (pb) is an

increasing, linear function of the initial debt-GDP ratio (b), after controlling for other

determinants (μ) of the primary balance-output ratio, and if these other determinants

measured as GDP ratios are bounded and the present value of output is finite, then the

solvency condition (3) holds. Hence, the MBS test consists of estimating the relationship:

                                          pbt = ρ bt −1 + μt + ε t .                                   (5)

where ε is a zero-mean error. The finding that ρ is positive and statistically significant is

sufficient to guarantee that condition (3) is satisfied. In most of his tests, Bohn sets the other

determinants of the primary balance as μt = β 0 + β1 g t + β 2 y t , where g t and y t are measures of

temporary fluctuations in government outlays and GDP respectively.
                                                                                  8

         The intuition behind the above result is that, if condition (5) holds, the government

budget constraint implies that debt grows between t and t+1 to a level that is (1-ρ) of the

level that would imply a Ponzi scheme, so that j periods ahead the debt will be (1-ρ)j the size

of a Ponzi scheme’s debt. If 0 < ρ < 1, this means that there is no Ponzi game because

Et ⎡⎣ qtt+ j +1 ( s t + j +1 )bt + j ( st + j +1 | s t + j ) ⎤⎦ ≈ (1 − ρ ) j bt → 0 in the limit as j→∞, where the discount

                                             β j u ′( yt + j − gt + j )
factor is q  t
             t + j +1   (s   t + j +1
                                        )=                                f ( st + j , st + j −1 ) f ( st + j −1 , st + j − 2 )... f ( st +1 , st ) . If ρ >1 then
                                                 u ′( yt − gt )

in fact this expected value diverges to minus infinity as j grows, so the government would be

accumulating infinite assets (instead of debt).

         The MBS test also yields a condition for computing sustainable debt ratios, defined as

the mean debt-GDP ratio to which the economy can be expected to converge in the long run.

In particular, if the “other” determinants of the primary balance and the growth-adjusted real

interest rate on public debt are stationary, with means μ and r respectively, the linear

response set in (5) and the government budget constraint yield the following long-run

expected value for the public debt-GDP ratio:

                                                                  − μ + (1 − ρ ) cov (1 + rt , bt −1 )
                                                     E [ bt ] =                                                                                              (6)
                                                                               ρ (1 + r ) − r

Notice that, assuming μ ≤0 (as is generally the case in the empirical applications of this

setup) and if cov(1+rt ,bt-1) ≥ 0, the mean debt ratio determined in (6) is a negative function

of ρ. Thus, everything else constant, a higher ρ indicates reduced average debt in the long

run because the government responds with larger primary balances, instead of further

borrowing, as past debt rises. Without additional information to establish if these larger

primary balances reflect fiscal solvency under optimal fiscal policies, or fiscal solvency
                                                 9


under suboptimal policies and/or limited debt market access, we cannot say that higher ρ

indicates more fiscal discipline or more sustainable fiscal policies. All we can say is that, as

long as ρ is positive and statistically significant, the data indicates that the fiscal solvency

condition holds. The situation changes if we can document other features of the fiscal

environment that distinguish countries, in addition to estimates of ρ. For example,

differences across industrial and emerging economies in average revenue ratios, the volatility

of revenues, or the cyclical co-movement of primary balances (see IMF (2003) and Mendoza

and Oviedo (2006)) can be useful for evaluating the implications of different values of ρ.

        It is important to note three key features of the MBS test: First, since the pricing

kernel in (1) applies to all kinds of financial assets, the test does not require particular

assumptions about debt management, or the composition of debt in terms of maturity and/or

denomination structures. Second, the linear, time-invariant conditional response of the

primary balance to debt in eq. (5) is sufficient but not necessary. A non-linear and/or time

varying response can also support fiscal solvency as long as the response is strictly positive

above a certain threshold debt-output ratio, or the response is at least positive almost surely.

Third, the test does not require knowledge of the specific set of government policies on debt,

taxes and expenditures. The MBS test determines whether the outcome of a given set of

policies implicit in the past primary balance and debt data is in line with the solvency

condition (3), without knowing the specifics of those policies.

        There are also two important caveats. One is that the equilibrium asset pricing kernel

in eq. (1) assumes that there are complete markets of state-contingent claims. Alternatively,

one could assume an incomplete-markets economy where the possible realizations of shocks

are known but there are not sufficient state-contingent claims to fully hedge against them. In
                                                10

this case, the equilibrium pricing kernel and debt dynamics consistent with fiscal solvency

are more difficult to analyze because of precautionary saving behavior (see, for example,

Aiyagari, Marcet, Sargent and Upsala (2002) and Mendoza and Oviedo (2006)). Still, the

results of the MBS tests for emerging economies documented in Section III produce long-run

mean debt ratios that are in line with those obtained by Mendoza and Oviedo. This is

reasonable because the linear rule specified in (5) yields a well-defined long-run distribution

of debt centered around a well-defined mean (see eq. (6) below), and this can be consistent

either with the complete-markets solvency condition or with the tighter debt limits imposed

by precautionary savings under incomplete markets. Intuitively, the linear response in eq. (5)

turns out to be too strong relative to what is needed to ensure that the complete-markets

solvency condition (3) holds with equality: A government with positive ρ remains solvent,

but it could afford higher indebtedness if markets were complete.

       The above intuition does not apply, however, to a “more severe” form of market-

incompleteness due to large and fully unanticipated shocks—for example, an unexpected

shutdown of credit markets or a surprisingly large negative shock to the primary balance. In

this case the problem is not only that the set of state-contingent claims is incomplete, but that

there are realizations of shocks that are not in the set that private agents considered to price

those claims. In this case, the government can become insolvent (i.e., the expected present

value of its primary balances is lower than the value of its debt), and hence results showing

that there is a positive and statistically significant conditional response of the primary

balance to debt in past data cannot ensure that the response will be enough to maintain fiscal

solvency in the future.
                                                11

        The second important caveat of the MBS test relates to how to read results showing

that the conditional response of the primary balance to debt is negative or statistically

insignificant. Bohn (2005) argues that as long as there is an active market for the debt

instruments of a government for which the test fails, and if investors are rational, failures of

the test should be seen as evidence that either the intertemporal budget constraint of

infinitely-lived agents is not the relevant one (e.g., holders of public debt could have finite

lives) or that the failures themselves signal of future policy changes that the market

anticipates. The alternative is of course that failures of the test do indicate that the prevailing

fiscal policies are unsustainable and that the government is insolvent and headed for default.

                 III. Cross-Country Empirical Analysis of Fiscal Solvency

        Figure 1 plots the evolution of public debt for industrial and emerging market

countries over the period 1992-2005. One feature stands out: industrial countries tend to have

higher debt ratios than do emerging market countries. While the debt ratios of both country

groups fluctuate widely and these country aggregates can mask important differences in

particular country experiences, the fact that industrial countries are able to sustain higher debt

ratios than emerging market countries in general remains a key feature of the data.

        One possible explanation of this fact can be given by conducting a conventional

analysis of debt-stabilizing primary balances, which are defined as the level of the primary

balance above which the debt-GDP ratio declines. Figure 2 shows that as of 2005, emerging

market countries are about equally divided in terms of those running primary balances that

are above or below the debt-stabilizing level, while below-debt-stabilizing primary balances

seem to be much less common among the advanced economies. These results suggest that

fiscal solvency is weaker in emerging market countries. However, the fact that the primary
                                               12

balance-GDP ratio in a particular year is above or below the debt-stabilizing value does not

provide robust evidence of whether fiscal policy is in line with solvency restrictions. This is

because the reasoning behind the analysis of debt-stabilizing primary balances suffers from

similar problems to those that affect ad hoc fiscal sustainability tests, as reviewed in Section

II: both can lead to misleading conclusions as to whether the current primary balance is

consistent with fiscal solvency. Hence, in the remainder of this Section we conduct a robust

cross-country analysis of fiscal solvency based on the MBS test.

       Our cross-country application of the MBS test is based on annual data for 22

industrial countries for the period 1970-2005 and 34 developing countries for the period

1990-2005. Within each group, the coverage of country-specific samples varies slightly

depending on data availability. The data include: total public debt and primary fiscal balances

as shares of GDP at current prices, real GDP, and real government purchases.

       Consistent cross-country data on public debt and primary balances are difficult to

obtain. For industrial countries, we used data from the OECD’s Analytical Database on gross

general government debt and the primary balance of the general government as shares of

GDP. For emerging economies, we use debt and primary balance data from an updated

dataset produced following the methodology used in the public debt studies in IMF (2003)

and Celasun, Debrun and Ostry (2006). These data were put together using information from

IMF country desk and fiscal economists for the most comprehensive coverage of the public

sector available, which was either the general government or the overall public sector (i.e. the

consolidated general government plus public enterprises). These debt data pertain mainly to

gross debt and are adjusted to include, where appropriate, debt issued by development banks

and debt used to recapitalize domestic banks in the aftermath of banking crises.
                                                             13

        Output and government purchases data are from the IMF’s World Economic Outlook

database. Since we run these data through the Hodrick-Prescott filter to remove trends, we

retrieved the longest time-series available, which for the majority of countries start in 1960.

        We estimate a cross-country panel version of the MBS test that allows for variation

across countries (indexed by i) and over time (indexed by t):

                                pbi ,t = β 0,i + β1 g i ,t + β 2 y i ,t + ρ bi ,t + ε i ,t ,         (7)

We allow for country-specific fixed effects, so the intercept can vary across i. In addition,

since within-country first-order autocorrelation of the error term is likely given the annual

macroeconomic time series used in the regressions, we compare estimates with and without

country-specific serial autocorrelation in error terms. In the regressions that assume within

country first-order autocorrelation, the error term becomes ε i ,t = δ i ε i ,t −1 + ηi ,t . All the

regressions use White cross-section standard errors and covariances to adjust for

heteroskedasticity.

        The regressions use two alternative sets of measures of temporary fluctuations in

government outlays and GDP. One set uses simply the cyclical components of those

variables obtained by detrending the data using the Hodrick-Prescott filter with the

smoothing parameter set at 100. The resulting detrended series are labeled “output gap” and

“government expenditures gap.” The second set follows Bohn (1998) to construct the

measures of temporary fluctuations in output and government purchases that enter in the

closed-form solution of Barro’s (1986) tax-smoothing model. These measures are defined as

GVAR and YVAR for government purchases and output respectively, and the corresponding

formulae are:
                                              14


                                gt − gtT gtT               ytT − yt gtT
                        GVARt =              ,     YVARt =                                     (8)
                                   gtT   yt                   ytT   yt

In these expressions, a superscript T denotes the trend value of the corresponding variable.

Note that YVAR is the product of the negative of the percent deviation from trend in output

multiplied by the same ratio. Thus, we should expect the sign of β2 obtained in specifications

that use YVAR to be the opposite of that produced by specifications that use output gap.

       Bohn applied this solvency test to long samples of U.S. time series (1916-1995 and

1792-2003 in his (1998) and (2005) articles respectively), and he measured temporary

government purchases as the difference between actual and estimated permanent military

expenditures. This was done because non-military expenditures are a random walk in long

U.S. time series (so they have no transitory component) and because transitory shifts in

military spending during large wars are so big that they represent the dominant force driving

temporary government spending. Since these two features of the long samples of U.S. data

are difficult to establish in our cross-country sample for a much shorter and more recent

period, we use a standard definition of temporary government spending as the cyclical

component of government expenditures detrended with the Hodrick-Prescott filter. We

conducted sensitivity analysis by comparing the results obtained in this way with those

produced by measuring temporary government spending as excess government spending

above thresholds set in units of standard deviations of the cyclical component of government

purchases. These thresholds are a proxy that captures more accurately large spikes in

government spending due to wars or natural disasters. The results were largely unaffected by

this change.
                                                15

       The panel regressions are separated into three groups. One group for industrial

countries (IC group), one for emerging economies (EM group) and one for the full sample of

industrial and emerging economies.

A.     Results for industrial countries

       Table 1 presents the results of six panel regressions for the IC sample. Column I

shows the results of a univariate regression that uses the debt ratio as the only explanatory

variable (other than country fixed effects and autocorrelation coefficients). Columns II and

III add the output gap in specifications without correcting for serial autocorrelation (Column

II) and with serial autocorrelation corrections (Column III). Columns IV and V add the

government purchases gap for the same options with and without correcting for country-

specific serial autocorrelation. Column VI is the same regression as in Column V but

replacing the output and government purchases gaps with YVAR and GVAR respectively

Country-specific estimates of the βi and δi coefficients are not listed in Table 1 and the other

tables of panel results to keep the tables short. The full set of results are available from the

authors.

       The univariate regression in Column I yields a positive value for ρ that predicts that

increases of 100 basis points in the debt-GDP ratio lead to an increase in the primary

balance-GDP ratio of 3.8 basis points. This response is statistically significant at the 95

percent confidence level. The response is about the same but estimated with a smaller

standard error in Column II, which adds the output gap but does not correct for

autocorrelation. Using the output gap and correcting for autocorrelation in Column III, the

response is stronger, at 4.5 basis points, and significant at the 1 percent confidence level.

Adding temporary fluctuations in government purchases weakens the response to around 2
                                                16

basis point in Columns IV-VI. The response is still statistically significant, albeit at the 90

percent confidence level. Columns V and VI show that the shift between the two measures of

temporary movements in output and government spending has no effect on the estimated

value of ρ or its standard error, and hence does not affect the solvency test.

       Overall, the IC results are in line with the findings obtained by Bohn (1998) using

U.S. data for the period 1916-1995. His estimates of ρ range from 0.028 to 0.054 in the full

sample and five subsample periods. The estimates in Bohn (2005), which used data for the

period 1792-2003, are somewhat higher, ranging from 0.028 to 0.147 depending on the

subsample period, measures of temporary changes in output and government purchases, and

estimation method. Hence, we conclude that the panel results for the IC group show that

Bohn’s conclusion that there is substantial evidence in favor of fiscal solvency in the United

States extends well to a panel of 22 industrial countries with data for the period 1970-2005.

       Our results for the IC group are also consistent with Bohn’s findings for the United

States in indicating the key role that conditioning the response of the primary balance to debt

plays. Figure 3 shows conditional and unconditional scatter plots of the primary balance-

GDP ratio against the lagged debt-GDP ratio for the IC, EM and FULL groups separately.

The conditional plot for the IC group (based on the regression in Column IV of Table 1)

shows clearly a positive relationship that is not visible in the unconditional plot.

       We also conducted two sets of tests to study whether the response of the primary

balance to debt varies at different levels of debt. The first set added non-linear coefficients to

the regressions by introducing as explanatory variables splines that test for changes in the

response of the primary balance to debt above a threshold level of debt, or terms in the square

or the cube of deviations of debt from within-country means. None of the coefficients for
                                                        17

these nonlinear variables was found to be statistically significant when we added the

variables to the regression models in Columns I-VI of Table 1.6 Thus, these results suggest

that, within the IC group, there is no identifiable difference in the conditional response of the

primary balance to debt as the debt ratio raises above threshold levels, and no significant

quadratic or cubic terms in the primary balance-debt relationship. These findings deviate

from the results that Bohn (1998) and (2005) found for the United States, where he identified

a stronger and statistically significant response of the primary balance to debt at high debt

ratios. We show next, however, that we can identify systematic differences in this response

when we separate high-debt countries from low debt countries.

           The second set of tests split the IC sample into two subgroups, high debt (HDIC) and

low debt (LDIC) countries. The LDIC (HDIC) subgroup is defined as the industrial countries

in our sample with mean and median debt ratios in their country time series that are less or

equal (greater) than the mean and median for the full IC panel (i.e. the mean and median

calculated using the data for all 22 industrial countries over the entire sample period).7 The

mean and median debt ratios in the IC panel are 59 and 57.8 percent respectively. Hence, an

industrial country in the HDIC group has a mean debt ratio above 59 percent and a median

debt ratio above 57.8 percent. The HDIC group consists of 9 countries and the remaining 13

countries form the LDIC group.




6
    As in Bohn (1998), we used spline variables of the form max(0, b − b ) . We tried values of b ranging from
0.45 to 0.90, and none of them was statistically significant.
7
 If the mean and median for a particular country give conflicting results (i.e., if one moment is above the full IC
group moment and the other below), we let the comparison of the medians determine the country’s designation
as high or low debt. This only happened in one of the 22 countries, Sweden.
                                                18

       Table 2 shows the results for the low-debt, high-debt split. Column I replicates the

results from Column VI of Table 1, which includes country-specific autoregressive terms and

uses YVAR and GVAR. Column II shows the results for the same regression but applied to the

HDIC group and Column III shows the results for the LDIC group. The estimates of the debt-

GDP ratio coefficient in the second row of Columns II and III show that the response of the

primary balance to debt in the HDIC group is not statistically different from zero, and the

point estimate of ρ is in fact negative. The coefficient is positive and significant at the 90

percent confidence level for the LDIC group, and the estimated ρ (0.022) is very close to the

estimate obtained using the data for the full IC group in Column I. Thus, the results of the

MBS test applied to the low-debt, high-debt split suggest that fiscal solvency cannot be

verified in industrial countries with a history of high debt such that the median debt ratio

exceeds 57.8 percent and the mean debt ratio exceeds 59 percent.

B.     Results for Emerging Economies

       Table 3 presents the results of panel regression models estimated using the data for

the EM group. Column I shows results for a univariate, autocorrelation-adjusted regression

for which the debt-GDP ratio is the only explanatory variable. Columns II-V show results

adding output gap unadjusted and adjusted for autocorrelation (Cols. II-III) and including a

spline set at a debt-GDP ratio of 50 percent (Cols. IV-V). Columns VI-IX follow the same

ordering adding now gov. expenditures gap. Finally, Columns X-XIII show results replacing

output gap and gov. expenditures gap with YVAR and GVAR respectively.

       The results show that the response of primary balances to debt in the EM group is

generally positive and statistically significant in all the regressions. The estimated response

without spline adjustments, which ranges from 0.033 in Column X to 0.041 in Column II,
                                               19

varies over a much narrower range than in the case of the IC group, which ranged from 0.02

to 0.045 (see Table 1), and the coefficients are estimated with more precision (they are all

significant at the 99 percent confidence level). As in the case of industrial countries, whether

we use output gap and government expenditures gap or YVAR and GVAR makes virtually no

difference for the estimates of ρ (compare Columns VI with X and VII with XI). Also, the

conditional and unconditional scatter plots for the EM group in Figure 3 show again that the

conditional plot (produced with the results from Column II in Table 3) yields a clear positive

relationship between primary balances and debt, while the unconditional one does not.

       Tables 1 and 3 yield two important differences in the results of the solvency tests for

the IC and EM groups:

(1) The estimate of ρ is higher in the EM group. Comparing Column VII of Table 3 with

Column V of Table 1, the response to a 100-basis-points increase in the debt ratio is 2 basis

points in the IC group v. 3.6 basis points in the EM group.

(2) The absolute values of the coefficients on output gap and gov. expenditures gap in the IC

group are significantly higher than in the EM group. An increase of 1 percentage point in

output gap increases the primary balance-GDP ratio by nearly 1/3 of a percentage point in

the IC group, compared to 0.09 of a percentage point in the EM group. An increase in gov.

expenditures gap of 1 percentage point reduces the primary balance in the IC group by 0.21

of a percentage point, compared to a reduction of about 0.08 of a percent in the EM group.

These differences reflect the sharp contrast between the countercyclical fiscal policies that

industrial countries tend to follow and the procyclical fiscal policies common in emerging

economies referred to in Section II. Table 4 confirms this pattern in our data. The Table lists

the unconditional correlations between the primary balance-GDP ratio and output gap for
                                                       20

each country in the IC and EM groups. The median correlation is 0.25 in the IC group v. only

0.03 in the EM group.

         The above two features that differentiate the IC and EM groups have important

implications. On one hand, as explained earlier, the solvency condition (4) implies that, if

asset markets are complete, fiscal solvency is compatible with higher debt ratios for countries

with acyclical or countercyclical primary balances (i.e., procyclical fiscal policy) than for

countries with procyclical primary balances (i.e., countercyclical fiscal policy). Hence, the

pattern of primary balance-output gap correlations shown in Table 4 would suggest that EM

countries should make more use of debt markets than they seem to make. On the other hand,

the higher value of ρ in the EM group implies that these countries must converge to lower

mean debt ratios than countries in the IC group, since the long-run expected value of the debt

ratio (eq. (6)) is lower as ρ rises. Thus, the higher ρ in the EM group is not an indicator of

“more sustainable” fiscal policies. Instead it indicates that an increase in debt of a given

magnitude requires a stronger conditional response of the primary balance than in the IC

group. This may in turn reflect frictions in asset markets that are more pervasive for EM

countries and the riskier fiscal environment they face—they experience acyclical or

countercyclical fluctuations in primary balances but at the same time they have access to a

limited set of non-state-contingent debt instruments.

         The results that include the 50-percent spline in the debt ratio (Columns IV-V, VIII-

IX and XII-XIII in Table 3) show that in the case of the EM group, the response of primary

balances to debt weakens considerably when the debt ratio is above 50 percent.8 The

8
 The 50-percent spline was chosen by comparing results with splines ranging from 40 to 90 percent. Splines at
60 percent or more were not statistically significant. From splines between 40 and 60 percent, the one set at 50
percent had the lowest standard error.
                                                21

reduction results in a net effect (i.e. the sum of the coefficients on the debt-GDP ratio and the

50 percent spline) that ranges from 0.023 to 0.029, which is still positive and statistically

significant. Thus, even though the response of primary balances to debt falls sharply at high

debt ratios, the net response is still positive and significant, and hence the spline does not

provide evidence against fiscal solvency as debt grows “too high” in EM countries. This test

is not conclusive, however, because it does not separate high-debt from low-debt countries

within the EM group.

       Table 5 presents panel regression results dividing the EM group into subgroups of

countries with high debt (HDEM) and low debt (LDEM), splitting the sample again by

assigning countries to the LDEM group if both their mean and median debt ratios are less or

equal than the mean and median of the full EM group (which are 64.5 and 58.2 percent

respectively). Column I reproduces the results from Column XI in Table 3, and Columns II

and III show results for the HDEM and LDEM groups respectively. The HDEM group

includes 15 countries and the LDEM group has 19 countries.

       The results in Columns II and III of Table 5 are in line with the findings derived from

splitting the industrial countries group into high- and low-debt groups. The high-debt group

shows an estimate of ρ that is not statistically significant, while the low-debt group yields an

estimate of ρ equal to 0.041 and significant at the 99 percent confidence level. Thus,

countries in the HDEM group do not appear to follow sustainable fiscal policies. Moreover,

comparing the results for low-debt groups in Tables 2 and 5, the estimate of ρ for emerging

economies is again higher than for industrial countries (0.041 for the LDEM group v. 0.022

for the HDEM group). This is more evidence in favor of the hypothesis that, among countries

that seem to maintain fiscal solvency, emerging economies can be expected to support lower
                                               22

debt levels because they respond with larger primary balances to increases in debt ratios of a

given magnitude.

C.     Results for the Full Sample of Industrial and Emerging Economies

       Tables 6 and 7 present results using the full sample of industrial and developing

countries in a similar set of regressions as those applied to the EM and IC groups separately.

There are tradeoffs in examining the full sample. One advantage is that the combined group

includes 56 countries and about 1000 observations, which is a significantly larger sample

than for the EM and IC groups separately. The disadvantage, however, is that the results for

the full sample can hide important differences in the behavior of fiscal variables and

macroeconomic volatility across countries in the two groups, which have been documented

already in discussing the previous results.

       The results for the full sample have similar features to those for the EM group. The

range of estimates of ρ in regressions without splines is the same (from 0.035 to 0.041), and

using output gap and gov. expenditures gap or YVAR and GVAR makes no difference again.

Moreover, conditioning the response of the primary balance to lagged debt, by controlling for

fluctuations in output and government purchases, continues to be very important for

identifying the positive response required by the MBS test. The conditional plot for the full

sample in Figure 3 (based on the regression in Column IV of Table 6) shows a clear positive

response, while the unconditional plot does not.

       Regarding results with spline variables, there is a range of splines that are statistically

significant, and the one with the lowest standard error is the 48-percent spline for which

results are reported in Cols. VI and VIII of Table 6. The net response is again statistically
                                                 23

significant and a little higher than in the case of the EM group (about 0.03 instead of ranging

from 0.022 to 0.029).

        Table 7 shows results dividing the full sample into high and low debt groups, defining

again low debt countries as those with mean and median debt ratios below the mean and

median for the full sample (which are 61.6 and 57.8 percent respectively). Column I

reproduces Column VII of Table 6 (the results for the full sample) and Columns II and III

show results for high- and low-debt countries. The results are similar to those obtained with

the EM and IC groups: the estimate of ρ is not statistically significant for the high-debt group

while the estimated value of ρ is 0.04 for the low-debt countries (similar to the value

obtained for low debt countries in the EM group) and this estimate is significant at the 99

percent confidence level.

        In general, the results from the combined IC-EM sample shows that the qualitative

findings derived from examining the two country groups separately continue to hold. The key

quantitative findings about fiscal solvency, however, are essentially the same as those

derived by looking at the EM group alone.

D.      Estimates of Long-Run Mean Debt Ratios

        We conclude the empirical analysis by examining the long-run mean debt ratios

implied by the results of the MBS tests. As explained earlier, this setup yields an estimate of

the sustainable debt ratio defined by the long-run expected value of the debt-output ratio

under the assumptions that the determinants of the primary balance, other than debt, and the

growth-adjusted real interest rate are stationary (see eq. (6)). For simplicity, we use Bohn’s

(2005) approximation to eq. (6), E [ b] ≈ − μ / [ ρ (1 + r ) − r ] , which ignores the long-run

covariance between the real interest rate and lagged debt.
                                               24

       Table 8 shows estimates of long-run expected values of the debt-GDP ratio for

industrial and emerging economies based on the results of the MBS tests for low-debt

countries (LDIC in Column III of Table 2 and LDEM in the same Column of Table 7). This

approach uses the most precise estimates of ρ and μ because it sets aside the high-debt

countries for which ρ was not statistically significant in both IC and EM groups. The

estimates of long-run mean debt ratios also require estimates of r (the difference in the long-

run averages of the real interest rate and the per-capita growth rate of real GDP). Panel A of

Table 8 shows results assuming a growth rate of 2.5 percent and real interest rates varying

from 2 to 6 percent, and Panel B shows results for the same range of real interest rates but

using a 5 percent growth rate. The last column of the Table shows the product (1+ r )(1-ρ),

which must be less than 1 for the debt ratio to be stationary. When this condition is violated,

fiscal policy is not sustainable because the debt ratio is not stationary, and so the Table shows

“NA” for the mean debt ratio. Note that higher ρ reduces (1-ρ) and hence implies that the

autocorrelation function of b converges faster to its long-run average.

       The results indicate that industrial countries can sustain significantly higher debt

ratios (i.e., attain larger mean debt ratios) than emerging economies under common

assumptions about growth and interest rates. Assuming the same growth rate for industrial

and emerging economies, the differences are larger at lower growth rates, and for a given

growth rate they widen as the interest rate rises. At the 5 percent growth rate, the debt ratio of

industrial countries exceeds that of emerging economies by 7 percentage points at a 2 percent

interest rate, 14 percentage points at a 4 percent interest rate, and 53 percentage points at a 6

percent interest rate. For the 2.5 percent real growth rate, the long-run mean debt ratio in

industrial countries exceeds that of emerging economies by 18 percentage points at a 2
                                                   25

percent real interest rate, and at a 4 percent real interest rate the gap widens to 100 percentage

points. Note that industrial countries attain higher mean debt ratios because the regressions

produce both a lower ρ and a higher absolute value of μ in the LDIC group.

        The gap in long-run debt ratios between industrial and developing countries widens

even more if we assume that emerging economies grow faster than industrial countries. At a

2 percent interest rate, industrial countries with a long-run growth rate of 2.5 percent

converge to a debt-GDP ratio of about 39 percent, while emerging economies growing at 5

percent converge to a 14 percent debt ratio. If emerging economies do reach higher sustained

growth rates, however, one would expect that the fundamentals behind the dynamics that

determine the values of ρ and μ would also change, and hence these economies could

support higher average debt ratios.

        It is important to keep in mind that the mean debt ratios in Table 8 represent debt-

GDP ratios to which the economy converges on average in the long run given: (a) the

information implicit in the conditional feedback response of the primary balance to debt

present in the data; (b) the estimated average of the other determinants of the primary balance

μ ; (c) the assumptions about average growth and interest rates; and (d) the period

government budget constraint: bt = (1 + rt )bt −1 − pbt . Note, in particular, that the mean debt

ratios in Table 8 rise as the gap between the interest rate and growth rate widens, up to the

point at which the stationarity condition fails.

        The result that the mean debt ratio predicted by the MBS setup rises with r seems

odd because it is the opposite of the prediction derived from the traditional formula used to

calculate long-run debt as the deterministic steady-state debt ratio. This formula states that

the steady-state debt ratio is equal to the annuity value of the steady-state primary balance
                                                 26

(i.e. b=pb/r), and hence it predicts that the debt ratio should fall as r rises. The two debt ratios

have, however, very different meanings. The mean debt ratio of the MBS framework shows

the ratio to which the economy converges on average under conditions (a)-(d). If we increase

the average growth-adjusted interest rate, keeping all other parameters unchanged and

maintaining conditions (a)-(d) (as is the case moving down the rows of Panels A and B in

Table 8), the mean debt ratio must rise. This is because the mean debt ratio has implicit a

feedback structure driving the stochastic dynamics of the primary balance (given by eq. (5)),

and a mapping from these dynamics into sustainable debt via the period government budget

constraint. This feedback structure implies that the mean debt ratio rises with r . In contrast,

the deterministic steady-state debt ratio simply takes condition (d) and evaluates it at steady-

state for arbitrary fixed values of pb and r. Unless appended to a fully-specified dynamic

equilibrium model, this steady-state debt ratio cannot tell whether the particular value of pb it

uses is a relevant one. Note that, without feedback (i.e. ρ = 0), the equation for the mean debt

ratio under the zero covariance assumption collapses to ( − μ ) /( − r ) = E[ pb]/ r , and in this

case the mean debt ratio is equal to the deterministic steady-state debt ratio (if we

set pb = E[ pb] and r = r ). This proves that the feedback from debt to primary balances is

indeed the reason why the mean debt ratio rises with r .

        The mean debt ratios in Table 8 assume exogenous values for growth and interest

rates. One straightforward way to endogenize the connection between these two rates is by

borrowing from the balanced-growth class of endogenous growth models the basic growth

equation γ ≈ (1/ σ ) ( r − δ ) , where γ is the growth rate, 1/σ is the intertemporal elasticity of

substitution in consumption and δ is the rate of time preference. Under the small open

economy assumption, r can be taken from the rest of the world (say set at r=0.06, which is
                                               27


the highest value considered in Table 8). With the standard assumption of σ=2, a discount

factor (1/(1+δ))=0.991 would reproduce the 2.5 percent growth rate of Panel A in Table 8 as

an “endogenous” growth rate, and would result in the same 127.1 percent mean debt ratio in

the second column, last row of Panel A in Table 8. With this endogenous growth rate,

however, the results can vary widely for small changes in δ. For example, reducing the

discount factor (1/(1+δ))=0.989 yields a decline in the growth rate to 2.39 percent and the fall

in the growth-adjusted interest rate results in a higher mean debt ratio of 148.5 percent.

                                            V. CONCLUSION

       This paper examined the issue of fiscal solvency in industrial and emerging market

countries. The main finding is that in both groups of countries, the data are consistent with

the key requirement of the model-based fiscal sustainability test, namely that the conditional

response of primary fiscal balances to changes in government debt be positive. In contrast to

the previous literature, we do not find that the responsiveness to debt increases above

threshold levels of debt in panel regressions for advanced countries, but it does diminish for

emerging market countries. We also find that, if we split each country group into subgroups

of high-debt and low-debt countries, the solvency criterion is satisfied for countries with

moderate levels of debt, but not for countries with debt levels that surpass the sample mean

and median of each group.

       The conditional response of primary balances to debt is estimated to be stronger in

emerging market than in advanced countries, because the riskier fiscal and financial

environment in the former group of countries requires a stronger response to maintain fiscal

solvency. This stronger response is therefore not an indicator of more fiscal discipline, as it

implies that emerging market countries can sustain lower mean public debt ratios in the long
                                              28

run. We believe the main policy message from our study is that countries should be wary of

allowing public debt ratios to rise above the 50-60 percent range: The ability of policy

makers to maintain fiscal solvency through higher primary balances in countries with mean

and median debt ratios above this range appears to wane.
                                              29




                                            REFERENCES

Aiyagari, R., Marcet, A., Sargent, T., and Seppala, J. I. (2002). “Optimal taxation without
state-contingent debt.” Journal of Political Economy, 110:1220-1254.

Alesina, A. and Tabellini, G. (2005). “Why is fiscal policy often procyclical,” Working Paper
no. 297, IGIER, Universita Bocconi.

Barro, R. J. (1979), “On the Determination of Public Debt,” Journal of Political Economy,
87:940-971.

Barro, R. J., (1986), “U.S. Deficits since World War I,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics,
88(1), 195-222.

Bohn, H. (1995), “The Sustainability of Budget Deficits in a Stochastic Economy,” Journal
of Money, Credit, and Banking, 27, 257-271.

Bohn, H., (1998), “The Behavior of U.S. Public Debt and Deficits,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 113(3), 949-963.

Bohn, H., (2005), “The Sustainability of Fiscal Policy in the United States,” mimeo, Dept. of
Economics, University of California-Santa Barbara.

Catao, L. A. and Sutton, B. W. (2002). “Sovereign defaults: The role of volatility,” IMF
Working Papers No. WP/02/149, International Monetary Fund, Washington DC.

Celasun, O., Debrun, X., and Ostry, J. (2006). “Primary Surplus Behavior and Risks to Fiscal
Sustainability in Emerging Market Countries: A `Fan-Chart' Approach,” IMF Staff Papers,
December, International Monetary Fund, Washington DC.

Gavin, M. and Perotti, R. (1997). “Fiscal policy in Latin America,” NBER Macroeoconomics
Annual. MIT Press.

IMF (2003), World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.

Ljungqvist, L. and Sargent, T. J. (2004). Recursive Macroeconomic Theory. MIT Press.

Mendoza, E.G. and Oviedo, P.M. (2006), “Fiscal Policy and Macroeconomic Uncertainty in
Developing Countries: The Tale of the Tormented Insurer,” NBER Working Paper No.
12586, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge:MA.
                                              30

Talvi, E. and Vegh, C. (2005). “Tax base variability and procyclical fiscal policy in
Developing countries,” Journal of Development Economics, 78(1):156-190.
                                                             Figure 1. Public Debt
                                                              (in percent of GDP)
  80
                                                                    Industrial countries
                                                                        (average)
  75




  70




  65
                                             Emerging market countries
                                                    (average)

  60




  55
       1992                  1993   1994     1995   1996     1997      1998    1999        2000    2001   2002    2003   2004   2005




                                    Figure 2. Actual and Debt-Stabilizing Primary Balances

                     8.0

                     6.0              Emerging market countries
                                      Industrial countries
                     4.0

                     2.0
  Debt stabilizing




                     0.0

                     -2.0

                     -4.0

                     -6.0

                     -8.0
                            -8.0      -6.0          -4.0        -2.0              0.0             2.0       4.0          6.0       8.0
                                                                           Prim ary balan ce




Note: Debt-stabilizing primary balances calculated using the average primary surplus
for the 2003-2005 period, the end-2005 debt-GDP ratio, and the average real GDP
growth rate for 2000-2005.
Figure 3. Conditional and Unconditional Correlations between Primary Balance and Public Debt
                                         Unconditional                                                                  Conditional
                                    Emerging Market Countries                                                  Emerging Market Countries
                         15                                                                          15

                         10                                                                          10
   Primary Balance/GDP




                                                                               Primary Balance/GDP
                          5
                                                                                                      5
                          0
                                                                                                      0
                          -5
                                                                                                      -5
                         -10

                         -15                                                                         -10

                         -20                                                                         -15
                               0   40     80        120     160    200   240                               0   40      80        120     160    200   240
                                          Public Debt/GDP                                                             Publi c Debt/GDP




                         15              Industrial Countries                                        16              Industrial Countries


                         10                                                                          12
   Primary Balance/GDP




                                                                               Primary Balance/GDP




                                                                                                      8
                          5
                                                                                                      4
                          0
                                                                                                      0
                          -5
                                                                                                      -4

                         -10                                                                          -8

                         -15                                                                         -12
                               0    40         80         120     160    200                               0    40          80         120     160    200
                                          Public Debt/GDP                                                             Publi c Debt/GDP




                                            All Countries                                                                All Countries
                         15                                                                          16

                         10                                                                          12

                                                                                                      8
   Primary Balance/GDP




                                                                               Primary Balance/GDP




                          5
                                                                                                      4
                          0
                                                                                                      0
                          -5
                                                                                                      -4
                         -10
                                                                                                      -8
                         -15                                                                         -12

                         -20                                                                         -16
                               0   40     80        120     160    200   240                               0   40      80        120     160    200   240
                                          Public Debt/GDP                                                             Publi c Debt/GDP
               Table 1. Debt Sustainability Regressions: Industrial Countries
                 (dependent variable: primary balance as a share of GDP)
                             I           II        III         IV         V       VI
     debt-gdp ratio        0.038      0.038      0.045       0.023      0.020  0.020
                         (0.018)** (0.011)* (0.014)* (0.012)** (0.012)*** (0.012)***
       output gap                     0.269      0.289       0.339      0.309
                                    (0.093)* (0.053)* (0.091)* (0.055)*
 gov. expenditures gap                                      -0.347     -0.209
                                                           (0.081)* (0.041)*
         YVAR                                                                  -1.239
                                                                              (0.211)*
         GVAR                                                                  -0.946
                                                                              (0.186)*
 Country AR(1) coeffs.      yes         no        yes         no         yes     yes

         adj. R2              0.739        0.240       0.760        0.283       0.769        0.767

          D.W.                1.595        0.349       1.643        0.367       1.669        1.664

           s.e.               1.648        2.825       1.581        2.763       1.558        1.564

    No. of countries            22          22           22           22          22           22

  No. of observations          514          534         514          524         504          504

Note: All regressions include country fixed effects and White cross-section standard errors and
covariances. Standard errors shown in paranthesis. "*," "**" and "***" denote that the corresponding
coefficient is statistically significant at the 99, 95 and 90 percent confidence levels respectively.
Output and government expenditures gaps are percent deviations from Hodrick-Prescott trends.
YVAR and GVAR are transitory components of output and government purchases as defined in
Barro (1986). YVAR is the percent deviation of trend GDP from actual GDP times the ratio of trend
government purchases to actual GDP. GVAR is the percent deviation of actual government
purchases from their trend times the ratio of trend government purchases to actual GDP. The panel
is unbalanced with country samples that cover mainly the 1980-2005 period.
             Table 2. Debt Sustainability Regressions: Industrial Countries with High and Low Debt
                           (dependent variable: primary balance as a share of GDP)
                                            I                           II                          III
                                    all countries           high debt countries          low debt countries
              c                                                    -24.635                       -1.058
                                                                   (2.335)*                     (0.745)
        debt-gdp ratio                    0.020                      -0.013                       0.022
                                      (0.012)***                    (0.026)                  (0.014)***
            YVAR                         -1.239                      -1.414                      -1.135
                                        (0.211)*                   (0.356)*                    (0.237)*
            GVAR                         -0.946                      -1.672                      -0.533
                                        (0.186)*                   (0.352)*                   (0.277)**
     Country AR(1) coeffs.                 yes                         yes                         yes

             adj. R2                           0.767                          0.794                            0.662

              D.W.                             1.664                          1.526                            1.813

               s.e.                            1.564                          1.958                            1.278

        No. of countries                         22                              9                              13

      No. of observations                       504                            196                              286

Note: All regressions include country fixed effects and White cross-section standard errors and covariances. Standard
errors shown in paranthesis. "*," "**" and "***" denote that the corresponding coefficient is statistically significant at the 99,
95 and 90 percent confidence levels respectively. YVAR and GVAR are transitory components of output and government
purchases as defined in Barro (1986). YVAR is the percent deviation of trend GDP from actual GDP times the ratio of trend
government purchases to actual GDP. GVAR is the percent deviation of actual government purchases from their trend
times the ratio of trend government purchases to actual GDP. The panel is unbalanced with country samples that cover
mainly the 1980-2005 period. Low debt countries are those with mean and median debt ratios at or below the mean and
median of all industrial countries in the sample (which are 59 and 57.8 percent respectively). The low-debt countries are
Austria, Australia, Germany, Finland, France, Great Britain, Greece, Norway, New Zealand, Sweden, United States,
Iceland, and Luxemburg. High-debt countries are: Canada, Denmark, Spain, Ireland, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Portugal,
                                                           Table 3. Debt Sustainability Regressions: Emerging Economies
                                                              (dependent variable: primary balance as a share of GDP)
                                    I          II        III          IV        V          VI        VII        VIII      IX               X           XI          XII         XIII
     debt-gdp ratio              0.037      0.041      0.039        0.122     0.128      0.035     0.036       0.107    0.106            0.033       0.035       0.104       0.107
                                (0.011)*   (0.008)*   (0.010)* (0.014)* (0.022)* (0.008)* (0.008)* (0.013)* (0.019)*                    (0.008)*    (0.008)*    (0.013)*    (0.019)*
50% spline of debt ratio                                           -0.092    -0.102                           -0.082   -0.084                                    -0.081      -0.085
                                                                  (0.017)* (0.029)*                          (0.015)* (0.020)*                                  (0.016)*    (0.021)*
   Wald test P. value                                               0.001     0.068                            0.003    0.032                                     0.007       0.046
(H0: spline=debt coefficient)
       output gap                           0.086       0.060      0.105      0.065        0.109    0.090     0.125     0.096
                                           (0.014)*   (0.030)**   (0.013)*   (0.023)*    (0.012)* (0.019)* (0.012)* (0.016)*
 gov. expenditures gap                                                                    -0.079   -0.076    -0.075    -0.073
                                                                                        (0.032)** (0.036)** (0.031)** (0.034)**
          YVAR                                                                                                                           -0.769   -0.651    -0.845    -0.730
                                                                                                                                        (0.109)* (0.140)* (0.111)* (0.146)*
          GVAR                                                                                                                           -0.544   -0.508    -0.529    -0.487
                                                                                                                                       (0.217)** (0.222)** (0.216)** (0.216)**
 Country AR(1) coeffs.            yes        no         yes         no         yes         no         yes          no         yes          no       yes       no        yes

         adj. R2                 0.526      0.369      0.528       0.390      0.534      0.413       0.548       0.429       0.552       0.416       0.552       0.432       0.556

           D.W.                  1.829      1.080      1.828       1.114      1.844      1.126       1.813       1.158       1.821       1.122       1.808       1.153       1.813

            s.e.                 2.227      2.636      2.221       2.592      2.207      2.518       2.154       2.482       2.144       2.511       2.145       2.476       2.135

    No. of countries              34         34          34         34         34          34          34          34          34          34          34          34          34

  No. of observations             459        493        459         493        459        477         443         477         443         477         443         477         443

Note: All regressions include country fixed effects and White cross-section standard errors and covariances. Standard errors shown in paranthesis. "*" and "**" denote that the
corresponding coefficient is statistically significant at the 99 and 95 percent confidence levels respectively. Output and government expenditures gaps are percent deviations from
Hodrick-Prescott trends. YVAR and GVAR are transitory components of output and government purchases as defined in Barro (1986). YVAR is the percent deviation of trend GDP from
actual GDP times the ratio of trend government purchases to actual GDP. GVAR is the percent deviation of actual government purchases from their trend times the ratio of trend
government purchases to actual GDP. The panel is unbalanced with country samples that cover mainly the 1990-2005 period.
Table 4. Unconditional Correlations between the Primary Balance-GDP Ratio and Output Gap
                 Industrial countries            Emerging economies
                 Country       Correlation       Country    Correlation
           Portugal              -0.542      Pakistan         -0.717
           Greece                -0.496      Mexico           -0.702
           Japan                 -0.244      Egypt            -0.661
           Iseland               -0.177      Bulgaria         -0.561
           Norway                -0.066      Turkey           -0.438
           Netherlands           -0.003      Brazil           -0.287
           Italy                  0.068      Croatia          -0.254
           Ireland                0.129      Colombia         -0.252
           New Zealand            0.179      Costa Rica       -0.210
           Belgium                0.223      Uruguay          -0.195
           France                 0.244      Morroco          -0.187
           Luxemburg              0.246      Indonesia        -0.169
           United Kingdom         0.293      Venezuela        -0.136
           Austria                0.373      India            -0.108
           Germany                0.374      Argentina        -0.099
           Spain                  0.377      Poland           -0.054
           Canada                 0.382      Ecuador          -0.021
           United States          0.515      Panama            0.081
           Australia              0.725      Ukraine           0.088
           Finland                0.757      South Africa      0.188
           Sweden                 0.822      China             0.209
           Denmark                0.833      jordan            0.212
                                             Korea             0.219
                                             Israel            0.225
                                             Chile             0.238
                                             Cote d Ivoire     0.286
                                             Peru              0.301
                                             Hungary           0.302
                                             Russia            0.321
                                             Nigeria           0.331
                                             Philippines       0.349
                                             Lebanon           0.493
                                             Thailand          0.742
                                             Malaysia          0.760

                mean             0.228           mean          0.009
                median           0.245           median        0.030
            Table 5. Debt Sustainability Regressions: Emerging Economies with High and Low Debt
                           (dependent variable: primary balance as a share of GDP)
                                             I                        II                      III
                                     all countries          high debt countries      low debt countries
              c                           -0.979                    0.155                  -0.945
                                         (0.661)                  (1.699)                 (0.320)*
        debt-gdp ratio                     0.035                    0.018                   0.041
                                        (0.008)*                  (0.018)                 (0.006)*
            YVAR                          -0.651                   -0.920                  -0.726
                                        (0.140)*                 (0.330)*                 (0.231)*
            GVAR                          -0.508                   -0.450                  -0.833
                                       (0.222)**                  (0.254)                 (0.313)*
     Country AR(1) coeffs.                  yes                      yes                     yes

             adj. R2                           0.552                          0.551                            0.543

              D.W.                             1.808                          1.762                            1.864

               s.e.                            2.145                          2.480                            1.815

        No. of countries                         34                             15                               19

      No. of observations                       443                            198                              245

Note: All regressions include country fixed effects and White cross-section standard errors and covariances. Standard
errors shown in paranthesis. "*" and "**" denote that the corresponding coefficient is statistically significant at the 99 and 95
percent confidence levels respectively. YVAR and GVAR are transitory components of output and government purchases
as defined in Barro (1986). The panel is unbalanced with country samples that cover mainly the 1990-2005 period. Low
debt countries are those with mean and median debt ratios at or below the mean and median of all emerging countries in
the sample (which are 64.5 and 58.2 percent respectively). Low-debt countries are Argentina, Brasil, Mexico, Peru, Turkey,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Chile, Korea, Russia, South Africa, Thailand, Colombia, Poland, Ukraine, Costa Rica, China, Croatia
and India. High-debt countries are: Malaysia, Hungary, Ecuador, Morocco, Panama, Philippines, Indonesia, Bulgaria, Cote
d'Ivoire, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Nigeria and Pakistan.
                 Table 6. Debt Sustainability Regressions: Industrial and Emerging Economies
                           (dependent variable: primary balance as a share of GDP)
                             I        II          III         IV         V          VI      VII                       VIII
   debt-gdp ratio         0.037     0.039       0.041       0.033      0.036      0.071   0.035                     0.072
                         (0.011)* (0.007)* (0.010)* (0.008)* (0.008)* (0.021)* (0.008)*                            (0.021)*
48% spline of debt ratio                                                         -0.041                             -0.044
                                                                                (0.020)**                         (0.021)**
  Wald test P. value                                                              0.001                              0.004
(H0: spline=debt coefficient)
       output gap                         0.126       0.109        0.155        0.138       0.145
                                         (0.028)*    (0.028)*    (0.026)*     (0.019)*    (0.018)*
 gov. expenditures gap                                            -0.099       -0.089      -0.088
                                                                 (0.027)*     (0.030)*    (0.030)*
          YVAR                                                                                         -0.925      -0.957
                                                                                                      (0.137)*    (0.138)*
          GVAR                                                                                         -0.570      -0.563
                                                                                                      (0.188)*    (0.182)*
 Country AR(1) coeffs.          yes         no         yes          no          yes         yes          yes         yes

         adj. R2                0.649     0.309       0.656        0.340       0.673       0.664       0.669        0.669

           D.W.                 1.731     0.668       1.740        0.668       1.726       1.721       1.725        1.728

            s.e.                1.921     2.737       1.903        2.672       1.854       1.889       1.871        1.874

    No. of countries             56         56          56          56           56          56          56           56

  No. of observations           988       1042         988         1015         961         920          925         920

Note: All regressions include country fixed effects and White cross-section standard errors and covariances. Standard errors
shown in paranthesis. "*" and "**" denote that the corresponding coefficient is statistically significant at the 99 and 95
percent confidence levels respectively. Output and government expenditures gaps are percent deviations from Hodrick-
Prescott trends. YVAR and GVAR are transitory components of output and government purchases as defined in Barro
(1986). YVAR is the percent deviation of trend GDP from actual GDP times the ratio of trend government purchases to
actual GDP. GVAR is the percent deviation of actual government purchases from their trend times the ratio of trend
government purchases to actual GDP. The panel is unbalanced.
                Table 7. Debt Sustainability Regressions: All Countries with High and Low Debt
                           (dependent variable: primary balance as a share of GDP)
                                           I                           II                        III
                                    all countries           high debt countries         low debt countries
              c                         -2.897                      -0.689                    -1.205
                                       (0.968)*                    (1.385)                   (0.246)*
        debt-gdp ratio                   0.035                       0.021                     0.040
                                       (0.008)*                    (0.015)                   (0.005)*
            YVAR                        -0.925                      -1.232                    -0.828
                                       (0.137)*                   (0.242)*                   (0.174)*
            GVAR                        -0.570                      -0.525                    -0.771
                                       (0.188)*                  (0.230)**                   (0.231)*
     Country AR(1) coeffs.                yes                         yes                       yes

             adj. R2                           0.669                          0.699                            0.593

              D.W.                             1.725                          1.664                            1.825

               s.e.                            1.871                          2.111                            1.567

        No. of countries                         56                             28                               28

      No. of observations                       925                            475                              450

Note: All regressions include country fixed effects and White cross-section standard errors and covariances. Standard
errors shown in paranthesis. "*" and "**" denote that the corresponding coefficient is statistically significant at the 99 and 95
percent confidence levels respectively. YVAR and GVAR are transitory components of output and government purchases
as defined in Barro (1986). The panel is unbalanced. Low debt countries are those with mean and median debt ratios at or
below the mean and median of all emerging countries in the sample (which are 61.6 and 57.8 percent respectively). Low-
debt countries are Austria, Australia, Finland, France, Great Britain, Norway, New Zealand, Iceland, Luxembourg,
Argentina, Brasil, Mexico, Peru, Turkey, Uruguay, Venezuela, Chile, Korea, Russia, South Africa, Thailand, Colombia,
Poland, Ukraine, Costa Rica, China, Croatia and India. High-debt countries are: Canada, Germany, Denmark, Spain,
Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Portugal, Sweden, United States, Belgium, Malaysia, Hungary, Ecuador,
Morrocco, Panama, Philippines, Indonesia, Bulgaria, Cote d'Ivoire, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Nigeria and Pakistan.
                        Table 8. Long-run Expected Values of Debt-GDP Ratios
          Debt-GDP ratio                                                                       Stationarity condition
     Industrial      Emerging         Growth-adjusted     Real interest rate   Growth rate    Industrial    Emerging
     countries       economies          interest rate                                         countries economies
     (ρ=0.022)       (ρ=0.041)
                                            A. Exogenous 2.5% growth rate
     38.640             20.641               -0.500              2.000            2.500          0.973        0.954
     60.105             26.108                0.500              3.000            2.500          0.982        0.964
     135.215            35.515                1.500              4.000            2.500          0.992        0.973
       NA               55.521                2.500              5.000            2.500          1.002        0.983
       NA               127.134               3.500              6.000            2.500          1.012        0.993
                                             B. Exogenous 5% growth rate
       20.415             13.548             -3.000              2.000            5.000          0.948        0.930
       25.162             15.707             -2.000              3.000            5.000          0.958        0.940
       32.786             18.684             -1.000              4.000            5.000          0.968        0.949
       47.040             23.055              0.000              5.000            5.000          0.978        0.959
       83.218             30.094              1.000              6.000            5.000          0.987        0.969
Note: Debt-GDP ratios estimated using eq. (6) assuming zero long-run covariance between the growth-adjusted
interest rate and the debt ratio. These estimates use values of ρ equal to 0.022 and 0.041 for industrial countries
and emerging economies respectively, which are the values estimated for the low-debt groups in the IC and EM
panel regressions shown in Column III of Tables 2 and 7. The averages of µ are -1.058 for industrial countries
and -0.945 in emerging economies.
