                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              SOME ISSUES CONCERNING INTEREST RATE
             PEGGING, PRICE LEVEL DETERMINACY, MID
                    THE REAL BILLS DOCTRINE


                      Bennett T. McCallutn




                     Working Paper No. 1294




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                           March 1984




I am indebted to Matt Canzoneri, Marvin Goodfriend, and Patrick
Minford for extremely valuable conversations on the topics of this
paper. Useful comments on earlier drafts were supplied by John
Geweke, James Hoehn, David Laidler, Michael Parkin, and Neil
Wallace, while financial support was provided by the National
Science Foundation under grant No. SES 82—08151. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research programs in Economic
Fluctuations arid Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #12914
                                                  March 19814




                 Some Issues Concerning Interest Rate Pegging,
              Price Level Deterininacy, and the Real Bills Doctrine



                                    ABSTRACT



     In a recent paper, Canzoneri, Henderson, and Rogoff have shown that it is

possible for the monetary authority to peg the nominal interest rate without

creating price level indeterminacy in a simplified version of the 1975

Sargent—Wallace model. The present paper begins by reviewing that result, which

involves a limiting case of a money supply rule that depicts the authority as

responding to current values of the interest rate. Then it shows that there

exists an alternative rule that will peg the nominal rate without creating inde-

terminacy, but that this rule induces a different pattern of price level fluc-

tuations. Next the paper considers whether indeterminacy will prevail if the

authority tries to effect a peg in a third way: by simply standing ready to buy

and sell securities at the desired rate. Finally, the implication of the

foregoing results are drawn for arguments concerning the real bills doctrine and

some critical comments are directed at the recent attempted rehabilitation of

that doctrine by Sargent and Wallace.




                                                   Bennett T. McCallum
                                                   Graduate School of
                                                   Industrial Administration
                                                   Carnegie—Mellon University
                                                   Pittsburgh, PA 15213
I. Introduction

     In one of the more famous papers of the past decade, Sargent and

Wallace (1975) argued that the price level and other nominal magnitudes
                                  1/
will be formally indeterminate in a flexible-price economy free of money

illusion and expectational irrationality if the monetary authority tries

to use an interest rate as its policy instrument, that is, adopts a policy

feedback rule that sets each period's interest rate as a fixed function of

previous realizations of relevant variables. A few years later Parkin (1978)

and McCallum (1981) showed that an interest rate feedback rule would not

lead to nominal indeterminacy in such economies if the rule was designed to

have some specified effect on the quantity of money (or the price level) in

an upcoming period. Indeterminacy would be avoided if the monetary authority's

objective function involved some nominal magnitude, a conclusion reminiscent

of Patinkin's (1965, p. 309) dictum that "a necessary condition for the

determinacy of the absolute price level ...   is   that the central bank concern

itself with some money value--and in this sense be willing to suffer from

money illusion." This contention would appear to be correct for any economy

in which private agents' behavior is concerned only with real magnitudes,

for without "money illusion" on the part of the monetary authority no nominal

variable will enter the system in any way.

     Given these arguments, a result recently developed by Canzoneri, Henderson,

and Rogoff (1983) is of considerable interest, for it indicates that the

interest rate can be              pegged at an arbitraryvalue in an economy of
                       virt,11y
the Sargent-Wallace type.    This result is considerably stronger than that

in the McCallum (1981) demonstration, it should be noted, as the latter does flOL

pertain   to cases in which parameters of the interest rate feedback rule are

autonomous (i.e., unrelated to behavioral characteristics of the private economy).
                                    2


 Furthermore, a pegged interest rate would appear to violate Patinkin's

 dictum, despite the latter's apparent reasonableness. But because their

 main concern is with other matters, Canzoneri, Henderson, and Rogoff--

 henceforth, CHR--do not devote much space or emphasis to their result.

 Nor do they contrast their own reasoning with that of previous writers.

 The first object of the present paper, accordingly, is to provide an

alternative development of the CHR result, one that facilitates comparison

with other analyses.

     Furthermore, CHR do not investigate the possibility that the interest

rate can be pegged by policy schemes other than the monetary rule

used in their discussion. The second object of the present paper is

then to consider some alternative schemes. Particular attention is accorded

the question of whether nominal indeterminacy obtains--or, in what sense it

obtains--if the monetary authority attempts to peg the interest rate not by

an Qxtreme versionof a money supply rule, as in the dR setup, but by

simply standing ready to buy or sell securities at the rate in question.

In the course of addressing this issue, it will become necessary to consider

what empirical interpretation should be given to a situation involving

nominal indeterminacy.

     Finally, a third objective of the paper is to consider the implications

of the pegging results for two topics of great importance in the development

of monetary thought--Wicksell's cumulative process and the so-called real

bills doctrine. Particular attention is devoted, in this portion of the paper,

to the recent reconsideration of the real bills doctrine provided by

Sargent and Wallace (1982).

     Before beginning the analysis, one possible source of confusion should

be addressed. In considering the various issues of concern in this paper,
                                 3


it is important to distinguish clearly between price level indeterminacy

and nonunigueness (or multiplicity) of price level solutions. The former,

discussed by Patinkin (1961), Sargent-Wallace (1975), and McCallum (1981),

involves situations in which the model economy (including specifications

of policy behavior) does not determine the value of ! nominal magnitude.

By constrast, the latter--discussed by Sargent and Wallace (1973), Taylor

(1977), McCallum (1983a), and many others--involves situations in which many

price level solution paths satisfy the model for each given path of the

money stock. Thus indeterminacy pertains to all nominal values but no real
                                                                             3/
values, while nonuniqueness involves multiple paths of real money balances.
                                     4

II. Basic Result

     In order to facilitate comparison with previous literature and provide

a maximum of simplicity, we shall begin the discussion in the context of

the two-equation, full-employment IS-LN model used by NcCallum (1981).

Letting r denote the nominal rate of interest with m and Pt logs of the

money stock and price level, respectively, this model can be written as:

(1) r = b0   + Etpt÷l -
                           Pt + v                           b0 > 0


(2) m - Pt   =        + c1r +                               C0 > O,c < 0.
                 c0

Here v and       are independent white noise disturbances while

Etpt+l =                 1 with -1 denoting   realizations of all variables

in periods t-1, t-2         Equations (1) and (2) can be thought of as IS

and LM functions, respectively; i.e., relationships describing saving!
                                                                4/
investment and portfolio balance behavior by the private sector.

     In this setting, the basic idea of the CHR result can be exhibited

quite simply. To do so, let us initially suppose that the monetary

authority adopts a money supply rule of the following form:

(3) m =      + 1t + A.(r -      r)                         X > 0


From this specification it is clear that it is being assumed that the monetary

authority can observe the interest rate for a given period when setting the

value of the money supply for that period. It is also clear that the type

of policy behavior in question involves a growth rate of money that equals p

on average but differs front that value if the current interest rate departs

from its desired value r. The greater the concern with the closeness of
                                                                            r to
r, the larger will be the magnitude of X.
                                                   5

        In   obtaining a solution to the model, we wish to exclude "bubble" or

"bootstrap" components--i.e., components that exist only because they are

arbitrarily expected to exist. One possible reason for excluding bubbles

is belief in the substantive hypothesis that they typically do not exist

as an empirical matter. Another reason, sufficient for the purposes of

this paper, is that the admission of bubble components would lead to a
                                       5/
multiplicity of solutions.                  As stated above, we wish clearly to distinguish

such multiplicities from indeterminacies. Furthermore, such multiplicities

make difficult the comparison of outcomes under alternative policies.

Consequently, we shall utilize the minimal-state-variable approach,

described in NcCallum (1983a), which leads to the exclusion of bubble

components.

        Inspection of the system (l),(2),(3) suggests that the essential relevant
                                                   6/
state    variables are t,
                                  v,    and .           Consequently, reduced-form "solution"
equations for Pt and r will be of the form


(4) Pt =      lO +              + rT12Vt    + l3t
(5) r =       IT20
                      + ¶121t +             + 23t

Now the first of these implies that expectations are generated according to

                 =          +
(6)                   'lO
Consequently, substitution of (4), (5), and (6) into (1) yields


(7)     IT20 + 1T21t + IT22V
                                   +   TT23T1t =
                                                   b0 + IT10 + 1T11(t+l)

                            + IT13) +
        10 + IT11t + ITi2Vt

which    implies      the following relationships between the undetermined co-

efficients rr.         and the basic parameters of the model:
                 13
                                                                6


 (8)             =         +
                      b0

                 = 0
       2l
       22             IT12
                                   +1
       Ti        =-TT
            23           13


Likewise, substitution into (2) yields

             +             + A(IT0 +       ÷                                 -
                                                                                 r)
                                             rr22v + 2311t
 (9)
                  P.1t               Ti21t
       =
            IT10 + Ti11t + IT12v + 1T1311 + c0 + c1(7120 + 1r21t +                                    + Ti23fl   +
which implies

(10)         + X('rr20 - r)             =         ÷         +
                                                                eli'20

             +                 =        +   C17121


       XTi22
                  =
                      l2 +         C11T22


       Xi-r23
                  =
                      l3       + c1Ti23     +1.

Finally,         solving equations (8) and (10) we obtain

(11) lO =            0     -
                               C0
                                    + X(b0 + 'l -           r)      -c1(b0 + )             2O
                                                                                                  =
                                                                                                       b0
                                                                                                            +

                                                                                                  = 0
                                                                                           1121

                 = (A -                     + A -
                               c1)/(l                 c1)                                  22 = 11(1 + X         -
                                                                                                                     c1)
                 = -11(1           +A   -
                                            c1)                                            1123 =      1/(1 + A - c1)

From the expressions for 2O and                                     we then conclude that--as is obvious

for this classical model--a choice of                                l = r   -
                                                                                 b0 is necessary to make the
mean value of r equal the target value r. If that choice is made, however,

r will fluctuate randomly around r. And by increasing the magnitude of A,

the values of 22 and 23 can be driven arbitrarily close to zero so the
                                        7


behavior of r can be made arbitrarily close to r =          r,   i.e., to the

desired peg. Furthermore, the price level parameters are well defined,

even as X—co.   In       particular, in the limit we have            and

so that


(12) Pt =    - c0    -
                         c1r +     + Vt.


Thus there is no indeterminacy of p even in this extreme case. This is,
                                            t
                                                       7/
in the present model, the result obtained by CHR.
                                                           8


 III. An Alternative Policy Rule

           In a non-stochastic setting, a constant money growth rate of value

 can, of course, be expressed by                               =
                                                                   m1   +   as   well as by    m =       +
 That      leads naturally to the question of whether the following money supply

 rule will have the same effects on r and Pt as (3):


 (13) m =       mi       +        + X(r       -


Now, in the system (l),(2), (13) the relevant set of state variables includes

           instead of t      so     we posit solutions of the form

(14) Pt =            + rr11m              ÷ 1112v      +

(15) r = 2O          + TT2im 1            + 1122V +

The implied expectation in this case is

(16) Etpl =                  +   ii[m1 +            l +                 +         + 22Vt   +
                                                                                               23t   -



Substitution        into (1) then yields an equation analogous to (7) which implies




                                              ll
relationships (analogous to (8)) as follows:

(17) (1 -                    =            -
               Xii11)ii20         b0                   + '1l1
        (1 -                      0
               X1T11)Tr21
        (1 -
               X•r111)1•T22 = 12 + 1
        (1 -
               1l'23
In addition, substitution into (2) implies

            + (A -                    -
(18)
                     c1)1r20                      lO   +

       1   + (A -                 =
                    c1)rr21           IT11

       (A -              =
               c1)1r22       IT12
       (A -              =            + 1.
               c1)1T23       IT13
                                                            9


In this case there are two sets of solutions, one in which the second of equati'

(17)-(18) are satisfied by i-r                         =   l/X   and the other in which          = 0

and rr11 =    1.    By means of the procedure described in McCallum (1983a, pp.146-7)

it can be determined that the second set provides the minimal-state-variable,

bubble-free solution--see Appendix B. Thus, after setting                                    =   r   -
                                                                                                         b0,
we have


(19) rr10 =    (1    -
                             c1)r
                                    -
                                        b0
                                             -
                                                  C0                                    2O
                                                                                             =   r

                                                                                        21_0
                                                                                                          —
     'l2 = (A        —
                             c1)/(l
                                        -
                                            c1)                                         22 = 11(1.             c1)

     'l3 =     -(1       -   X)/(1      -
                                            c1)                                         23 = 1/(1         -
                                                                                                               c1)

From these, we see that rt fluctuates randomly about r. But we also see

that the coefficients 22 and 23 do not; approach zero as X-4'o. On the

other hand,                  and iT13 approach                   as    .      So with the non-stationary

version of the money supply rule, responding more strongly to current

deviations of r from r serves to increase (without bound) the variance of
               t
                                                                       8/9/
Pt and has no effecton the variance of r.

     These last conclusions should not, however, be given much weight for

they are not robust to specificational adjustments in the model. Suppose,

in particular, that output is not strictly constant but instead departs from

a (constant) capacity value in response to a price level surprise term,

Pt - EP 1c               as it does in the CHR (1983) specification. Then the

appropriate modification of equations (1) and (2) would be as follows:


(1') rt = b0        + Ep÷i Pt + b1(p -                            Eptlt_l)    + Vt


(2') m -      p     =
                         c0
                               + c1r + c2(p -                   EptlQt_l) +
Here b1 < 0 and c2 > 0.
                                                     10


        Re-solving the model with these changes leads to no alteration in the

 solution values for                                              but for the remaining coefficients
                                 IT10, IT11 IT2o or
 we have


 (20) IT12 = (X -
                              c1)/1                                            IT22 =    (1 +
                                                                                                  c2)/1
        IT13
                   =      - l)(1i                                              '23 = (1      -
                                                                                                  b1)/$1
where          =         - X)(l + c2)   + (X -
                                                     c1)(l
                                                             -
                                                                 b1).   Consequently, we see that
as                 we obtain rr22—0 and rT2340 unless by chance
                                                                                        c2       -b1.
Furthermore, with the same proviso, we see that                                                          and
                                                                        II12.........-1/(b1 +    c2)
                        + c2),   so that the variance of Pt does not increase without

bound. The behavior of the system is in these two ways the same as in
                                                                 10/
Section II, with the money supply rule (3).

     An important difference can be                   noted,      however, when we reconsider the

present model in light of the money supply rule of Section Il--i.e., when

we consider the system (1'), (2'), (3).                          Again the values of
                                                                                                        IT11
and IT21 are unchanged but for the other coefficients we obtain

(21) IT12 =              - c1)/$2                                                   =   (1 +

                                                                                        (1   -
        1113           _l/2                                                   1123 =             b1)/2
where '2 = (1 +                                  -
                          c2) + (X - c1)(]           b1).    Continuing now with or without the

presumption that c2               -b1, we again find that IT2._0 and IT23                    >0    as

But instead of the limiting values in the previous paragraph we now have
                   -
                       b1      1113>0. Thus with the extended modeL (1'), (2'), we

see that the limiting behavior of the price level is described by


(22) Pt ( - C0 - c1)                    +   (r   -
                                                     b0)t +             V
                                                                 1-b1
when the money supply rule is (3), and by
                                                    11

                                                             vt+nt
              r(l
              -
                                                             ______
(23)   Pt =         -
                        c1)
                              -
                                  b0
                                       -
                                           c0
                                                +   mi   -




'when the rule is (13). Thus, even with a complete peg of rt enforced by

X—), the stochastic behavior of p (as well as                         is different under

the two rules. It is then evidently not a complete description of monetary
                                                                              11/
policy to say that the interest rate will be pegged at r =
                                            12


IV.    A "Pure"    Interest Rate Peg?

       Given the conclusion of the last paragraph, it then becomes natural

to ask whether it is possible for the monetary authority to peg r at the

value r, not by means of a money supply rule, but by simply standing

ready to buy or sell securities at the chosen value. The distinction

between this "pure" type of pegging operation and the ones previously

considered is that, while the others involve money supply behavior, in the

present case the money stock is entirely demand determined at the pegged

value of the interest rate. The monetary authority is committed, under

this type of policy, to maintaining a constant interest rate regardless

of the path of rn that materializes.

       Analytically, this type of pure peg is expressed by the simple condition

(24)      r = r.

Consequently, the system under discussion becomes (1'), (2'), (24), and the
                                                                           12/
variables to be solved for are Pt and m, rather than Pt and r.

Inspection of equations (1'), (2'), and (24) shows that no lagged variables

or trends appear explicitly, so it appears that the relevant set of state
                                           13/
variables includes only v and                    This tentative assumption also reflects
the notion that nothing from the past is relevant to the determination of

Pt in a flexible-price model of the type at hand when the monetary authority

does not provide a connection between successive periods by its adopted
      14/
policy.

       We provisionally assume, then, that solution equations will be of the

form

(25)      Pt =    lO + II12v + l3't
              =
(26)     't       3O +   TT•32Vt +   33t
                                                        13


Continuing as before, we next note that Etpt÷l =                              so substitution of

that condition plus (24), (25), and (26) into (1') yields


(27)        r =
                  b0 + ir -(TT +
                                                             + l3t ÷ bi(rr12vt + l3t +

which implies the relationships


(28)        r=b0
            o =             -            + 1
                      (b1       l)1T12
            o =
                      (b1
                            -
                                l)l3.
Likewise, substitution into (2') yields

                                                         + l2't + 1T13T1 +
(29)        30 + T1•32V + 33t =                   10
            + c1r + c2(TTi2v +                           +

imp lying

(30)                              +
            IT30 =      rr10 + C0           cr
            IT32 =                +   c2)

            1133 = 1113(1 + c2) + 1.


Now from (28) and (30) we readily deduce that

'12 = 17(1
                  -
                                '13 =    0,             (1 + c2)I(l - b1),   and 1133 =   1.   But
                       b1),                    1132 =


these equations fail to determine values for either                              or 113o.

Furthermore, they require--for the avoidance of inconsistency--that the
                                                                                   15 /

peg value r be chosen to equal the "natural rate" value b0.                               Consequently,

in this case we find an apparent nominal indeterminacy with precisely the

sort of symptoms as described in McCallum (1981, pp. 323-4).

       Reflection upon the last-mentioned symptom leads one, however, to

consider the possibility that the previous analysis has been attempted

with a sub-minimal set of state variables. The idea is that rational agents,
                                                 14


being aware of the classical structure of the economy, will understand that

 for the policy objective            r =   r   to be achieved in all future periods it

will be necessary for the inflation rate to equal r -
                                                                    b0 on average.
Furthermore, these rational agents will also know that this magnitude of

inflation will necessitate an average money stock growth rate of r -
                                                                                      b0.
But money stock growth rates involve comparisons of successive values of

m. Thus a relevant determinant of any m value must be mi. In other

words, m 1 appears to be a relevant state variable when policy is
                               16/
specified as in (24).

        To investigate this conjecture, let us then consider solutions to (1'),

(2'), (24) of the form


(31)      Pt lO + 11m_1 +                        + l3t
(32)      m =             +
                              1r31m 1 + 32h1t + ir3311.

To solve the system in this case, we first note that with               r =   r   there is

no information concerning v or                   available to private agents during

period t. Thus the expectational variable in (1) becomes

(33)      Ep÷1 = 'lO + 'll3O + 31m_i).

Substitution into (1') then yields

(34)      r =
                b0 + lO + 1l3O + ff31m l -                lO +   ffi1m l 12v + 13t +
          b1(rr12v
                          +          +

which   implies

(35)      r =  + 1l3O
                b0
          o 'll3l -
                               l1
          o =         -        l2 + 1
                (b1       1)

          0 =         —
                (b1       1)
                                                        15


Also, substitution into (2) gives


(36)             1130 + 113im_i + 1132Vt +             1133t
                                                               =
                                                                   l0 +       1111mb 1
                                                                                         +   l2    + 11l3t

                                                                 +
                 + c0 +     c1r + c2(TTi2v +
imp lying

(37)             1130 =           + c0 + c1r

                 11311111
                 1132 =    (1 + c2) "12
                        = (1     + c2) 1113 + 1.
                 1133


From the expressions in (35) and (37) we quickly see that again 1112 =

1/(1     -                        0,               (I + c2)/(l     -          and 1133 =     1.   Also, it is
             b1),       1113 =            1132 =                       b1),
apparent that rr11 and 1131 both equal 0 or 1. With the former value, the

system would be identical to the one based on (25) and (26), so we take the

values 1111 =                    =   1.     Then from the first of equations (35) we                     find   that
                          1131

1130 =       r   -
                     b0
                          and from the first of equations (37) that 1110 =                         r(1    -
                                                                                                              c1)
                                                                                                                    -
                                                                                                                        b0
                                                                                                                             -
                                                                                                                                 C0.
Thus the solution with m1 included as a state variable is well behaved;

it involves no inconsistency or inability to solve for particular parameters.

         This result seems to suggest that a pure pegging policy is feasible,

a conclusion that is more drastic than the CHR result that money supply

rules can be designed to maintain a constant interest rate. Before accepting

this conclusion, however, we need to consider whether a different solution

would be obtained if the private agents in our economy behaved as if t,

rather than m1 were the relevant state variable missing from (25) and

(26). That this possibility needs to be examined is indicated by the

contrasting results obtained in Section III under the alternative money

stock rules (3) and (13).
                                               16


       Accordingly, we now seek solutions to the model (1'), (2'), (24) of

the form


(38)
          Pt l0 + ll + lZt + 13t
(39)      m =     30      + rr31t ÷ TT32V + 33t'

where the trend variable t appears rather than mci. In this case,

Etpt+i =   lO     + ir11(t + 1) and proceeding as before we find that the

relations implied by substitution into (1') are


(40)

            =

          0 =
                ll    -


                      -
                          11
                           1) l2 + 1
                (b1
          0 =         -
                           1)
                (b1

Also, substitution into (2t)               leads    to


(41)      '3O =           +
                                c0 + c1r
          31 =    l1
          32 = (1         + c2) 'l2

          33 = (1 + c2) 'l3 +

From these we see that p12' 13' 22' and IT23 are the same as in the previous

example. We also see, however, that TT =
                                                         IT31
                                                                =   r   -
                                                                            b0
                                                                                 and that the system

fails to determine IT10 or IT30.


       At a superficial level, one might be inclined to interpret the non-

determination of 1T]M and IT30 as an indication that this solution is not

viable, leaving the solution with the mi state variable as the only well-

behaved candidate. But that conclusion would be unjustified. No parameters
                                  17


are undetermined in the mi solution precisely because the previous period's

value of m enters the solution equation. But some value of mi must be

used as an initial value to start up the process, and that value is just

as undetermined as is 3O in the solution with the time trend. In each

case, one initial condition is needed to put the system in operation. Thus

the solution with reduced-form equations of the form (38)-(39) is just as

worthy   a candidate for selection as "the solution" as is the one with
reduced-form equations of the form (3l)-(32). The conjecture that
must be a relevant state variable is incorrect; the trend variable t would
serve as well.

     But the solutions with m_1 and t included are different in their implied

time series properties for m and p. In particular, one of these solutions

describes the behavior of m as a random walk with drift r - b0, while the

other implies that m is generated by a process that departs in a white-noise
                      t
                                                     17/
fashion from a linear trend path with slope r - b0.        So while it is true

that rational agents should be able to infer that r = r requires an average

money stock growth rate of r -         there is no way for them to infer whether
                                 b0,
this average rate is generated in a random-walk or trend-stationary fashion.

And of course these different processes for m correspond to different

processes with the same qualitative characteristics for pr__and, consequently,

to different expectations of future values of p.

     The main implication of this finding is that a commitment by the monetary

authority to peg rt at the value r is not a satisfactory description

of policy behavior. In particular, it does not indicate whether or not the

authority will permit "base drift" and is therefore not complete enough to

enable private agents to form expectations--themselves crucial for asset demand

behavior--in a rational manner. A "pure interest rate peg" does not, in
                                       18


other words, constitute a well-formulated monetary policy. While the

monetary authority can come arbitrarily close to effecting a peg of the

form r =   r,   it must do so by adopting a money supply rule such as (3)

or   (13) and by making .   large   in magnitude--not by attempting a pure peg.

This conclusion expresses in a new way the old idea that attempts to peg

interest   rates   may be misguided.

      It should also be noted, before moving to other matters, that the

solutions in this section provide something akin to counterexamples to the

indeterminacy proposition of Sargent and Wallace (1975). An even clearer

case can be developed, moreover, by use cf an intaras t      rate   ruJ..e f the


           im_i.       The resulting solution would provide a counterexample in

the sense that Pt would be determinate with a fixed and autonomous feedback

rule for r provided that an initial condition is available for mci. But

without such an initial condition one component of the model--the policy

rule--would not be well-specifie& Thus the Sargent-wallace (1975, p. 250)

discussion goes astray by considering only terminal conditions, as opposed

to initial conditions, as possible ways of pinning down nominal magnitudes.

      In addition, the foregoing discussion suggests a more detailed


interpretation of indeterminacy findings in static, non-stochastic models

such as those used by Gurley and Shaw (1960), Patinkin (1961) (1965, pp. 308-9),

Sargent (1979, pp. 92-5), and Fischer (1983). In particular, one can see

that to restrict the analysis to the fully static case with zero inflation

is tantamont to adoption of a solution form like (25) (26). But that seems

overly restrictive; admission of non-zero inflation rates would seem desirable

even in a non-stochastic framework and such an admission would eliminate

certain inconsistencies. There would be a remaining indeterminacy corresponding

to the need for an initial condition to go with our equations (35) (37) or
                                 19


(40) (41). But this hardly seems to be a matter of great consequence

since the choice of an initial value for m has no effect on any real

magnitude, not even real money balances. Thus traditional findings of

nominal indeterminacy seem to point Out inadequacies of the assumptions

utilized, rather than the policies investigated.

     Our main result indicates, however, that there is a valid criticism to

be made of interest rate pegging policies of the pure type. This criticism

is based on the different time series properties of solutions for nominal

variables that are consistent with the model when stochastic elements are

recognized. These differing solutions indicate that pure pegging--a standing

offer to buy and sell securities at a specified interest rate--does not

constitute a well-formulated monetary policy.
                                          20

  V.    Indeterminacy and the Real Bills Doctrine

         An interesting and important interpretation of a pegged interest rate

  is as a manifestation of policy behavior
                                                   of the type recommended by the
                                                    19/
 ancient and infamous "real bills doctrine."
                                                          This interpretation has been
 expressed by a number of writers, including Patinkjn
                                                                 (1965, P. 309),
                                                                          20/
 Humphrey (1982), Sargent (1979, pp. 92-5), and Sargent and Wallace (1975).

 Price level indeterminacy is viewed, under this interpretation, as
                                                                    illustrating
 in an extreme fashion the
                           undesirability of a policy regime of the real-
 bills type.

         n a provoca va rnabt Sargent and WalLace (1982) havt recently

 attempted to provide "something of a rehabilitation of the real bills doctrine"

 (1982, p. 1214). In developing this new position, these authors (henceforth,

S-W) construct an overlapping generations model in which Pareto optimality

obtains    under a policy   regime   of the real-bills type, but does not obtain
                                                     21/
under a regime of the "quantity theory" type. A subsidiary but crucial
strand of the argument focuses on the issue of price level determinacy.
In this regard, s-w indicate that the          price level is   determinate in their
1982 model under the      real bills regime even though the latter features an
interest    rate pegged at the   value zero.

        Elsewhere,   Sargent (1982) has   contrasted this finding with the
indeterminacy result in the earlier (1975) S-W
                                                          paper. Indeed, Sargent has
(1982, p. 387) conjectured that "the difference in these two analyses stems

sensitively from the fact that the older one took the demand function for

money and a particular definition of money as
                                                      primitive objects, while the
later   paper goes deeper   and has primitive objects in the form       of preferences,
opportunities, endowments,     and explicit restrictions on financial intermediation
                                                     21


One purpose of the present section is to investigate this conjecture;

another aim is to comment more generally on the S-W rehabilitation of the

real bills doctrine.

       We begin by reviewing aspects of the S-W (1982) analysis, adopting

notation related (but not identical) to theirs. Under all of the policy

regiMes considered, the price level P(t) is required to satisfy the

following condition in each period, t =                     1,2,...:
            N
                 h                                              = H(t)/P(t).
(42) hlt(t) - wh(t÷l)/(l                       + rh(t))]/2
                                                          22/
        h
flCLC W- -L)fSO      i I.. (..,.                ...
              - \ LL&C G4S,.%J5StStJUOJ CLfl.flJWLUCLSL
                                                      .. 4-     . ..,i,
                                                          JA ULCULIJCJ.   1,
                                                                          LA
                                                                             ,.'.11.  , ,. -4
                                                                                  c &&t.A1.     ,-.,   4 .-' .'.- 4 ,,,-l

t     while r"(t)       is    the real rate of return available between .t an4 t+l to

agent h (h=1,. .       .,N).        Also, H(t) is the aggregate nominal stock of currency

held by the current old in period t after transfers from, and loan repayments
                             23 /
to,    the government.              The term iii square brackets is, given the symmetric Cobb-

Douglas utility function used by S-W, the utility-maximizing quantity of
                                                    24/
real savings in period t by member h of generation t.   Thus (42) equates

the aggregate saving of each period's young to the aggregate dissaving of its
                                                                            25/
old, with the latter supplying their money balances (currency) inelastically.

       After rationalizing the foregoing type of saving behavior and assuming

that currency and private loans are the only available stores o1f value,
                                                            26/
S-W go on to discuss monetary equilibria                          under three different policy

regimes--arrangements that involve "laissez faire" (LF), "quantity theory"

(QT), and "real-bills discount window" (DW) modes of behavior by the monetary

authority. Under the LF regime, all individuals face the same intertemporal

terms of trade so rh(t) =               r(t)    for all h. Also, equilization of returns on
                                                27/
currency and private securities                       requires that


(43)        r(t) =    [P(t)/P(t+l)1        -    1.
                                            22

In   this regime, moreover, there re no loans to the young and the monetary

authority holds constant the stock of currency:


(44)        H(t) =    II.
Together, as S-W show, equations (42), (43), and (44) determine solution

sequences for the variables H(t), P(t), and r(t).

       Turning now to the real-bills DW regime, conditions (42) and (43)
                    28 /
continue   to hold.         The monetary authority's behavior, however, is in this

case designed to peg the interest rate on private securities at zero:

"the   government stands ready at      every date to grant   safe one-period loans
in the form of (newly printed)        government currency at a zero nominal rate

of   interest" (S-W, 1982, p. 1225). But that mode of behavior is expressed
analytically   as


(45)        r(t) + P(t+1)-P(t)          =


which then replaces (44) as the formal representation of policy. And (45)

is algebraically equivalent to (43), so the DW system includes only two

independent equations, a number that is inadequate to determine values for

the three variables H(t), P(t), and r(t). Only r(t) and the ratio H(t)/P(t)

can be found from analysis of the model.

       The contrary conclusion that there is no indeterminacy problem is reached

by S-W (1982, p. 1226) because they treat H(t) as a constant for all t =            1,2...
and take that constant value as exogenously given. But since in their model

H(t) is the currency stock held by the old in t          after   transfers, should the

government choose to make any, the value of H(t) in the initial period t=l is

not independent of the choice of the monetary authority. The objective of a

zero magnitude for r(t) + 1 -        P(t)/P(t+l)   is inadequate, given private agents'
                                     23


concern for real magnitudes, to determine what constant value of H(t) will

prevail in period 1 and thereafter. What the S-W (1982) example shows, then,

is that it is feasible in. their (non-stochastic) model for the monetary

authority both to peg the interest rate at zero and to hold the money stock

constant at an arbitrarily chosen value. Given the latter value the price
                                                        29/
level is determined; without such a value it will not be.

     But this essentially duplicates in a non-stochastic setting the

result described in previous sections as pertaining to the 1975 S-W model,

in which it is possible to maintain a constant interest rate and a money

stock that is constant except for random (white noise) fluctuations,

provided that r =         The random fluctuations in the money stock are not
                    b0.
present in the S-W (1982) model because it is non-stochastic in specification,

and a constant money stock is compatible with a zero nominal rate of interest

because that rate is required by (43) as a necessary condition of a monetary

equilibrium.

     Thus we see that there is no significant difference, with respect to

the indeterminacy status of the two S-W models, to attribute to the fact

that the earlier analysis took demand functions as primitive analytical

objects. As Patinkin's dictum would suggest, the relevant distinction as

far as potential indeterminacy is concerned is whether the demand functions

(primitive or derived) are free of money illusion.

     A more interesting issue, of course, is whether the 1982 S-W analysis

in fact provides any support for the real bills doctrine. In that regard
                                             30/
there are two points that need to be made here, both of which suggest

that such support is not provided by the analysis in question. First, as

we have seen, the S-W (1982) model is one in which price level determinacy

requires that the monetary authority specify a value for H(l), the initial
                                    24

money stock. But the need for any such quantitative specification is

precisely what is denied by the real bills doctrine in its claim that a

restriction of loans to discounts of real bills is sufficient to guarantee
                           31/
desirable monetary behavior.

     Second, and of greater import, is the fact that the S-W (1982) model

is one in which the asset termed ttcurrency" serves as a store of value
                               32/
but not as a medium of exchange.   This fact is crucial in evaluating the

main theme of the S-W argument, namely, that Pareto-optimality obtains

under the real bills DW regime even though the resulting equilibrium

features a relatively large extent of price level variability. With

respect to that theme, Laidler (1984) has suggested that the S-W analysis

is inconsistent with the views of the doctrine's 18th and 19th century

advocates, who ... regarded the maintenance of price level stability as

a vital principle of social organization, and would not have entertained

a defense of their doctrine which showed that it failed to ensure such

stability" (Laidler, 1984, p.     ).   Now, while this suggestion of Laidler's

would certainly appear to be correct, the substantive issue of whether

a real bills regime is socially desirable does not hinge on what its

original proponents believed. If the S-W model were one that satisfactorily

depicted the essential features of a contemporary economy, then their

results would be of importance regardless of the views of Adam Smith,

Thomas Tooke, John Fullerton, et. al.

     As it happens, however, the S-W (1982) model does not provide an

adequate vehicle for analysis of a contemporary monetary economy. Laidler

mentions the model's neglect of uncertainty and production, but not its

most fundamental weakness: the asset called "currency" does not serve
                       33 /
as a medium of exchange.      That being the case, there is no reason to
                                   25


think of this asset as money--it would be better thought of as government
    14/
bonds--and thus no reason to think of the reciprocal of its price in terms

of goods as "the price level." Nor is there any reason to think of the

model's financial intermediaries as "banks"--i.e., as intermediaries with

liabilities that serve as money--or to think of the government's loan

office as a central bank. What S-W call the price level is just the

price of goods relative to the price of government bonds, and the fact

that its value fluctuates in the LF and DW regimes is merely the

reflection of assumptions regarding tastes and endowments that directly
                                                        35/
necessitate fluctuations in the real rate of interest.

        Thus the S-W (1982) model is, as a consequence of its design, one

that is incapable of addressing issues concerning the real bills doctrine.

As I have argued elsewhere (1983b)(l983c), the specific feature that makes

this model inapplicable to various monetary issues is not its life-cycle

structure, but its adherence to a particular version of the "principle of

finance theory that assets are valued according to the streams of returns

that back them" (S-W, 1982, p. 1214). There is nothing wrong with that

principle as stated, except for some ambiguity involving the term

"back   them," but S-W have for some reason interpreted it to mean that only
pecuniary returns should be counted. In particular, the transactions-
facilitating   services of money are not to be counted, a proviso that seems

analogous to requiring that the pleasures of owning a painting by (say)

Vermeer must not be taken into account in the analysis of that asset's

value. As a result of that proviso, every asset in the model must have

the same monetary status--all serve as media of exchange or none do.

Thus it becomes impossible to carry out any analysis that involves a

distinction between money and non-monetary paper assets, a distinction

that is central to the   very notion of the "discounting of real bills."
                                 26


VI. The Wicksellian Dynamic Process

    A notable feature of the analysis in Sections Il-tV is its evident

inconsistency with the Wickselliari notion that policy designed to yield
                                                               36/
a low nominal rate of interest will tend to induce inflation. In the

analysis of those sections, by contrast, the average rate of inflation

moves (across policy regimes) together with the target value of the nominal

rate. Indeed, extremely low values of r--values below the rate b0--are

associated with falling prices, deflations of magnitude b0 -   r.    We need

to consider, then, whether the Wicksellian notion is itself incorrect as

a matter of neoclassical theory or if, alternatively, there is some

deficiency in the model (l')-(2') as a vehicle for expressing that theory.

     The most prominent way in which our analysis differs from that of

previous Wicksellian discussions--e.g., Wicksell (1898)(1905), Friedman (1968),

Laidler (l972)-—is in its assumption that expectations are formed rationally.

But given the attractiveness of that assumption, recognition of this

difference does not suggest a deficiency in our framework. It leads, rather,

only to a re-phrasing of the question, which now becomes: Is the Wicksellian

notion incorrect for an economy with rational expectations?

     The first thing to be said in this regard is that it does appear in-

correct to suggest--as Friedman (1968, p. 5) comes very close to doing--that

the monetary authority cannot permanently keep the nominal interest rate

low or high, as it chooses, by means of low or high rates of money creation.

Ironically, Friedman's hypothesis concerning the natural rate of unemployment

seems more convincing today than the interest rate counterpart that he used

as a relatively uncontroversial means of introduction.
                                              27


       The second point to be mentioned concerns pegging of the real rate,

r _(EPt÷i -             In    this regard, reflection indicates that the real rate

cannot--in the model (l'),(2')--be maintained at any value differing from

the natural rate value b0; any attempt to do so would founder on an inconsistency

similar to the one noted in Section IV (just below equations (30)). But that

conclusion is not robust to plausible specificational adjustments. In

particular, the inclusion of a real balance effect in (1') would, as is well

known, make the steady-state real rate dependent upon the inflation rate.

So in an economy in which the real balance effect is operative, the monetary

authority can permanently influence the real rate by its money creation activity.

It cannot literally peg the real rate under the informational assumptions

employed in Sections II-IV, because it cannot observe without error the

contemporaneous value of private agents' expected inflation rate. But by

adopting a policy rule of the form

(46)     m =   m1   +         +   X[r   -               -
                        p.1                 E(pt+1-p)
and setting     appropriately, the monetary authority can induce the real rate

to fluctuate randomly around the chosen value p. In this case, lower values of

p will require larger values of               and will be associated with higher inflation

rates. This association of high inflation rates and low real rates of interest

is reminiscent of the Wicksellian notion, and indeed might be regarded as a

reformulated version of the latter. It should be recognized, however, that the

phenomena responsible for this association--in particular, the real balance

effect--are quite different from those involved in the original version of the

Wicksellian notion.
                                   28


        Returning now to the matter of nominal-rate pegging, let us conclude

with a recognition that there is one type of potential malfunction that has

not been explicitly considered in the foregoing discussion--namely, dynamic

instability. It is certainly arguable that dynamic instability would represent
                                                                                12/
Wicksell's hypothesis more accurately than the situation of nominal indeterminacy.

For instability to obtain, it is clear that the model at hand would have to be

modified in ways that introduce a more interesting dynamic structure. In this

respect there are two reasonably attractive possibilities. The first of these
would involve replacement of the classical supply function utilized in

Sections II-IV with one that makes prices somewhat sticky, i.e., temporarily

rigid. To maintain consistency with neoclassical theory the adopted supply

function should, however, respect the natural rate hypothesis as applied to

employment and output--something that naive Phillips Curve relationships and
                                  38/
NAIRTJ specifications fail to do. The second type of dynamic modification

that seems of potential interest is one that reflects some sort of lag in

the reaction of policy to rt observations. In this case the policy rule (13)

might, for example, be replaced by


 (47)      m =   m1   +   + X(r1   -
                                        r).
Investigation of such dynamic elaborations is, however, a large task that is

beyond the scope of the present paper.
                                    29


VII. Conclusions

     The conclusions of our various investigations can be stated very

briefly. First, it is possible—-as Canzoneri, Henderson, and Rogoff

(1983) have shown--for the monetary authority to peg the nominal interest

rate without generating price level indeterminacy in an economy with

rational expectations and no private-sector money illusion. But, second,

this can be accomplished by adhering to either of two (or more) alternative

policy rules, and these have differing implications for the stochastic

behavior of the price level. Third, the feasibility of effecting a pure

peg is more problematical; merely standing ready to buy and sell securities

at the desired rate does not constitute a well-specified policy and so

leaves private agents unable to formulate expectations rationally. Fourth,

the Sargent-wallace (1982) analysis of the real bills doctrine is conducted

in a model that features indeterminacy to the same extent as their 1975

model. Fifth, the mora recent Sargent-wallace model provides an

unsatisfactory framework for consideration of the real bills doctrine

because it neglects the medium-of-exchange role of money, thereby negating

the possibility of distinguishing between monetary and non-monetary paper

assets. Finally, the combination of flexible prices and rational expectations

is not favorable to the Wicksellian idea that low nominal interest rates tend

to induce inflation.
                                           Appendix A

        The object here is to show by means of a familiar example that the

inclusion of extraneous state variables, i.e., ones not included in the

minimal set, can lead to an infinite multiplicity of solutions. For

this purpose, consider the model (l)(2) with a constant money stock,

     = m.   Substitution of (1) into (2) then yields


(A-l)       m -        =         + ci(Ep÷i -            +
                  Pt       c3

where c3 =         + c1b0 and U           =    + c1v. The minimal-state-variable solution
              c0
is of the form


(A-2)                  + rr1u

and straightforward calculations show that IT0 = m -                         and   =
                                                                        c3             -11(1-c1).
        Suppose, however, that one seeks a solution of the form


(A-3)       Pt = IT0 + Ir1u + IT2pt_l + .rr3U1,

in   which the extraneous state variables p
                                                            t—l
                                                                  and u
                                                                       t—l
                                                                           are admitted. Then

we have


(A-4)       Etpt÷l =             +   1T2(ffo+TTiu MT2pt i+r13ui) + IT3Ut


and substitution into (A-i) gives rise to the implications


(A-5)       m =
                   c3 + crT2TT + IT0
            0 =                 + cjT3 + (l-c1)1T1 + 1
                   c1ir2r1
            0 =
                   c1II    + (l-c1)IT2

            0 =
                   c1TT2TT3 + (l-c1)ff3.


The third of these implies that 112 equals zero or (c1-l)/c1. If the
former value is chosen, the minimal-state-variable solution is obtained.

But if the value IT2 =               is used, then the equations re
                         (c1-l)/c1
consistent with any value for ¶T1. So the analyst concludes, unless side

conditions are brought in, that there is an infinity of solution paths

for Pt.
                                        Appendix B

        To show that the minimal-state-variable solution to the system (l)(2)

(13) is as asserted in Section III, consider a more general version of (13)

in which the coefficient on m1 is not necessarily 1.0:


(B-i) m =          m1 +            + X(r-r).
With this modification, the second of equations (17) and (18) become


(B-2)       (l-X11)21 =

(B-3)            + (X-c1) 2l IT11.

consequently,      flj1 is determined as


  -
            IT11—
                  - ________
                       2X


where 6 =    1   + 'X -(X-c1)Cy-l). But in the case with '               = 0 the minimal-

state-variable solution will have ¶111 =             0,   so we see that the negative

square root in (B-4) gives the appropriate value to TT1.                    Then we consider

our case, in which y = 1, and obtain


(B-5)
                 -
            IT11 —
                     1   +   X -   \l)2
                                   2X
                                           -         = (1) 2X    (l-X)     = 1.
                                  Appendix C

     The purpose here is to provide some bibliographic evidence in support of

the interpretation of the real bills doctrine offered in footnote 19, namely,

as asserting that desirable behavior of the money supply will result if banks

(including the central bank) restrict their loans to the discounting of non-

speculative "real bills." Each of the following paragraphs will consist of

a brief passage quoted from the indicated source.

         the error which it is the object of the present Chapter to expose;

namely, that of imagining that a proper limitation of bank notes may be

sufficiently secured by attending merely to the nature of the security for

which they are given (Thornton, 1802 t19781, p. 244).

     We can only consider their ti.e., the banking school's] view of the

influence of bank credit, and more especially of note issues, on prices. This

school ...   denies any stch influence so long as the banks only grant credit to
the public in the form of loans on absolutely sound security. Even if the

banks are not compelled to redeem their notes in gold they cannot, says Tooke,

under such conditions either increase or diminish the total amount of credit

instruments in circulation (Wicksell, 1905 t19351, p. 173).

     The anti-bullionists ...    claimed that as long as currency was issued only
by banks, and was issued by them only in the discount of genuine and sound

short-term commercial paper, it could not be issued in excess of the needs of

business, since no one would borrow at interest funds which he did not need

(Viner, 1937, p. 148).

         if only "real" bills are discounted, the expansion of bank money will

be in proportion to ...   the   'needs of trade,' and ..., when trade contracts,

bank loans will be correspondingly paid off. Closely associated with this point

of view is the doctrine that, if only commercial loans are made, the currency
will have a desirable elasticity and the banks will at all times be in a

liquid condition. I shall designate these ideas as the "real-bills doctrine"

(Mints, 1945, P. 9).

         any continuing excess of note-issues above a safe figure was automatically

prevented ...   tprovided   that] notes were issued only against sound commercial

discounts.... The discounting of real trade bills could not lead to an over-

issue of paper (Horsefield, 1953, pp. 16, 26).

     It was alleged tby the real bills doctrine] that the quantity of money

would automatically be properly regulated if the monetary authorities ensured

that banks always had enough reserves to meet the demand for loans intended to

finance "real" (as opposed to "speculative") investments at an interest rate

set "with a view of accommodating commerce and business" (Sargent, 1979, p. 92).
                                 Re fere aces



Barro, Robert J., and Gordon, David B., "A Positive Theory of Monetary

    Policy in a Natural Rate Model," Journal of Political Economy 91

    (August 1983), 589-610.

Begg, David K.H., and Hague, Nd Badrul, "A Nominal Interest Rate Rule and

    the Price Level Determiriacy Reconsidered," Centre for Economic Fore-

    casting Discussion Paper No. 112, London Business School, June 1983.

Blaug, Mark, Economic Theory in Retrospect (2nd. ed.). Homewood,

    Illinois: Richard D. Irwin, 1968.

Calvo,   Guillertno A.,   "Pegged Interest Rates and Indeterminacy of

    Equilibrium," Columbia University, April 1981.

Canzoneri, Matthew B., Henderson, Dale W., and Rogoff, Kenneth S., "The

    Information Content of the Interest Rate and Optimal Monetary Policy,"

    Quarterly Journal of Economics 98 (November 1983), 545-566.

Carison, John A., "Why Not an Interest Rate Rule Under Rational Expectations?"

    Purdue University, February 1983.

Dotsey, Michael, and King, Robert G., "Monetary Instruments and Policy Rules

    in a Rational Expectations Environment," Journal of Monetary Economics 12

   (Sept.ember 1983), 357-382.

Fischer, Stanley, "A Framework for Monetary and Banking Analysis,"

    Economic Journal 93 (March 1983, Supplement) ,     1-16.
Flood,   Robert P., and Garber, Peter N., "An Economic Theory of Monetary Reform,"

    Journal of Political Economy 88 (Feb. 1980), 24-58.

Friedman, Milton, "The Role of Monetary Policy," American Economic Review 58

    (March 1968), 1-17.


Goodfriend, Marvin, "Rational Expectations, Interest Rate Smoothing, and

    the Optimality of a Non-Trend-Stationary
                                                 Money Supply Rule," Federal
   Reserve Bank of Richmond, Working Paper, July 1983.
 Gurley, John G., and Shaw, Edward S., Money in a Theory of Finance.

     Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1960.

 Horsefield, J.K., "The Duties of a Banker, II: The Effects of Inconvertibility,'

     in Papers in English Monetary History, ed. by T.S. Ashton and R.S. Sayers.

     Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1953.


 Humphrey, Thomas N., "The Real Bills Doctrine," Federal Reserve Bank of

     Richmond. Economic Review 68 (September/October 1982), 3-13.

 Laidler, David, "Misconceptions About the Real Bills Doctrine and the

     Quantity Theory: A Comment on Sargent and Wallace," Journal of Political
     Economy 92 (February 1984), 149-155.

______________   "Adam Smith as a Monetary Economist," Canadian Journal of

    Economics 14 (May 1981), 185-200.

_____________    "On Wicksell's Theory of Price Level Dynamics," Manchester

    School 40 (June 1972), 125-144.

Liviatan, Nissan, "Pegging the Interest Rate Under Rational Expectations,'t

    Hebrew University, 1981.

McCallum, Bennett T., "Price Level Determinacy with an Interest Rate Policy

    Rule and Rational Expectations," Journal of Monetary Economics 8

    (November 1981), 319-329.

                        ,   "On Non-Uniqueness in Rational Expectations Models:

    An Attempt at Perspective," Journal of Monetary Economics 11

    (March 1983), 139-168. (a)

_____________________       "The Role of Overlapping-Generations Models in Monetary

    Economics," in Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series in Public Policy,

    Vol. 18, ed. by K. Brunner and A.H. Neltzer. Amsterdam: North-

    Holland, 1983. (b)
______________________ "Comments,"         Journal of Monetary Economics 12

     (July 1983), 189-196. (c)

_______________________, "Macroeconomics After a Decade of Rational Expectations:

     Some Critical Issues," Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review

     68 (November/December 1982), 3-12.

Mints, Lloyd W., A History of Banking Theory in Great Britain and the

     United States. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1945.

Nelson, Charles R., and Plosser, Charles I., "Trends and Random Walks in

     Macroeconomic Time Series: Some Evidence and Implications," Journal
     _r r___.___
     UL i1oue1ary'r.______P__
                    icouomics   11%
                                .Lu           Loh), Inn
                                      epeiuer lflflns.     Itn
                                                       .LJ—.LO.

Parktn,   Mithel, "A Comparison of Alternative Techn-ites of Monetary

     Control Under Rational Expectations," Manchester School 46 (September 1978).

Patinkin, Don, "Financial Intermediaries and the Logical Structure of

     Monetary Theory: A Review Article," American Economic Review 51

     (March 1961), 95—116.

_____________ Money, Interest, and Prices, 2nd ed., New York: Harper
     and Row,    1965.

Sargent, Thomas J., Macroeconomic Theory. New York: Acadenic Press, 1979.

_______________          "Beyond Demand and Supply Curves in Macroeconomics,"

   American Economic Review 72 (May 1982), 382-389.

Sargent, Thomas J., and Wallace, Neil, "The Stability of Models of Money

    and Growth with Perfect Foresight," Ecoriometrica 41 (November 1973),

    1043-1048.

_____________________________________        "'Rational' Expectations, The Optimal

    Monetary Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of

    Political Economy 83 (April 1975), 241-254.
______________________________________   "The Real-Bills Doctrine versus the

    Quantity Theory: A Reconsideration," Journal of Political Economy 90

    (December 1982), 1212-1236.

Taylor, John B., "Conditions for Unique Solutions in Stochastic Macroeconomic

    Models with Rational Expectations," Econonietrica 45 (September 1977),

    1377-1385.


Thornton, Henry, An Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit

    of Great Britain, 1802. Reprint, edited by F.A. von Hayek.

    Fairfield, N.J.: Augustus N. Kelley, 1978.

Viner, Jacob, Studies in the Theory of International Trade. New York:

   Harper and Brothers, 1937.

Wicksell, Knut, Lectures on political Economy, Vol. 2, 1905. Translated

   by Lionel Robbins. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd., 1935.

_____________    Interest   and Prices, 1898. Translated by R.F. Kahn.

   London: Macmillan, 1936.
                                    Footnotes

1. The distinction between "indeterminacy" and "non'uniqueness" will.

     be discussed below.


2. A related line of argument was put forth earlier by Liviatan (1981)

     and more recently by Dotsey and King (1983) and Goodfriend (1983).

     Also relevant is the analysis in Sargent-Wallace (1982). Recent

     papers concerning indeterminacy but bearing less directly on the

     issues here considered include Begg and Hague (1983), Calvo (1981),

     and Carison (1983).

3. The terminology proposed in this paragraph is not currently used by

     all writers, but is consistent with the usage of Sargent and Wallace

     (who have contributed leading papers on both topics).

4. Actually, this specification differs in one way from that in McCallum (1981):

     agents base their expectations of the future price level         on r as

     well as            That change is not crucial for tie issues under

     discussion, but should be kept in mind in obtaining solutions to the

     various models. For additional discussion of the model, see McCallum (1981).

5. For an illustration of this phenomenon, see Appendix A.

6. Here and in all that follows it is taken for granted that the constant

     state "variable" 1.0 is also included.

7.   It will be noted that the values of 22 and           in (11) would also be

     small for large negative values of X and would approach zero for

     Our specification does not, however, permit negative values of X.      One

     reason for this restriction is that X > C1 is necessary to rule out

     "process inconsistency", in the language of Flood and Garber (1980), of

     the type discussed in McCallum (1983a, pp. 159-160).

8. Suppose one were to adopt the other set of solutions to (17) and (18),

     the    =   l/X   set that (according to Appendix 3) includes bubble

     components. In this event it would be found that the coefficients
       l2' l3' 22' arid ff23              equal     (for all X) the values obtained as

       X —      in      the model with policy rule (3). By itself, this finding

       might lead one to believe that the procedure is picking the "wrong"

       solution. ut it is also the case that the system requires that

          =   X(r   -         to avoid an inconsistency, thereby restricting ).            to
                        b0)

       the value 1.0 if           =   r   -
                                              b0.   Also,          is not determinate. So this

       solution is very poorly behaved.


 9. Compare equations (20) in Goodfriend (1983).

10. Another change from the original model that will yield these qualitative

       results is the inclusion of a real-balance term in the IS function,

       provided that this term is written--as consideration of budget equations

       suggests it should be--as mt-i -                              -
                                                            (not
                                                       Pt
'Li.   This conclusion is also obtained by Goodfriend (1983) and by Dotsey

       and King (1983).

12. We continue with the modified equations (1') and (2t), rather than

       (1) and (2), for generality.

13. This is the set indicated by the procedural rule suggested in McCallum

       (1983a) for cases with white-noise disturbances and no lagged expectations,

       i.e., include only disturbances and predetermined variables that

       explicitly appear in the equations of the model.

14. At an earlier stage, it was my belief that this notion was suggested

       by the analysis of Barro and Gordon (1983, P. 595). That this is not

       the case will become apparent shortly.


15.    That one     is bound to meet some problem with r                  b0 is obvious from the

       specification       of (26).
16. It should be emphasized that this conclusion does not involve a

     departure from the strategy of limiting our attention to solutions

     with a minimal set of state variables (i.e., bubble-free solutions).

     Instead, it reflects a conjecture that in the case at hand the

     minimal   set   of state variables includes     as well as V    and   'Ti.


     (Alternatively,         could be used in place of mi. The resulting

     solution would be the same; i.e., the same paths would be generated

     for the endogenous variables.)


17. In the language of Nelson and Plosser (1982), one of these processes

     is, and the other is not, trend stationary.


18. The line of argument developed in this section can be applied to the

    analysis on pp. 323-4 of McCallurn (1981).


19. It is not an entirely straightforward task to determine what the real

    bills doctrine, or commercial loan theory of credit, is.        My impression--
    formed on the basis of discussions by Blaug (1968), Humphrey (1982),

    Horsefield (1953), Mints (1945), Thornton (1802), Viner (1937), and

    Wicksell (1905)--is that the doctrine claims that desirable

    behavior of the money supply will be assured if banks, including

    the central bank, restrict their loans to the discounting of "real

    bills," i.e., to the financing of non-speculative investments. (For

    some supportive quotes, see Appendix C.) This version implies that

    no quantitative restrictions on the stock of money need to be

    imposed as a matter of policy, a situation represented by a policy

    rule that focuses on interest rates rather than any monetary

    aggregate. In this paper, as in part I of S-W (1982), the discussion

    presumes a fiat monetary standard.       Some writers, including
      Adam Smith, have espoused the real bills doctrine under the proviso

      that the economy be on a commodity money standard, in which case no

      issue of price level determinacy can arise. (For a discussion of

      Smith's position, see Laidler (1981).)

20. Actually, Sargent and Wallace (1975) did not mention the real bills

      doctrine. But Sargent (1982, p. 387) and Sargent-Wallace (1982, p. 1213)

      have indicated that the 1975 results concerning an interest rate

      policy rule should be interpreted as a criticism of the real-bills

      doctrine.


21.   Whether    the S-W representation of quantity-theory recommendations is

      accurate    is debatable, for reasons to be discussed below.

22.   There   is but one good, which is perishable.
23. In fact, the magnitude of monetary transfers to the old is zero for
      all t =   1,2,... in the two S-W regimes that are of concern here.
      It is nevertheless appropriate to write H(t) as a variable, thereby
      reflecting    the possibility of other regimes and the possibility that

      loan repayments will fluctuate over time.

24. Here there is no need to spell out the fluctuating endowment patterns

      that are crucial for other aspects of the S-W discussion.

25. This heuristic interpretation of the equilibrium condition (42) applies

      under the laissez faire regime. For an interpretation pertaining to

      the real bills regime, see S-W (1982, p. 1226).

26. That is, equilibria in which currency has a positive value in terms

      of goods.

27. Requiring this equalization of returns is implicitly to deny that

      currency serves as a medium of exchange--or, more precisely, does so

      to a greater extent than private securities--in the modelled economy.

      It will be seen below that this condition necessitates some re-

      interpretation of the present discussion.
28. In this regime there are legal restrictions on private security

     issues. Relation (43) nevertheless obtains in any monetary

     equilibrium since all asset holders are free to hold government

     currency (S-W, 1982, p. 1225).

29. This statement is also applicable, it should be noted, to the LF regime.

30. Laidler (1984) has presented other arguments suggesting that the

     attempted rehabilitation is unsuccessful.

31. Recall fn. 19.

32. This conclusion is based on arguments developed in McCallum (l983b),

     especially pp. 23-28 and 33-34, and McCallum (l983c).

33. Neglect of uncertainty and production is less fundamental in the

     sense that much interesting monetary analysis can be, and has been,

     conducted in non-stochastic models of exchange economies.

34. That this asset is said to carry a zero nominal interest rate is no

     reason to think of it as currency. In fact, all this condition

     implies is that the "nominal interest rate" has been computed from

     its real rate by addition of the inflation rate with the price level

    based on this asset as numeraire. But the own rate of interest on

    any paper asset is always zeros

35. This conclusion obviously implies that the indeterminacy analysis in

    the first part of this section must be reinterpreted as involving

    a relative price.
36. It is not universally agreed how Wicksell's (1898) (1905) ideas should be

      expressed in terms of 1980's-style analysis. Thus Sargent and Wallace

      refer to price level indeterminacy as "Wicksellian" (1982, p. 1213)

      or as tttqjcsel1's indeterminacy" (1975, p. 215) while Laidler (1984)

      contends that this is a misrepresentation, with Wicksellian phenomena

      requiring some form of "disequilibrium." My own impression is that the

      main aspect of Wicksell's analysis resides in the hypothesized tendency

      for low nominal rates to lead to continuing inflation.

37.   For the representation to be satisfactory, however, the price level
      explosion would need to be in an upward direction when r is low and     in
      a downward direction when r is high.


38. On this point, see McCallum (1982).
