                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE:
                           CHANGES AND THEIR DRIVING FORCES

                                           Betsey Stevenson
                                            Justin Wolfers

                                         Working Paper 12944
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12944


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2007




The authors would like to thank Leora Friedberg, Christopher Jencks, William Johnson, Lawrence
Katz, John Knowles, Robert Pollak, Timothy Taylor, and participants in Wharton's applied economics
seminar for useful comments. Adam Isen, Sam Proctor, Rachel Schwartz, and Hao Wang provided
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Betsey Stevenson and Justin Wolfers. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Marriage and Divorce: Changes and their Driving Forces
Betsey Stevenson and Justin Wolfers
NBER Working Paper No. 12944
March 2007
JEL No. D1,H31,I3,J1,K36,N3

                                              ABSTRACT

We document key facts about marriage and divorce, comparing trends through the past 150 years and
outcomes across demographic groups and countries. While divorce rates have risen over the past 150
years, they have been falling for the past quarter century. Marriage rates have also been falling, but
more strikingly, the importance of marriage at different points in the life cycle has changed, reflecting
rising age at first marriage, rising divorce followed by high remarriage rates, and a combination of
increased longevity with a declining age gap between husbands and wives. Cohabitation has also
become increasingly important, emerging as a widely used step on the path to marriage. Out-of-wedlock
fertility has also risen, consistent with declining "shotgun marriages". Compared with other countries,
marriage maintains a central role in American life. We present evidence on some of the driving forces
causing these changes in the marriage market: the rise of the birth control pill and women's control
over their own fertility; sharp changes in wage structure, including a rise in inequality and partial closing
of the gender wage gap; dramatic changes in home production technologies; and the emergence of
the internet as a new matching technology. We note that recent changes in family forms demand a
reassessment of theories of the family and argue that consumption complementarities may be an increasingly
important component of marriage. Finally, we discuss the welfare implications of these changes.

Betsey Stevenson
Assistant Professor of Economics
Business and Public Policy Department
Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Room 1454 Steinberg-Deitrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6372
betsey.stevenson@wharton.upenn.edu

Justin Wolfers
Assistant Professor of Economics
Business and Public Policy Department
Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Room 1456 Steinberg-Deitrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6372
and NBER
jwolfers@wharton.upenn.edu
       The family is not a static institution. In recent decades, marriage rates have fallen, divorce

rates have risen, and the defining characteristics of marriage have changed. The economic

approach to the family seeks to explain these trends by reference to models that can also explain

how and why families form. Gary Becker’s 1981 Treatise on the Family proposed a theory based

on “production complementarities”, in which husband and wife specialize in the market and

domestic spheres, respectively, and hence are more productive together than apart. Production

complementarities also arise in the production and rearing of one’s own children. However,

production complementarities—at least as initially described—are decreasingly central to modern

family life. Increased longevity and declining fertility mean that most of one’s adult life is spent

without one’s own children in the household, and the rise in marital formation at older ages,

including re-marriage, means that many families form with no intention of producing children.

Moreover, increases in female labor force participation suggest that household specialization has

either declined or taken on a different meaning.

       These changes have come about as what is produced in the home has been dramatically

altered both by the emergence of labor-saving technology in the home and by the development of

service industries that allow much of what was once provided by specialized homemakers to be

purchased in the market. The availability of birth control and abortion has affected the potential

consequences of sex both in and out of marriage, while changes in divorce laws have altered the

terms of the marital bargain. These forces also have important feedback effects, changing the pool

of marriageable singles across the age distribution, thereby affecting search, marriage, remarriage,

and the extent of “churning” in the marriage market.

       To remain relevant to the 21st century, the theory of the family will need to push beyond

the production of own children and traditional notions of specialization, and must seek to uncover

the forces that yield the modern family form. This may mean re-conceiving the notion of


                                                                                                       1
household production or, as we argue, extending models of the family beyond the notion of a

household-based firm, and toward emphasizing motivations such as consumption,

complementarities, and insurance as central to marriage. Furthermore, the theory of the family as

originally developed was a theory of household formation rather than a theory of legal marriage.

Couples have become increasingly likely to form households without entering into a marriage,

adding a new dimension for considering decisions surrounding family formation. This article lays

the groundwork for a reconsideration of the theory of the family, by describing the tremendous

changes in family forms, pointing to some of their driving forces, and suggesting ways of

expanding our thinking about the family to better understand its future.



Trends in Marriage and Divorce



       Figure 1 lays out some facts about marriage and divorce in the United States over the last

150 years: the divorce rate—measured as the number of new divorces each year, on a per capita

basis—has risen, while the marriage rate has fluctuated around a relatively stable mean. The

timing of these changes suggests that social and economic factors strongly influence the marriage

market. Marriage rates rose during, and in the wake of, the two World Wars and fell during the

Great Depression. The divorce rate fell during the Depression and spiked following World War II.

       Developments since the 1960s appear to reflect more subtle influences, and have been the

focus of heated political debate as the heyday of marriage gave way to rapid social change.

Divorce rates rose sharply, doubling between the mid-1960s and the mid-1970s. During this

period, family life was potentially altered by many factors: the rise of the women’s liberation

movement, the sexual revolution, the Supreme Court’s granting of marriage as a “fundamental”

right under the U.S. Constitution and thus the abolition of laws restricting marriage between races,


                                                                                                    2
the elimination in many states of fault-based divorce, and a sharp rise in women’s labor force

participation. Yet when viewed over the longer time period, we see that while the 1970s had

exceptionally high divorce rates, the low divorce rates in previous decades were also somewhat

exceptional. Fitting a simple trend line to the divorce rate between 1860 and 1945 (excluding the

post-World War II surge in divorce), as shown in Figure 1, suggests that some of the run-up in

divorce in the latter third of the 20th century reflects the divorce rate reverting to levels consistent

with earlier trends, following unusually low divorce in the 1950s and early 1960s. Indeed, based

on extrapolation, family scholars as early as the turn of the last century had predicted future

divorce rates like those actually witnessed in the 1980s (Coontz, 2005). While the 1970s overshot

the trend, the subsequent fall in divorce has put the divorce rate back on the trend-line and by 2005

the annual divorce rate projected by the pre-1946 trend is quite close to actual divorce rates.

       Figure 1 also points to a remarkable and often overlooked fact: the divorce rate per

thousand people actually peaked in 1981, and has been declining over the ensuing quarter century.

The divorce rate in 2005—3.6 divorces per thousand people—is at its lowest level since 1970.

The number of people entering marriage, as a proportion of the population, in the U.S. has also

been falling for the past 25 years, and the marriage rate is currently at its lowest point in recorded

history. Marriage rates rose as the divorce rate rose, but reached an earlier peak in 1972. Yet even

when measuring the number of divorces relative to the “at-risk population” (that is, those who are

currently married), we see a similar decline in the divorce rate over the last 25 years falling from a

peak of 22.8 divorces per 1,000 married couples in 1979 to 16.7 divorces in 2005. The sustained

decline in divorce over the past quarter century provides an ideal testing ground for assessing the

validity of alternative theories of why the divorce rate rose in the late 1960s and into the 1970s;

unfortunately, such tests are mostly absent from the existing literature.




                                                                                                           3
        Figure 2 analyzes data from marital histories to assess the fate of first marriages, grouping

them by the decade in which the wedding occurred. For those marriages that occurred in the

1950s through the 1970s, we know a lot about their eventual outcomes, and the figure clearly

shows that the probability of divorce before each anniversary rose for each successive marriage

cohort until the 1970s. For marriages that occurred in the 1970s, 48 percent had dissolved within

25 years, roughly confirming—for this specific cohort—the popular claim that “half of all

marriages end in divorce.”1 Yet for first marriages that occurred in the 1980s, the proportion that

had dissolved by each anniversary was consistently lower, and it is lower again for marriages that

occurred in the 1990s. While it will take several more decades for the long-term fate of recent

marriages to be realized, it appears likely that fewer than half of these recent marriages will

dissolve.

        Much of the concern over the high divorce rates in the 1970s stemmed from the impact of

divorce on children. Indeed, as divorce rose in the 1960s and 1970s so too did the number of

children involved in each divorce. In the 1950s, the average divorce involved 0.78 children; by

1968 that number had risen to 1.34. However, since 1968, the average number of children

involved in each divorce has fallen dramatically, and in 1995 the average was 0.91, only slightly

above the 1950 average. Similar patterns are evidence in data on the proportion of divorces that

involve any children. While the collection of detailed national divorce statistics ceased in 1995,

recent data from individual states suggest that the number of children involved in divorce has

continued to decline over the subsequent decade.


1
  There are many alternative sources for this claim. The simplest approach is to take the ratio of the number of
divorces to the number of marriages, which would correspond to the proportion of marriages ending in divorce if the
marriage market were in a steady state (an assumption that Figure 1 shows to be markedly false). “Life tables” offer a
somewhat more refined, but related approach, adding age-specific divorce rates to come up with the probability that a
marriage ends in divorce. This approach effectively simulates the likely course of a cohort were age-specific divorce
rates measured at a point in time to remain unchanged. Yet as Figure 2 makes clear, there are strong cohort-specific
influences on these rates, confounding such an inference.


                                                                                                                     4
       There exists substantial controversy—and uncertainty—about the impact of divorce on

children. While children from divorced households fare worse along a range of outcomes than

those from intact households, this observation does not speak to the policy-relevant question of

whether those children would have been better off if their parents had not divorced. The conflict

in these households may be such that children are actually better served by their parents divorcing.

Thus, comparisons of the “happily married” with the “unhappily divorced” are likely irrelevant for

those choosing between an unhappy marriage and an unhappy divorce. Moreover, the difficulty in

establishing a causal link between divorce decisions and children’s outcomes is compounded by

the possibility that the type of parents and households that end up divorced are likely different

from those who do not. These differences may themselves lead to worse outcomes for children

even if the parents were to remain married. Additionally, unobserved negative shocks to the

family may both lead to divorce and negative outcomes for children, further confounding attempts

at causal inference.

       With entry into marriage falling, but exit through divorce also falling, what has happened

to the proportion of the population living in a married relationship? Figure 3 shows the proportion

of the population currently married, by age, for every other decade, from 1880 to the present.

Four striking patterns emerge from this analysis. First, the proportion married at each age has

been surprisingly stable over more than a century; the pattern in 1980, for instance, is remarkably

similar to that in 1880. Second, consistent with our earlier analysis, the 1960s were unusual,

reflecting not only more marriage, but earlier marriage. Third, the data for 2000 suggest a very

different pattern, with marriage less prevalent among young adults, but more prevalent among

those at older ages. This trend toward rising age at first marriage represents both a return to, and a

departure from, earlier patterns. The return to earlier patterns is the later age at which men first

marry; in 1890, the median age at which men first married was 26, declining to 23 by the mid-


                                                                                                       5
1950s, and then returning to 27 in 2004. The departure is that the age gap between men and

women has declined through the past century, with the median age at which women first marry

rising from 22 in 1890 to 26 in 2004 (U.S. Census Bureau, 2005).

       This shrinking gap between the ages of husbands and wives helps explain the fourth

striking fact in Figure 3: those over 65 are now much more likely to be married than at any other

time in the past. In fact, those over 65 are now as likely to be married as are those aged 16 to 65.

The larger proportion of people married at older ages reflects greater life expectancy for both men

and women and a decreasing gap in the difference between men’s and women’s life expectancy.

Additionally, some of this increase in the proportion of those over 65 who are married stems from

an increase in the proportion marrying at older ages, with these later-age marriages potentially

being facilitated by a thicker remarriage market in recent decades that allowed greater remarriage

following either divorce or the death of a spouse.

       This changing age profile of marriage also points to the declining role of fertility and child-

rearing in married life. In 1880, 75% of married people lived in a household in which their own

children were present. That proportion has fallen steadily over the past 125 years, and by 2005

only 41% of married people had their own children present in their household. This dramatic shift

reflects the confluence of many factors, including declining fertility, increased longevity,

increasing rates of marriage at later, post-childbearing ages, rising non-marital births, and rising

divorce.




                                                                                                       6
The Marital Life Cycle



       Basic statistics on marriage and divorce rates, or age at first marriage, no longer paint a

complete picture of modern family life. Marriage is now likely to be preceded by cohabitation,

and in many cases may be succeeded by divorce, remarriage, and for some people further “churn”

may follow. Figure 4 illustrates, showing marital status through the life cycle for the 1940-

45 birth cohorts—the most recent group for which complete marital histories through to age 55 are

available.

       By age 30, six out of seven of these men and women had entered into a first marriage; one-

sixth of these marriages had already ended, and of these, one-half had subsequently remarried. By

age 45, only 7 percent remained never married and around one-third of first marriages had ended.

The share of the previously married population that had subsequently remarried remained around

one half. By age 55, all but 5 percent of this cohort had married at some point, and 53 percent of

the population remained in intact first marriages.

       Table 1 provides further detail on life cycle patterns both comparing the 1940-45 cohort

with the cohort born a decade later and exploring variation by demographic group in the more

recent cohort. In order to allow us to explore this younger cohort (those born in 1950-55), Table 1

assesses outcomes through to age 45. Thus, the first two columns compare the 1940-45 birth

cohort discussed in the previous paragraph with the subsequent cohort born between 1950 and

1955. These data suggest that by age 45 the more recent cohort was less likely to have married

and more likely to have divorced than the preceding cohort. Moreover, conditional on divorcing,

those in the more recent cohort exit their marriages faster and have slightly lower, but still high,

levels of remarrying within five years of divorce. Based on life patterns like these, Cherlin (1981)

described the increasingly typical life course as “marriage, divorce, remarriage.”


                                                                                                       7
       As Ellwood and Crane (1990) have noted in this journal (and as a huge literature in

sociology has discussed) there is a stark racial divide in family structure. This difference is

evident in Table 1. This racial divide is driven almost entirely by lower and slower entry into

marriage by blacks, rather than higher or more rapid divorce. By age 45, nearly one-in-four blacks

born between 1950 and 1955 had never married, while the equivalent statistic for whites was one-

in-ten. Yet, among those marrying, divorce rates for blacks and whites were similar, and blacks in

fact spent more time in their marriages before divorce than whites. As with first marriage, re-entry

into marriage among blacks was both rarer, and typically slower than that of whites.

       Figure 5 shows that for much of the first half of the twentieth century, blacks were in fact

more likely than whites to marry. In the 1940s and 1950s, the proportion of whites who were

married rose, closing and ultimately reversing the racial gap in marriage. The incidence of

marriage has subsequently declined for all groups, but most dramatically among blacks: 71 percent

of blacks born in 1945 had married by age 25, compared with 51 percent of those born in 1955.

       While the changing racial gap in the incidence of marriage largely reflects differences in

entry into marriage, not divorce rates, differences across education levels reflect an emerging

“divorce gap.” Table 1 highlights a 10 percentage point gap between college graduates and those

with less than a college education in the probability of a first marriage surviving to age 45, and the

higher divorce propensity among those without a college degree is too large to simply reflect their

earlier entry into marriage. Furthermore, conditional on divorcing, those without a college degree

are less likely to remarry, and if they do remarry, they are again more likely to divorce.

       Although the data in Table 1 show similar marriage rates across education levels, these

data hide interesting differences which become evident only when the data are further

disaggregated by gender. For men, those with a college degree are 3 percentage points more likely

to have married by age 45 than those without, while female college graduates are 3 percentage


                                                                                                      8
points less likely to have married. Yet, marriage rates for college-educated women have been

rising over time and—while still below those of their less-educated peers—are at an historic high.

In the late nineteenth century almost half of all college-educated women never married (Coontz,

2005). In the 1960 census, 29 percent of the college-educated women in their sixties had never

married. By contrast, four decades later, the equivalent proportion was only 8 percent. Indeed,

highly educated women are now as likely—and may eventually be more likely—to marry than less

educated women. The difficulty in comparing marriage rates across education groups is that

highly-educated women marry much later than do those with less education, so comparisons early

in the life span tend to show that those with less education are more likely to have married. Even

so, the 2004 American Community Survey suggests that college-educated women between the

ages of 35 and 40, were as likely to have ever married as those without a college degree and were

10 percentage points more likely to be currently married than their less educated peers.

       Table 1 shows that divorced women are less likely than divorced men to remarry—a fact

that has been pointed to by scholars concerned with women’s poverty following divorce. Once

again, this average masks big differences in remarriage rates by education (not shown in Table 1).

Among those without a college degree, divorced women are as likely as divorced men to remarry:

71 percent of both groups have remarried by age 45. In contrast, nearly three-quarters of college-

educated divorced men remarry, compared with two-thirds of college-educated divorced women.

Counter to the conventional wisdom that it is women with the least resources that are less likely to

remarry, it appears to be those best equipped to cope outside of marriage who are more likely to

eschew marriage the second time around.



Cohabitation




                                                                                                     9
       So far we have discussed patterns in formal marriage. Yet the decision to form a

household with another is increasingly becoming decoupled from the decision to marry. Indeed,

in recent decades, cohabitation has emerged as an important institution, as both a precursor to, and

sometimes a substitute to, marriage. This decoupling of domestic arrangements from the legal

(and social) status of relationships raises important new questions for economic analysis of the

family, as early models treated marriage and household formation almost identically. These labels

also have substantive economic content, determining the default allocation of property rights

following separation, tax treatment of the couple, and eligibility for both social programs and

employment-related family benefits. Growing social acceptance of non-marital relationships and

the changing legal institutions surrounding marriage, leads one to ask: what distinguishes marital

relationships from cohabiting relationships, and how has this distinction changed?

       However empirical analysis related to these questions is beset by a simple difficulty: until

recently, few available data collections contain information on non-marital cohabiting

relationships. The available data documenting the rise of cohabitation suggests that levels of

cohabitation were low prior to 1970 and that they have grown at a roughly constant rate since then,

with perhaps faster growth in the past decade. This assessment comes from three sources. First,

in 1995 the Current Population Survey started allowing people to identify themselves as an

“unmarried partner” of the householder (rather than just “partner/roommate”). These data suggest

that cohabitation rates among adults have risen from 2.9 percent in March 1995 to 4.7 percent in

March 2005. Second, a similar change was made for the Census, which recorded a 3.5 percent

cohabitation rate among adults in 1990 and 5 percent in 2000, one-in-nine of whom were same-sex




                                                                                                   10
couples (with roughly equal numbers involving male and female same-sex couples).2 Finally, for

earlier periods, Fitch et al. (2005) analyze Census data and calculate a proxy measure of

cohabitation, the number of persons of the opposite sex sharing living quarters (“POSSLQ”),

documenting that there was virtually no rise in cohabitation between 1880 and 1970, followed by

roughly constant growth in the years hence.

         The 2002 National Survey of Family Growth found that 50 percent of women aged 15 to

44 had cohabited at some point and 9 percent were currently cohabiting. In the United States,

cohabitation has thus far largely been a stepping stone toward marriage, with most people who

cohabit either ending their relationship or marrying within a few years. Among those currently

cohabiting, the vast majority expect their cohabitation to lead to marriage. Indeed, 34 percent

enter cohabitation having announced a plan to marry. Even among the remaining two-thirds who

enter cohabitation without being engaged, 36 percent were “almost certain” that they would marry

their current partner, and another 46 percent thought that there was either “a pretty good chance”

or “a 50-50 chance” of marrying their partner (National Survey of Fertility Growth, 2002).

Contrary to stereotypes, men and women express similar expectations about their likelihood of

marrying their cohabiting partners. Such beliefs regarding their future likelihood of marriage,

however, are not always warranted. Among those couples who were cohabiting in January 1997,

slightly more than half were no longer together 5 years later, and only a quarter had married.

         While most cohabitations do not end in marriage, most marriages are preceded by

cohabitation. Among those entering first marriages in the early 2000s, 59 percent had cohabited

with their future spouse prior to marriage. Pre-marital cohabitation with one’s future spouse is

even more common among those who have previously divorced, with 75 percent of those

2
  The 1990 Census cohabitation estimates need to be interpreted with some caution as the Census “corrected”
responses by same-sex couples, either recoding the gender of one partner, or their relationship status. For more on
this issue, see the paper by Black, Sanders, and Taylor in this volume.


                                                                                                                      11
remarrying in the early 2000s preceding their wedding with a period of cohabitation. (Moreover,

this differential is robust to controlling for the higher age of most remarriages.) This trend to pre-

marital household formation may also explain some of the rise in measured age at first marriage.

Cohabiting couples represent a bit more than half of all first marriages, and these couples typically

entered into domesticity about two years prior to marriage, thus high recent rates of premarital

cohabitation may explain up to a year of the rise in mean age at first marriage.

       While it might seem that cohabiting before marriage should reduce uncertainty about the

quality of a couple’s match, U.S. couples who cohabit before marriage have been historically more

likely to divorce than those who do not. This pattern may reflect differential selection into

cohabitation, as those who live together prior to marriage may be doing so because they are less

certain of the quality of their match, or because they stand to gain less from marriage (Lillard,

Brien, and Waite, 1995; Brien, Lillard, and Stern, 2006). In other words, those who choose to

cohabit may have been more likely to divorce even if they had not lived together first.

Cohabitation may also be responsible for some of the reduction in divorce rates witnessed over the

past 25 years as separations that previously occurred while legally married may now occur during

pre-marital cohabitation. The difficulty in making any of these attributions convincingly lies in

constructing a counterfactual: Would the cohabitating couple still have separated if they had

married earlier?

       Cohabitation is clearly evolving, and some couples are currently entering cohabitation as a

permanent or semi-permanent state. Among those cohabiting in 2002, a little over one-fifth had

been doing so for five years or more, indicating that some couples are treating cohabitation as a

more permanent state. While for some the decision to cohabit may reflect a lower commitment to

one’s partnership, for others this choice may reflect a lower value of the institutional structure of

marriage rather than a lower commitment. For instance, an increasing number of dual-career


                                                                                                        12
couples, combined with high marginal tax rates on secondary earners may face a “marriage

penalty”, while increasing social acceptance of cohabitation may have diminished social stigma.

Additionally, the incremental value of formal marriage in enforcing intertemporal commitments is

smaller when divorce laws allow one partner to unilaterally dissolve the relationship. Similarly,

pre-nuptial contracts have reduced the role of family law as an important default for allocating

property at divorce.

       It remains an open question as to whether cohabitation might evolve from the largely

transitional role it currently plays in the U.S. to being a viable alternative to marriage. Turning to

international comparisons, as we do in the next section, we see that cohabitation is poised to

become an important family form, in several comparable nations.




International Comparisons



       Family life varies widely across industrialized nations. Table 2 shows that Americans

marry, divorce, and remarry at rates higher than in most other countries with comparable income

levels. This greater “churning” in marriage is reminiscent of the cross-country labor market

literature, in which the United States is known for its greater labor market entry and exit.

       Marriage appears to be more central and cherished in the United States than in many other

countries. Italy is similar to the U.S. in many respects—both countries have low cohabitation

rates and few consider marriage to be an outdated institution, although the United States is by far

the greatest outlier in the low proportion agreeing with that sentiment. Yet a major difference

arises when examining divorce rates. In Italy divorce rates are extremely low and those who

divorce in Italy remain divorced (which accounts for why the proportion of the population


                                                                                                     13
“currently divorced” remains at levels similar to the United States). While Americans reveal their

willingness to exit bad marriages in their high rates of divorce, only 43 percent agree that “divorce

is usually the best solution when a couple can’t seem to work out their marriage options,”

compared with an overwhelming majority in every other country including Italy.

       Sweden provides a particularly stark counterpoint to the United States and Italy, and is an

interesting example of the “Nordic model” of the family. Swedish marriage rates are low and

cohabitation rates are high. Yet fertility—and particularly non-marital fertility—remains quite

high, consistent with an emerging social norm in Sweden that childbirth and formal marriage need

not be linked. Other high-income countries may be moving toward the Nordic model, albeit

slowly. For instance, France, Canada, and the United Kingdom have cohabitation rates similar to

Sweden and high rates of out-of-wedlock childbirth.

       Another point in which the United States seems exceptional is the relatively young age at

which women are giving birth. The age at which women have children has been rising in all the

countries, and in 2002, the average age at child birth was over 30 in Italy and Sweden, and 29 or

higher everywhere, save the United States where the average age was 27.

       Earlier, we documented the declining importance of children to married life—at least for

the United States, where today only a minority of married households include own children. The

data in Table 2 suggest that this may be even more evident in other industrialized nations, where

the trend toward out-of-wedlock childbirth is also paired with a greater proportion of women

marrying at older (post-fertility) ages. For instance, in the U.S., Canada, the U.K., France, and

Sweden, between a quarter and a third of marriages involved women at least 35 years old. In Italy

the proportion was only 15%, partially reflecting the country’s very low rate of remarriage.

Moreover, aggregate fertility—whether married or not—is currently quite low in many European




                                                                                                    14
nations, a fact that beyond portending changes in the family, points to a looming “demographic

crisis” in many countries.



The Driving Forces of Family Change



       The economic approach to the family seeks to explain how and why families form, and in

so doing, this approach highlights the potential forces that change family formation. Couples

marry, and stay married, when the gains from marriage exceed the gains from being single. These

gains come from production complementarities (such as household specialization and the raising

of one’s children), the benefits of risk pooling, and from consumption complementarities (such as

from the joint consumption of public goods and from shared leisure activities). Thus, reduced

market discrimination against women and technological advances that allow much of what was

once produced by skilled-labor in the home to be purchased or produced with little skill reduce the

benefits from specialization of spouses in the home and market spheres, thereby decreasing the

gains from marriage. Simultaneously, increasing leisure time and wealth along with the changing

landscape defining sexual relations potentially raises the gains from consumption

complementarities. These changes in tastes, technology, and the institutional or legal environment

have altered gains from marriage. With an eye to these drivers of family formation and

dissolution, we now review some of the fundamental changes in the purpose, function, and form

of family life over the past half century.



       The Technology of Birth Control

       The Economist (1999) cited the birth control pill as the invention that “defined the 20th

century.” In 1960, the first birth control pill was approved by the FDA and diffused rapidly to


                                                                                                   15
married woman; by 1965, 41 percent of married women under 30 who used contraceptives were

on “the pill” (Goldin and Katz, 2002). However, laws limiting the distribution to unmarried

women slowed broader diffusion of the pill until the early 1970s, when such laws were finally

overturned by the Supreme Court in Eisenstadt v. Baird. This ruling quickly facilitated

distribution of the pill to unmarried women and by 1976, three-quarters of ever-contracepting

single 18 and 19 year olds had used the pill (Goldin and Katz, 2002).

       The birth control pill was an important innovation in two respects: it was far more effective

than other forms of birth control and, unlike many other forms of contraception, the pill allowed

contraceptive decisions to be made privately by a woman, rather than jointly with her partner. In

the early 1970s, women also gained greater access to abortion through the legalization of abortion

by five states in 1970 and nationwide through the Supreme Court’s decision in Roe v. Wade (410

U.S. 113) three years later. Both the birth control pill and abortion decreased the probability of an

unwanted pregnancy. This improved control over fertility changed the timing of marriage and

births, and also facilitated the increase in women’s accumulation of human capital by reducing the

risk of disruption to women’s education or labor market plans.

       The pill also reduced the cost of waiting to marry, by allowing sex outside of marriage

with little fear of an unwanted pregnancy. The lower cost of delaying marriage led to longer

courtships, and courtship was also more informative (due to greater sexual contact). Thus, those

entering marriage did so with less uncertainty about their compatibility, thereby reducing the

number of bad matches. One effect of this change was to lower the probability of divorce; another

effect was to encourage others to wait longer to marry, as fears receded that those left unmarried

by their mid-twenties would confront an adversely-selected set of potential spouses. Examining

college-educated women, Goldin and Katz (2002) demonstrate that differential access to the pill

across states and cohorts robustly predicts subsequently higher age at first marriage, lower


                                                                                                     16
divorce, and lower marriage rates. They also demonstrate qualitatively similar, albeit smaller,

effects from the legalization of abortion.

       While greater access to birth control and abortion did reduce unplanned pregnancies, out-

of-wedlock births increased following these technological innovations. Akerlof, Yellen, and Katz

(1996) address this puzzle by arguing that women’s newfound control over pregnancy increased

pressure on them to engage in premarital sexual relations and reduced their ability to extract a

commitment to marry in the event of a pregnancy. Thus, those who did not adopt the pill, or who

suffered contraceptive failure, gained the option of choosing between abortion instead of

pregnancy, but if choosing pregnancy, typically lost the offer of a subsequent “shotgun marriage.”

Akerlof, Yellen, and Katz document a decline between the late 1960s and late 1980s in the

percentage of parents marrying when faced with an out-of-wedlock pregnancy and argue that—at

least in an accounting sense—this failure to marry subsequent to pregnancy explains much of the

growth in out-of-wedlock births seen over this period.

       While birth control has made sex safer in terms of an unwanted pregnancy, the emergence

of AIDS has made sex riskier. Specifically, AIDS changes the benefit of sex within a

monogamous relationship relative to that from casual sexual encounters, which may involve

greater health risks, or costs of prevention through safe sex practices. Differences in infection and

transmission rates across sub-groups also changes the costs of some pairings, and Francis (2006)

provides intriguing evidence that greater knowledge of the risk of AIDS reduces the probability of

men choosing same-sex partners, while increasing prevalence of same-sex partnerships among

women. Recent improvements in HIV treatments have substantially reduced AIDS-related

mortality and Lakdawalla, Sood, and Goldman (2006) provide evidence that access to these

treatments partly undoes some of these trends.




                                                                                                   17
       Household Technology

       The spread of indoor plumbing and electricity in the first half of the twentieth century,

along with the myriad of household appliances that diffused throughout the last century

(particularly in the 1950s and 1960s), led to vast increases in the productivity of housework.

Homemakers suddenly had freezers, washing machines, dryers, steam iron, and a lucky few,

dishwashers, at their disposal. Greenwood, Seshadri, and Yorukoglu (2005) document this rise in

household appliances over the last century and cite evidence that the time required to clean a load

of laundry fell from four hours using manual methods to only 41 minutes when aided by a 1940s

era electric washing machine and dryer. These breakthroughs in the invention of household

appliances heralded a new age of freedom for housewives, freeing them of the drudgery of

household production and turning them into “household managers” of an electric army.

       Electricity and household appliances are “labor-saving” in that one can now produce the

same bundle of home-produced goods in less time. While substitution effects may lead to some

increased consumption of home-produced goods, income effects from these time-saving advances

may also be important, increasing the household’s consumption of both home- and market-

produced goods. Greenwood, Seshadri, and Yorukoglu (2005) suggest that the time-saving effects

of these new technologies dominated, leading women to spend less time working in the home and

more time in the market, thereby increasing female labor force participation.

       Moreover, this technical change is unlikely to have been skill-neutral. Even basic tasks

like laundry take much less skill with a modern washer and dryer. (Anyone who has tried to do

laundry on a scrub board or rock knows that it is quite difficult!) In turn, this lower skill

requirement has reduced the returns to specialization in home production. Indeed, this skill-

substituting technical change parallels the decline in the field of home economics, the historically

female-dominated subject devoted to developing skills such as sewing and cooking.


                                                                                                   18
       Additionally, a growing service sector and increasing commoditization have created ready

market substitutes for products that were previously the exclusive domain of home producers.

Perhaps most significantly, technological improvements in the mass production of food led to the

increased availability of factory-prepared food. Cutler, Glaeser, and Shapiro (2003) credit these

innovations with the 50 percent reduction in food preparation and clean-up times for both working

and non-working women between 1965 and 1990.

       These changes in household technology have implications for family formation. If the

returns to specialization within a household fall, then the opportunity cost of remaining single

rather than marrying falls. Moreover, in a time when men were specialized in market production,

and household production required specialized labor inputs, it was not surprising that women with

specialized market skills had less to gain from marriage, and were therefore less likely to marry. It

is only as women have entered the labor market en masse that the education gap in marriage rates

among women has closed.

       Consider a further implication of these changes. Greenwood and Vandenbroucke (2005)

credit technological progress with reducing the workweek from 70 hours in 1830 to 41 hours in

2002, and Aguiar and Hurst (2007) document a rise in leisure over the past 40 years that

corresponds roughly to an additional 5-10 weeks of vacation per year. As the mix of household

activities has shifted, optimal matching in the marriage market has likely changed. Thus, one

might expect these changes to have made leisure and consumption complementarities more

important drivers of matching than the production complementarities emphasized by Becker

(1981). For instance, while Becker had predicted that those with high wage rates will tend to

marry those with lower wage rates (“negative assortative mating”) because the benefits from the

division of labor within a household can make the earning abilities of the man and the woman

substitutes, this argument loses force in two-career couples. Thus, as marriage comes to be built


                                                                                                    19
more around consumption complementarities we might expect it to increasingly involve the

pairing of those with similar income and interests (Lam, 1998).

       An alternative complementarity arises from thinking about households as insurance units.

While the increase in female labor force participation has reduced specialization in the home, it

may have increased the benefit from household risk-sharing. As such, we may see a different

form of negative assortative matching, as people seek spouses whose labor income risk is

negatively correlated with their own.



       Changes in Wage Structures

       A large literature in labor economics (surveyed in the Spring 1997 issue of this journal) has

documented increasing wage inequality since the 1970s. These changes reflect several factors,

including: skill-biased technical change, a declining real value of the minimum wage, and the de-

unionization of the American workforce. Gould and Paserman (2003) argue that this change

directly impacts marriage markets, raising the importance of “searching for Mr. Right.” That is,

rising wage inequality has increased the returns to further search and thus increased the option

value of remaining unmarried. Gould and Paserman test this effect of inequality on marriages

rates by examining the consequences of differences across cities in the rates at which inequality

grew through the 1970s and 1980s. They find that in cities in which wage inequality rose fastest,

the proportion of young women who were married fell quite dramatically. Indeed, their estimates

suggest that this rising wage inequality may account for up to one-third of the decline in the

marriage rate of 21 to 30 year old women.

       Another important change in the wage structure derives from the decline in the gender

wage gap. Blau and Kahn (2000) describe these changes as emanating from a decline in explicitly

sexist personnel policies (partly driven by the increasing reach of anti-discrimination law),


                                                                                                    20
increased labor market experience among women (and increased returns to this experience),

declining occupational segregation, and de-unionization. In the face of these trends, the

comparative advantage of wives in home rather than market production has declined, driving an

increasing share of men into home production, or reducing the value of specialization within

marriage.

       Beyond possibly reducing the attractiveness of marriage, the reduction in the wage gap

may have other, subtle effects. For instance, Becker, Landes, and Michael (1977) explain the

historically younger age at which women marry by noting that the specialized investments made

by women in home economics were much less useful to singles. Indeed, as women have come to

invest more in market skills, so too the age at which they choose to marry has drawn closer to

parity with men. Caucutt, Guner, and Knowles (2002) argue that rising returns to labor market

experience may also have important dynamic effects, raising the incentive for highly educated

women to delay the timing of fertility in favor of developing stronger prospects in both labor and

marriage markets.

       The difficulty in empirically assessing the effects of changes in labor markets on family

outcomes is that a strong reverse channel likely confounds any easy inference. For instance,

women who forecast later or more fragile marriages may choose to invest more in their careers,

leading to better labor force outcomes for women. As one example of such a dynamic, Johnson

and Skinner (1986) find that women who anticipate a future divorce are more likely to participate

in the labor market. Similarly, Stevenson (2006) finds that unilateral divorce laws led to an

increase in labor force participation for both married and unmarried women.




                                                                                                   21
        Changes in the Legal Structure of Marriage

        Governments set the parameters which define the family as a legal institution. These

parameters define who is to be granted marriages, divorces, and parental rights, and articulate

subsequent obligations. The law also provides a set of default property rights in case of separation

or death, and defines families for the purposes of taxation and government programs.

        In the U.S., the 1960s ushered in a wave of large-scale deregulation of the family.

Consequently, the role that the government plays in deciding both who can marry and divorce has

steadily diminished. In the 1950s some state legislatures began to repeal laws restricting marriage

between racial groups. These anti-miscegenation laws were eliminated nationwide in 1967 by the

Supreme Court ruling in Loving v. Virginia (388 U.S. 1).which argued that marriage was “one of

the ‘basic civil rights of man’” (in this issue, Fryer discusses patterns of interracial marriage over

time). This ruling set the stage for further deregulation of marriage, including providing a legal

challenge to state marriage bars for those deemed “unsuitable”, such as felons, the disabled, those

with a low IQ, and “dead-beat dads”.3

        Supreme Court rulings in the 1960s and 1970s also changed the nature of family

relationships by eliminating many of the legal distinctions stemming from the marital status of a

child’s parents. In 1968 the Supreme Court ruling in Levy v. Louisiana (391 U.S. 68) granted

equal protection under the Fourteenth Amendment to illegitimate children. Five years later, the

1973 ruling in Gomez v. Perez (409 U.S. 535) overturned state laws exempting men from

financial responsibility for illegitimate children. These rulings reduced both the social and




3
  In 1978 the US Supreme Court (Zablocki v. Redhail) invoked the Loving decision when holding that a Wisconsin
law requiring non-custodial parents to seek a court order (to prove that they were not behind in child support
payments) prior to receiving a marriage license was unconstitutional. Similarly, in 1987 Loving was cited in a
decision that overturned a regulation that prohibited inmates from marrying without the permission of the warden
(Turner v. Safley1987).


                                                                                                                   22
economic cost of bearing a child out-of-wedlock, and thus may help to explain the decline in

shotgun marriages. This remains an under-researched topic in need of further scrutiny.

       During this period, states also began to consider reducing their role in divorce proceedings.

In the 1950s, most states required evidence of marital fault before allowing a marriage to be

dissolved. Beginning in the late 1960s, many states introduced “irreconcilable differences” as

grounds for divorce; effectively ushering in a period of unilateral divorce—divorce upon the

request of either spouse, regardless of the wishes of his or her partner. In addition to the passage

of unilateral divorce laws during this period, many states removed fault as a consideration in

property division and some states changed laws governing property division subsequent to

divorce. Currently all but five states have some form of unilateral divorce and two-thirds allow

unrestricted unilateral divorce.

       These legal changes fundamentally alter the basis of the marriage contract. They remove

the ability to make intertemporal contracts within marriage—one spouse cannot promise not to

leave his or her spouse in the future. They shift the right to divorce (and hence bargaining power)

from the party most interested in preserving the marriage to the person who most wants out of the

marriage. While the old laws had allowed divorce only if there was sufficient evidence of fault,

many divorces involved couples where there was mutual consent to divorce. These couples used

private bargaining to determine uncontested (and often manufactured) claims of fault to present to

the courts. Thus, the fault-based system essentially allowed mutual consent divorce, but not

unilateral divorce.

       Becker, Landes, and Michael (1977) argued that the divorce rate would be unaffected by a

shift from consent to unilateral divorce laws. They argued that this shift simply represents the

reallocation of an existing property right from one spouse to the other—namely the right of

oneself or one’s spouse to remarry. Invoking the Coase theorem, they suggested that “the


                                                                                                       23
allocation of property rights or legal liability does not influence resource allocation when the

parties involved can bargain with each other at little cost.” Yet the assumptions required for

Coasian bargaining, including symmetric information, transferable utility, and the absence of

important transaction costs, may be unrealistic for the marginal divorce.

       Many empirical papers have investigated whether unilateral divorce laws have led to a rise

in the divorce rate with several reaching conflicting findings (Peters, 1986 and 1992, Allen 1992,

Friedberg 1998). Most recently, Wolfers (2006) tests these competing views by analyzing divorce

rates and divorce laws across U.S. states from 1956-1998. He finds that divorce rates rose sharply

in the two years following the adoption of unilateral divorce laws, as the courts catered to pent-up

demand for divorce. Subsequently, the divorce rate reverted back toward earlier levels, and a

decade after these reforms there is no discernable effect on the divorce rate. Despite apparent

conflict in this literature, it is worth emphasizing the point of substantial agreement: each of these

authors finds that liberalized divorce laws had at most a small effect on divorce rates, and these

reforms explain very little of the rise in divorce over the past half century.

       While Coasian bargaining predicts little change in divorce rates, it does predict changes in

intra-household distribution, as these changes affect each spouse’s options outside marriage, and

hence their bargaining position. Stevenson and Wolfers (2006) find that female suicide and

domestic violence fell in states that adopted unilateral divorce laws. They interpret these findings

as suggesting that unilateral divorce laws shift bargaining power to women. These laws may also

affect both the likelihood of marriage and intertemporal decision making within marriage. Rasul

(2006) finds that the reduced gains from marriage under unilateral divorce led to a decrease in

marriage rates. Research by Stevenson (2007) focuses on the difficulty in intertemporally

contracting when marriages can be unilaterally dissolved. Analyzing a sample of newlyweds (so

as to minimize selection due to changes in divorce), she finds that the adoption of unilateral


                                                                                                     24
divorce laws led to a decrease or delay in several forms of investment whose returns are at least

partly marriage-specific, including having children, household specialization, and the financial

support of a spouse’s education.



       Shocks to the Marriage Market Matching Function

       A key insight of “search” models of the labor market is that the ease with which workers

can locate relevant job openings determines equilibrium employment, unemployment duration,

and bargained wages. So too, in the marriage market, the ease with which potential partners can

meet and decide whether to date affects if, when, and to whom marriage occurs. Moreover,

changes in the marriage market “matching function” have effects beyond the dating phase, as an

important factor shaping behavior within marriage is the threat that a spouse may file for

divorce—a threat whose impact is shaped by an assessment of one’s likely chances on the

remarriage market.

       McKinnish (2006) provides intriguing evidence of a shock to matching: increasingly

sexually-integrated workplaces now create greater opportunities for men and women to meet.

Analyzing data from the 1990 census, she shows that working in an industry or occupation

comprised of a greater share of members of the opposite sex is more likely to lead a marriage to

end in divorce, a phenomenon she labels “another form of on-the-job search.” While she does not

analyze effects on marriage, these effects could plausibly go in either direction: the increased

likelihood (and speed) with which one meets an acceptable spouse could increase marriage, while

greater current, and future, exposure to potential mates raises the option value of remaining single.

A related shock to future marital patterns—and surely a useful focus for future research—comes

from sharply changing gender ratios on college campuses: Goldin, Katz and Kuziemko, 2006,




                                                                                                    25
report that while women were a distinct minority of undergraduates in 1960, they are now a clear

majority.

        The potential of the Internet to increase the efficiency of matching provides another

important shock. Indeed, it inspired a bold claim in Wired (Griscom, 2002): “Twenty years from

now, the idea that someone looking for love without looking for it online will be silly, akin to

skipping the card catalog to instead wander the stacks because ‘the right books are found only by

accident’... serendipity is the hallmark of inefficient markets, and the marketplace of love, like it

or not, is becoming more efficient.” Data from Forrester Research suggests that in 2004, 16

percent of singles are using online personals, and a September 2005 Internet Tracking Poll

suggests that 3 percent of internet users who are currently coupled first met online.4 Online search

differs from offline search in two important ways: it expands the set of potential partners and it

affords a degree of anonymity. Each of these characteristics shapes the contours of online dating.

For instance, Forrester data suggest that over one-third of those using online personals are

currently married.

        The Internet’s potential to change matching is perhaps greatest for those facing thin

markets or difficulty in meeting potential mates. Indeed, the Forrester data reveals that those who

perceive themselves as facing such markets are more likely to use online personals: blacks and

Asians are three times as likely as whites, those with physical disabilities are twice as likely as

those without, and gays are four times as likely as straights. Not surprisingly then, several large

dating sites exist to serve these niche matching markets, including various ethnic groups, gays,




4
 Forrester data are author’s calculations using Forrester’s 2004 Technographics Benchmark Survey (sample size:
55,000). The Internet Tracking Poll is done by the Pew Internet & American Life Project and Princeton Survey
Research Associates International, September 14-December 8, 2005.




                                                                                                                 26
lesbians, the elderly, farmers, persons living with specific disabilities, and those who are HIV-

positive.

       The larger mainstream dating sites also allow for narrowly-tailored searches, reversing the

typical temporal pattern of courtship from assessing attraction before suitability, to one in which

couples can ensure that they are appropriately matched on information about religion, fertility and

marriage aspirations, income or other important factors, before ever meeting. While this may hark

back to the days of parents selecting suitable mates for their children, these matches may be

importantly different in the characteristics desired for matching than those selected by parents or

other matchmakers. The targeted search offered by the Internet might lead one to forecast greater

endogamy (within-group matching). Hitsch, Hortaçsu, and Ariely (2006) examine the

characteristics of couples whose dates were arranged through an online dating service, and find,

however, that the correlations of characteristics such as age, height, weight, beauty, income, and

education were qualitatively similar to those observed among married couples. Yet even within

these groups, Internet search allows for the selection of mates with similar consumption and

leisure preferences (e.g. “must love dogs”).

       While the Internet may yet transform marriage markets, it is too early to assess whether

those matched on the Internet are better matched than they would have been without the Internet,

whether marriage rates will subsequently rise, and what impact this will have on divorce. The

tremendous amount of search being done online by those already married is potentially a harbinger

of rising divorce rates, yet this affect may be ameliorated by improved match quality in new

marriages.

       Finally, search and matching can have an important role in amplifying shocks to the

marriage market. For instance, Chiappori and Weiss (2000) note that if the divorce rate rises,

then—assuming undirected search—one might meet more divorcees in the course of a day. Thus,


                                                                                                      27
were one to divorce, the probability of remarrying is higher, making divorce a more attractive

option; this thick market externality creates a self-reinforcing rise in divorce.



Interpreting the Evidence



       Our analysis of the family has pointed to trends in family life and possible driving forces,

but we have provided little interpretation of the welfare implications of these trends. It is

commonly noted that , on average, divorced people are worse off—and married people better

off—financially, physically, and emotionally. These associations often lead to a belief that all

marital dissolution is welfare decreasing, and that all marriage is welfare increasing (for instance,

Waite and Gallagher, 2000). Yet, there is little hard evidence that preventing couples from

divorcing is welfare-enhancing. Instead, much of the public concern about divorce stems from a

belief that divorce causes people to be worse off, rather than that people who are worse off face a

greater risk of divorce. Furthermore, it is important to differentiate between the average

marriage—which is likely a happy one—and the marginal marriage that may be created or spared

by changes in the environment governing marriage, which may be quite different.

       Indeed, the economic theory of the family points precisely in this direction. Becker,

Landes, and Michael (1977, p. 1144) argue that “the majority of divorces results from uncertainty

and unfavorable outcomes.” Thus, we would expect to see those who suffer adverse shocks to be

more likely to both divorce and remain unmarried following a divorce, thereby contributing

disproportionately to the stock of the currently divorced. Empirical research has found evidence

for such a pattern: Charles and Stephens (2004) find that the divorce hazard rises following a

spouse’s layoff and they suggest that this increased probability of divorce stems from the




                                                                                                    28
information conveyed about the person’s suitability as a spouse, rather than stemming directly

from financial losses.

        The theory of the family also suggests that marriage is most likely to occur when the

potential gains from marriage are large. Individuals with high earning potential have more to gain

from domestic arrangements that allow them to specialize in market production; those with a “love

of fun” have more to gain from shared leisure and consumption; and those with good health have

more to gain due to the greater potential longevity of their marriage. Thus, we should expect that

the wealthy, healthy, and happy are more likely to marry. Indeed, even as surveys show that

married people are happier than those who are not married, our analysis of self-reported happiness

and marital histories in the British Household Panel Survey reveals that singles who are the

happiest are also the most likely to marry in the future. If we follow those who were single in

1996 through time, we find that those who married by 2004 experienced gains in happiness similar

to gains experienced by those who didn’t marry. Similarly, Gardner and Oswald (2006) find that

while people are less happy the year that they separate, a year after the divorce they are happier

than they were while married.

        Ultimately, purely observational studies cannot convincingly establish whether people are

better or worse off as a result of marriage or divorce. The problem is that a number of factors

linking wellbeing and marital status are unobservable to the researcher. One response is to seek

natural experiments that may lead to a sort of random variation across marital status. A small

number of quite promising studies have taken this tack and found quite surprising results. For

instance, an earlier literature had shown that the economic status of divorced women was lower

than that for married women, a fact that had led to concern that divorce impoverishes women

(rather than a concern that low income drives divorce). Bedard and Deschênes (2005) exploit the

fact that divorce is more likely to follow if the first child born is a girl than a boy to assess the


                                                                                                        29
effects of those “random” divorces caused by child gender. They find that divorced women have

higher household income and annual earnings than never-divorced women, a fact that is

attributable to divorced women working more intensively and the potential for divorced women to

join higher income households (such as their parents’). In another study, Dahl (2006) uses

variation in state laws restricting the minimum age of marriage to show that those who are

prevented from marrying while young are substantially less likely to end up living in poverty later

in their lives.

        Even while these studies seek to separate correlation from causation, they do not provide

directly welfare-relevant metrics. For instance, even if we isolate factors that create more or less

divorce, these insights would only yield insight to maximizing social welfare if coupled with an

understanding of whether we currently have an efficient number of divorces, too many, or too few.

To understand this point, consider an analogy to the labor market. The U.S. labor market, like its

marriage markets, differs from Europe in having substantially greater “churn”; in any given month

in the U.S., workers are more likely to be fired, and those without a match are more likely to be

hired, than are their European counterparts. There is an emerging consensus that restrictions on

churning in European labor markets yields inefficient labor markets, with “too few” job

separations. We do not mean to infer by analogy that Europe is afflicted with too few divorces.

Rather, we highlight this parallel because it makes the case that a combination of empirical work,

attention to causal inference, and general equilibrium theorizing are required to assess implications

for aggregate well-being changes in marriage markets. With the economics of the family now

celebrating the 25th birthday of its foundational text (Becker, 1981) we are confident that the next

25 years will provide progress toward this goal.




                                                                                                       30
References

Akerlof, George, Janet Yellen, and Michael, Katz (1996) “An Analysis of Out-of-Wedlock
Childbearing in the United States” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111 (2): 277-317.

Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst (2007) “Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation of Time over Five
Decades” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3), forthcoming.

Allen, Douglas W. (1992) “Marriage and Divorce: Comment”, American Economic Review, 82(3).

Becker, Gary S. (1981) A Treatise on the Family, Harvard University Press: Cambridge.

Becker, Gary S., Elizabeth M. Landes, and Robert T. Michael (1977) “An Economic Analysis of
Marital Instability” Journal of Political Economy, 85 (6): 1141-87.

Bedard, Kelly and Olivier Deschenes (2005) “Sex Preferences, Marital Dissolution, and the Economic
Status of Women” Journal of Human Resources, 40 (2): 411-434.

Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn (2000) “Gender Differences in Pay”, Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 14 (4): 75-99.

Caucutt, Elizabeth, Nezih Guner, and John Knowles (2002) “Why Do Women Wait? Matching, Wage,
Inequality, and the Incentives for Fertility Delay” Review of Economic Dynamics, 5 (4): 815-855.

Charles, Kerwin and Melvin Stephens (2004) "Disability, Job Displacement and Divorce", Journal of
Labor Economics, 22 (2): 489-523.

Cherlin, Andrew (1981) Marriage, Divorce, Remarriage, Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA.

Chiappori, P. A. and Y. Weiss. (2000). “Marriage Contracts and Divorce: An Equilibrium Analysis,”
mimeo, University of Chicago. http://home.uchicago.edu/~pchiappo/wp/divrevsh.pdf

Coontz, Stephanie (2005) Marriage, a History: From Obedience to Intimacy, or How Love Conquered
Marriage, New York: Viking.

Cutler, David, Edward Glaeser, and Jesse Shapiro (2003) “Why Have Americans Become More Obese”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17 (3): 93-118.

Dahl, Gordon (200) “Myopic Matrimony and Dropout Decisions? Evidence Using State Laws for
Marriage, Schooling and Work”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper # 11328,
Cambridge, MA.


The Economist (1999) “Millennium Issue: Oral Contraceptives The Liberator” The Economist
Newspaper Dec. 23.

Ellwood, David T. and Jonathan Crane (1990) “Family Change Among Black Americans: What Do We
Know?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 4 (4): 65-84


                                                                                    References – 1
Eurostat (2005) Eurostat Yearbook: The Statistical Guide to Europe, Luxembourg: Office for Official
Publications of the European Union.

Fitch, Catherin, Ron Goeken and Steven Ruggles (2005), “The Rise of Cohabitation in the United
States: New Historical Estimates”, mimeo, University of Minnesota.
http://www.hist.umn.edu/~ruggles/cohab-revised2.pdf

Francis, Andrew M. (2006), “The Economics of Sexuality: The Effect of HIV/AIDS on Homosexual
Behavior, Desire, and Identity in the United States”, mimeo, Emory University.
http://userwww.service.emory.edu/~afranc5/Economics_of_Sexuality.pdf

Friedberg, Leora (1998) “Did Unilateral Divorce Raise Divorce Rates? Evidence From Panel Data”,
American Economic Review, 83(3): 608-627.

Gardner, Jonathan and Andrew Oswald (2006) “Do Divorcing Couples Become Happier By Breaking
Up?”, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series A, 169 (2): 319-336.

Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz (2002) “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and Women’s
Career and Marriage Decisions”, Journal of Political Economy, 110 (4): 730-70.

Gould, Eric and Daniele Paserman (2003) “Waiting for Mr. Right: rising inequality and declining
marriage rates” Journal of Urban Economics, 53 (2): 257-281.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Seshadri, and Mehmet Yorukogu (2005) “Engines of Liberation” Review
of Economic Studies, 72 (1): 109-133.

Greenwood, Jeremy and Guillaume Vandenbroucke (2005) “Hours Worked: Long-run Trends”,
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #11629, Cambridge, MA.

Griscom, Rufus (2002) “Why Are Online Personals So Hot?”, Wired, Issue 10.11.
http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/10.11/view.html?pg=2

Carter, Susan B., Scott Sigmund Gartner, Michael R. Haines, Alan L. Olmstead, Richard Sutch, and
Gavin Wright. (eds) (2006) Historical Statistics of the United States, Earliest Times to the Present:
Millennial Edition, Cambridge University Press: New York.


Hitsch, Guenter, Ali Hortaçsu and Dan Ariely (2006) “What Makes You Click? Mate Preferences and
Matching Outcomes in Online Dating”, mimeo, University of Chicago.
http://home.uchicago.edu/~ghitsch/Hitsch-Research/Guenter%20Hitsch_files/Online-Dating.pdf

Jacobson, Paul H. (1959) American Marriage and Divorce, Rinehart and Company, Inc.: New York.

Johnson, William H. and Jonathan Skinner (1986) “Labor Supply and Marital Separation”, American
Economic Review, 76 (3): 455-69.

Lakdawalla, Darius, Neeraj Sood and Dana Goldman (2006) “HIV Breakthroughs and Risky Sexual
Behavior”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121 (3): 1063-1102.


                                                                                        References – 2
Lam, David (1988) “Marriage Markets and Assortative Mating with Household Public Goods:
Theoretical Results and Empirical Implications”, Journal of Human Resources, 23 (4): 462-87.

Michael J. Brien, Lee A. Lillard and Steven Stern (2006) “Cohabitation, Marriage, and Divorce in a
Model of Match Quality”, International Economic Review, 47(2): 451-494.

Lillard, Lee A., Michael J. Brien, and Linda J.Waite (1995) “Pre-Marital Cohabitation and Subsequent
Marital Dissolution: A Matter of Self-Selection?” Demography. 32 (3): 437-458.

McKinnish, Terra (2006) “Sexually-Integrated Workplaces and Divorce: Another Form of On-the-Job
Search” Journal of Human Resources, forthcoming.

Peters, H. Elizabeth (1986) “Marriage and Divorce: Informational Constraints and Private Contracting”,
American Economic Review, 76 (3): 437-54.

Peters, H. Elizabeth (1992) “Marriage and Divorce: Reply”, American Economic Review, 82(3): 686-
693.

Rasul, Imran (2006) “The Impact of Divorce Laws on Marriage”, mimeo, University College, London.

Statistics Canada (2004) “The Canada Year Book”, online edition available at: www.statcan.ca.

Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers (2006) “Bargaining in the Shadow of the Law: Divorce Laws and
Family Distress”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121 (1): 267-288.

Stevenson, Betsey (2006) “Divorce-Law Changes, Household Bargaining, and Married Women’s Labor
Supply Revisited”, mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.

Stevenson, Betsey (2007) “The Impact of Divorce Laws on Investment in Marriage-Specific Capital”,
Journal of Labor Economics, 25 (1): 75-94

U.S. Census Bureau (2005) Current Population Survey, March and Annual Social and Economic
Supplements, 2005 and earlier. http://www.census.gov/population/socdemo/hh-fam/ms2.pdf

U.S. Census Bureau (2007) Statistical Abstract of the United States, Washington, DC.

Waite, Linda J. and Maggie Gallagher (2000) The Case for Marriage, New York: Random House.

Wolfers, Justin (2006) “Did Unilateral Divorce Raise Divorce Rates? A Reconciliation and New
Results”, American Economic Review, 96(5) 1802-1820.




                                                                                       References – 3
                                Figure 1: Marriage and Divorces per Thousand People 1860-2005


                                          Marriage and Divorce in the United States
                           25
                                          Marriage Rate: New marriages per thousand people
                                          Divorce Rate: New divorces per thousand people
                                          Divorces per thousand married couples
                           20
                                          Extrapolating 1860-1945 trend in divorce
            Annual rates




                           15



                           10



                           5



                           0
                                1860    1880     1900      1920      1940         1960        1980        2000
                                                                  Year


Sources: For the United States, data for 1860-1919 are from Jacobson (1959); 1920-1998 from Carter et. al. (2006),
Historical Statistics of the United States, Millenium Edition; 1999-2005 from Statistical Abstract of the United States.




                                                                                                             Figures – 1
                                                                                Figure 2


                                                    First Marriages Ending in Divorce, by Year of Marriage
                                               .6
Conditional on being married but not widowed
  Proportion of marriages ending in divorce




                                               .5
                                                                                                                                      1970-79

                                               .4                                                               1980-89               1960-69

                                               .3

                                                                            1990-99                                                   1950-59
                                               .2


                                               .1


                                               0
                                                    0        5               10           15                     20                25
                                                                              Years since Wedding

                                  Source: Retrospective marital histories recorded in the 2001 Survey of Income and Program Participation.




                                                                                                                                  Figures – 2
                                                              Figure 3: Percent Married by Age 1880-2004


                                                                    Marriage Rates by Age: 1880-2000
                                               1
  Proportion of population currently married


                                               .8



                                               .6



                                               .4



                                               .2
                                                                                        1880          1900             1920
                                                                                        1940          1960             1980
                                                                                        2000
                                               0
                                                    15   20    25   30   35   40   45    50 55   60   65     70   75   80   85
                                                                                         Age

Source: U.S. Censuses of Population, 1880-2000.




                                                                                                                              Figures – 3
                                                                           Figure 4



                                                   Marital Status Through the Life Cycle
                                                                    Cohort born 1940-1945
                              1                                                                            Prev. married (>twice)
                                                                                                       Third (or higher) marriage
                                                                                                       Prev. married (twice)
                                                                                            Remarried (2nd marriage)
                              .8
Marital Status: % of cohort




                                                                                      Previously married (once)

                              .6


                              .4                                1st marriage


                              .2
                                          Never married
                              0
                                   15         20          25          30        35     40         45          50               55
                                                                                Age
                                   Source: SIPP 2001 Marital History module.




                                                                                                                    Figures – 4
                                                                                          Figure 5


                                                                Racial Differences in Marital Outcomes
                                                             Current Marital Status                        Ever Married or Divorced
                                                 100
                                                                      Whites
                                                                      African-Americans
                                                                                                                          % Ever married
    Proportion of the population aged 18-45, %




                                                 80
                                                                % Currently
                                                                 married


                                                 60




                                                 40




                                                 20
                                                                                                                               % Ever divorced *

                                                                 % Currently divorced
                                                   0
                                                       1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000       1880     1900      1920      1940      1960      1980      2000

                                                                                                 * %Ever divorced measures currently divorced, or remarried.



Sources: Census 1880-2000; American Community Survey 2004; Ever-divorced from 1910, 1940-1980 census,

supplemented by 1990, 1995 CPS and 2001 SIPP marital history supplements.




                                                                                                                                                               Figures – 5
      Table 1

      Marital Life Cycle: Outcomes by Age 45 Across Cohorts, Time, Education and Race

                                                Born         Born 1950-55
                                               1940-45
                                                  By Cohort            By Gender               By Race             By Education
                                                  All      All         Men   Women           Black   White       College <College
                                                                                                                  grads
%Ever married                                  93.1%      89.5%       88.2%      90.7%      77.6%     91.0% 89.5%        89.5%

Among those ever married:
Average Age at First Marriage                  22.6       23.6        24.7       22.6       24.7      23.3  24.9         22.8
%Still in first marriage                       64.5%      56.6%       59.1%      54.3%      52.7%     56.1% 63.3%        52.6%
% of first marriages ending in divorce         32.7%      40.8%       39.4%      42.0%      42.9%     41.5% 34.8%        44.3%

Among those who divorced
Average duration of marriage (yrs)             10.3       9.0         8.7        9.3        9.7       8.9   9.0          9.1
%Remarrying                                    70.5%      68.9%       71.3%      66.8%      56.8%     70.6% 67.8%        69.4%

Among those remarrying after divorce
Average time to remarriage (yrs)               3.9        4.2         3.9        4.5        4.7       4.2   4.2          4.2
%Still in 2nd marriage                         70.7%      62.5%       64.1%      61.0%      58.6%     63.0% 70.2%        59.0%
% of 2nd marriages ending in divorce           26.5%      35.7%       35.3%      36.2%      36.1%     35.7% 28.7%        39.0%

Among those whose 2nd marriage ends in divorce
Average duration of 2nd marriage (yrs)    6.7             6.0         6.1        5.9        6.4       6.0   5.7          6.1
%Remarrying                               49.2%           53.0%       55.8%      50.5%      49.1%     54.1% 49.9%        54.1%
      Source: Authors calculations based on retrospective marital histories collected in the 2001 Survey of Income and
      Program Participation.




                                                               1                                          Tables – 1
        Table 2

        International Comparisons

        (latest statistics, typically around 2003)

                                                 U.S.        Canada UK       France Germany Italy         Sweden
Marriage
Annual marriages per thousand people             7.4         4.7     5.1     4.3      4.8        4.3      4.8
Annual marriages per thousand unmarried          18.1        13.0    11.4    9.4      12.1       10.8     8.8
adults
% of adult population currently married          59.6% 62.9%         55.1% 54.3% 60.4%           60.0% 45.2%
% of adult population ever married               76.9% 75.5%         72.0% 69.5% 75.9%           72.8% 64.3%
Remarriage (% of marriages in which the          28.4% --            28.9% 17.6% 28.3%           6.3% 23.7%
bride was previously married)
% of 2002 marriages in which the bride was       31%         28%     30%     28%      -          15%      33%
35 years old or over

Divorce
Annual divorces per thousand people              3.6         2.2     2.8     2.1      2.6        0.8      2.2
Annual divorces per thousand married             8.5         4.6     6.9     5.1      5.7        1.3      6.8
people
% of adult population currently divorced         10.2% 4.9%          8.3%    6.7%     6.3%       9.6%     11.3%

Cohabitation
% of adult population in non-marital             4.7%        10.7%   11.6% 10.8% 7.1%            3.9%     11.7%
cohabitation

Fertility
Annual births per thousand people                14.0        10.4    11.7    12.7     8.6        9.5      11.1
Completed fertility: 1961 birth cohort           1.96         --     1.95    2.10     1.63       1.63     2.03
Mean age at childbirth                           27.3        29.0    28.8    29.5     29.1       30.3     30.3
Non-marital births (% of all births)             34.6%       36.2%   42.3%   45.2%    28.0%      14.9%    55.4%

Attitudes: % Agree that…
Marriage is an out-dated institution         10.1% 22.3%             25.9% 36.3% 18.4%           17.0% 20.4%
People who want children ought to get        65.3% 48.9%             52.4% 41.2% 52.9%           60.9% 31.0%
married
Divorce is usually the best solution when a 43.0% 78.0%              61.1% 61.0% 74.8%           65.0% 54.6%
couple can't seem to work out their marriage
problems
Sources: Eurostat yearbook; Statistical Abstract of the United States; Canada Yearbook; International Social Survey
Programme, 1994 & 2002; World Values Survey; 2002 Eurobarometer, 2002.




                                                         2                                          Tables – 2
