                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE INFLUENCE OF ACTUAL AND UNREQUITED INTERVENTIONS

                                     Kathryn M.E. Dominguez
                                         Freyan Panthaki

                                       Working Paper 12953
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12953


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2007




We are grateful to two anonymous referees, Francis Breedon, Takatoshi Ito, Christopher Neely, Andrew
Patton, Mark Taylor, Ian Tonks, Paolo Vitale, as well as seminar participants at Oxford University
and the "Exchange Rate Intervention: Theory and Experience" conference in Cambridge, England,
for useful comments and suggestions. We thank FMG at LSE for providing the Reuters D2000-2 data,
and Ryan Love and Jinhui Luo for sharing their mastery of the data with us. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2007 by Kathryn M.E. Dominguez and Freyan Panthaki. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Influence of Actual and Unrequited Interventions
Kathryn M.E. Dominguez and Freyan Panthaki
NBER Working Paper No. 12953
March 2007
JEL No. F3,F31,G14,G15

                                            ABSTRACT

Intervention operations are used by governments to manage their exchange rates but officials rarely
confirm their presence in the market, leading inevitably to erroneous reports in the financial press.
There are also reports of what we term, unrequited interventions, interventions that the market expects
but do not materialize. In this paper we examine the effects of various types of intervention news on
intra-day exchange rate behavior. We find that unrequited interventions have a statistically significant
influence on returns, volatility and order flow, suggesting that the expectation of intervention, even
when governments do not intervene, can affect currency values.

Kathryn M.E. Dominguez
University of Michigan
Weill Hall
735 S. State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1224
and NBER
kathrynd@umich.edu

Freyan Panthaki
Financial Markets Group
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
freyanp@hotmail.com
    1. Introduction

         This paper examines intra-day foreign exchange market reactions to news of
actual and unrequited interventions reported in the financial press. Intervention
operations are used by many governments to manage their exchange rates. Research has
found that these operations can, under certain circumstances, effectively influence the
level and volatility of exchange rates. 1 One of the more puzzling aspects of intervention
policy is the fact that some governments keep their intervention operations secret, even
ex post. 2 The financial press often reports when a central bank is intervening over the
wire services, though governments rarely officially confirm their presence in the market.
Because there is often uncertainty in the market about whether a given government is
intervening, there are inevitably circumstances when the financial press reports
interventions that have not occurred. There are also frequently reports of what we term,
unrequited interventions, interventions that the market expects but do not materialize. In
this paper we examine the effects of various types of intervention news (reported actual
interventions, falsely reported interventions, oral interventions and unrequited
interventions) on exchange rate behavior.



1
  A number of recent papers have examined the influence of intervention operations on daily exchange rate
returns and volatility and generally find evidence that interventions influence returns and increase
volatility. Dominguez and Frankel (1993a,b), Dominguez (2003b), Humpage (1999), Fatum and Hutchison
(2003, 2006), De Grauwe and Grimaldi (2003), and Ito (2003) find that interventions influence daily
returns. Bonser-Neal and Tanner (1996), Dominguez (1998), Galati et al. (2005), and Frenkel et al. (2005)
find that interventions lead to increases in implied volatilities measured using options data. Chaboud and
LeBaron (2001) find a positive correlation between daily (futures) trading volume and Fed interventions.
Dominguez (1998) using a GARCH model, Beine et al. (2002) using a FIGARCH model, and Beine and
Laurent (2003) using a model that allows for a time-varying jump probability associated with interventions,
all find evidence that interventions tend to increase exchange rate volatility. Dominguez (2006) and Beine
et al. (2003b) examine the effects of G3 interventions on daily realized volatility using an ARFIMA model.
A few papers find evidence that situation-specific interventions lead to decreases in volatility. For
example, Beine et al. (2003a) allow for a regime-dependent specification using a Markov switching model
and find that when the market is highly volatile concerted interventions decrease volatility. Dominguez
(1998) and Taylor (2004) find that interventions in the mid-1980s reduced exchange rate volatility.
2
  Dominguez and Frankel (1993b) discuss the possible reasons that central banks might want to keep their
intervention operations secret (the so-called stealth operations). Neely (2000) notes that central banks are
moving increasingly toward electronic trading methods, which suggests that they are less interested in keeping
operations secret. On this topic also see: Vitale (1999), Bhattacharya and Weller (1997), Chiu (2003), Beine
et al. (2004) and Beine and Bernal (forthcoming). Although the Japanese government generally does not
provide contemporaneous information about their intervention operations, the Ministry of Finance
publishes lagged daily intervention data (lagged one month) on their website:
http://www.mof.go.jp/english/e1c021.htm.


                                                      1
        A number of previous studies have shown that in order to find significant
reactions in the foreign exchange market to the news, one needs to measure the precise
impact of the news at the intra-day level. 3 Using Reuters’ time-stamped newswire
reports we are able to match the timing of intervention news to movements in intra-day
exchange rates. We also include scheduled macro announcement news reports which
have been used in previous studies to allow us to compare the effects of intervention
news against these more “traditional” variables.
        The intra-day foreign exchange data used in this study are transactions prices and
quote spreads in three dollar currency markets: usd-gbp, usd-eur and yen-usd available
from the Reuters D2000-2 electronic trading system over the period from December 1999
through July 2000. The data do not include information on traded quantities, but they do
indicate whether trades were initiated by a buyer or seller, allowing us to measure order
flow as well as returns and volatility. We use a 20 minute sampling frequency and
measure order flow as the cumulative number of buyer initiated trades minus the
cumulative number of seller initiated trades over the same 20 minutes.
        The intra-day intervention news and exchange rate data allow us to test whether
interventions have similar impact effects on returns and volatility as compared to (the
already heavily studied) scheduled macro announcements. The fact that information
regarding interventions most often comes from unofficial sources suggests that there are
likely to be differences of opinion among market participants about the implications of
the information. In our application, we can distinguish between scheduled (and
presumably better-understood) macro announcements and more ambiguous intervention
news. We also measure what proportion of the price discovery process in reaction to
intervention news occurs via order flow. Previous studies have found evidence that a
substantial proportion of the market reaction to macro-announcements occurs via order
flow. By examining how intervention news events influence order flow – we can begin
to better understand how this measure relates to price and volatility movements in the
foreign exchange markets.



3
 See Dominguez and Panthaki (2006) for a more detailed discussion of the intra-day influence of news on
exchange rates.


                                                   2
         The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the links between
intervention operations and exchange rates in standard models. Section 3 describes the
exchange rate and order flow data from Reuters D2000-2 used in our empirical analysis.
Section 4 provides results of our event study analysis of the influence of intervention
news and macro surprises on exchange rate returns and volatility. Section 5 introduces
our order flow information and examines its role in explaining exchange rate movements.
Section 6 concludes.


    2. Intervention News and Exchange Rates
         Theory suggests that foreign exchange market interventions that are sterilized 4
may influence exchange rates through two potential channels: portfolio balance and
“information/signaling”. In portfolio-balance models of exchange rate determination
investors diversify their holdings among domestic and foreign assets as a function of
expected returns and the variance of returns. Foreign and domestic assets are assumed to
be outside assets (so that Ricardian equivalence does not hold) and imperfect substitutes
(so that uncovered interest parity does not hold). Portfolio balance theory predicts that the
change in the relative supply of foreign and domestic assets that occurs with a sterilized
intervention will require a change in expected relative returns. For example, after a
sterilized home-currency supporting intervention, investors will require a higher expected
return on foreign assets to hold willingly the larger outstanding stock, leading to a
depreciation of the foreign currency relative to the home currency. In the portfolio
balance model, traders do not need to observe the intervention operation in order for it to
be effective. However, only actual intervention operations, which change the
composition of domestic relative to foreign assets in trader’s portfolios, can influence
exchange rates via this channel. Consequently, unrequited interventions (as well as false




4
  Sterilized interventions are a combination of two transactions. The central bank conducts a non-sterilized
intervention, for example, by purchasing (or selling) foreign-currency denominated bonds and increasing
(decreasing) the home monetary base. The central bank then sterilizes the operation by selling (or
purchasing) a corresponding quantity of home-currency denominated bonds in order to reverse the effects
on the monetary base. Countries that adhere to monetary or inflation targets are generally assumed to
engage chiefly in sterilized intervention operations. In practice the U.S. and the ECB claim to routinely
sterilize their operations.


                                                     3
reports of interventions and oral interventions) should have no influence on exchange
rates via the portfolio balance channel.
         The second channel whereby intervention operations may influence exchange
rates is the information or signaling channel. Intervention operations may provide
investors with “information” about the Central Bank’s (or Government’s) view of the
appropriate exchange rate. 5 Intervention operations may also provide a “signal” of future
policy intentions (for example, future monetary policy). Moreover, the intervention
operation may itself “buy credibility” for future policy intentions. As long as the
information signaled through intervention policy is relevant and credible, it can
potentially influence the exchange rate. 6 Only those intervention operations that are
observed by the market can serve to influence exchange rates via the signaling channel so
that non-reported or secret interventions (if they are truly secret) are unlikely to serve as
signals.
         When traders first learn of an intervention operation over the newswires, they
may not know whether the information is substantiated or not. It is therefore possible for
all intervention news (whether actual, false or unrequited) to have a short-term impact on
exchange rates via the signaling channel. 7 As soon as traders learn that intervention news
is false or unrequited then we might expect returns and volatility to revert to their original
levels. Alternatively, it may be that in periods when interventions are expected (even if
they do not occur) that unrequited interventions reported over the newswires serve to
coordinate the markets’ view of exchange rate movements. 8



5
  It is also possible for governments to communicate this information directly to the market. See, for
example, Fratzcher (2004), Jansen and DeHaan (2005) and Sager and Taylor (2004).
6
  See Mussa (1981), Dominguez (1992), Vitale (2003), Sarno and Taylor (2001), D’Souza (2002) and
Taylor (2005) for further discussion of the intervention-signaling hypothesis.
7
  Naranjo and Nimalendran (2000) hypothesize that interventions create significant adverse selection
problems for dealers. They find evidence in daily data that dealers increase exchange rate spreads around
interventions and suggest that in doing so they protect themselves against the greater informational asymmetry
around interventions.
8
  Montgomery and Popper (2001) suggest that actual central bank intervention may also serve to aggregate
and disseminate traders’ information and thereby serve an informational sharing role for a heterogeneously
informed market




                                                      4
        We use time-stamped Reuters’s newswire reports 9 to measure intervention news.
Our search criteria retrieved newswire articles under the joint subject area of “foreign
exchange” and “intervention”. We then coded and grouped 10 news articles according to
geographic region (Euro-zone, U.K., U.S. or Japan) and type of intervention news. Table
1 provides a breakdown of the intervention news categories that appeared in newswire
reports over the period under study. In the table we distinguish between cases where there
was a ‘threat’ or ‘no threat’ of intervention from the policymaker. Further distinctions
were made between interventions that were ‘reported’ or ‘not reported’ in the news
(panel a), and interventions that were ‘expected’ or ‘not expected’ by the market (panel
b).
        There were 172 newswire reports that we classified as ‘threats’; these included
reports of interventions, threats of intervention, and statements that were intended to
influence the home currency (sub-classified as oral interventions). Examples of this
category of intervention news include:
        “The beleaguered euro got a boost overnight when French Finance Minister
        Laurent Fabius reminded markets that currency market intervention was a weapon
        in Europe's arsenal and the currency should rise in the coming weeks” (May 9,
        2000).
         “Japanese Finance Minister Kiichi Miyazawa said Japan would act in response to
        rapid moves in the foreign exchange market” (March 14, 2000).

There were 48 newswire reports that we classified as ‘No Threat’ interventions, defined
as news that a central bank did not intend to intervene; examples include:
        ”ECB President Wim Duisenberg says the ECB could not and should not do
        anything directly to influence the euro's exchange rate but said he would not
        fundamentally rule out intervention. Asked whether there was a floor set at which
        the ECB would defend the euro at all costs, Duisenberg said, ‘If there were such a
        limit, I wouldn't tell you. But there isn't one. But we know how limited the effect

9
  These data are from the Factiva database and, unfortunately, do not include the headline news that run
over the Reuters ticker second by second, but they include the major economic news events that occur over
a given day. Chang (2006) finds evidence that newswires and print media are often inaccurate in terms of
substance (missing interventions as well as falsely reporting interventions), and Fischer (2006) finds
evidence that the timing of newswire reports of SNB interventions often differ substantially from the
official timing of interventions. Newswire reports, however flawed, are one of the main sources of
information for traders and dealers in the forex market, and are the only source of timed intra-day news
available to researchers.
10
   In theory each “news” report may have a different one-time influence on exchange rates. We group
similar news items together in order to examine whether certain “types” of intervention news have a
systematic influence on exchange rate behavior.


                                                    5
        of such intervention is. If we take such a step in coordination with the United
        States and Japan, then that would be a possibility. But we see no reason for it at
        present’” (February 17, 2000).

        “Bundesbank's Welteke says he doesn't believe short-term measures can stabilise
        euro's exchange rate” (March 6, 2000).

‘Detected interventions’ refer to cases where newswires correctly reported that a central
bank intervened. The one ‘false intervention’ refers to a newswire that incorrectly stated
that the ECB was intervening. The largest category of intervention news, termed
‘unrequited interventions’, includes 292 newswire reports that indicated that the market
expected an intervention that did not occur; examples include:


        “The authorities have to show their hand. They have to stand up and be seen. I
        think the market will take their lead,” Soros said in London (May 5, 2000).

        “Actions speak louder than words, and it is all very well saying that you want the
        currency to be higher but people are actually waiting to see intervention, said Paul
        Coughlin, chief trader at American Express Bank in London” (May 11, 2000).

        The euro officially came into existence in January 1999, and a year later there was
broad concern in Europe that the euro had dipped below parity against the dollar. The
majority of the unrequited intervention news reports in our data over this period were
associated with the absence of ECB operations to support the euro against the dollar. It
was not until September 2000 (beyond our sample period) that the ECB actually
intervened (in coordination with a number of other central banks including the Fed, the
BOJ and the BOE).
        The Japanese government, in contrast to the Europeans, sought a depreciation of
the yen relative to the dollar in this time period. Figure 1, which shows the yen-usd
exchange rate and BOJ interventions from 1990 though 2002, puts Japanese exchange
rate objectives into context. After a number of years of yen depreciation relative to the
dollar, the yen began to strengthen in August 1998 (on the heels of a number of
interventions in support of the yen by the BOJ and the Fed) 11 with a precipitous rise in

11
  Ito (2003) provides a chronological description of Japanese foreign exchange intervention over the period
1991 through 2004. He notes that Japanese intervention strategy changed dramatically in 1995 under


                                                    6
the value of the yen relative to the dollar starting in July 1999 through early 2000. The
BOJ intervened to weaken the yen by selling yen and purchasing dollars on 17 days over
the period January 1999 (with the yen-usd rate at 108) through April 2000 (with the yen-
usd rate at 104). Our eight-month sample period (circled on Figure 1) includes the last 5
of these 17 intervention days. 12 Newswire reports over this period suggest that both the
market and the Japanese government considered the yen-usd “100” mark as a critical
value not to be crossed (which indeed did not happen). The first BOJ intervention in our
sample occurred on December 24, 1999, a day when our Reuters electronic brokerage
data (and the Reuters newswire data) suggests there was extremely little trading in
advance of the Christmas holiday. The second intervention, on January 4, 2000, also
occurred during a period of extremely light trading volume. The yen-usd rate rebounded
from the critical “100” level after these interventions for a few weeks and then as the yen
began to depreciate in early March, the BOJ again intervened on March 8th, 15th and
April 3rd. The yen-usd rate rebounded over the next few months and it was not until
after a year’s hiatus that the BOJ again began to purchase dollars in September 2001
through June 2002. Along with the actual BOJ interventions that took place during this
time, there were numerous unrequited intervention news reports of additional Japanese
operations (which did not occur) to weaken the yen.
        During our sample period the Bank of England (BOE) did not engage in any
actual intervention operations, though newswire reports indicate BOE concern over the
strength of the pound (and its impact on the competitiveness of UK exports), as well as
statements regarding the costs and benefits of joining the euro-zone. We include the usd-
gbp in our analysis in large part because the source of our exchange rate data, the Reuters
D2000-2 electronic brokerage trading system, is most dominate in this market.



Eisuke Sakakibara, the Director General of the International Bureau, toward larger sized interventions on
fewer occasions. Sakakibara retired in July 1999 but his successor, Mr. Kuroda, who was in charge of
Japanese intervention policy during our sample period, followed a similar intervention philosophy of
infrequent, large and unpredictable operations. Also see Chaboud and Humpage (2005), Kim
(forthcoming), Fatum and Hutchison (2006) and Frenkel, Pierdzioch, and Stadtmann (2005) for further
analysis of Japanese interventions over this time period.
12
   Newswire reports suggest that the BOJ intervened on multiple occasions on each “intervention day”.
The Fed, Bundesbank, and ECB also generally follow a strategy of intervening on multiple occasions over
the course of a given intervention day. See Dominguez (2003a) for more discussion of intra-day
intervention operation strategies.


                                                    7
         The empirical approach we take in this paper is based on the assumption that
exchange rates are forward looking asset prices that react to changes in the market’s
expectation of future fundamentals. We further assume that “future fundamentals” may
include both standard variables from international macro models (for example, money
and income differentials) as well as variables such as actual and unrequited interventions
that may provide information about future fundamentals. We use intra-daily exchange
rate data to allow a narrow enough window around the times of news announcements to
be able to precisely estimate the exchange rate reactions in the spirit of Anderson,
Bollerslev, Diebold and Vega (2003) 13 .
         We examine the intra-daily influence of intervention news on exchange rate
movements. 14 We also consider whether intervention news not only impacts exchange
rates directly, but also influences exchange rates via order flow (signed trade volume).
Like unrequited interventions, order flow plays no role in standard models of exchange
rate determination, so a finding that order flow matters will provide evidence in favor of a
different modeling strategy for exchange rate determination (at least for very short term
movements). 15
         The information that market participants in foreign exchange markets receive can
be broadly categorized into two types: “scheduled” and “non-scheduled”. Official macro
data are typically announced by the relevant government agency on a pre-arranged
schedule, so that market participants can plan in advance their reactions to this
information. Table 2 describes the scheduled macro news announcements from the UK,
the US, the Euro-area and Japan that are included in our “macro surprise” variables. Non-
scheduled news is by its nature less likely to be anticipated by the market. It is also likely

13
   The enormous literature measuring the effects of macro news on intra-daily exchange rates includes
Hakkio and Pearce (1985), Ito and Roley (1987), Ederington and Lee (1995), DeGennaro and Shrieves
(1997), Almeida, Goodhart and Payne (1998), Andersen and Bollerslev (1998), Bauwens et al. (2005),
Chaboud, Chernenko, Howorka, Iyer, Liu and Wright (2004), Faust, Rogers, Wang and Wright (2003),
Love (2004), Love and Payne (2003), Melvin and Yin (2000), and Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2005).
14
   Bauwens et al. (2005) examine the influence of news, including rumors of intervention, on euro-usd
volatility over a six month period in 2001. They find that the most significant pre-announcement increase
in volatility is related to rumors of central bank interventions. They also find that once a rumor is refuted,
volatility stabilizes or drops. Other intra-day studies of the effects of (actual) intervention operations
include: Goodhart and Hesse (1993), Peiers (1997), Chang and Taylor (1998), Beattie and Fillion (1999),
Fischer and Zurlinden (1999), Neely (2002), Payne and Vitale (2003), Breedon and Vitale (2004), Panthaki
(2005), Pasquariello (2004, forthcoming), and Dominguez (2003a, 2006).
15
   Evans and Lyons (2002) is one of the first studies that found a link between order flow and exchange rate
movements. We will be examining these same links though with a very different data set and time period.


                                                      8
that market participants are less able to quickly interpret the implications of non-
scheduled news. All our categories of intervention news are non-scheduled, potentially
leading to more heterogeneity in trader responses to this sort of news. 16 Further,
regardless of whether news is scheduled or not, its influence on exchange rates may be
related to the state of the market at the time of the news arrival. 17 News that arrives
during periods of high uncertainty may have different effects on the exchange rate, than
news that arrives in calmer periods. 18


     3. Exchange Market Data
        Our intra-day exchange rate and order flow data cover an eight-month period,
from December 1999 through July 2000 for the usd-gbp, the usd-euro, and the yen-usd.
The data are from the brokered segment of the inter-dealer exchange rate market as
captured by the Reuters D2000-2 electronic trading system. Electronic brokers were first
introduced in 1992 and since that time their market share has increased rapidly. In the
early 1990s the inter-dealer market was split evenly between direct and voice-broker
trading but by the late 1990s (the sample period used in this study) the two top electronic
brokerage systems, Reuters and EBS, made up over 50 percent of the market. Reuters has
the largest share of the usd-gbp market, while EBS has a much larger share of total
trading in the usd-eur and yen-usd markets, potentially leading the Reuters data in these
markets to be less representative. Reuters usd-eur and yen-usd order flow data, in
particular, may not well capture average trading behavior in these markets. Likewise,


16
   Of course, an increase in market heterogeneity may also occur in reaction to scheduled announcements.
Kondor (2005) shows that if traders display confirmatory bias, the release of public information may
increase divergence in opinion. The main insight is that sometimes (public) information implies something
different when it is coupled with different (private) pieces of existing information. Bacchetta and van
Wincoop (2006) also model the influence of higher-order expectations in reaction to news.
17
   For example, Dominguez (2003a) shows that the influence of central bank interventions on exchange rate
returns depends on the intra-day timing of intervention operations (whether they occur during heavy trading
volume, or are closely timed to scheduled macro announcements) as well as whether the operations are
coordinated with another central bank. Dominguez and Panthaki (2006) find that “news” has its greatest
influence on intra-day exchange rate returns during periods of high market uncertainty (proxied by high
volatility as measured by the absolute value of returns).
18
   Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold and Vega (2003) find evidence that “bad” news in good times (economic
expansions) have greater impacts than good news in good times, suggesting that good news in good times
confirms beliefs but bad news in good times comes as more of a surprise. Our short sample period will not
allow us to test this hypothesis directly, though in future work we intend to test whether “confirming”
versus “surprising” news about interventions has different effects.


                                                    9
spreads in the usd-eur and yen-usd quotes are sometimes quite wide due to the relative
lack of liquidity in these markets on the Reuters system.
        Inter-dealer brokering systems provide prices that are advertised to all subscribers
(though the identity of the quoting dealer is only available once the quote is hit). Dealers
can submit a buy or sell quote or “hit” a quote of another dealer. Only the highest bid and
lowest ask (the touch) are shown on the Reuters screen. The quantity available at each
(best) bid and ask is also shown (which may involve more than one bank), and when a
bid or ask is hit the quantities available at that price are adjusted if they dip below $10
million. When multiple banks have entered the same bid or ask price, and the price is hit,
offers are met on a first come basis (meaning that the dealer who first input the price gets
the deal first and if more quantity is needed, the dealer that next submitted the same price
fills the order, and so on). All transactions are made at either the posted bid or ask. While
dealers in individual banks will know their own customer order flow – they do not have
access to information on customer orders of other banks. One of the reasons that inter-
dealer brokerage systems have become so popular is that they provide an important
source of real time information on both market quotes and overall market order flow. 19
The Reuters D2000-2 system classifies transactions as buyer-initiated or seller-initiated,
providing dealers with a real time proxy of signed trading volume. 20 We measure order
flow in this study as the difference between the number of buyer-initiated trades and
seller-initiated trades in each 20-minute interval.
        The intra-day price series used in this study incorporates information from both
transactions prices (actual trades) and (tradeable) bid and ask quotes submitted by dealers
(but not hit). 21 We use tradeable quotes in addition to actual transactions prices to create
a 20-minute price series for the usd-eur, usd-gbp and yen-usd rates that spans the period
over which we have intervention news data. 22 We measure exchange rate returns as the

19
   See Rime (2003) and Lyons (2001, chapter 3) for detailed descriptions of electronic trading systems.
20
   The dealer posting the quote is considered the non-initiating side. Reuters does not provide information
on the size of each trade.
21
   Tradeable quotes differ from indicative quotes, which have been used in a number of previous studies, in
that they provide “firm” prices. Indicative quotes provide market information for non-dealers.
22
   There are a periods of low liquidity on Reuters D2000-2 due to technical problems (the feed failing),
holidays, and during Asian trading hours. Some studies simply drop these time periods from the sample.
Our approach is to interpolate a 20 minute time series (using a linear interpolation method) from all
available quotes in order to fully span our “news” data set. Reuters does not include weekend data so any
news that arrives over a weekend is moved to the first 20-minute interval on the nearest Monday. The


                                                    10
log difference in 20-minute (midpoint) prices. Figure 2 shows average daily usd-eur,
usd-gbp and yen-usd returns, order flow and news arrival (measured as the number of
newswire articles in a given 20-min interval) over the 24-hour GMT time scale. News
arrival and order flow are fairly evenly spread over the day, and there is little evidence of
trend in average returns.
        We measure exchange rate volatility as the absolute value of the 20-minute
returns. Figure 3 shows the average absolute return in each 20-minute interval over the
24-hour GMT time scale for each of the exchange rates (the x-axis for the three
currencies starts at midnight, which is approximately 12am GMT for usd-eur and usd-gbp
and 3pm GMT for yen-usd). The data confirm the seasonal pattern that is typically found
in intra-day exchange rate volatility data which, in turn, largely reflects the opening and
closing of the three main trading markets in Tokyo, Europe and New York. In order to
take the opening and closings of markets into account we de-seasonalize the volatility
series using the Andersen and Bollerslev (1997ab, 1998) flexible fourier form (FFF)
regression method which involves decomposing the demeaned i-minute exchange rate
returns, into a daily volatility factor, a periodic component for the ith intraday interval and
an i.i.d. mean zero unit variance innovation term all divided by the square root of the
number of uncorrelated intraday return components. 23 This estimated FFF seasonal is
shown (together with the average daily volatility) in Figure 3.
        Table 3 provides descriptive statistics for our 20-minute exchange rates, returns 24
and volatility as well as order flow, order flow volatility and transaction frequency
(measured as the number of transactions in a given 20-min interval). The three exchange
rate returns series display little autocorrelation, suggesting that future exchange rate
changes cannot be predicted from past changes. Intra-day return volatility, order flow
volatility, and transaction frequency for all three currencies shows evidence of strong and
persistent autocorrelation. While buy and sell orders are highly autocorrelated, net order-
flow (buy orders minus sell orders) does not display significant autocorrelation. Usd-gbp
returns are significantly less variable than are usd-eur or yen-usd returns over this time

average number of newswire reports on Mondays (including weekend news) is 93 compared to 100 for
Tuesdays, 123 for Wednesdays, 132 for Thursdays and 81 for Fridays.
23
   See Dominguez (2006) for a detailed description of how this was implemented.
24
   We compute returns (approximately) as the percentage change in the exchange rate multiplied by 100, so
the units can be thought of as basis points.


                                                   11
period and yen-usd transaction frequency is significantly lower (at 3 transactions every
20 minutes) than is transaction frequency for usd-eur or usd-gbp (which have closer to 30
transactions every 20 minutes).
           Table 4 presents contemporaneous correlations among our key variables:
exchange rate returns, exchange rate volatility, order flow, order flow volatility, trading
frequency and news arrival. 25 The correlations for all three currencies indicate that there
exists a strong contemporaneous association between exchange rate returns and order
flow, as well as between exchange rate volatility, order flow volatility and transaction
frequency. The correlation between returns and order flow is highest for usd-eur (at .51)
and lowest for yen-usd (at .224). Beyond these contemporaneous correlations, we might
expect longer-lived correlation between intervention news and the other variables if
traders have different views of the implications (and information content) of the news.


     4. Effects of Intervention News on Returns and Volatility
           The standard approach in the empirical exchange rate literature is to run the
following sort of “event study” style regression 26 of the conditional mean of i-minute
exchange rate returns on j leads 27 and lags of the actual intervention indicator, each of the
k “news” announcements, and on g lags of past returns (to account for any autocorrelation);
that is:

      Δsti = α 0 + ∑ j α1, j I ti − j + ∑ k ∑ j α 2,k j Ntik− j + ∑ gα 3, g Δsti − g + ε ti           (1)

where Δsti denotes the change in the natural log of the i-minute (spot market) exchange rate

on day t, I denotes the intervention indicator, and N denotes intervention news and macro
surprises 28 . All news variables are time-stamped to the nearest i-minute. We use the

25
   Evans and Lyons (2003) document strong contemporaneous correlation between news arrival, transaction
frequency and order flow volatility. Melvin and Yin (2000) find a positive correlation between trading
frequency (using indicative quotes) and the rate of flow of public information.
26
   An alternative approach based on state dependent heteroscedasticity is used by Rigobon and Sack (2004)
and Evans and Lyons (2003).
27
   We include leads and lags in order to take into account the possibility that the time-stamp on our news
does not match the actual timing of when market participants first learn about the news. We find evidence
of both lead and lag effects for our intervention news variables for up to 2 hours before and after the
Reuters’ time stamp.
28
   The intervention indicator and the intervention news variables are (0,1) dummy variables. Macro
surprises are measured as the difference between the specific announcement and the ex-ante expectation of


                                                             12
Schwarz (1978) criteria to fix the lead/lag lengths, and we correct for heteroskedasticity
and serial correlation in the error term using the Newey and West (1987) approach. Using
this general regression specification it is possible to test for the impact and intra-day effects
of different kinds of intervention news and macro surprises on exchange rate returns by
examining whether the α1, j s and α 2,k j s are individually and jointly statistically significant.

The coefficients in this context measure the typical effect of the kth news announcement at
time i (on day t) on exchange rate returns in the same (narrow) i-minute window. It is
worth noting that in order to be able to interpret the coefficients in this way we need to
assume that the variables in the regression can be viewed as predetermined regressors over
the i-minute period (which is less likely to be realistic for low-frequency data windows). It
is also the case that the coefficients will measure the linear combination of exchange rate
return effects associated with the market’s assessment of both the news and how the news
will influence the economy. 29
         Our “news” variable (N) includes five distinct categories of news: (1) macro
surprises, (2) news about intervention policy from policy-makers, (3) news about
intervention policy from the market, (4) news about policy-maker-market interactions, and
(5) news about unrequited interventions (interventions that the market expected but did not
occur). 30 All our categories of intervention news are further broken down by geographic
region (Euro-zone, Japan, UK or Joint). Macro surprises are also disaggregated by
country so that UK, US, Euro-area and Japanese surprises are included separately. 31
         Table 5 presents results of our regression of intra-day (20-minute) usd-eur, usd-
gbp, and yen-usd returns on news. The first, third and fifth columns in table 5 present the
results of our benchmark regression, which include the actual Japanese interventions and

the announcement (based on the median response to a survey conducted by Money Market Services
International) divided by the sample standard deviation of each announcement (this serves to normalize the
surprises so that comparisons of the relative size of coefficients is feasible).
29
   For a nice discussion of the underlying assumptions in this sort of event study analysis see Faust, Rogers,
Wang and Wright (2003) pages 6-9.
30
   We attempted to group news into variables in such a way as to insure that we would not be combining
news that would be expected to lead to opposite effects on exchange rates. (This task was made easier for
the fact that there were no major shifts in exchange rate objectives by the relevant governments over the 8-
month period under study.) The coefficients on these disaggregated news variables are then aggregated into
broader groupings of variables in order to keep our tables readable. Regression results with the
disaggregated news categories are available upon request.
31
   As robustness checks we also included disaggregated macro surprises (by type and region). Results were
qualitatively similar whether surprises are included in aggregated or disaggregated form.


                                                     13
the macro surprises as “news”, for each exchange rate. Both leads and lags of the
Japanese intervention indicator variable significantly influence yen-usd returns and
lagged interventions influence usd-gbp returns. Macro surprises are generally not found
to be statistically significant, only Japanese macro surprises significantly influence usd-
eur returns. Further, the relatively low regression goodness-of-fit for these benchmark
regressions suggests that actual interventions and macro surprises account for a small
fraction of the overall variability of returns for all three exchange rates.
        The second, fourth and sixth columns in table 5 include our intervention news
variables in the lower panel. For each intervention news category the reported coefficient
is the sum of six leads and lags, corresponding to two hours before and after the
newswire time-stamp. Statistical significance is based on two criteria. The first is an
exclusion restriction, where the null hypothesis is that all the leads and lags are zero
(under the column labeled F-test). The second is a Wald test of the null hypothesis that
the sum of the leads and lags equals zero. This second test provides evidence on mean
reversion. For example, if there is an immediate influence of news on returns which is
subsequently reversed (within the 4 hour window), the sum of the coefficients would be
zero (or close to zero). In many cases individual coefficient leads or lags were found to
be statistically significant (leading to a significant F-stat), while the sum of the
coefficients over the 4 hour lead/lag window was not always statistically different from
zero (leading to an insignificant Wald test).
        The coefficient values and statistical (in)significance of the macro surprises in
table 5 remain qualitatively unchanged with the inclusion of intervention news. The
coefficient on the Japanese intervention indicator variable remains significant especially
in the yen-usd regression, suggesting that these interventions led to a depreciation of the
dollar relative to the yen (recall that the objective of the Japanese government in this
period was to depreciate the yen). Interestingly, the results suggest that all our categories
of intervention news seem to have a qualitatively similar influence on returns. For
example, news that the ECB would not intervene led to a six-basis-point depreciation of
the euro. Recall that, had the ECB intervened (which they did not) in this sample period,
their objective would have been to appreciate, not depreciate, the euro. Likewise, market




                                                14
expectations of Japanese interventions led to a five-basis-point depreciation of the dollar
in both the yen-usd and usd-gbp markets
        The regression results presented in table 5 indicate that actual interventions,
threats of interventions, denials of interventions, and unrequited interventions all had an
influence on intra-daily exchange rate returns in the usd-eur and yen-usd markets.
However, the relatively low regression goodness-of-fit (for all specifications across all
three exchange rates) suggests that intervention news does not go very far in explaining
overall exchange rate movements. It is possible that our binary coding of intervention
news is partly to blame for our inability to explain a larger fraction of exchange rate
variation. It may be that our news variables will be more successful at explaining
exchange rates during periods when the market is more uncertain, or that intervention
news influences volatility more than returns. It may also be that intervention news do not
impact price directly, but that their influence is mediated through order flow. We
investigate these possibilities in the next three sets of regressions.
        In order to examine how intervention news influences traders under different
market conditions, we test for two types of interaction effects. First, we ask whether
intervention news is more (or less) likely to influence returns during periods of high
market uncertainty (proxied by high volatility). We create an indicator variable that takes
on the value 1 during 20-minute intervals when volatility (measured as the absolute value
of returns) exceeds the sample average by two standard deviations. The first three
columns in table 6 present regression results that show that during periods when the
market is most uncertain, intervention news (of all types) had a significantly larger
influence on returns than was the case when news arrived during normal periods (while
we include each intervention news variable separately as well as interacted with our
“high volatility” indicator in the regression, we report only the sums of the leads and lags
of the coefficients on the interacted terms in the table). Second, we examine if
intervention is more (or less) effective when lots of other news is hitting the market. We
create an indicator variable that takes on the value 1 during 20-minute intervals when the
number of news reports exceeds the sample average by two standard deviations. 32 The


32
 The “news report” variable is based on a broad interpretation of foreign exchange market news. For
more information about this variable see Dominguez and Panthaki (2006).


                                                  15
coefficients in the last three columns of table 6 (again we report only the sums of the
leads and lags of the coefficients on the intervention news variables interacted with the
“high news arrival” indicator variable) indicate that intervention news often had a larger
impact on returns when it arrived during heavy news periods. In the usd-eur market, in
particular, the Wald tests indicate that intervention news continued to influence returns
beyond a four-hour window. These results suggest that intervention news is more likely
to influence trader behavior during specific market conditions, especially during times of
high uncertainty. However, the regression goodness-of-fit measures remain relatively
low indicating that intervention news explains a small fraction of overall variability of
returns.
        In order to examine whether intervention news helps to explain the absolute value
of exchange rate returns, we regress de-seasonalized 33 intra-day volatility, Vtis , on the
same set of explanatory variables:
           Vtis = λ 0 + ∑ j λ1, j I ti − j + ∑ k ∑ j λ2,k j Ntik− j + ∑ gλ3, gVtis− g + ηti       (2)

Andersen and Bollerslev (1998) find that three factors influence intra-daily exchange rate
volatility: calendar effects and volatility dependencies (both of which are captured in the
FFF seasonal) and macro surprises, with macro surprises providing the least explanatory
power. We augment their specification with our intervention news variables and allow
for a longer lag structure to test whether the effects of these (non-scheduled) news reports
are longer-lived. We use the Schwarz (1978) criteria to fix the leads and lags in the
regression specification and correct for potential heteroskedasticity and serial correlation in
the error term using the Newey and West (1987) approach.
        Table 7 presents our volatility regression results using the same column format as
we did in table 5. We again find that only Japanese macro surprises enter significantly in
the usd-eur regression, providing suggestive evidence that scheduled news, perhaps
because it is less ambiguous, has extremely short-lived (less than 20 minutes) influence
on volatility. The Japanese intervention indicator variable now significantly influences
volatility for all three currencies. We also find that all the different types of intervention


33
  It could be that the intra-day seasonal is explained by news arrival. We test for this possibility by
including our intervention news variables and macro surprises directly in the FFF regression and find no
evidence of correlation between the daily seasonal and our news variables.


                                                             16
news significantly influence volatility across all three currencies (the F-stats are
consistently significant for all our news variables). 34 Interestingly intervention news
often led to own-market increases in volatility but decreases in volatility in the other
currency markets. Very few of the Wald tests are significant in table 7 suggesting little
evidence of a long-lived influence of news on volatility.


     5. Does Intervention News Influence Order Flow?
         In standard models of exchange rate behavior when “positive” news arrives for a
currency, demand for that currency rises, causing the relative value (the price) of the
currency to rise. In these models there is no reason for order flow to rise in reaction to
news because price is assumed to instantaneously reflect the news. Trading volume may
rise in reaction to news, but as long as the new price is efficient, there is no reason for
these trades to be biased in favor of purchases or sales. So that in standard models the
arrival of “news” should be orthogonal to changes in order flow. 35
         We use transaction frequency, TF, as a proxy for volume, and first test whether
the arrival of intervention news in our sample is positively related to transaction
frequency.
         TFti = γ 0 + ∑ j γ 1, j I ti − j + ∑ k ∑ j γ 2,k j Ntik− j + ∑ gγ 3, gTFti − g + υti            (3)

Table 8 presents the results of this regression. We find strong evidence of a relationship
between transaction frequency and both the Japanese intervention indicator variable and
intervention news (but not macro surprises). This suggests that when traders learn of
interventions news (regardless of whether the news indicates that an intervention is likely
or not) this influences their decision about whether to trade or not. In some cases the
coefficient sign on intervention news is negative suggesting transaction frequency fell in
reaction to the news, though the signs on intervention news do not indicate any
discernable patterns among the different sorts of news. While our measures of regression

34
   It is also worth noting that the regression goodness-of-fit is dramatically higher, due in part to the strong
AR component of volatility.
35
   One view of the relationship between order flow and prices is that it is only a temporary phenomenon.
Order flow in this context reflects trader “digestion effects” in reaction to news, so that once the news is
fully “digested”, any order flow induced price effects will revert back. Work by Evans and Lyons (2002)
and Danielsson, Payne and Luo (2002), however, shows that order flow continues to explain changes in
foreign exchange returns well after 24 hours, suggesting either that digestion is very slow, or more likely,
that the influence of order flow on prices is not temporary.


                                                            17
goodness-of-fit in table 8 are quite high, this is largely due to the strong autoregressive
nature of transaction frequency.
        Under what circumstance might intervention news cause a change not just in
volume, but in order flow? One reason that price might not immediately (or fully) react is
if the intervention news either is not common knowledge, or if different market
participants interpret the news differently. Unrequited intervention operations are likely
to be good examples of news that evoke heterogeneous reactions. In this case, order flow
might convey this information to the market (rather than price). Further, if underlying
demand for currencies is driven not by news per se, but by changes in risk aversion or
hedging technologies, again it might be order flow that will convey this information to
the market. 36
        A simple linear regression specification that relates foreign exchange returns to
order flow is:
                          Δsti = β 0 + ∑ j β1, j OFti − j + ∑ gβ 2, g Δsti − g + μti               (4)

Table 9 presents results for a regression of returns on contemporaneous and lagged order
flow (OF). The first thing to note in the table is that our measure of regression goodness-
of-fit differs significantly across the three currencies. Our estimates suggest that order
flow explains over 14% of the variation in 20-minute usd-gbp returns, 6% of yen-usd
returns, and only 2.8% of usd-eur returns. These differences are likely due in large part to
the fact that the Reuters D2000 system dominates in the sterling market but only captures
a small fraction of trades in either the euro or yen markets. 37 The coefficient on
contemporaneous order flow is statistically significant and positively associated with
returns for all three currencies, suggesting that the influence of news is not fully captured
in price changes and that order flow may play a role in the price discovery process.



36
   Four recent papers that have studied the link between “news” and order flow include: Love (2004), Love
and Payne (2003), Melvin and Yin (2000), Evans and Lyons (2003), and Dominguez and Panthaki (2006).
Breedon and Vitale (2004) find that the strong contemporaneous correlation between order flow and
exchange rates is mostly due to liquidity (and not information) effects.
37
   The fact that Reuters has incomplete market share in these currencies suggests that Reuters’ order flow
measures total order flow with error. This in turn suggests that the relationship between order flow and
returns is measured with error in the usd-eur and yen-usd regressions, leading coefficients to be biased
toward zero. This sort of measurement error is less of a concern in the usd-gbp regression because Reuters
is dominant in that market.


                                                     18
         Our results so far suggest that intervention news influences exchange rate returns,
volatility, and transaction frequency and that order flow influences returns. The next
question to ask is what drives order flow? Previous studies have found a link between
macro surprises and order flow, which runs counter to standard models that would
suggest that common knowledge news, such as macro surprises, should be instantly
incorporated in price. We test whether this result also holds for our data sample, and
whether intervention news is also linked to order flow, OF.
         OFti = ϕ 0 + ∑ j ϕ1, j I ti − j + ∑ k ∑ j ϕ2,k j Ntik− j + ∑ gϕ3, g OFti − g + ξti            (5)

         Table 10 presents results for the regression of order flow on the Japanese
intervention indicator, macro surprises, intervention news, and past order flow. The first,
third and fifth columns provide results for our benchmark specification which only
includes the Japanese intervention indicator and macro surprises. Again, only the
Japanese macro surprises are statistically significant in the usd-eur regression, while
actual Japanese interventions enter statistically significantly in all three currency markets.
The results in the second, fourth, and sixth columns of table 10 indicate that the
intervention indicator variable is no longer significant when we include the other
intervention news variables in the regression specification. Interestingly it is in the yen-
usd market, where Reuters’ has limited market share, that we find the intervention news
variables have the most influence. However, the regression goodness of fit never rises
above .026 suggesting that order flow is largely not being driven by these variables. 38
The coefficient signs on intervention news in these regressions are generally consistent
with what we found earlier in the returns regressions. Coefficient signs on Japanese
intervention news are generally negative suggesting that this news led buy orders for
dollars to fall relative to sell orders. Likewise, the coefficient signs on ECB intervention
news are generally positive suggesting that this news led buy orders for dollars to rise
relative to sell orders.




38
  This result is at odds with results in Evans and Lyons (2004) which find a strong connection between
disaggregated order flow and news. It is possible that the difference in results is due to the fact that our
order flow information is only reflecting inter-dealer trades.


                                                         19
   6. Conclusions
       In this paper we examine whether actual and unrequited intervention news
influences exchange rates. Previous studies have found that scheduled macro
announcements, when measured in surprise form, help to explain intra-daily exchange
rate behavior. Likewise, official interventions by governments in the foreign exchange
market have been found to influence intra-day (and daily) returns and volatility. Results
in this paper indicate that unrequited intervention news (and even news of “no
intervention”) has a statistically significant influence on both intra-day exchange rate
returns and volatility, suggesting that the expectation of intervention, even when
governments do not intervene, can affect currency values. These results provide strong
evidence in favor of the hypothesis that interventions influence exchange rates via the
information/signaling channel.
       We also examine the role of order flow in exchange rate determination. In
standard models there is no reason for order flow to rise in reaction to news because price
is assumed to instantaneously adjust. Trading volume may rise in reaction to news, but
as long as the new price is efficient, there is no reason for trades to be biased in favor of
purchases or sales. We find evidence that order flow has some explanatory power
suggesting that prices are, at the very least, slow to adjust. At the same time, we find that
actual interventions and our various categories of intervention news explain a very small
fraction of the variation in order flow. Overall, our results indicate that along with actual
interventions, other kinds of intervention news (including denials of intervention and
unrequited interventions) and order flow matter. We do not find evidence that macro
surprises have much influence on intra-day returns, volatility or order flow over our
sample period. These results suggest that future models of exchange rate determination
ought include a broader conception of price relevant “news”.




                                              20
                                         References

Almeida, A., Goodhart, C., Payne, R., 1998. The effects of macroeconomic news on high
frequency exchange rate behavior. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 33 (3),
383-408.

Andersen, T., Bollerslev, T., 1997a. Intraday periodicity and volatility persistence in
financial markets. Journal of Empirical Finance 4, 115-158.

Andersen, T., Bollerslev, T., 1997b. Heterogeneous information arrivals and return
volatility dynamics: uncovering the long-run in high frequency returns. Journal of
Finance 52 (3), 975-1005.

Andersen, T., and T. Bollerslev, 1998. Deutsche mark-dollar volatility: Intraday activity
patterns, macroeconomic announcements, and longer run dependencies,
Journal of Finance, 53: 219-265.

Andersen, T., T. Bollerslev, F. Diebold, C. Vega, 2003. Micro effects of macro
announcements: Real-time price discovery in foreign exchange, American
Economic Review, 93: 38-62.

Bacchetta, P., van Wincoop, E., 2006. Can information heterogeneity explain the
exchange rate determination puzzle? American Economic Review, 96, 3: 552-576.

Bauwens, L., Ben Omrane, W., Giot, P., 2005. News announcements, market activity and
volatility in the euro/dollar foreign exchange market. Journal of International Money and
Finance, 24, 7, 1108-1125.

Beattie, N., Fillion, J., 1999. An intraday analysis of the effectiveness of foreign exchange
intervention. Bank of Canada Working Paper 99-4.

Beine, M., Bernal, O., forthcoming. Why do central banks intervene secretly? Journal of
International Financial Markets, Institutions, and Money.

Beine, M., Benassy-Quere, A., Lecourt, C., 2002. The impact of foreign exchange
interventions: new evidence from figarch estimations. Journal of International Money and
Finance 21, 115-144.

Beine, M., Janssen, G., Lecourt, C., 2004. Should Central Bankers Talk to the Foreign
Exchange Markets? Mimeo, CORE.

Beine, M., Laurent, S., 2003. Central bank interventions and jumps in double long
memory models of daily exchange rates. Journal of Empirical Finance 10, 641-660.




                                              21
Beine, M., Laurent, S., Lecourt, C., 2003a. Official central bank interventions and
exchange rate volatility: evidence from a regime-switching analysis. European Economic
Review 47, 891-911.

Beine, M., Laurent, S., Palm, F., 2003b. Central bank forex intervention assessed using
realized moments. Mimeo, CORE.

Bhattacharya, U., Weller, P., 1997. The advantage of hiding one’s hand: speculation and
central bank intervention in the foreign exchange market, Journal of Monetary
Economics, 39, 251-277.

Bonser-Neal, C., Tanner, G., 1996. Central bank intervention and the volatility of foreign
exchange rates: evidence from the options market. Journal of International Money and
Finance 15 (6), 853-878.

Breedon, F. and P. Vitale, 2004. An empirical study of liquidity and information effects
of order flow on exchange rates. Tanaka Business School Discussion Paper
TBS/DP04/23.

Chaboud, A., LeBaron, B., 2001. Foreign exchange market trading volume and Federal
Reserve intervention. Journal of Futures Markets 21, 851-860.

Chaboud, A., Chernenko, S., Howorka, E., Iyer, R., Liu, D., Wright, J., 2004. The high-
frequency effects of U.S. macroeconomic data releases on prices and trading activity in the
global interdealer foreign exchange market. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, IFDP No. 823.

Chaboud, A., Humpage, O., 2005. An Assessment of the Impact of Japanese Foreign
Exchange Intervention: 1991-2004. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
IFDP No. 824.

Chang, Y., 2006. The accuracy of reports of foreign exchange intervention by the Bank of
Japan: does Tokyo know more? Journal of International Money and Financy 25, 1241-
1256.

Chang, Y., Taylor, S., 1998. Intraday effects of foreign exchange intervention by the Bank
of Japan. Journal of International Money and Finance 18, 191-210.

Chiu, P., 2003. Transparency versus constructive ambiguity in foreign exchange
intervention. BIS Working Paper No.144.

Danielsson, J., Payne, R., and J. Luo, 2002. Exchange rate determination and inter-market
order flow effects, FMG mimeo, London School of Economics.




                                            22
DeGennaro, R., and R. Shrieves, 1997. Public information releases, private information
arrival, and volatility in the foreign exchange market, Journal of
Empirical Finance, 4: 295-315.

De Grauwe, P., Grimaldi, M., 2003. Intervention in the foreign exchange market in a model
with noise traders. Mimeo, University of Leuven.

Dominguez, K., 1992. The Informational Role of Official Foreign Exchange Intervention
Operations: The Signalling Hypothesis, in: Dominguez, K., Exchange Rate Efficiency and
the Behavior of International Asset Markets, chapter 2, Garland Publishing Company,
N.Y., pp. 41-80.

Dominguez, K., 1998. Central bank intervention and exchange rate volatility. Journal of
International Money and Finance 17, 161-190.

Dominguez, K., 2003a. The market microstructure of central bank intervention. Journal of
International Economics 59, 25-45.

Dominguez, K., 2003b. Foreign exchange intervention: did it work in the 1990s? In:
Bergsten, C.F., Williamson, J. (Eds.), Dollar Overvaluation and the World Economy.
Institute for International Economics, Special Report 16, Washington, D.C., pp.217-245.

Dominguez, K., 2006, “When Do Central Bank Interventions Influence Intra-Daily and
Longer-Term Exchange Rate Movements? Journal of International Money and Finance
25, 1051-1071.
Dominguez, K., Frankel, F., 1993a. Does foreign exchange intervention matter? The
portfolio effect. American Economic Review 83, 1356-69.

Dominguez, K., Frankel, F., 1993b. Does Foreign Exchange Intervention Work? Institute
for International Economics, Washington, D.C.

Dominguez, K., Panthaki, F., 2006. What Defines ‘News’ in Foreign Exchange Markets?,
Journal of International Money and Finance, 25, 168-198.

D’Souza, Chris, 2002. A Market Microstructure Analysis of Foreign Exchange
Intervention in Canada. Bank of Canada working paper 2002-16.

Ederington, L., and J. Lee, 1995. The short-run dynamics of price adjustment to new
information, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 30: 117-134.

Ehrmann, M., and M. Fratzscher, 2005. Exchange rates and fundamentals: new evidence
from real-time data, Journal of International Money and Finance, 24, 317-341.

Evans, M., and R. Lyons, 2002. Order flow and exchange rate dynamics, Journal of
Political Economy, 110: 170-180.



                                            23
Evans, M., and R. Lyons, 2003. How is macro news transmitted to exchange rates?,
NBER Working paper 9433.

Evans, M., and R. Lyons, 2004. Exchange rate fundamentals and order flow, mimeo,
Georgetown University.

Fatum, R. and M. Hutchison, 2003. Is sterilized foreign exchange intervention effective
after all? An event study approach, Economic Journal, 113, 487, 390-411.

Fatum, R. and M. Hutchison, 2006. Effectiveness of Official Daily Foreign Exchange
Market Intervention Operations in Japan, Journal of International Money and Finance,
25, 199-219.

Faust, J., Rogers, J., Wang, S., Wright, J., 2003. The high-frequency response of
exchange rates and interest rates to macroeconomics announcements, Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System, IFDP No. 784, October.

Fischer, A.M., 2006. On the inadequacy of newswire reports for empirical research on
foreign exchange interventions. Journal of International Money and Finance, 25, 1226-
1240.

Fischer, A.M., Zurlinden, M., 1999. Exchange rate effects of central bank interventions: an
analysis of transaction prices. Economic Journal 109, 662-676.

Fratzscher, M., 2004. Communication and exchange rate policy. ECB working paper 363,
May.

Frenkel, M., Pierdzioch, C., Stadtmann, G., 2005. The effects of Japanese foreign exchange
market interventions on the yen/us dollar exchange rate volatility. International Review of
Economics and Finance, 14, 27-39.

Galati, G., Melick, W., Micu, M., 2005. Foreign exchange market intervention and
expectations: an empirical study of the dollar/yen exchange rate. Journal of International
Money and Finance, v.24, 6, 982-1011.

Goodhart, C., Hesse, T., 1993. Central bank forex intervention assessed in continuous time.
Journal of International Money and Finance 12, 368-389.

Hakkio, C., and D.K. Pearce, 1985. The reaction of exchange rates to economic news.
Economic Inquiry, 23, 4, 621-636.

Humpage, O., 1999. U.S. intervention: assessing the probability of success. Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking 31 (4), 731-747.




                                             24
Ito, T., 2003. Is foreign exchange intervention effective? The Japanese experiences in the
1990s. In: Mizen, P. (Ed.), Monetary History, Exchange Rates and Financial Markets,
Essays in Honor of C. Goodhart. Cheltenham U.K.; Edward Elgar, pp.126-153.

Ito, T., and V. Roley, 1987. News from the US and Japan: which moves the yen/dollar
exchange rate?, Journal of Monetary Economics, 19, 2, 255-277.

Jansen, D-J., and J. De Haan, 2005. Talking heads: the effects of ECB statements on the
euro-dollar exchange rate, Journal of international Money and Finance, 24, 343-361.

Kim, Suk-Joong, forthcoming. Intraday evidence of efficacy of 1991-2004 Yen
Intervention by the Bank of Japan. Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions
and Money.

Kondor, P., 2004. The More We Know, the Less We Agree: Public Announcements and
Higher-order Expectations, FMG Discussion paper No. 532, London School of
Economics.

Love, R., 2004. First and second moment effects of macro news in high frequency
foreign exchange data, mimeo FMG, London School of Economics.

Love, R., and R. Payne, 2003. Macroeconomic news, order flows, and exchange rates,
Discussion Paper 475, FMG, London School of Economics.

Lyons, R., 2001. The Microstructure Approach to Exchange Rates, MIT Press.

Melvin, M., and X. Yin, 2000. Public information arrival, exchange rate volatility, and
quote frequency, Economic Journal, 110: 644-661.

Montgomery, J., Popper, H., 2001. Information Sharing and Central Bank Intervention in
the Foreign Exchange Market. Journal of International Economics (55) 2, 295-316.

Mussa, M., 1981. The Role of Official Intervention. Group of Thirty, New York, N.Y.

Naranjo, A., Nimalendran, M., 2000, Government Intervention and Adverse Selection
Costs in Foreign Exchange Markets. Review of Financial Studies 13, 453-477.

Neely, C., 2000. The practice of central bank intervention: looking under the hood. Central
Banking 11 (2), 24-37.

Neely, C., 2002. The temporal pattern of trading rule returns and central bank intervention:
intervention does not generate technical trading rule profits. Journal of International
Economics 58, 211-232.

Newey, W., and K. West, 1987. A simple, positive semidefinite, heteroskedasticity and
autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica, 55, 703-708.



                                             25
Panthaki, F., 2005. Exchange rate volatility and central bank interventions, FMG
Discussion Paper No. 550, London School of Economics.

Pasquariello, P., 2004. Central bank intervention and the intraday process of price
formation in the currency markets. Mimeo, University of Michigan Business School.

Pasquariello, P., forthcoming. Informative trading or just noise? An analysis of currency
returns, market liquidity, and transaction costs in proximity of central bank interventions.
Journal of Financial Markets.

Payne, R., Vitale, P., 2003. A transaction level study of the effects of central bank
intervention on exchange rates. Journal of International Economics 61 (2), 331-352.

Peiers, B., 1997. Informed traders, intervention and price leadership: a deeper view of the
microstructure of the foreign exchange market. Journal of Finance 52 (4), 1589-1614.

Rigobon, R. and B. Sack, 2004. The impact of monetary policy on asset prices, Journal of
Monetary Economics, 51, 8, 1553-71.

Rime, D., 2003. New electronic trading systems in foreign exchange markets, in D.C.
Jones (ed.), New Economy Handbook, Academic Press: Elsevier Science, USA, 469-504.

Sager, M., and M.P. Taylor, 2004. The impact of European central bank governing
council announcements on the foreign exchange market: a microstructural analysis,
Journal of International Money and Finance, 23, 1043-1051.

Sarno, L., and M.P. Taylor, 2001. Official intervention in the foreign exchange market: is it
effective and, if so, how does it work? Journal of Economic Literature 39, 839-868.

Schwarz, G., 1978. Estimating the dimension of a model. Annals of Statistics 6, 461-464.

Taylor, M.P., 2004. Is official exchange rate intervention effective? Economica, 71, 1-12.

Taylor, M.P., 2005. Official foreign exchange intervention as a coordinating signal in the
dollar-yen market. Pacific Economic Review, 10, 1 73-82.

Vitale, P., 2003. Foreign exchange intervention: how to signal policy objectives and
stabilize the economy. Journal of Monetary Economics 50, 841-87.

Vitale, P., 1999. Sterilized central bank intervention in the foreign exchange market,
Journal of International Economics, 49, 245-267.




                                              26
Figure 1 Japanese Interventions and the yen-usd rate, 1990-2002

            180                                                                                                                     20000



                                                                                                                                    15000

            160

                                                                                                                                    10000



            140                                                                                                                     5000




                                                                                                                                             Intervention ($ Million)
                                                                                                                                    0
  Yen-USD




            120

                                                                                                                                    -5000



            100                                                                                                                     -10000



                                                                                                       Sample Period:               -15000
                                                                                                       Dec 99 - July 00
            80

                                                                                                                                    -20000



            60                                                                                                                      -25000
             Jan-90   Jan-91   Jan-92   Jan-93   Jan-94   Jan-95   Jan-96   Jan-97   Jan-98   Jan-99    Jan-00    Jan-01   Jan-02




Notes: Left-hand scale shows the daily yen-usd exchange rate and right-hand scale
shows daily Japanese interventions (in millions of dollars) from 1990-2002. Daily
Japanese intervention data is available at: http://www.mof.go.jp/english/e1c021.htm. Our
eight month sample period (circled in the figure) includes five Japanese intervention
days.




                                                                    27
                                                                                                     Figure 2: Average Daily Returns, Order Flow and News Arrival
                                                                    USD-EUR                                                                                                USD-GBP                                                                                                YEN-USD
                         0.04                                                                                           0.04    0.04                                                                                           0.04    0.04                                                                                           0.04
Average Return


                         0.02                                                                                           0.02    0.02                                                                                           0.02    0.02                                                                                           0.02

                         0.00                                                                                           0.00    0.00                                                                                           0.00    0.00                                                                                           0.00

                        -0.02                                                                                           -0.02   -0.02                                                                                          -0.02   -0.02                                                                                          -0.02

                        -0.04                                                                                           -0.04   -0.04                                                                                          -0.04   -0.04                                                                                          -0.04
                                     0:00

                                                   3:00

                                                             6:00

                                                                     9:00

                                                                            12:00

                                                                                    15:00

                                                                                             18:00

                                                                                                        21:00




                                                                                                                                             0:00

                                                                                                                                                           3:00

                                                                                                                                                                    6:00

                                                                                                                                                                            9:00

                                                                                                                                                                                   12:00

                                                                                                                                                                                           15:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                    18:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                               21:00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           18:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      21:00
                         6                                                                                                6     6                                                                                                6     6                                                                                                6
 Average Order Flow




                         4                                                                                                4     4                                                                                                4     4                                                                                                4

                         2                                                                                                2     2                                                                                                2     2                                                                                                2

                         0                                                                                                0     0                                                                                                0     0                                                                                                0

                        -2                                                                                                -2    -2                                                                                               -2    -2                                                                                               -2

                        -4                                                                                                -4    -4                                                                                               -4    -4                                                                                               -4
                             0:00

                                            3:00

                                                          6:00

                                                                    9:00

                                                                            12:00

                                                                                     15:00

                                                                                                18:00

                                                                                                                21:00




                                                                                                                                     0:00

                                                                                                                                                    3:00

                                                                                                                                                                  6:00

                                                                                                                                                                           9:00

                                                                                                                                                                                   12:00

                                                                                                                                                                                            15:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                       18:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       21:00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              18:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              21:00
 Average News Arrival




                        0.15                                                                                            0.15    0.15                                                                                           0.15    0.15                                                                                           0.15


                        0.10                                                                                            0.10    0.10                                                                                           0.10    0.10                                                                                           0.10


                        0.05                                                                                            0.05    0.05                                                                                           0.05    0.05                                                                                           0.05


                        0.00                                                                                            0.00    0.00                                                                                           0.00    0.00                                                                                           0.00
                                                                                                                                            0:00

                                                                                                                                                       3:00

                                                                                                                                                                    6:00

                                                                                                                                                                            9:00

                                                                                                                                                                                   12:00

                                                                                                                                                                                           15:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                    18:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                21:00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           18:00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       21:00
                                    0:00

                                               3:00

                                                            6:00

                                                                     9:00

                                                                            12:00

                                                                                    15:00

                                                                                             18:00

                                                                                                        21:00




                        Notes: The data cover the eight month period from 01 Dec 1999 to 24 July 2000 and are sampled at 20-minute frequency.
                        Currencies are defined as the number of dollars per foreign currency for the euro and sterling, and number of foreign currency
                        per dollar for the yen. The figures plot the average intra-daily pattern of returns, order flow and news arrival over a 24-hour
                        period. Returns are calculated as 100 times the log difference of the mid quote where the mid quote is calculated as the
                        average of the bid and ask quotes. Order flow is the net of the total buys and total sells, where a buy (sell) refers to a trade in
                        which the initiator is a purchaser (seller) of the denominator currency (euro for USD-EUR, sterling for USD-GBP and US dollar
                        for YEN-USD). News Arrival is an indicator variable for the number of Reuters news articles in each 20 minute period.




                                                                                                                                                                              28
             Figure 3: Average Daily Volatility and FFF Seasonal
                                    (in basis points)
3a. USD-EUR

 0.10                                                                             0.10

 0.08                                                                             0.08

 0.06                                                                             0.06

 0.04                                                                             0.04

 0.02                                                                             0.02

 0.00                                                                             0.00
     12:00



              3:00



                       6:00



                                 9:00



                                          12:00



                                                   3:00



                                                             6:00



                                                                      9:00
              AM



                       AM



                                 AM




                                                   PM



                                                             PM



                                                                      PM
      AM




                                           PM
3b. USD-GBP

 0.03                                                                             0.03




 0.02                                                                             0.02




 0.01                                                                             0.01
     12:00



              3:00



                       6:00



                                 9:00



                                          12:00



                                                   3:00



                                                             6:00



                                                                      9:00
              AM



                       AM



                                 AM




                                                   PM



                                                             PM



                                                                      PM
      AM




                                           PM




3c. YEN-USD

 0.10                                                                             0.10

 0.08                                                                             0.08

 0.06                                                                             0.06

 0.04                                                                             0.04

 0.02                                                                             0.02

 0.00                                                                             0.00
     3:00



              6:00



                       9:00



                                 12:00



                                          3:00



                                                   6:00



                                                             9:00



                                                                      12:00
     PM



              PM



                       PM




                                          AM



                                                   AM



                                                             AM
                                  AM




                                                                       PM




Notes: The data cover the eight month period from 01 Dec 1999 to 24 July 2000 and
are sampled at 20-minute frequency. Currencies are defined as the number of dollars
per foreign currency for the euro and sterling, and number of foreign currency per
dollar for the yen. The figures plot the average intra-daily pattern of volatility (jagged
line) and the Flexible Fourier Form seasonal (smooth line) over a 24-hour period. Each
24-hour day starts at midnight, which is 12am GMT for USD-EUR and USD-GBP and
3pm GMT for YEN-USD. Volatility is defined as the absolute return, where returns
are calculated as 100 times the log difference of the mid quote. The mid quote is
calculated as the average of the bid and ask quotes.




                                                     29
                       Table 1. Broad Categories of Intervention News

                                  (a) Intervention and News
                                                              News
                                                Reported               Not Reported
                  Threat of Actual or
    Policymaker




                                                               2
                                   1     Intervention detected     Intervention missed
                  Oral Intervention
                  No Threat of Actual or                     4
                                   3       False intervention
                  Oral Intervention

                          (b) Interventions and Market Expectations
                                                              Market
                                                Expecting              Not Expecting
                  Threat of Actual or
    Policymaker




                                   1                               Surprise Intervention
                  Oral Intervention
                  No Threat of Actual or       Unrequited
                                   3                      5
                  Oral Intervention           intervention


Notes: The data cover the eight month period from 01 Dec 1999 to 24 July 2000.
(1) 38 for the Euro-zone, 134 for Japan, 6 joint; (2) the Japanese conducted
interventions on 5 days in support of the dollar, all were reported by Reuters; (3)
26 for the Euro-zone, 1 for Japan, I for UK, and 20 joint; (4) there was one false
(ECB) intervention; (5) 215 unrequited actual interventions ((Euro-zone: 76,
Japan: 91, joint: 48) and 77 unrequited oral interventions (Euro-zone: 8, joint:
69).




                                                     30
                Table 2: Summary Statistics of Macro News Announcements

Announcement                                          Reported as                Local time
UK Announcements (total = 80)
 RPIX                                                 Y/Y % change               08:30 GMT
 Retail Sales                                         M/M % change               08:30 GMT
 Global trade                                         GBP (billion)              08:30 GMT
 Provisional M4                                       M/M % change               08:30 GMT
 PPI                                                  M/M % change NSA           08:30 GMT
 Industrial Production                                M/M % change               08:30 GMT
 Unemployment                                         thousands                  08:30 GMT
 Current Account                                      GBP (billion)              08:30 GMT

US Announcements (total = 80)
 PPI                                                  M/M % change               08:30 ET
 CPI                                                  M/M % change               08:30 ET
 Industrial Production                                M/M % change               09:15 ET
 Monthly M3                                           change $ Bln               16:30 ET
 Goods & Services Trade Balance                       USD (billion)              08:30 ET
 Civilian Unemployment Rate                           percent                    08:30 ET
 Nonfarm Payrolls                                     thousands                  08:30 ET
 Retail Sales                                         M/M % change               08:30 ET

Euro Area Announcements (total = 58)
 PPI                                                  M/M % change               11:00 GMT
 Harmonised CPI                                       M/M % change               11:00 GMT
 Ind Production                                       3M/3M % change             11:00 GMT
 M3                                                   Y/Y % change               09:00 GMT
 Trade ex-EMU prel. EUR                               EUR (billion)              11:00 GMT
 Unemployment rate                                    percent                    11:00 GMT

Japanese Announcements (total = 122)
 Current Account                                      billions of Yen            23:50 GMT
 Adjusted Merchandise Trade Balance                   billions of Yen            23:50 GMT
 CPI                                                  M/M % change               23:00 GMT
 CPI Tokyo                                            M/M % change               23:00 GMT
 Crude Oil Imports                                    Y/Y % change               23:30 GMT
 Domestic Wholesale Price Index                                                  23:50 GMT
 GDP                                                  Q/Q % change               23:50 GMT
 Housing Starts                                       Y/Y % change               05:00 GMT
 Job-to-Applicant Ratio                                                          23:00 GMT
 Large Scale Retail Sales                             Y/Y % change               23:50 GMT
 Machine Orders                                       M/M % change               05:00 GMT
 Merchandise Trade Balance Total                      billions of Yen            23:50 GMT
 Money Supply                                         Y/Y % change               23:50 GMT
 Preliminary Industrial Production                    M/M % change               23:50 GMT
 Tankan Survey Manufacturing                                                     23:50 GMT
 Tertiary Industry Index                              M/M % change               23:50 GMT
 Unemployment Rate                                                               23:00 GMT
 Vehicle Sales                                        Y/Y % change               00:00 GMT
 Workers' Household Spending                          Y/Y % change               04:30 GMT

Notes: The data cover the eight month period from 01 Dec 1999 to 24 July 2000. M/M% change refers to
month-on-month percentage change. 3M/3M% change is three month-on-three month percentage change.
Q/Q% change refers to quarter-on-quarter percentage change. Y/Y% change is year-on-year percentage
change. NSA refers to non-seasonally adjusted. 22 GMT is 7am in Japan.




                                                 31
     Table 3: Summary Statistics for Returns, Volatility, Order Flow and
                        Transaction Frequency

a. USD-EUR

                        Mid                              Net Order Order Flow Transaction
                       Quote     Return     Volatility     Flow     Volatility Frequency
Mean                    0.97      0.00        5.55         0.27        1.14         30.36
Variance                0.04      9.99        8.30        13.04       1.73          52.13
Skewness                0.10     -0.13        2.93         0.53       2.04          2.30
Kurtosis                2.87     12.07       14.56        17.62       11.62         11.27
Autocorrelation lags
         1              0.99      0.13        0.47         0.04       0.86          0.85
         5              0.98      0.05        0.30         0.02       0.61          0.56
        10              0.98       0.01       0.19         -0.01      0.38          0.32
        20              0.97      -0.02       0.06         0.00       -0.03         -0.04


b. USD-GBP

                        Mid                              Net Order Order Flow Transaction
                       Quote     Return     Volatility     Flow     Volatility Frequency
Mean                   1.57       -0.03       2.06         0.42        1.07         28.02
Variance               0.05       2.88        2.01         7.88        1.17         41.51
Skewness               -0.32      0.00        1.40         0.38        1.39         2.24
Kurtosis                1.83      5.01        7.92        11.40        5.09         9.37
Autocorrelation lags
         1              1.00      0.01        0.36         0.04        0.80         0.79
         5              1.00      0.02        0.26         0.02        0.56         0.49
        10              1.00      0.00        0.19         0.00        0.35         0.27
        20              1.00      0.01        0.12         0.00        0.00         -0.11


c. YEN-USD

                        Mid                              Net Order Order Flow Transaction
                       Quote     Return     Volatility     Flow     Volatility Frequency
Mean                   106.29     0.01        7.01         0.06        0.26         2.83
Variance                2.28     14.06       12.19         2.98        0.36         4.96
Skewness                -0.19     0.17        4.23        0.18         1.91         3.30
Kurtosis                 3.15    21.82       26.83        20.46        8.45         20.50
Autocorrelation lags
         1              0.98      0.07        0.49         0.15        0.66          0.66
         5              0.95      0.04        0.17         0.04        0.47          0.43
        10              0.93      0.03        0.11         0.02        0.32          0.27
        20              0.91      0.01        0.04         -0.01       0.11          0.11

Notes: The data cover the eight month period from 01 Dec 1999 to 24 July 2000 and are
sampled at 20-minute frequency. Currencies are defined as the number of dollars per
foreign currency for the euro and sterling, and number of foreign currency per dollar for
the yen. The mid quote is calculated as the average of the bid and ask quotes. Returns
are defined as 100 times the log difference of the mid quote. Volatility is defined as the
absolute return. Order flow is the net of the total buys and total sells, where a buy (sell)
refers to a trade in which the initiator is a purchaser (seller) of the denominator currency
(euro for USD-EUR, sterling for USD-GBP and the US dollar for the YEN-USD). Order
flow volatility is the standard deviation of order flow and transaction frequency is the
number of actual trades in each 20-minute period.



                                                         32
                               Table 4: Contemporaneous Correlations

a. USD-EUR
                                                                                 Order
                                           Total Buy Total Sell       Order      Flow      Transaction Reuters
                          Return Volatility Orders Orders             Flow      Volatility Frequency    News
Return                       1         …          …         …           …          …          …            …
Volatility                -0.011       1          …         …           …          …          …            …
Total Buy Orders           0.108     0.321        1         …           …          …          …            …
Total Sell Orders         -0.141     0.324      0.882        1          …          …          …            …
Order Flow                 0.511     0.011      0.292     -0.193         1         …          …            …
Order Flow Volatility     -0.023     0.317      0.921     0.934       0.022        1          …            …
Transaction Frequency     -0.015     0.333     0.971      0.969       0.054      0.956         1           …
Reuters News               0.005     0.018     -0.007     -0.007      -0.001    -0.008      -0.007         1


b. USD-GBP
                                                                                 Order
                                           Total Buy Total Sell       Order      Flow      Transaction Reuters
                          Return Volatility Orders Orders             Flow      Volatility Frequency    News
Return                       1         …         …            …         …          …          …            …
Volatility                 -0.033      1         …            …         …          …          …            …
Total Buy Orders            0.050      0.397     1            …         …          …          …            …
Total Sell Orders          -0.091      0.397     0.930        1         …          …          …            …
Order Flow                  0.376      0.013     0.222       -0.151      1         …          …            …
Order Flow Volatility      -0.025      0.452     0.909        0.908     0.037      1          …            …
Transaction Frequency      -0.020      0.404     0.983        0.982     0.038    0.925         1           …
Reuters News               -0.001     -0.008    -0.023       -0.017    -0.016   -0.023      -0.022         1


c. YEN-USD
                                                                                 Order
                                           Total Buy Total Sell       Order      Flow      Transaction Reuters
                          Return Volatility Orders Orders             Flow      Volatility Frequency    News
Return                       1         …         …            …       …            …          …            …
Volatility                  0.014      1         …            …       …            …          …            …
Total Buy Orders            0.120      0.180     1            …       …            …          …            …
Total Sell Orders          -0.111      0.168     0.469        1       …            …          …            …
Order Flow                  0.224      0.016     0.533       -0.497    1           …          …            …
Order Flow Volatility       0.010      0.226     0.799        0.782 0.036          1          …            …
Transaction Frequency       0.007      0.203     0.861        0.853 0.028        0.922         1           …
Reuters News               -0.003     -0.008    -0.011        0.010 -0.020       0.003      -0.001         1




Notes: The data cover the eight month period from 01 Dec 1999 to 24 July 2000 and are sampled at 20-
minute frequency. Currencies are defined as the number of dollars per foreign currency for the euro and
sterling, and number of foreign currency per dollar for the yen. Returns are defined as 100 times the log
difference of the mid quote where the mid quote is calculated as the average of the bid and ask quotes.
Volatility is defined as the absolute return. Order flow is the net of the total buys and total sells, where a
buy (sell) refers to a trade in which the initiator is a purchaser (seller) of the denominator currency (euro for
USD-EUR, sterling for USD-GBP and the US dollar for the YEN-USD). Order flow volatility is the standard
deviation of order flow and transaction frequency is the number of actual trades in each 20-minute period.
Reuters News is the number of intervention news reports in each 20 minute period.




                                                        33
                                                   Table 5: The Influence of Intervention News on Returns

                                                            USD-EUR                                         USD-GBP                                      YEN-USD

                                                                   Benchmark +                                   Benchmark +                                    Benchmark +
Independent Variables                             Benchmark        Reuters News                  Benchmark       Reuters News                  Benchmark        Reuters News
 Constant                                         0.0000          -0.0003                       -0.0004          -0.0003                      0.0003           0.0007
 Japanese Intervention Indicator
    leads 2-6                                    0.0026           0.0021                        -0.0031          -0.0038                      -0.0001          -0.0213
    lead 1                                       -0.0030          0.0010                        -0.0041          -0.0068                      -0.0615 **       -0.0938   **
    lag 0                                        -0.0014          -0.0245                       0.0226           0.0191                       -0.0394 *        -0.0600   **
    lag 1                                        0.0005           0.0034                        -0.0075 *        -0.0097 **                   -0.0344          -0.0450   *
    lags 2-6                                     0.0002           0.0008                        0.0017           0.0011                       -0.0368 *        -0.0459   **
 Lagged Dependent variable
    lag 1                                         0.1205 ***       0.1116 ***                   0.0147           0.0125                       0.0626           0.0577
    lag 2                                         0.1014 ***       0.0946 ***                   0.0084           0.0074                       0.1217 ***       0.1172 ***
Macro Surprises
  UK                                             0.0083           0.0072                        0.0053           0.0049                        0.0005           0.0000
  US                                             -0.0117          -0.0115                       0.0024           0.0024                       -0.0067          -0.0065
  Euro-zone                                      0.0181           0.0160                        0.0027           0.0026                       -0.0162          -0.0177
  Japan                                          0.0241 **        0.0236 **                     0.0038           0.0034                       -0.0057          -0.0056
                                                                                   Wald                                           Wald                                          Wald
                                                                            F-test Test                                    F-test Test                                   F-test Test
News from Policymakers
 Euro-zone
    Oral Policy                                                   0.0285 ***                                     0.0056                                        0.0992 ***
    Intervention                                                  0.0625 ***        **                           0.0053                                        0.0041 ***
    No intervenion                                                -0.0676 ***       *                            -0.0172                                       0.0076 ***
 Japan
    Oral Policy                                                   -0.2142 ***       ***                          -0.0207                                       0.0846 ***
    Intervention                                                  0.0064 ***                                     0.0077                                        0.0355 ***
    No intervenion                                                -0.5935 ***       ***                          -0.0514                                       0.0795 ***
 UK
    Oral Policy                                                   -0.1032 ***                                    0.0269                                        -0.0804 ***
    Intervention                                                  0.0403 ***                                     -0.0599                                       -0.0273 ***
    No intervenion                                                -0.2720 ***                                       …                                          -0.3854 ***
 Joint
    Intervention                                                  0.0513 ***        ***                          -0.0039                                       0.1313 ***        *
    No intervenion                                                -0.0391 ***                                    -0.0001                                       -0.0360 ***
News about Market's Expectations
 Euro-zone
    Intervention                                                  0.0239 ***                                     -0.0574                                       0.0495 ***
    No intervenion                                                -0.0649 ***                                    0.0079                                        -0.0955 ***
 Japan
    Intervention                                                   0.1148 ***                                    0.0569            *                           -0.5120 ***       **
 Joint
    Intervention                                                  0.0800 ***                                     0.0145                                        0.0885 ***
    No intervenion                                                -0.0832 ***       ***                          0.0016                                        0.0260 ***
News about Policymaker-Market Interactions
    Euro-zone intervention denied                                  0.0021 ***                                       …                                          -0.5978 ***       **
    Market detects Japan intervention                              0.0054 ***                                    -0.0010                                       0.0054 ***
News about Unrequited Interventions
 Euro-zone
    Unrequited actual intervention                                -0.0008 ***                                    0.0069            **                          -0.0035 ***
    Unrequited oral intervention                                  -0.0611 ***                                    -0.0317                                       0.0651 ***
 Japan
    Unrequited actual intervention                                 0.0335 ***                                    -0.0031                                       -0.0099 ***
 Joint
    Unrequited actual intervention                                -0.0266 ***                                    -0.0027                                       -0.0336 ***
    Unrequited oral intervention                                  0.0067 ***                                     0.0020                                        -0.0781 ***       **

Rbar-squared                                      0.0275           0.0317                       -0.0001          0.0002                       0.0194           0.0178
F-test (all regressors)                           35.91 ***         4.23 ***                      0.97            1.03                         25.06 ***        2.76 ***

Notes: Returns are calculated at 20 minute frequency and are defined as 100 times the log difference of the mid quote where the mid quote is calculated as the average of the
bid and ask quotes. *, ** and *** represent significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent respectively. Significance for the upper panel of the table is based on the t-statistic. Coefficients
for each "news" regressor (in the lower panel of the table) represent the sum of all coefficients from lead 6 to lag 6. The individual F-tests are exclusion restrictions for the six
leads and lags of each regressor. The Wald tests are for the null hypothesis that the sum of the six leads and lags is equal to zero.




                                                                             34
                                Table 6: The Influence of Intervention News on Returns in "High Volatility" and "High News Arrival" Periods

                                                                              "High volatility"                                                                "High news arrival"

Independent Varia$Bles                                 USD-EUR                  USD-G$BP                   YEN-USD                        USD-EUR                  USD-G$BP                   YEN-USD
  Constant                                          -0.0008                   -0.0003                   0.0010                         -0.0004                   -0.0003                   0.0007
  Japanese Intervention
    leads 2-6                                       -0.0054                   -0.0028                   -0.0049                        -0.0014                   -0.0018                   -0.0234
    lead 1                                          -0.0030                   -0.0045                   -0.0701       **               -0.0028                   -0.0068                   -0.0942       **
    lag 0                                           -0.0084                   -0.0004                   -0.0357                        -0.0206                   0.0192                    -0.0595       **
    lag 1                                           0.0021                    -0.0083       *           -0.0441        *                0.0049                   -0.0094     **            -0.0475       **
    lags 2-6                                        0.0029                     0.0027                   -0.0441       **               -0.0009                   0.0012                    -0.0455       **
  Lagged Dependent variable
    lag 1                                            0.0730     ***           0.0163                    0.0491                          0.1052     ***           0.0154                    0.0555
    lag 2                                            0.0723     ***           0.0054                    0.1082      ***                 0.0879     ***           0.0057                    0.1167      ***
Macro Surprises
  UK                                                0.0068                    0.0059                    0.0024                          0.0068                   0.0052                    0.0002
  US                                                -0.0103                   0.0022                    0.0090                         -0.0108                   0.0025                    -0.0063
  Euro-zone                                         -0.0006                   0.0017                    -0.0162                         0.0148                   0.0027                    -0.0166
  Japan                                             0.0228       **           0.0035                    -0.0056                         0.0232      **           0.0033                    -0.0050
                                                                     Wald                      Wald                      Wald                           Wald                      Wald                      Wald
Interaction Terms                                             F-test Test               F-test Test               F-test Test                    F-test Test               F-test Test               F-test Test
 News from Policymakers
    Euro-zone
       Oral Policy                                  -0.2796 ***       **      -0.0171 ***               1.5151 ***                     0.0131 ***        ***     0.0017                    -0.0358 ***
       Intervention                                 1.0991 ***                -0.2042 ***               0.2584 ***                     -0.0763 ***       ***     -0.0360                    0.0106 ***
       No intervenion                               -0.8976 ***       ***      0.0222 ***               0.2747 ***                     0.0765 ***        ***     0.0035                    0.1191 ***
    Japan
       Oral Policy                                  -2.5053 ***       ***     0.0049 ***                -0.6283 ***                     0.0350 ***       ***     -0.0028                   -0.1048 ***
       Intervention                                 0.1362 ***                0.0588 ***                0.4517 ***                     -0.0363 ***       ***     -0.0117                   -0.0558 ***
       No intervenion                                  …                        …                          …                           -0.0314 ***       ***     -0.0371                   -0.0373 ***
    UK
       Intervention                                  0.1290 ***               0.0566 ***                -0.7862 ***                    -0.2598 ***       ***     -0.0609                   0.2572 ***
    Joint
       Intervention                                 0.1564 ***                -0.0214 ***               0.5202 ***                      0.3233 ***       ***     -0.0413                   -0.0507 ***
       No intervenion                               -0.3180 ***       ***     -0.0036 ***               -0.9098 ***                    -0.2488 ***       ***     -0.0441                   0.0804 ***
 News about Market's Expectations
    Euro-zone
       Intervention                                 -0.3286 ***               0.0250 ***                1.8344 ***                     -4.0615 ***       ***     -8.5049                  -19.7749 ***
       No intervenion                               -0.7514 ***               0.0811 ***                0.3384 ***         ***         33.8263 ***       ***     8.9223                    -6.1190 ***
    Japan
       Intervention                                  0.0242 ***               0.0477 ***                0.6929 ***                     -0.0202 ***       ***     0.0035                    -0.0209 ***
    Joint
       Intervention                                 2.6037 ***                -0.1261 ***               1.6604 ***                      0.2984 ***       ***     0.0025                    -0.2385 ***
       No intervenion                               -0.7002 ***                0.0035 ***               -0.3037 ***        ***         -0.1168 ***       ***     -0.0125                   0.0000 ***
 News about Policymaker-Market Interactions
       Euro-zone intervention denied                   …                        …                       -1.0636 ***                    -0.0997 ***       ***        …                      0.0525 ***
       Market detects Japan intervention             0.5193 ***       ***     0.0233 ***                1.4374 ***                     -0.0407 ***       ***     -0.0151                   0.1471 ***
 News about Unrequited Interventions
    Euro-zone
       Unrequited actual intervention               -0.0046 ***       **      0.0106 ***          ***   0.0394 ***                     0.0063 ***        ***     0.0090                    -0.0136 ***
       Unrequited oral intervention                    …                        …                       -0.1560 ***                    -0.0384 ***       ***     -0.0116                   -0.0563 ***
    Japan
       Unrequited actual intervention                0.1892 ***               -0.0914 ***               -0.8888 ***                     0.0887 ***       ***     0.0318                    -0.0321 ***
    Joint
       Unrequited actual intervention               -0.1281 ***               0.1267 ***                0.9163 ***                     -0.2688 ***       ***     0.0766                    0.1690 ***
       Unrequited oral intervention                 -0.2781 ***               -0.1580 ***               -0.7987 ***                     0.2649 ***       ***     0.0016                    -0.1750 ***

Rbar-squared                                         0.1083                   0.0235                    0.0611                          0.0363                   -0.0004                   0.0168
F-test (all regressors)                               8.82 ***                 2.50 ***                  5.29 ***                        3.45 ***                  0.98                     2.11 ***

Notes: Returns are calculated at 20 minute frequency and are defined as 100 times the log difference of the mid quote where the mid quote is calculated as the average of the bid and ask quotes. *, **
and *** represent significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent respectively. Significance for the upper panel of the table is based on the t-statistic. Coefficients for each "news" regressor (in the lower panel of
the table) represent the sum of all coefficients from lead 6 to lag 6. The individual F-tests are exclusion restrictions for the six leads and lags of each regressor. The Wald tests are for the null
hypothesis that the sum of the six leads and lags is equal to zero.




                                                                                        35
                                               Table 7: The Influence of Intervention News on Volatility

                                                         USD-EUR                                    USD-GBP                                       YEN-USD

                                                                Benchmark +                                Benchmark +                                  Benchmark +
Independent Variables                         Benchmark        Reuters News               Benchmark       Reuters News                 Benchmark       Reuters News
   Constant                                   -0.0001         -0.0004                     0.0000          0.0000                      -0.0001         -0.0001
   Japanese Intervention
     leads 2-6                                -0.0015         -0.0044                     0.0072          0.0065                      -0.0256         -0.0281
     lead 1                                   -0.0411   ***   -0.0426 ***                 -0.0133 ***     -0.0159 ***                 -0.0068         -0.0109
     lag 0                                    -0.0299   ***   -0.0228                     0.0093          0.0110                      -0.0223 *       -0.0352
     lag 1                                    -0.0255   ***   -0.0266 **                  -0.0164 **      -0.0147 **                  -0.0130         -0.0125
     lags 2-6                                 -0.0171   ***   -0.0163 **                  -0.0049 *       -0.0045 *                   -0.0094         -0.0076
   Lagged Dependent variable
     lag 1                                     0.3191   ***   0.3126   ***                0.2232    ***   0.2214    ***               0.4385    ***    0.4339   ***
     lag 2                                     0.1236   ***   0.1191   ***                0.1267    ***   0.1253    ***               0.0323           0.0299
     lag 3                                     0.1037   ***   0.1015   ***                0.0948    ***   0.0933    ***               0.0595    ***    0.0575   ***
     lag 4                                     0.0794   ***   0.0791   ***                0.0858    ***   0.0880    ***               0.0275    *      0.0298   *
     lag 5                                     0.0466   ***   0.0478   ***                0.0859    ***   0.0877    ***               0.0207           0.0216   *
     lag 6                                     0.0467   ***   0.0496   ***                0.0685    ***   0.0698    ***               0.0456    ***    0.0468   ***
Macro Surprises
  UK                                          -0.0077         -0.0071                     0.0000          -0.0001                     -0.0036         -0.0042
  US                                           0.0079         0.0080                      -0.0026         -0.0024                     0.0168          0.0177
  Euro-zone                                    0.0042         0.0029                      -0.0045         -0.0037                     -0.0047         -0.0059
  Japan                                        0.0167 *       0.0169 **                   0.0019          0.0019                      0.0030          0.0029
                                                                                Wald                                         Wald                                        Wald
                                                                       F-test   Test                                F-test   Test                               F-test   Test
News from Policymakers
 Euro-zone
    Oral Policy                                               -0.0223 ***                                 0.0036 ***                                  -0.0274 ***
    Intervention                                              0.0002 ***                                  -0.0044 ***                                 -0.0210 ***
    No intervenion                                            -0.0234 ***                                 -0.0001 ***                                 -0.0186 ***
 Japan
    Oral Policy                                               -0.0216 ***                                 -0.0071 ***        *                        -0.0377 ***
    Intervention                                              -0.0130 ***                                 -0.0002 ***                                 0.0038 ***
    No intervenion                                            0.2939 ***                                  0.0057 ***         *                        -0.1088 ***
 UK
    Oral Policy                                               0.0412 ***                                  -0.0137 ***                                 -0.0602 ***
    Intervention                                              0.0321 ***                                  0.0082 ***         **                       0.0082 ***
    No intervenion                                            0.0500 ***                                  0.0000 ***         ***                      0.0290 ***
 Joint
    Intervention                                              0.0708 ***                                  -0.0022 ***                                 0.0166 ***         *
    No intervenion                                            0.0209 ***                                  0.0027 ***                                  -0.0215 ***
News about Market's Expectations
 Euro-zone
    Intervention                                              0.0834 ***                                  0.0181 ***                                   0.0753 ***
    No intervenion                                            -0.0176 ***                                 -0.0101 ***                                  0.0032 ***
 Japan
    Intervention                                              -0.0220 ***                                 0.0349 ***                                   0.2280 ***
 Joint
    Intervention                                              -0.0184 ***       **                        -0.0004 ***                                  0.0110 ***
    No intervenion                                            -0.0320 ***                                 0.0025 ***                                   0.0035 ***
News about Policymaker-Market Interactions
    Euro-zone intervention denied                             0.0174 ***                                  0.0000 ***         ***                       0.3014 ***        ***
    Market detects Japan intervention                         -0.0134 ***                                 -0.0015 ***                                  0.0002 ***
News about Unrequited Interventions
 Euro-zone
    Unrequited actual intervention                            0.0007 ***                                  0.0033 ***                                  -0.0116 ***
    Unrequited oral intervention                              -0.0606 ***                                 -0.0172 ***                                 -0.0536 ***
 Japan
    Unrequited actual intervention                            0.0228 ***                                  -0.0004 ***                                  0.0029 ***
 Joint
    Unrequited actual intervention                            0.0002 ***        *                         -0.0049 ***                                 -0.0208 ***
    Unrequited oral
                 q intervention
                           _ g                                0.0013 ***        ***                       -0.0008 ***                                 0.0078 ***


Rbar-squared                                   0.2901         0.2910                      0.2135          0.2131                      0.2541           0.2548
F-test (all regressors)                          360  ***       40   ***                    209  ***        25   ***                    296  ***         33   ***

Notes: Returns are calculated at 20 minute frequency and are defined as 100 times the log difference of the mid quote where the mid quote is calculated as the average of
the bid and ask quotes. *, ** and *** represent significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent respectively. Significance for the upper panel of the table is based on the t-statistic.
Coefficients for each "news" regressor (in the lower panel of the table) represent the sum of all coefficients from lead 6 to lag 6. The individual F-tests are exclusion
restrictions for the six leads and lags of each regressor. The Wald tests are for the null hypothesis that the sum of the six leads and lags is equal to zero.




                                                                             36
                                           Table 8: The Influence of Intervention News on Transaction Frequency

                                                                      USD-EUR                                        USD-GBP                                        YEN-USD

                                                                              Benchmark +                                   Benchmark +                                    Benchmark +
Independent Variables                                       Benchmark        Reuters News                  Benchmark       Reuters News                   Benchmark        Reuters News
   Constant                                                -0.0901          -0.1202                       -0.1033         -0.0058                        0.0238           0.0228
   Japanese Intervention
     leads 2-6                                             -4.1961   ***    -1.0888                       -1.2462         -0.0416                       -0.7591   ***    -0.8314 ***
     lead 1                                                -4.6617   **     -2.2000                       -4.6529         -2.6797                       -0.6516   ***    -0.5112
     lag 0                                                 -4.9106   **     0.4313                        -5.0647 **      -2.9112 *                     -0.7455   ***    -0.5577
     lag 1                                                 -4.8273   **     -2.6017                       -6.4330 **      -4.9652 *                     -0.5991   ***    -0.5347 **
     lags 2-6                                              -5.4774   ***    -5.3553 ***                   -4.4389 ***     -3.4090 **                    -0.5534   ***    -0.6662 ***
   Lagged Dependent variable
     lag 1                                                 0.7755 ***        0.7699 ***                    0.6057 ***      0.6012 ***                    0.4559   ***     0.4528   ***
     lag 2                                                 0.0427            0.0435                        0.1520 ***      0.1499 ***                    0.1610   ***     0.1637   ***
     lag 3                                                 0.0516 **        0.0535 **                      0.1126 ***      0.1135 ***                    0.0806   ***     0.0777   ***
     lag 4                                                 0.0286           0.0302                         0.0003          0.0018                        0.0471   ***     0.0464   ***
     lag 5                                                 0.0006           0.0022                        -0.0130         -0.0119                        0.0411   **      0.0432   **
     lag 6                                                 -0.0202          -0.0228                       -0.0082         -0.0075                        0.0189           0.0183
Macro Surprises
  UK                                                       -0.7112          -0.4355                       -3.4219         -3.3835                       0.6023           0.6344
  US                                                       -3.2518          -3.1317                       -8.1411         -7.4204                       -0.1137          -0.0810
  Euro-zone                                                5.0465           4.3927                        2.8137          4.0070                        0.1512           0.1080
  Japan                                                    1.2362           1.2640                        3.2781          3.3334                        0.0457           0.0578
                                                                                               Wald                                          Wald                                           Wald
                                                                                      F-test   Test                                 F-test   Test                                  F-test   Test
News from Policymakers
 Euro-zone
    Oral Policy                                                             -0.8451 ***                                   5.4976 ***                                     -1.1338 ***        *
    Intervention                                                            -7.8173 ***                                   2.5021 ***                                     0.0237 ***
    No intervenion                                                          -2.4841 ***                                   -4.6132 ***                                    -0.1862 ***
 Japan
    Oral Policy                                                             -9.5428 ***                                   -13.8889 ***                                   -3.2321 ***
    Intervention                                                            -5.5828 ***                                    -3.2929 ***                                   0.4353 ***
    No intervenion                                                          -8.8341 ***                                   -16.4646 ***                                   -0.6557 ***
 UK
    Oral Policy                                                             -4.6169 ***                                   -35.9528 ***                                   -3.6353 ***
    Intervention                                                            21.2232 ***        **                          24.4042 ***       ***                         -0.7175 ***
    No intervenion                                                          62.0837 ***                                     0.0000 ***       ***                         -2.5963 ***        ***
 Joint
    Intervention                                                           -15.1287 ***                                   -6.5957 ***                                    1.4204 ***
    No intervenion                                                          -3.5515 ***                                   13.2230 ***                                    -2.2718 ***        *
News about Market's Expectations
 Euro-zone
    Intervention                                                            0.2503 ***         **                         15.9818 ***                                    0.1355 ***
    No intervenion                                                         -17.6266 ***                                   -14.3607 ***                                   -1.3407 ***
 Japan
    Intervention                                                           -61.4805 ***        ***                        -27.1369 ***                                   -3.2594 ***
 Joint
    Intervention                                                             2.2816 ***                                   0.9085 ***                                     -0.4039 ***
    No intervenion                                                          10.1862 ***                                   30.3033 ***                                    7.9178 ***         ***
News about Policymaker-Market Interactions
    Euro-zone intervention denied                                          -19.4562 ***                                    0.0000 ***        ***                         5.4402 ***         ***
    Market detects Japan intervention                                       -1.1506 ***                                   -8.5638 ***                                    -0.9340 ***
News about Unrequited Interventions
 Euro-zone
    Unrequited actual intervention                                          14.9062 ***                                    2.2208 ***                                    0.7883 ***
    Unrequited oral intervention                                            -9.2145 ***                                   -11.2818 ***                                   -1.0867 ***
 Japan
    Unrequited actual intervention                                          7.5046 ***                                     4.4229 ***                                    -0.2101 ***
 Joint
    Unrequited actual intervention                                          -2.4655 ***                                   -3.3131 ***                                    0.0766 ***
    Unrequited oral intervention                                            -3.8946 ***                                   -5.5740 ***                                    -0.6304 ***        *

Rbar-squared                                               0.7444           0.7446                        0.6529           0.6522                        0.4814           0.4834
F-test (all regressors)                                     2557 ***          279  ***                     1440 ***          170  ***                      805  ***         89   ***

Notes: Transaction frequency is calculated as the number of transactions in any given 20 minute period. *, ** and *** represent significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent respectively. Significance
for the upper panel of the table is based on the t-statistic. Coefficients for each "news" regressor (in the lower panel of the table) represent the sum of all coefficients from lead 6 to lag 6.
The individual F-tests are exclusion restrictions for the six leads and lags of each regressor. The Wald tests are for the null hypothesis that the sum of the six leads and lags is equal to
zero.




                                                                                   37
                      Table 9: The Influence of Order Flow on Returns



                                                                Return on order flow
Independent Variables                            USD-EUR              USD-GBP              YEN-USD
 Constant                                        -0.0007             -0.0008 ***          -0.0004
 Lagged Dependent Variable
   lag 1                                         0.1675 ***           0.0219               0.0569
   lag 2                                         0.1092 ***           0.0279 **            0.1166 ***

Order Flow
  Contemporaneous                                0.0039 ***          0.0014 ***           0.0104 ***
  lag1                                           -0.0010 ***         -0.0002 ***          -0.0008
  lags 2-6                                       0.0000              0.0000               -0.0003 **
Rbar-squared                                     0.0279               0.1429               0.0677
F-test (all regressors)                           1310 ***              448  ***             221  ***

Notes: Returns and order flow are calculated at 20 minute frequency. Returns are defined as 100
times the log difference of the mid quote .The mid quote is calculated as the average of the bid and
ask quotes. Order flow is the net of the total buys and total sells, where a buy (sell) refers to a trade
in which the initiator is a purchaser (seller) of the denominator currency (euro for USD-EUR, sterling
for USD-GBP and US dollar for YEN-USD). *, ** and *** represent significance at 10, 5 and 1
percent, respectively. Significance is based on the t-statistic.




                                                                    38
                                              Table 10. The Influence of Intervention News on Order Flow

                                                              USD-EUR                                        USD-GBP                                         YEN-USD

                                                                    Benchmark +                                   Benchmark +                                    Benchmark +
Independent Variables                               Benchmark       Reuters News                  Benchmark       Reuters News                  Benchmark        Reuters News
 Constant                                            0.2666         0.2759 **                    0.3996 ***       0.4634 ***                    0.0506 *         0.0851 ***
 Japanese Intervention
    leads 2-6                                       -0.0745        -0.5618                       0.8630           0.6523                       0.2239    *       0.0924
    lead 1                                          -0.0506   **   1.2326                        -1.0250          -0.6853                       0.0915          -0.1048
    lag 0                                           -0.2786   **   -0.5813                       1.4212           1.9847                       -0.0975   **     -0.1959
    lag 1                                           -0.2626   **   0.0313                        -0.6675          -0.6011                      -0.0596   **     -0.1645
    lags 2-6                                        -0.2666   **   0.0604                        -0.5724 *        -0.7803                      -0.0506   *      -0.0836
 Lagged Dependent variable
    lag 1                                           0.0399          0.0379 **                    0.0407 **        0.0370 **                     0.1448 ***       0.1405 ***
    lag 2                                           -0.0202 ***    -0.0237                       0.0091           0.0068                        0.0449 **        0.0440 **
Macro Surprises
  UK                                                3.0779          2.9382                       2.7724           2.6714                       -0.6831          -0.7494
  US                                                -0.3832        -0.3064                       1.7723           1.7367                       -0.3029          -0.2943
  Euro-zone                                         2.1095          1.8050                       -0.8338          -1.1205                      -0.5074          -0.5557
  Japan                                             -0.5666 ***    -0.7007                       1.1653           1.0225                       -0.0051          -0.0362
                                                                                     Wald                                          Wald                                          Wald
                                                                              F-test Test                                   F-test Test                                   F-test Test
News from Policymakers
 Euro-zone
    Oral Policy                                                    5.6522                                         -0.9875                                       -0.1881 ***
    Intervention                                                   5.6845            *                            -5.2476                                       0.5707 ***
    No intervenion                                                 -4.9886                                         0.9475                                       -0.6269 ***
 Japan
    Oral Policy                                                    -5.1987                                         1.6619                                       -0.8987 ***
    Intervention                                                   0.4738                                         -1.5611                                       0.3872 ***
    No intervenion                                                 -6.2427                                       -13.4875                                        0.4510 ***
 UK
    Oral Policy                                                     -1.5977                                       6.1912                                         -8.3645 ***
    Intervention                                                    7.3140                                       -15.6653           **                           2.7784 ***
    No intervenion                                                 -73.2060          ***                          0.0000                                        -14.0207 ***      **
 Joint
    Intervention                                                   -1.2165                                        6.2558                                        0.9641 ***
    No intervenion                                                  0.3160                                        2.0383            **                          -1.8633 ***
News about Market's Expectations
 Euro-zone
    Intervention                                                   -3.6648           **                           2.1373                                        5.1265 ***
    No intervenion                                                 -3.6073                                        -6.1506                                       -2.6148 ***
 Japan
    Intervention                                                   -0.9566                                       24.0111            **                          -0.5457 ***
 Joint
    Intervention                                                    -3.3238                                       4.4762                                        -2.0084 ***
    No intervenion                                                 -15.1552          **                           -0.1322                                        1.0609 ***       **
News about Policymaker-Market Interactions
    Euro-zone intervention denied                                  3.2289                                         0.0000                                        -12.9331 ***      ***
    Market detects Japan intervention                              -1.0236                                        1.1837                                         -0.3967 ***
News about Unrequited Interventions
 Euro-zone
    Unrequited actual intervention                                  1.3072                                        -1.0556                                       -0.4556 ***       *
    Unrequited oral intervention                                   -10.0007                                        5.7612                                        3.3315 ***
 Japan
    Unrequited actual intervention                                  2.5613                                        -0.6994                                       -0.3581 ***
 Joint
    Unrequited actual intervention                                  0.1258                                        -1.0981                                       1.0570 ***
    Unrequited oral intervention                                    1.7268                                        -1.1626                                       -0.5606 ***

Rbar-squared                                         0.0014         0.0010                       0.0016           0.0013                        0.0244           0.0263
F-test (all regressors)                               2.89 **        1.11                         2.86 **          1.13                          31.43 ***        3.63 ***

Notes: Order flow are calculated at 20 minute frequency. It is the net of the total buys and total sells, where a buy (sell) refers to a trade in which the initiator is a purchaser
(seller) of the denominator currency (euro for USD-EUR, sterling for USD-GBP and US dollar for YEN-USD). *, ** and *** represent significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent
respectively. Significance for the upper panel of the table is based on the t-statistic. Coefficients for each "news" regressor (in the lower panel of the table) represent the sum of
all coefficients from lead 6 to lag 6. The individual F-tests are exclusion restrictions for the six leads and lags of each regressor. The Wald tests are for the null hypothesis that
the sum of the six leads and lags is equal to zero.




                                                                                   39
