                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            IS URBAN DECAY BAD? IS URBAN REVITALIZATION BAD TOO?

                                             Jacob L. Vigdor

                                          Working Paper 12955
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12955


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2007




The author is grateful to Yongsuk Lee, Joshua Kinsler and Patrick Dudley for research assistance,
and to Erzo F.P. Luttmer and seminar participants at Yale University, the 2006 NBER Summer Institute
workshop on Public Economics and Real Estate, and at the 2005 American Real Estate and Urban
Economics Association International Meeting for helpful comments on earlier drafts. Remaining errors
are the author's responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Jacob L. Vigdor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Is Urban Decay Bad? Is Urban Revitalization Bad Too?
Jacob L. Vigdor
NBER Working Paper No. 12955
March 2007
JEL No. D1,R21,R31

                                            ABSTRACT

Many observers argue that urban revitalization harms the poor, primarily by raising rents. Others argue
that urban decline harms the poor by reducing job opportunities, the quality of local public services,
and other neighborhood amenities. While both decay and revitalization can have negative effects if
moving costs are sufficiently high, in general the impact of neighborhood change on utility depends
on the strength of price responses to neighborhood quality changes. Data from the American Housing
Survey are used to estimate a discrete choice model identifying households' willingness-to-pay for
neighborhood quality. These willingness-to-pay estimates are then compared to the actual price changes
that accompany observed changes in neighborhood quality. The results suggest that price increases
associated with revitalization are smaller than most households' willingness to pay for neighborhood
improvements. The results imply that, in general, neighborhood revitalization is more favorable than
neighborhood decline.

Jacob L. Vigdor
Terry Sanford Institute of Public Policy
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
jacob.vigdor@duke.edu
1. Introduction

         For at least two decades, social science has lamented the decline of the economically

integrated neighborhood. The absence of higher-SES households from inner city neighborhoods

has been blamed for a range of urban maladies, ranging from teen pregnancy and high school

dropout rates to poor public services (Wilson 1987; Jencks and Mayer 1990; Ellen and Turner

1997; Vigdor 2006).          The implication of much of this research is that urban decay, by

contributing to reductions in quality of life, has a detrimental influence on those who remain in

declining neighborhoods.

         When the opposite of urban decline occurs, however, social scientists and community

activists alike have often raised a completely different set of concerns.                         In revitalizing

neighborhoods, the primary concern is that poor renter households will be harmed by rising

prices (Schill and Nathan 1983; Marcuse 1986; LeGates and Hartman 1986; Atkinson 2000;

Kennedy and Leonard 2001).1               From a naive perspective, it would thus appear that no

neighborhood change is beneficial to the poor. Basic economic theory suggests, however, that

these tales of the costs of urban decline and renewal are not contradictory, rather they both

ignore potential countervailing benefits – urban decay reduces prices, and urban revitalization

restores quality of life. Indeed, more recent evidence on gentrification suggests that the benefits

exceed costs for the majority of affected households (Vigdor 2002; Braconi and Freeman 2004).2

The goal of this paper is to more formally ground these notions of costs and benefits in an


1 It is generally presumed that owner-occupiers are insulated from rent increases, and benefit from revitalization
  through property value increases (Sinai and Souleles, 2005). Some observers voice concern, however, that
  owners may suffer from large increases in property tax bills or may be at risk for property condemnation if
  revitalization is government-initiated.
2 These studies employ a form of revealed preference analysis to determine whether the benefits of gentrification
  exceed associated price increases, by studying the rate of residential turnover. Both studies find lower rates of
  turnover in neighborhoods undergoing gentrification.

                                                         1
economic model, and to empirically determine whether price changes associated with urban

decay and revitalization are commensurate with the value that households place on neighborhood

quality.

       After a brief review of basic evidence on neighborhood dynamics in the United States,

Section 3 presents a basic model of neighborhood choice, where neighborhoods vary in quality

and housing prices adjust to reflect these quality differences. So long as individual preferences

obey a simple single-crossing property, it is straightforward to show that the impact of an

exogenous change in neighborhood quality depends on the nature of price determination in

equilibrium and the extent of moving costs.        When mobility is universally costless and

equilibrium prices are constrained to exceed some absolute minimum in all neighborhoods,

declines in neighborhood quality have a broad negative impact that extends beyond the decaying

neighborhood itself.   When mobility is sufficiently costly for some group of agents, any large

change in neighborhood quality, for better or worse, may have a negative impact on that group,

particularly if they rent rather than own housing.      Ultimately, theoretical predictions are

ambiguous, which implies that the question of whether decay or revitalization is more harmful is

fundamentally an empirical one.

       In practice, do equilibrium housing price changes in revitalizing neighborhoods render

existing residents worse off? In order to answer this question, it is necessary both to measure

households’ willingness to pay for neighborhood quality and the impact of revitalization on

prices. These two exercises are undertaken in Sections 4 and 5, utilizing longitudinal data on

housing units derived from the metropolitan samples of the American Housing Survey (AHS).

The analysis employs four proxy variables for neighborhood quality: binary indicators for



                                               2
whether a survey enumerator noted abandoned housing within 300 feet of a sampled unit, an

indicator for whether the enumerator observed houses with bars on the windows within the same

radius, an indicator for whether the enumerator observed trash in the street outside the unit, and

an indicator for whether the street itself was in disrepair. In some specifications, factor analysis

is used to combine these four factors into a composite neighborhood quality index. Household

valuations of neighborhood quality are then derived from a discrete choice conditional logit

model of the decisions made by sample respondents who moved into their housing unit within

the past year. Results suggest that households are willing to pay between one and three percent

of their annual income for a one-standard-deviation increase in neighborhood quality. There is

significant evidence of heterogeneity in this valuation.

       The same AHS data are then used to determine the typical price changes associated with

neighborhood decline and revitalization. Consistent with the notion that the chosen quality

indicators distinguish neighborhoods at the low end of the distribution, and that price

differentials in those neighborhoods are determined by consumers with low valuation of

neighborhood quality, price movements associated with quality movements tend to be small.

Across the entire sample of three- to four-year intervals, price increases in revitalizing

neighborhoods are statistically indistinguishable from those in neighborhoods of persistent low

quality. Point estimates suggest that the premium associated with revitalizing neighborhoods is

on the order of one to five percent. Point estimates also suggest that declining neighborhoods

experience price decreases of similar magnitude.

       To address the concern that observed indicators measure latent neighborhood quality with

error, additional specifications employ an instrumental variable strategy, exploiting the



                                                 3
availability of multiple correlated indicators of neighborhood quality in later AHS panels.

Ordinary least squares estimates of neighborhood quality impacts are larger when the sample is

restricted to these later samples, which might reflect the increased precision of instructions given

to enumerators over time. Point estimates from IV specifications are nearly identical to those

from OLS, which suggests that attenuation bias is not a serious concern in the later AHS panels.

The ultimate estimate of the impact of neighborhood revitalization on rents is 9%, a value that

equates to the low end of the estimated willingness-to-pay distribution.

       The analysis concludes by directly imputing changes in utility for householders who

persistently reside in neighborhoods undergoing decay and revitalization.           Imputed utility

changes associated with revitalization are positive in the overwhelming majority of cases. While

it is quite possible that these computations are skewed by endogenous exit from neighborhoods

on the part of households who expect to be worse off following a quality change, there is little

evidence of selective out-migration from revitalizing or declining neighborhoods.

       Section 6 offers concluding observations.


2. How widespread are decay and revitalization?

       Social scientists have repeatedly documented the rise and decline of individual cities, and

have similarly analyzed both the causes and consequences of metropolitan obsolescence.

Histories of individual cities provide substantial insight into the factors that promote and retard

decay (Glaeser 2003; Gyourko 2005; Glaeser 2005).           Though there are a few noteworthy

analyses of individual neighborhoods (e.g. Gans 1962), the importance of idiosyncratic factors in

their growth and decline, coupled with the comparative absence of longitudinal data, render such

research efforts difficult if not impossible.


                                                 4
        The empirical analysis in this paper will focus on neighborhoods in one of eighteen US

metropolitan areas included in a subset of American Housing Survey (AHS) metropolitan files.

While the set of included areas is not necessarily representative of the entire country, it does

incorporate a number of cities that underwent notable declines in the late twentieth century (e.g.

Detroit, Newark, Philadelphia), cities that grew consistently over the same time period (e.g. Los

Angeles, Phoenix, Tampa), and some that declined through the early part of the sample period

before beginning an urban renaissance (e.g. Boston, San Francisco).

        In these metropolitan areas, the AHS tracked two sets of housing units longitudinally,

with one set observed in 1974, 1977 and 1981, and the second set observed in 1985, 1989 and

1993.3 These longitudinal observations permit the construction of variables measuring decay and

revitalization in individual neighborhoods.                 While AHS enumerators asked household

respondents many subjective questions about neighborhood quality, the enumerators themselves

recorded a set of observations on the area immediately surrounding each sampled housing unit –

either on the same street or within 300 feet – during each survey wave. 4 Among the enumerator-

coded variables is an indicator for whether there were abandoned housing units in the immediate

vicinity of the sample unit. This variable will serve as the primary indicator of neighborhood

decline in the empirical portion of this paper. Three additional enumerator-coded variables, also

potentially indicative of decline, note whether nearby housing units have bars on their windows,

whether the streets are in disrepair, and whether there is litter on the streets and sidewalks.

These additional indicators are available only in the later AHS panel. While these indicators are

3 The second panel is available in only 11 of the 18 MSAs.
4 The “same street” criterion applied in 1974, 1977 and 1981; the “within 300 feet” criterion applied thereafter.
  As will be seen in Table 2, the result of this change is to reduce the frequency of observed changes in
  neighborhood quality. Results reported below indicate that the change in methodology increased the signal-to-
  noise ratio of these indicators.

                                                        5
either dichotomous or trichotomous in nature, and may therefore overly simplify a complex

phenomenon, they are relatively objective in nature and thus less susceptible to reporting bias.

Moreover, they are recorded relatively consistently throughout the waves of the survey.

       Table 1 reports sample proportions for the four enumerator-coded neighborhood quality

variables. Across all MSAs and all sample years, roughly 7% of all housing units were recorded

as having abandoned housing nearby. In the later AHS panel, 12% of all households had nearby

buildings with bars on the windows; two-thirds of these had more than one such building nearby.

More than a quarter of all housing units were located on streets that were in some state of

disrepair, and a quarter were within 300 feet of an accumulation of trash.

       Rough estimate of the correlations between these indicators, coding each trichotomous

variable on a scale from 0 to 2, with 2 indicating the lowest degree of neighborhood quality, are

uniformly positive and of a modest magnitude.          The street repair and trash accumulation

indicators show the strongest correlation, at 0.41, while street repair is least correlated with the

bars on windows measure, possibly because bars are most likely to appear in cities with

moderate climates. The remaining correlations are on the order of 0.2 to 0.3.

       Beginning in 1985, the AHS supplemented enumerator-coded quality indicators with

survey respondents' own assessments of the quality of their neighborhood, on a scale from 1 to

10. These self-assessments are most likely afflicted by Tiebout bias: individuals sort into

neighborhoods that offer higher quality in their own estimation, which might differ substantially

from the estimation of an impartial observer. Nonetheless, it would be reassuring to know that

residents tend to value the characteristics employed as proxy measures for neighborhood quality

in this analysis. Table 2 offers evidence to this effect, comparing the mean neighborhood rating



                                                 6
from respondents in neighborhoods with differing values for the enumerator-coded variables.

        In each case, mean neighborhood ratings tend to be lower in areas coded more negatively

by enumerators. The gradient is particularly steep for the abandoned housing and trash-in-street

indicators, where the difference between best and worst category translates into more than 2

points on a ten point scale. It is least pronounced in the case of street disrepair – much of the

variation in road condition appears to be idiosyncratic and not necessarily related to latent

neighborhood quality.         The presence of buildings with bars on windows is slightly more

indicative of low quality ratings than street disrepair, but this indicator is substantially less

informative than either the abandoned housing or trash in street measures. Thus, each indicator

is correlated at least to some extent with self-reports of neighborhood quality, but the degree of

correlation varies.5

        The cross-sectional statistics reported in Table 1 give little sense of the degree to which

neighborhood quality changes over time. Table 3 provides basic information on the frequency of

neighborhood transitions, defined as situations where enumerators record different values for an

indicator in consecutive surveys. Given the overall frequency of neighborhood problems as

recorded in Table 1, the frequency of transitions is quite high. The first two rows of Table 3

report the marginal and conditional probabilities of decline and improvement. Averaging across

all time periods and MSAs, five percent of all neighborhoods witness the appearance of

abandoned housing over three to four years. Among neighborhoods that begin a time period

with abandoned housing, more than 60% witness some improvement by the end of the period.

This statistic is somewhat surprising, given the generally accepted notion that the renewal of

5 This pattern corroborates willingness-to-pay estimates derived below: residential choice behavior is consistent
  with larger premiums for neighborhoods that lack abandoned buildings and trash in the streets, relative to
  premiums commanded by neighborhoods that lack bars on windows or streets in disrepair.

                                                         7
urban neighborhoods is rare (see, for example, Berry 1985). Aside from the conclusion that

renewal takes place in the majority of decayed neighborhoods over any three-to-four year time

period, there are two alternative explanations. The first is that this quality measure is statistically

noisy. Enumerators may not consistently evaluate whether in fact there is abandoned housing

within a given area. The second is that this form of “renewal” occurs when abandoned units are

demolished, possibly to be replaced with vacant lots. Few would argue that such an occurrence

truly constitutes revitalization. Additional evidence presented in Table 3 addresses these two

alternative interpretations.

        Changes in the coding of neighborhood quality indicators other than abandoned housing

are similarly common across survey waves in the later AHS panel. According to enumerators,

bars on windows appear in roughly 8% of neighborhoods at risk for them.6 Street conditions

worsen in 16% of all neighborhoods, and litter problems worsen in 13%.7                           The marginal

probabilities of improvement in these conditions are comparable to the probabilities of decline,

but the conditional probabilities are much higher.                 Between 50 and 65 percent of those

neighborhoods at risk for improvement in neighborhood conditions actually experience them,

regardless of the measure used.             This evidence assuages concerns regarding the second

alternative interpretation posed above – there is no obvious way that the removal of litter could

be construed as a bad thing – but does little to address the first, as each of these measures is

subject to similar concerns regarding statistical noise. This poses particular concerns for the

empirical work undertaken below, as willingness-to-pay estimates are derived from cross-

6 Neighborhoods at risk for bars on windows include those with either no or exactly one building with bars at the
  beginning of the interval. Recall that two-thirds of housing units with barred windows nearby have more than
  one neighboring building adorned with them.
7 Neighborhoods at risk for worsening street or litter problems include those with at most minor problems at the
  beginning of the interval. Relatively few neighborhoods are coded as having major problems.

                                                        8
sectional analysis and the analysis of equilibrium responses to quality changes are derived from

differenced models. Attenuation bias might therefore lead to an underestimate of equilibrium

price changes relative to willingness-to-pay. An instrumental variable estimation strategy, where

changes in some quality indicators are used as instruments for changes in others, will be

implemented to address this concern.

       The remainder of Table 3 breaks down the decline and revitalization indicators by time

period and year.    To these extent that these indicators are informative, rather than simply

reflecting statistical noise, they should provide evidence consistent with received wisdom on the

varying fates of cities and changes in trends over time. For example, Detroit should be a location

marked by decline more than revitalization.

       Generally speaking, these statistics offer at least some reassuring evidence that

neighborhood change indicators are informative. The “net” increase in abandoned housing,

computed as the difference between the probability of decline and revitalization, is highest in

cities such as Detroit (4 percentage points) and Newark (2.2 percentage points), and

comparatively low in Sun Belt cities (0.1 percentage points in Phoenix and Tampa). The

appearance of bars on windows occurs more frequently in West Coast cities, but controlling for

this regional effect, cities with more notorious crime problems do tend to witness bars on

windows more often.

       Changes in street disrepair and the presence of trash in the streets are more common than

changes in the other quality proxy measures. The marginal probabilities of neighborhood change

are between two and four times larger for these indicators. There are also some signals that

neighborhood quality may not be unidimensional.             For example, Minneapolis, which



                                                9
demonstrates very little fluctuation in abandoned housing or bars on windows, shows substantial

evidence of net declines in street repair and litter. Detroit, by contrast, manages to post very

little net change in the street repair and trash in street measures, despite substantial evidence of

growth in abandoned housing over time. This variation across cities may reflect differences in

government investment patterns across municipalities. Local governments in the Detroit area

may simply be more aggressive about patching potholes and cleaning up the streets. This

variation could also reflect differences in enumerator training or coding conventions across AHS

sites. The possibility that neighborhood characteristics are measured with error will be an

important consideration in empirical analysis below.

       Neighborhoods undergoing transition are clearly not representative of the entire

population. Table 4 reports basic summary statistics for households in neighborhoods observed

in the AHS metro samples, classified by whether the neighborhood subsequently underwent

decline, revitalization, or no change in status, according to indicators of abandoned housing or

bars on windows. In the case of the bars on windows measure, neighborhoods undergoing

transitions are further classified by whether that transition was rapid, a change of two coding

categories in either direction, or moderate, signifying a change of one category in either

direction.

       Both declining and revitalizing neighborhoods are more disadvantaged than stable areas,

according to a number of measures derived from AHS statistics on the households occupying

sampled housing units. Areas undergoing transition have median incomes 10,000 1993 dollars

lower than stable neighborhoods. Gross rents, which sum the amount paid directly to landlords

with any tenant-paid utility costs, to adjust for situations where landlords pay these costs directly,



                                                 10
are correspondingly lower as well. Transitioning neighborhoods have a higher proportion of

black and female householders, slightly larger household sizes, and lower home ownership rates.

        The ex ante differences between declining and revitalizing neighborhoods are generally

more subtle than the differences between transitioning and stable areas. This is consistent with

the notion that the indicators of neighborhood quality used here distinguish among

neighborhoods that are generally at the low end of the quality distribution. Along several

dimensions, however, evidence suggests that low-quality neighborhoods about to undergo

revitalization are slightly better off than higher quality neighborhoods about to undergo decline.

Household incomes tend to be a bit higher, female-headed households are slightly less prevalent,

and home ownership rates are slightly higher. These observations provide some reassurance that

the neighborhood quality measures used in this analysis provide some informational content.


3. Theoretical model

3.1 Basic setup

        Suppose households receive utility from housing h and neighborhood quality q.8 Quality

varies continuously in a set of n∈[1,N] neighborhoods, and the supply of housing in each

neighborhood is fixed.9 The price of housing in neighborhood n=1 is normalized to equal unity,

and the prices in all other neighborhoods vary to equilibrate supply and demand for housing in

each neighborhood.10 This assumption is not innocuous; the consequences of selecting other

8 The addition of a numeraire commodity to the model does not influence the basic logic behind the results.
Readers accustomed to seeing numeraire commodities in models of this type might imagine that utility takes the
Cobb-Douglas form, which makes the omission of a numeraire here completely inconsequential.
9 Allowing elastic housing supply does not change the basic outcome of the model.
10 It is conceivable that conditions of excess supply may exist in certain neighborhoods. Reductions in demand for
a certain location are generally not accompanied by reductions in supply, at least in the short-to-medium term
(Glaeser and Gyourko, 2005). The presence of safety and tenants' rights regulations in the housing market may lead
some landlords to refrain from allowing tenants to occupy a housing unit rather than lease it at market rates. There
may also be scenarios where housing remains vacant even when local rent levels effectively fall to zero.

                                                        11
normalizations will be discussed in more detail below.             Households choose a location to

maximize

(1) max U (h, q n )
     h ,n



subject to the budget constraint

(2) pnh ≤ y.

            In this scenario, a marginal increase in a neighborhood’s quality, other things equal, will

increase households’ willingness to pay for housing in that neighborhood, with the exact amount

determined by the relation:

              ∂U p
(3) ∂ p     =
                ∂q ,
    ∂ q U= U ∂ U h
                ∂h

where p without the n superscript denotes willingness to pay rather than a market equilibrium

price. In general, willingness to pay for neighborhood quality is high when the marginal utility is

high relative to the marginal utility of housing, is lower for households that consume more

housing, and is higher when housing prices are higher.

            Suppose further that household preferences for neighborhood quality can be indexed by a

single parameter α:

(4) ∂ U > 0 .
      2


   ∂ q∂ α

It follows from (3) that households with a stronger preference for neighborhood quality will have

a higher willingness to pay for that commodity, other things equal. Thus, the price mechanism

will generally encourage the sorting of consumers with stronger tastes for quality (high-α types)

into higher quality neighborhoods. In the spirit of Epple and Romano (1991), which defines


                                                    12
equilibrium as a scenario where no household wishes to move and there is neither excess demand

nor supply for residence in any neighborhood, necessary conditions for equilibrium in this model

consist of the following:

a) Neighborhoods are perfectly stratified; that is if any preference types α1 and α2 reside in the

same neighborhood, then all types on the interval [α1, α2] also reside in that neighborhood.

b) Associated with each neighborhood n∈[2,N] is a boundary type, Bn, who is exactly indifferent

between neighborhoods n and n-1.         With the normalization of prices in neighborhood 1

mentioned above, prices in the n-1 other neighborhoods are determined by these indifference

constraints.

c) There is assortative matching between households and neighborhoods. Formally, if α i is the

highest value of α in neighborhood i and αj is the highest value in neighborhood j, qi>qj if αi>αj.

Moreover, it is straightforward to show that pi>pj as well.



3.2 Effect of urban decline, under assumptions

       Figure 1 graphically depicts equilibrium in this context, in price-quality space.

Neighborhoods are indexed in order of increasing quality; the relation between quality and price

is determined by the indifference curves of boundary types. Price-quality combinations yielding

higher utility are those towards the lower and right sides of the graph. In this figure, indifference

curves have been plotted as straight lines for simplicity, an innocuous assumption since the

measurement of quality is arbitrary. This discussion will also make the simplifying assumption

that households’ demand for housing is fixed, or at least relatively price insensitive. While this

assumption is less innocuous than the first, relaxing it does not substantially alter the



                                                 13
conclusions. Finally, the supply of residential units in each neighborhood is presumed to be

fixed. In the long run, one might expect that higher-valued neighborhoods would become more

densely populated or replicated. The net effect would be to reduce observed price differentials

over time.

        The weakest preference for neighborhood quality belongs to a household having the

indifference curve marked B1 – this household is completely indifferent to quality. Such a

household naturally sorts into the neighborhood with lowest quality.                     All households with

indifference curves steeper than B1 but less steep than B2 also sort into this lowest-quality

neighborhood, paying the equilibrium price p1. The household with indifference curve B2 is

exactly indifferent between (q1, p1) and (q2, p2).11 Similarly, the household with indifference

curve B3 is indifferent between (q2, p2) and (q3, p3). Households with indifference curves steeper

than B2 but less steep than B3 sort into neighborhood 2.

        In this setup, it is straightforward to show that an exogenous decrease in one

neighborhood’s quality results in lower utility for all households who strictly prefer that

neighborhood or any neighborhood with higher quality. Figure 2 illustrates the impact of such a

shock. When quality in neighborhood 2 declines from q2 to q2', prices must decline in that

neighborhood in order to maintain household B2's indifference between neighborhoods 1 and 2.

Note that for any resident of neighborhood 2 with indifference curves steeper than B2, the shift

from equilibrium point (q2, p2) to (q2', p2') leads to a decrease in utility.

        The decline in q2 breaks household B3's indifference between neighborhoods 2 and 3.

With a fixed housing supply in each neighborhood, equilibrium is restored through an increase in


11 Note that given the assumption of a fixed supply of housing in each neighborhood, the identity of boundary
households is determined by the distribution of preferences in the population.

                                                        14
prices in neighborhood 3, brought about through a bidding-up process instigated by households

with indifference curves only slightly less steep than B3.                 This increase in p3 breaks the

indifference between neighborhoods 3 and 4 for household B4, which in turn leads to an increase

in p4. Thus in a city with N neighborhoods arrayed in order of quality, a quality decline in

neighborhood n leads to a price decrease in n and increases in the N - n neighborhoods with

higher quality.12

        In this scenario, the projected impact of an exogenous increase in neighborhood quality is

the simple reverse of the impact depicted in Figure 2.                  Prices increase in the improving

neighborhood, however utility increases for all households in that neighborhood except the

boundary household.         Prices decline in neighborhoods with quality levels higher than the

improving neighborhood.



3.3 Extensions: relaxing assumptions

        The scenario displayed in Figure 2 and described above maintains certain severe

assumptions: that the supply of housing is fixed in each neighborhood, and each households’

demand is fixed. By neglecting potential wealth effects, the scenario also assumes that all

households are renters and that housing is owned by absentee landlords. The assumption that

prices are bounded from below is also potentially controversial. Finally, by assuming that

households are freely able to arbitrage differences in living standards across neighborhoods, the

scenario ignores the potential impact of moving costs. This section examines the consequences

of relaxing each of these assumptions.

12 One would expect that in the long run, supply responses would reduce the size of neighborhood 2 and increase
   the size of neighborhoods 3 and 4 relative to the initial equilibrium. The implications of allowing variable
   supply are discussed in the following section.

                                                       15
         Allowing demand and supply to vary. When housing demand and supply vary, changes

in neighborhood quality may also bring about changes in neighborhood capacity. Increases in

quality, by raising prices, lead households to consume less housing and producers to supply

more. Conversely, reductions in quality, which lower prices, will lead towards increases in per-

household consumption of housing and lower supply. Changes in neighborhood quality should

thus covary positively with population growth.

         Relaxing the fixed demand and supply assumptions implies that the identity of boundary

households is not necessarily fixed. In declining neighborhoods, reductions in population imply

that the range of households located in the declining neighborhood will shrink: referring to

Figure 2, the boundary household determining p2' will have an indifference curve steeper than B2.

The boundary household determining p3' will have an indifference curve less steep than B3. The

net impact will be to slightly raise p2' and to lower p3' (and by extension new equilibrium prices

in all higher quality neighborhoods). The main welfare result from the basic analysis continues

to hold: quality decline in neighborhood n harms all those in neighborhoods from n to N.13

Quality increases have the opposite effect.

         Incorporating ownership. So long as quality changes are persistent, the asset value of

houses in declining neighborhoods should reflect declines in rents. Owner-residents of declining

neighborhoods thus experience negative wealth effects in addition to negative impacts on

consumption, magnifying the net impact of the decline. Wealth effects negate the impact of

decline in neighborhood n on owners in areas ranked above n, however. For these households,

the present value of the stream of rent increases brought about by flight from the declining

13 The exception to this conclusion would be if supply in each neighborhood were completely elastic. This
   scenario is inherently uninteresting as it implies that all individuals (except perhaps those completely indifferent
   to quality) would sort into the highest-quality neighborhood, and no price premium would be supported.

                                                          16
neighborhood is exactly offset by increases in assets. Similarly, revitalizing neighborhoods

convey duplicative benefits on owner-residents in those neighborhoods.

        Changing the normalization of prices.        The conclusions of this analysis are highly

sensitive to the assumption that prices in all neighborhoods are constrained to be at or above

some minimal level.        Together with the standard Epple and Romano-style equilibrium

conditions, this implies that the price response an increase in quality in any neighborhood is

determined by the preferences of the neighborhood resident with the least valuation of quality.

The assumption that land prices are bounded from below, either by the constraint that prices may

not be negative, or by the presence of agricultural rents to land, is quite common in urban

economics.     Nonetheless, it is instructive to consider the potential impact of alternative

assumptions.

        If prices are constrained to be below some ceiling level in all neighborhoods, then the

price response to a quality change in a neighborhood is determined by the resident with the

highest valuation of quality. When the quality of neighborhood j declines, prices fall far enough

to render most residents better off rather than worse off. Prices do not adjust, and hence resident

utility is not impacted, in neighborhoods ranked above j in the quality distribution. Prices fall in

neighborhoods ranked below j, as residents of those neighborhoods are drawn to the superior

price-quality offering in j.

        From a relative standpoint, the model's predictions are not sensitive to assumptions

regarding price normalization. Neighborhood decline is relatively more advantageous to those

who place little value on quality; revitalization is conversely more advantageous to those who

value quality highly. The absolute implications, by contrast, are starkly different. Expectations



                                                17
regarding the impact of neighborhood quality changes on welfare depend significantly on one's

priors regarding the nature of equilibrium price determination across neighborhoods. While it is

certainly more common to assume that prices are bounded from below, the question of whether

quality changes are positively or negatively correlated with welfare changes is fundamentally

empirical.

       Introducing mobility costs. Even maintaining the assumption that prices are normalized

so that the minimum exceeds some threshold, introducing mobility costs can weaken the model's

predictions. Note that in the scenario depicted in Figure 2, under assumptions maintained in

section 3.2, there is no mobility in the transition from one equilibrium to another.       Thus,

introducing some forms of mobility costs – for example, costs that affect only a subset of the

population – may have a minimal impact in this scenario. Mobility costs could theoretically

influence the pace of transition to long-run equilibrium in a model with flexible demand and

supply, but such transition costs would not fundamentally alter the model's predictions.

       A more interesting scenario arises when mobility costs are substantial and a

neighborhood undergoes a large change in quality.          Figure 3 depicts a case where one

neighborhood “leapfrogs” another, with the net impact of changing the rank order of

neighborhoods by quality.     Note that the modeled quality change is positive in this case:

neighborhood 2 experiences an increase that leaves it ahead of neighborhood 3. In a frictionless

world, much mobility between neighborhoods two and three would ensue. In the special case

where the neighborhoods were of equal size, and supply and demand were fixed, the populations

of the two areas would trade places. In the presence of mobility costs, some households may

become “trapped” in their initial neighborhood. In Figure 3, residents of neighborhood 2 whose



                                               18
initial indifference curve traveled through the triangular shaded area are at risk for being made

worse off by neighborhood improvement. This cone is bounded below by household B2, and

above by the household exactly indifferent between (q2, p2) and (q2', p2'). These households

value the increase in neighborhood quality at or below the change in market price. They also at

least weakly prefer (q3', p3') to (q2, p2). These households will suffer a net loss if their cost of

switching from neighborhood 2 to neighborhood 3 exceeds the gain from relocating to a superior

price/quantity combination.

       In the presence of mobility costs, then, it is conceivable that both decay and revitalization

could lead to reductions in utility for certain residents of urban neighborhoods. This scenario is

most likely to apply to renters facing high mobility costs in areas undergoing particularly stark

changes in neighborhood quality.

       In the end, theoretical arguments leave a substantial amount of uncertainty regarding the

impact of neighborhood quality changes on welfare.          It is fairly clear that the impact is

heterogeneous: owners and those who value quality highly are most likely to benefit when the

quality of their own neighborhood increases; renters and those who value quality least are least

likely to benefit. Renters who face high moving costs are likely to be harmed by substantial

quality changes in either direction. The sign and magnitude of these welfare changes is difficult

to ascertain without making more specific assumptions regarding the magnitude of moving costs

and the nature of price determination in equilibrium.

       Theory thus leaves several empirical questions to be addressed.             How much are

households with varying observable characteristics willing to pay for neighborhood quality?

How much do prices change in neighborhoods that decline or revitalize? How do these price



                                                19
changes compare with willingness to pay?               Is there any evidence that individuals become

“trapped” in revitalizing areas, where price increases exceed their estimated willingness to pay

for improved neighborhood quality?


4. The valuation of neighborhood quality

         Suppose households i choosing among available housing units j have a utility function of

the following form:

(5) U ij = α (Yi − r j ) + β i X j + ε ij ,

where Yi represents the household’s income, rj indicates the rental price of the unit in question,

and Xj is a vector of housing unit and neighborhood characteristics.14 Note that the vector β is

presumed to vary across households. The error term εij represents an idiosyncratic household-

and choice-specific shock to utility. When the error terms are independent and identically

distributed across choice alternatives, following an extreme value distribution, and households

systematically select the alternative that maximizes Uij, the conditional logit procedure can be

used to identify the parameters α and β. In most specifications below, elements of β will be

estimated as linear functions of observed household characteristics.

         A common obstacle in consumer choice models of this type is the correlation of price

with unobservable components of quality. In the presence of such a correlation, estimates of the

coefficient on post-rent income, α, will be biased downwards: households will appear to

frequently choose more expensive housing units with little to offer in terms of observed


14 Note that this formulation treats income as exogenous to location choice. Some models, such as the spatial
   mismatch hypothesis (Kain, 1968), suggest that income is a function of location. Indeed, Vigdor (2002) posits
   that improved job opportunities form one potential benefit of neighborhood revitalization. Recent evidence,
   much of it derived from randomized mobility experiments such as the Moving to Opportunity program, suggest
   that the effect of location choice on earnings is insignificant (Orr et al. 2003).

                                                       20
amenities. Ferreira (2005) offers a means of circumventing this bias, by introducing a situation

where two households may face different prices for the same housing unit. The source of

variation are amendments to California’s constitution, which allow certain households to move

while retaining the property tax bill associated with their previous residence.                         In models

presented here, Ferreira’s estimate of α will be imposed as a parameter restriction. Effectively,

these models will assume that Ferreira’s estimate is free of the bias typically associated with

estimation of such parameters.15

         The relevant sample for the conditional logit estimates presented here consists of all

renter households in our AHS samples who report having moved into a housing unit within the

year prior to their interview. The potential choice set for each household is comprised of those

AHS rental units in the respondent’s MSA listed as vacant or having turned over in the past year.

For purposes of analytical tractability, the choice set includes only a random sample of ten

unchosen alternatives. Specifications control for the probability that a housing unit was included

in the choice set, constraining the coefficient on this probability measure to equal one

(McFadden 1978).

         The vector Xj consists of housing unit characteristics and characteristics of the relevant

AHS “zone.” The AHS zone contains roughly 100,000 residents and can be mapped relatively

reliably into Census geography.16 While coefficients on household characteristics, including


15 In practice, conditional logit estimates of this equation that do not impose the Ferreira constraint produce
   coefficients that are uniformly much closer to zero, consistent with the presence of omitted variable bias.
   Readers inclined to discount the importance of omitted variable bias may think of willingness-to-pay values
   derived from the constrained estimates to be lower bounds. As will be seen below, the lack of a strong
   association between neighborhood quality and price trajectories implies that this paper's substantive conclusions
   are not sensitive to the values generated by the willingness-to-pay exercise.
16 Zone characteristics are only available in the AHS enumerations of 1985 and later. This constraint is only
   binding in the case of the abandoned housing measure, since the other enumerator-coded variables are also
   unavailable before 1985.

                                                         21
income, cannot be identified in a conditional logit framework, interactions between household

characteristics and housing unit characteristics can.                These interactions operationalize the

parameter heterogeneity implied in equation (5).

        Table 5 presents selected coefficient estimates from conditional logit specifications. In

addition to the variables listed here, each specification controls for a set of housing unit

characteristics, including the number of bedrooms, whether the unit is detached, and a

categorical control for the decade in which the unit was built. These structural characteristics as

well as AHS zone characteristics are fully interacted with household characteristics in the model.

The five specifications examined in Table 5 focus on five different proxies for neighborhood

quality: the four enumerator-coded indicators discussed above, as well as a composite index

derived through factor analysis.17 The enumerator-coded indicators are each transformed into

binary indicators, combining the minor and major problem categories.

        The first set of coefficient estimates in Table 5 examines the probability of selecting a

housing unit that is in close proximity to abandoned housing. There is significant evidence of

heterogeneity in the valuation of this measure of neighborhood quality. Among other things, the

coefficients suggest that neighborhood quality is a normal good, as willingness to pay to avoid

abandoned housing increases, albeit slightly, with income. More educated householders also

display a tendency to avoid neighborhoods with abandoned housing, other things equal.

Willingness to pay for this measure of neighborhood quality is lower among nonwhite

householders, younger householders, and householders with children, other things equal.

17 Factor analysis reveals that the four enumerator-coded variables load onto exactly one factor with an eigenvalue
   in excess of 1. No other factor has an eigenvalue greater than 0.07. The factor loadings are all in the same
   direction, implying that the factor can reasonably be considered to represent neighborhood quality. Note that the
   quality index is reverse-coded, with higher values indicating lower quality. The index has a mean of zero and an
   observed standard deviation of 0.75.

                                                        22
       Table 6 uses the coefficient estimates provided in Table 5 to estimate households’

marginal willingness to pay to avoid housing in neighborhoods with nearby abandoned units.

These estimates are expressed on an annual basis, in 1993 dollars. The degree of heterogeneity

in willingness to pay is substantial: the value of a relatively high-income white household is

more than twice that of a more moderate income nonwhite household with similar family

structure and education.   The willingness-to-pay numbers are fairly substantial relative to

income, equivalent to between 3 and 5% for each of the household types listed. Given the

limited number of additional neighborhood characteristics included in the conditional logit

specification, the abandoned housing measure is almost certainly standing in for a number of

other neighborhood amenities, local public goods and services, or housing unit attributes. Bear

in mind, however, that any such attributes loaded on to the abandoned housing measure must be

orthogonal to average income and education levels in the unit's AHS zone.

       The remaining specifications in Table 5 repeat this exercise, replacing the abandoned

housing measure of neighborhood quality with the three other enumerator-coded variables as

well as the composite neighborhood quality index. Entries in Table 6 reveal similar patterns in

willingness-to-pay across the five measures of neighborhood quality.           In each case,

neighborhood quality is estimated to be a normal good, with a doubling of income associated

with an increases in willingness-to-pay on the order of 50%. Less educated and nonwhite

householders show less demand for quality, other things equal; older householders will pay a

slightly higher premium for quality, other things equal. Householders living with children show

a greater propensity to avoid neighborhoods with bars on windows, but are less averse to other

manifestations of low quality. In general, abandoned housing and the presence of trash in the



                                              23
street are characteristics eliciting the strongest avoidance responses, which corroborates the

earlier finding that these indicators are most strongly associated with survey respondents' own

assessments of neighborhood quality. A unit increase in the neighborhood quality index, which

corresponds to roughly 1.3 standard deviations, is associated with reductions in willingness-to-

pay of 1 to 3 percent of annual income.


5. How do actual price changes compare with estimated valuations?

         Evidence to this point suggests that the valuation of neighborhood quality is substantially

heterogeneous. As discussed in Section 3 above, it is not inherently clear which valuation should

matter most when neighborhood quality changes. This section presents evidence on the actual

impact of quality changes on market prices.18

         Table 7 presents the results of ordinary least squares regressions where the unit of

observation is the rental unit/time interval19. The dependent variable is equal to the change in the

logarithm of gross rent for the unit. Each specification controls for time period fixed effects as

well as MSA fixed effects, to eliminate any MSA- or time period-specific trends in rents. The

specifications include a binary indicator for whether the unit was located in a low-quality

neighborhood at the beginning of the time period. In the first four specifications, initial quality is

low if enumerators coded at least a minor problem along one of the four standard dimensions. In

the final specification, initial quality equals the initial value of the neighborhood quality index.

         The independent variables of interest are controls for whether neighborhood quality


18 Evaluating the effect of neighborhood quality change on observed prices to estimated valuations may give an
inaccurate picture of the change in well-being residents experience if prices are trending upwards or downwards in
the remained of the metropolitan area. An actual evaluation of the impact of quality change on resident utility based
on repeat observation of AHS renter households appears in Table 9 below.
19 In the abandoned housing specification ,time intervals include 1974-77, 1977-81, 1985-89, and 1989-93. In the
    remaining specifications, only the 1985-89 and 1989-93 intervals are used.

                                                         24
improved or worsened over the four-year interval. In the first four specifications, these control

variables exploit the trichotomous nature of the underlying quality indicators.                             Thus a

neighborhood in the low initial quality state may transition in either direction, if in the initial

period the enumerator coded only a “minor” degree of street disrepair or litter in the street, or

spotted only one abandoned housing unit or one unit with bars on the windows. In the final

specification, the change in neighborhood quality index is effectively interacted with an indicator

for whether that change is for the better.

         While the results vary in terms of the impact of initial quality on subsequent rent changes,

point estimates are consistent regarding the impact of quality changes on rent changes. 20 These

point estimates are generally not statistically significant, however. Taking them at face value,

they suggest that improving neighborhoods do tend to post higher rent increases than other

neighborhoods that begin at a low level of quality, and declining neighborhoods exhibit a

decrease in rents. The estimated effects, in addition to being statistically insignificant, are of

relatively modest magnitudes.             Relative to other initially low-quality neighborhoods, for

example, point estimates suggest that rents in neighborhoods where bars disappear from nearby

windows increase by an average of 4.5%. With average monthly rent levels just over $500 in

low-initial-quality neighborhoods, this suggests that revitalization is associated with annual price

increases on the order of $300 in 1993 dollars. Referring to Table 6, this figure is well within the

range of marginal willingness-to-pay estimates.21

20 In three of five specifications, the impact of initial quality on subsequent rent growth is statistically
   indistinguishable from zero. Units located in neighborhoods where streets are in need of repair show a
   significant tendency to decline in price over the subsequent four-year period, while units in neighborhoods with
   trash in the street tend to increase in price over the subsequent period.
21 Note that this example refers to the specification with the largest point estimate, and the quality indicator with
   the lowest reported marginal willingness-to-pay estimates in Table 6. Coupled with the statistical insignificance
   of the result, it would be inappropriate to conclude that this estimate implies that neighborhood quality
   improvements leave some households worse off.

                                                         25
       As discussed in section 2 above, these neighborhood quality indicators are best thought of

as noisy indicators of a latent neighborhood quality variable. These specifications operate with

first-differenced versions of these indicators, which will tend to amplify attenuation bias

associated with measurement error. The true impact of neighborhood quality change on prices

could conceivably be larger than what is estimated here.

       The final specification in Table 7 addresses this concern to some extent by employing the

neighborhood quality index, which incorporates information from multiple signals of the latent

variable. If each of the four signals were independent of one another, use of a weighted sum

could potentially increase the signal-to-noise ratio. It is possible however, that the errors in

variables are correlated with one another, as they are all based on the observations of a single

enumerator.

       Table 8 presents a second method for addressing the potential for attenuation bias,

instrumental variable analysis. In this case, changes in one neighborhood quality indicator, the

presence of abandoned housing, are instrumented for with changes in the other three indicators.

The analysis rests on the assumption that changes in the three other indicators should not

influence growth in rents except through their impact on latent neighborhood quality, which the

instrumented variable presumably also measures with error. If the measurement error in each

neighborhood quality indicator were classical, this method would produce unbiased estimates of

the impact of neighborhood quality changes on rent changes. For reasons discussed in the

preceding paragraph, along with the fact that the quality indicators are discrete in nature,

measurement error is not likely to be classical in this case. Under certain assumptions, however,

OLS and IV coefficient estimates can be considered bounds on the true parameter when



                                               26
measurement error is non-classical (Black, Berger and Scott, 2000).

       The first column in Table 8 shows the results of an OLS specification linking changes in

the abandoned housing indicator to changes in log gross rent. Somewhat surprisingly, the impact

of quality changes is estimated to be positive and significant in this specification, which also

includes controls for time period and MSA fixed effects, as well as two binary indicators for

initial presence of one or multiple abandoned housing units. In part, this discrepancy can be

attributed to changes in the specification. This model estimates one quality change parameter

rather than two, effectively constraining the effect of decay to be the opposite of the effect of

revitalization. This model also excludes data from the 1974-1977 and 1977-1981 time periods.

As discussed previously, the instructions to enumerators were different in these earlier time

periods. Enumerators were asked to indicate whether abandoned housing was located on the

same street, rather than within 300 feet. Summary statistics in Table 3 show that the frequency

of neighborhood quality transitions was correspondingly larger in the earlier period relative to

the late period. This evidence is consistent with the notion that the abandoned housing variable

is a noisier indicator of neighborhood quality in the earlier period, owing to ambiguity in the

radius of reference.

       The point estimate suggests that rents rose an average of 9.1% in neighborhoods

undergoing revitalization, relative to other neighborhoods in the same initial quality state. Initial

quality has a strong association with price changes as well. With average rent levels just over

$500, this implies a relative increase of nearly $600 in equilibrium annual rent levels. Compared

with the marginal willingness-to-pay estimates in Table 6, this value appears somewhat modest.

       Instrumental variable estimates of the relationship between neighborhood quality changes



                                                 27
and rent changes, though estimated quite imprecisely, are remarkably similar to OLS

specifications.22 The IV estimate of the impact of neighborhood quality change on rent change is

higher than the OLS estimate, which would be expected if attenuation bias were a concern, but

the difference between coefficients is nearly imperceptible. The results suggest that attenuation

bias is a serious concern in the earlier AHS panels, but not a significant impediment in the later

period.

          Overall, the regression results suggest that willingness-to-pay for neighborhood quality

improvements tends to exceed the price changes associated with such improvements. Regression

analysis necessarily obscures variation in the experiences of individual households in individual

neighborhoods. Is there evidence that some households experience decreases in utility when

their neighborhood revitalizes? Do households predicted to have a low willingness to pay for

neighborhood quality display a propensity to exit when their neighborhood revitalizes? Do

households predicted to highly value neighborhood quality tend to exit when neighborhoods

decline? The remainder of the evidence presented here addresses these three questions.

          For individuals that remain in the same housing unit between two AHS waves, it is

possible to directly predict changes in utility. Table 9 reports the results of such an exercise,

which amounts to reporting the change in predicted value derived by a representative conditional

logit specification.23 The table reports the mean change in predicted value, by neighborhood

quality trend, as well as the proportion of estimated utility changes that are positive, for renters in


22 The first stage fit is quite good in this model. Change in bars on windows has a t-statistic of 19.5, change in
   street disrepair has a t-statistic of 5, and change in trash in street has a t-statistic of 8.25. It is thus unlikely that
   the IV estimates are subject to bias associated with weak instruments.
23 These predictions are derived from a conditional logit specification where both abandoned housing and bars on
   windows appear as choice-specific characteristics, and utilize potentially time-varying characteristics of
   households. Alternative sets of predictions, holding household characteristics constant and equal to their first-
   period values, produces similar conclusions.

                                                              28
the second of the two AHS metro longitudinal datasets.24

           In general, the results of this analysis confirm the intuition generated by a simple

comparison of willingness to pay to observed changes in rent. The highest mean changes in

utility are experienced in revitalizing areas, the lowest in declining neighborhoods. Utility

changes are comparatively modest in stable neighborhoods. In general, utility changes tend to be

more positive in the latest time period covered in this analysis, between 1989 and 1993.

           There is considerable heterogeneity in the utility changes predicted for individual

households in the AHS sample, driven primarily by variation in rent changes for individual

housing units. In stable neighborhoods, roughly 60% of all households have positive predicted

changes in utility, averaging across both time periods and all available cities. In neighborhoods

marked by the disappearance of abandoned housing, 80% of all households had positive

predicted changes, while only 30% of households in areas where abandoned housing appeared

had positive predicted changes. Using the bars-in-windows criteria produces somewhat less

stark contrasts, but utility changes continue to be more reliably positive in revitalizing areas.

           While it is not accurate to state that no households suffer decreases in utility in

revitalizing neighborhoods, households forced to choose one of these three states of nature from

behind a “veil of ignorance” would almost certainly choose revitalization if it appeared in their

choice set. Neither stability nor decline offer any assurances against utility-decreasing increases

in rent.

           This analysis could be misleading if the set of individuals who remain in declining or

revitalizing neighborhoods is not representative of the entire population in those areas.


24 Recall that this represents the time period where measurement error in neighborhood quality does not appear to
   be a severe issue.

                                                        29
Revitalization may look positive, for example, because all those individuals with negative

predicted utility changes exit the neighborhood.              Tables 8 and 9 address this concern by

analyzing mobility patterns among households initially located in neighborhoods that

subsequently experienced decline or revitalization, respectively.

        Table 8 presents coefficients derived from probit specifications that examine the

propensity for AHS renter households to exit their residence between consecutive waves of the

survey. The sample is restricted to households initially residing in neighborhoods at risk for

decline, according to the abandoned housing criterion in the first specification and the bars on

windows criterion in the second.           The specifications control for a number of householder

characteristics, an indicator for whether the neighborhood exhibits decline between survey

waves, and interactions between the decline indicator and the various household characteristics.

Coefficients on main householder effects are omitted from the table.25

        Generally speaking, these specifications provide little in the way of consistent evidence.

Interaction terms in the two specifications, which employ different definitions of neighborhood

decline, are often of opposite sign. Of the sixteen interaction terms presented in the table, three

attain some level of statistical significance. In all three cases, these statistically significant

coefficients have opposite-sign counterparts in the alternative specification.                      The most

appropriate conclusion to take away from this evidence is that there are no robust, strong

associations between household characteristics and responses to neighborhood decline. It is

interesting to note, however, that the three statistically significant coefficients all present

evidence consistent with the willingness-to-pay exercise above.                  Households with children

25 The main effects reveal that female-headed households, nonwhite households, households with children present,
   married-couple households, and households headed by older, more educated, and higher-earning householders
   are less likely to move out of a rental unit between survey waves.

                                                       30
generally have lower willingness-to-pay to avoid abandoned housing, and those households are

also relatively less likely to depart when abandoned housing appears in a neighborhood.

Willingness-to-pay for neighborhood quality tends to rise with education, and more educated

householders show a relatively high propensity to move out of neighborhoods when bars appear

on windows. It thus appears that selective attrition from declining neighborhoods may lead to an

understatement of the negative effects of decline in Table 7. But this evidence is far from strong.

       Table 9 offers an analogous set of results, examining the propensity to move out between

survey waves among those individuals in neighborhoods at risk for revitalization. The smaller

sample sizes in these specifications reflect the smaller number of neighborhoods in this state at

any one point in time. Once again, there is little evidence of any systematic pattern in these

results. Of the sixteen displayed interaction terms, only one attains statistical significance. That

result suggests that college-educated householders are more likely to exit low-quality

neighborhoods when a sign of revitalization – the removal of bars on windows – is observed by a

survey enumerator.     There is little evidence, in particular, that those households with low

willingness-to-pay for neighborhood quality show a disproportionate tendency to exit when

quality increases.

       To summarize the results of this exercise, most evidence points to the existence of

accelerated rent growth in neighborhoods undergoing revitalization, and to relative rent declines

in neighborhoods experiencing decay. Estimates suggest, however, that the magnitude of these

price movements is small relative to the distribution of willingness-to-pay for neighborhood

quality. Predicted utility changes for householders in revitalizing neighborhoods are much more

likely to be positive than predicted utility changes for householders in stable or declining



                                                31
neighborhoods. This evidence is consistent with the notion that equilibrium price differentials in

low-quality neighborhoods are determined by households with a relatively low valuation of

quality.

   6. Conclusions

       Could a rational householder truly oppose both neighborhood decline and neighborhood

improvement? It is relatively easy to construct a theoretical model that predicts opposition to

one trend or the other. By incorporating moving costs, it is also possible to construct a model

that predicts opposition to all forms of neighborhood change. The question of which model is

most likely to hold in reality is fundamentally empirical.

       Discrete choice analysis of household location decisions shows that individuals do place

a value on neighborhood quality, and there is significant evidence of heterogeneity in this

valuation. Household will pay a sum on the order of several hundred 1993 dollars to avoid

residing in a housing unit with abandoned housing nearby. More generally, estimates suggest

that households will pay between 1 and 3 percent of their annual income for a neighborhood

roughly one standard deviation higher in latent quality. Estimates imply that this willingness to

pay is significantly lower for certain types of households, including those with low incomes,

less-educated heads, or children present.

       Households could be harmed by revitalization if associated price increases exceed their

willingness-to-pay. Specifications exploiting the longitudinal nature of the AHS reveal that there

is some price appreciation associated with quality improvements, but the average price increase

is modest relative to the distribution of willingness-to-pay. Direct prediction of utility levels for

long-term neighborhood residents are much more likely to be positive in revitalizing



                                                 32
neighborhoods than in declining ones.

        The term “gentrification” has negative, even alarming, connotations in some urban areas.

The evidence provided here suggests that those who fear neighborhood revitalization have made

a basic error of attribution, by associating it with price increases that appear more strongly linked

to other, albeit not fully identified, market forces.




                                                  33
References

Atkinson, R. (2000) “Measuring Gentrification and Displacement in Greater London.” Urban
Studies v.37 pp.149-65.

Berry, B. (1985) “Islands of Renewal in a Sea of Decay.” in P.E. Peterson, ed., The New Urban
Reality. Washington: Brookings Institution Press.

Black, D.A., M.C. Berger and F.A. Scott (2000) “Bounding Parameter Estimates with
Nonclassical Measurement Error.” Journal of the American Statistical Association v.95 pp.739-
748.

Braconi, F. and L. Freeman (2004) “Gentrification and Displacement in New York City.”
Journal of the American Planning Association v.70 pp.39-52.

Cutler, D.M., E.L. Glaeser and J.L. Vigdor (2006) “Is the Melting Pot Still Hot? Explaining the
Resurgence of Immigrant Segregation.” Unpublished manuscript.

Ellen, I.G. and M.A. Turner (1997) “Does Neighborhood Matter? Assessing Recent Evidence.”
Housing Policy Debate v.8 pp.833-866.

Epple, D. and T. Romer (1991) “Mobility and Redistribution.” Journal of Political Economy
v.99 pp.828-858.

Ferreira, F.V. (2004) “You Can Take It With You: Proposition 13 Tax Benefits, Residential
Mobility, and Willingness to Pay for Housing Amenities.” Unpublished manuscript, University
of Pennsylvania, Wharton School, Real Estate Department.

Gans, H.J. (1962) The Urban Villagers: Group and Class in the Life of Italian-Americans. New
York: Free Press of Glencoe.

Glaeser, E.L. (2005) “Urban Colossus: Why is New York America's Largest City?” NBER
Working Paper #11398.

Glaeser, E.L. (2003) “Reinventing Boston: 1640-2003.” NBER Working Paper #10166

Glaeser, E.L. and J.E. Gyourko (2005) “Urban Decline and Durable Housing” Journal of
Political Economy v.113 pp.345-375.

Gyourko, J.E. (2005) “Looking Back to Look Forward: Learning from Philadelphia's 350 Years
of Urban Development.” Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs.




                                              34
Jencks, C. and S. Mayer (1990) “The Social Consequences of Growing Up in a Poor
Neighborhood.” In L. Lynn and M. McGreary, eds., Inner-City Poverty in the United States.
Washington: National Academy Press.

Kain, J.F. (1968) “Housing Segregation, Negro Employment,                  and    Metropolitan
Decentralization.” Quarterly Journal of Economics v.82 pp.175-197.

Kennedy, M. and P. Leonard (2001) “Dealing with Neighborhood Change: A Primer on
Gentrification and Policy Choices.” Discussion paper, Brookings Institution Center of Urban and
Metropolitan Studies.

LeGates, R.T. and C. Hartman (1986) “The Anatomy of Displacement in the United States.” In
Gentrification of the City, N. Smith and P. Williams, eds. Boston: Allen and Unwin.

Marcuse, P. (1986) “Abandonment, Gentrification, and Displacement: The Linkages in New
York City.” In Gentrification of the City, N. Smith and P. Williams, eds. Boston: Allen and
Unwin.

McFadden, D. (1978) “Modeling the Choice of Residential Location.” in A. Karlqvist, L.
Lundqvist, F. Snickars and J. Weibull, eds., Spatial Interaction Theory and Planning Models.
Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Orr, L., J.D. Feins, R. Jacob, E. Beecroft, L. Sanbonmatsu, L.F. Katz, J.B. Liebman, and J.R.
Kling (2003) Moving to Opportunity: Interim Impacts Evaluation. Washington: Department of
Housing and Urban Development.

Schill, M.H. and R.P. Nathan (1983) Revitalizing America's Cities: Neighborhood Reinvestment
and Displacement. Albany: SUNY Press.

Sinai, T. and N. Souleles (2005) “Owner-Occupied Housing as a Hedge Against Rent Risk.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics v.120 pp.763-789.

Vigdor, J.L. (2006) “Peer Effects in Neighborhoods and Housing.” in K.A. Dodge, T.J. Dishion
and J.E. Lansford, eds., Deviant Peer Influences in Programs for Youth: Problems and Solutions.
New York: Guilford Press.

Vigdor, J.L. (2002) “Does Gentrification Harm the Poor?” Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban
Affairs pp.133-173.

Wilson, W.J. (1987) The Truly Disadvantaged. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.




                                              35
    Table 1: Summary statistics for enumerator-coded neighborhood quality variables, AHS
                                                                  Correlation with:
                              Sample proportion, all
Indicator                                               Bars on    Streets in   Trash in street
                              years and metro areas
                                                        windows    disrepair
Abandoned housing
(on same street pre-1984;             6.9%             0.31           0.21            0.32
within 300 feet thereafter)
Bars on windows of at
                                     12.1
least one building within                                             0.16            0.29
                              (8.1% more than one)
300 feet
Minor or major repairs
                                      26.2
needed to street within 300                                                           0.41
                                  (3.4% major)
feet
Minor or major
                                      25.3
accumulation of trash
                                  (2.9% major)
within 300 feet
Note: sample proportion calculations exclude observations coded “not applicable” or “not
answered.” For puproses of computing correlations, the bars on windows, streets in disrepair,
and trash in street variables are coded on a 0, 1, or 2 scale, with 2 indicating more than one
building with bars on windows, major repairs needed, or major accumulation of trash,
respectively.




                                                 36
          Table 2: Comparing enumerator- and respondent-coded neighborhood quality
                                                     Mean respondent-coded neighborhood
              Enumerator-coded variables
                                                             quality (1-10 scale)
                        none                                         7.93

Abandoned housing       one                                          6.43

                        more than one                                5.68

                        none                                         7.99

Bars on windows         one                                          7.13

                        more than one                                6.81

                        no repair needed                             8.05

Streets in disrepair    need minor repair                            7.37

                        need major repari                            7.27

                        none                                         8.19

Trash in street         minor accumulation                           7.00

                        major accumulation                           6.02

Note: Source is AHS samples from 1985 and later.




                                             37
                   Table 3: Neighborhood decline and revitalization in a set of American cities
                        Percent of neighborhood/time period                   Percent of neighborhood/time period
                      observations exhibiting decline based on:          observations exhibiting revitalization based on:
                    Abandoned Bars on         Streets in        Litter   Abandoned      Bars on     Streets in   Litter
                     housing  windows         disrepair                   housing       windows     disrepair
Marginal
                          4.8%      7.0%        15.5%       13.0%           3.90%         5.5%        17.1%      15.1%
probability
Conditional
                          5.2        7.7          16            13.4         61.7          50.0        64.4       60.7
probability
Marginal Probabilities:
By time period
  1974-1977               5.9         ---         ---            ---          4.4           ---         ---        ---
  1977-1981               4.7         ---         ---            ---          4.5           ---         ---        ---
  1985-1989               3.7        8.1         16.7           14.8          2.2          5.5         17.5       15.7
  1989-1993               2.4        5.1         17.6           13.5          2.8          5.5         16.3       14.1
By city
  Anaheim                 1.4         ---         ---            ---          1.3           ---         ---        ---
  Boston                  5.7        3.4         15.0           10.9          4.1          1.9         21.9       15.9
  Dallas                  3.9        6.5         9.6             8.4          3.6          5.7         24.9       20.8
  Detroit                 10.3       7.8         22.2           13.7          6.3          7.8         21.2       13.1
  Fort Worth              3.5        7.1         15.5           10.2          2.9          5.4         18.3       18.6
  Los Angeles             4.1        17.4        25.2           27.7          5.8          11.0        11.1       15.1
  Minneapolis             2.0        1.0         24.8           20.5          2.0          0.8         15.3       13.1
  Newark                  6.7         ---         ---            ---          4.5           ---         ---        ---
  Orlando                 4.3         ---         ---            ---          3.9           ---         ---        ---
  Philadelphia            5.7        9.8         16.4           15.8          5.1          7.4         19.4       16.0
  Phoenix                 3.8        7.6         11.4           13.5          3.7          6.2         11.0       11.7
  Pittsburgh              6.0         ---         ---            ---          4.9           ---         ---        ---
  San Francisco           5.0        11.6        18.7           17.0          2.9          9.0         13.1       15.6
  Spokane                 2.9         ---         ---            ---          3.8           ---         ---        ---
  Tacoma                  4.4         ---         ---            ---          3.6           ---         ---        ---
  Tampa                   1.9        5.6         10.4           10.3          1.8          4.5         15.6       14.8
  Washington              4.9        6.1         14.1           11.1          3.5          5.0         16.0       14.9
  Wichita                 3.0         ---         ---            ---          3.6           ---         ---        ---
Note: Indicators of decline and revitalization are based on enumerator-coded variables in the AHS. Prior to 1984,
enumerators were instructed to code conditions in the area “on the same street” as the sample unit. After 1984, this
definition changed to “within 300 feet.” Marginal probabilities show the proportion of all housing units that
transition from one state to another between survey waves. Conditional probabilities show the proportion of
housing units with the potential to decline (revitalize) that actually decline (revitalize) between survey waves.


                                                           38
                           Table 4: A comparison of conditions in declining, revitalizing, and stable neighborhoods
                                                         Initial value of statistic in neighborhoods exhibiting:
Summary statistic        Increase in   No change in   Decrease in        Rapid         Moderate      No change in      Moderate        Rapid
                         abandoned      abandoned     abandoned       increase in     increase in      bars on        decrease in   decrease in
                           housing       housing       housing          bars on         bars on       windows           bars on       bars on
                                                                       windows         windows                         windows       windows
Median income (1993       $26,370        $38,119        $27,496         $30,284         $30,820         $41,406        $32,877       $32,292
dollars)
Median gross rent           $410          $509           $407              $509          $517            $590           $512           $498
(1993 dollars)
Mean household size         2.88           2.78           2.92             2.63           2.65            2.55           2.58          2.54
Percent black               37.3           10.2           35.8             34.9           32.8            8.7            34.4          36.6
Percent female-headed       23.6           10.7           19.3             22.3           22.3            12.5           21.0          22.3
households
Home ownership rate         43.6           60.4           47.8             42.0           45.6            56.6           46.5          43.8
N                          9,101         171,508         7,406             2,253         3,534          43,800          2,764         1,641
Note: Abandoned housing statistics are based on observations from 1974, 1977, 1985, and 1989. Bars on windows statistics are based on
observations from 1985 and 1989. A “rapid” decrease (increase) is defined as progressing from more than one (no) nearby house(s) with bars on
windows to none (more than one). A “moderate” increase is defined as progressing from zero to one, or from one to more than one; moderate
decreases are defined analogously. Statistics are based on the characteristics of households occupying AHS sample units.




                                                                      39
                                  Table 5: Conditional logit coefficient estimates
                                                                 Neighborhood quality proxy:
Independent variable                           Abandoned       Bars on Streets in Trash in          Composite
                                                Housing        Windows disrepair     streets       Quality Index
Annual rent (in 1993 dollars)                    -2.11          -2.11     -2.11       -2.11           -2.11

Neighborhood quality proxy (NQP)                  -254.7         443.7      676.3     1091.6           493.12
                                                  (5.785)      (3.799)    (2.538)    (2.139)          (1.773)
Nonwhite householder*NQP                           1231          740.1      218.8     593.14           612.89
                                                  (2.446)      (1.494)    (1.362)    (1.661)          (1.079)
Family income*NQP                                 -0.06          -0.02      -0.02      -0.04            -0.03
                                                (1.1*10-4)    (4.8*10 ) (3.7*10 ) (2.6*10-5)
                                                                       -5         -5
                                                                                                    (1.9*10-5)
Householder's age*NQP                              -7.76         -6.56     -14.21     -21.13           -12.02
                                                  (0.070)      (0.069)    (0.048)    (0.030)          (0.033)
                                                   700.1        -147.9       110       440.7            244.5
Presence of children under 18*NQP
                                                  (2.407)      (1.834)    (1.633)    (1.397)          (1.253)
                                                  -1102          -876      -647.7    -1335.3          -818.28
Householder has HS diploma*NQP
                                                  (2.947)      (2.101)    (1.433)    (1.461)          (1.084)
Mean family income in zone                        -0.03          -0.02      -0.02      -0.02            -0.02
                                                (2.3*10-4)    (2.1*10-4) (2.6*10-4) (1.7*10-4)      (1.8*10-4)
Percentage of adults w/ HS diploma in zone        -2623         -2768     -2470.1     -1746          -2251.12
                                                  (23.96)      (25.56)    (21.39)     (16.8)          (17.67)
Percent nonwhite in zone                          -8381         -8847      -8796      -8290          -8489.17
                                                  (10.05)      (9.322)     (9.66)    (7.896)           (7.71)

Structural characteristics controlled               Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes            Yes
Structural/household characteristic
                                                    Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes            Yes
interactions
Zone/household characteristic interactions          Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes            Yes
Observations                                      403,671        403,671    396,551 411,520            387,060
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Unit of observation is the household/choice alternative. Estimates pool
observations across three waves of AHS metro data, from 1985, 1989, and 1993.




                                                        40
 Table 6: Implied marginal-willingness-to-pay (per year) for neighborhood quality, 1993 dollars
                                                       Implied MWTP to avoid:
                                                                                       Unit
Household characteristics               Abandoned Bars on Streets in Trash in
                                                                                    decrease in
                                         housing windows disrepair streets
                                                                                       NQI
Age 30, income $30,000, white, no
                                         1533.14     524.87 457.97 912.26             736.28
children, HS graduate
Age 30, income $60,000, white, no
                                         2314.02     752.03 727.73 1409.18           1148.02
children, HS graduate
Age 30, income $30,000, white, no
                                         1011.61     110.29 151.44 280.31             349.02
children, HS dropout
Age 30, income $30,000, nonwhite, no
                                          950.56     174.60 354.42 631.55             446.22
children, HS graduate
Age 30, income $30,000, white,
                                         1201.81     594.86 405.92 703.69             620.57
children, HS graduate
Age 60, income $30,000, white, no
                                         1643.33     617.97 659.73 1212.26            906.94
children, HS graduate




                                              41
             Table 7: OLS estimates of the impact of quality change on rent change
                                                      Neighborhood quality proxy:
Independent variable                                                                 Composite
                                      Abandoned Bars on Streets in Trash in
                                                                                      quality
                                       housing windows disrepair    street
                                                                                       index
Low initial quality                      -0.027        -0.021    -0.037      0.081       0.002
                                        (0.109)       (0.014)   (0.015)    (0.017)     (0.010)
Neighborhood quality indicator           -0.013        -0.026    -0.028     -0.025      -0.003
declines                                (0.008)       (0.023)   (0.013)    (0.013)     (0.006)
Neighborhood quality indicator            0.006         0.045     0.013      0.034       0.006
improves                                (0.014)       (0.031)   (0.021)    (0.021)     (0.007)
MSA fixed effects                          Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes
year fixed effects                       Yes           Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes
R-squared                                0.039        0.039      0.038      0.042       0.056
no. of observations                     57,205        13,743    13,527     14,079      12,253
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Unit of observation is the housing unit/time interval,
where time intervals are based on repeat observations in AHS data.




                                                 42
              Table 8: IV estimate of the impact of quality change on rent change
                                                    Quality indicator: abandoned housing
Independent variable
                                                        OLS                         IV
change in neighborhood quality                          0.091                      0.093
indicator                                             (0.021)                    (0.101)
Abandoned housing present in initial                   -0.142                     -0.143
period                                                (0.038)                    (0.074)
Multiple abandoned housing units                       -0.202                     -0.204
present in initial period                             (0.033)                     (0.08)
MSA fixed effects                                        Yes                        Yes
year fixed effects                                       Yes                        Yes
R-squared                                               0.041                      0.041
no. of observations                                   12,978                     12,978
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Unit of observation is the housing unit/time interval,
where time intervals are based on repeat observations in AHS data. The instrumental variable
specification employs changes in three other neighborhood proxy variables – bars on windows,
streets in disrepair, and trash in street – as instruments for changes in abandoned housing. The
change in neighborhood quality indicator is coded such that improvements in quality are
positive and reductions in quality are negative.




                                               43
                                       Table 9: Predicted changes in utility for “stayer” households
                                   Abandoned housing criterion                                      Bars on windows criterion
                           Declining     Revitalizing         Steady                    Declining         Revitalizing        Steady
All cities, all periods
  Mean                         -1946            2380                413                -225                835              383
  Proportion positive           0.28             0.81              0.59                0.42               0.67              0.6
  N                              167             110               2925                 332                264             2606
1985
  Mean                         -1555            3224                -18                -271                589              -57
  Proportion positive           0.31             0.86              0.51                0.39               0.65             0.51
  N                              127              50               1840                 243                152             1622
1989
  Mean                         -3189            1677               1144                 -97               1169             1109
  Proportion positive           0.18             0.77              0.73                0.52                0.7             0.74
  N                               40              60               1085                  89                112              984
Note: Utility predictions are based on conditional logit models incorporating heterogeneity in the valuation of neighborhood quality
attributes, and controlling for both abandoned housing and bars on windows. Utility comparisons are made only for renter
households.




                                                                    44
                             Table 10: Who exits declining neighborhoods?
Independent variable                           Abandoned housing criterion Bars on windows criterion
Declining neighborhood                                     0.393                         -0.030
                                                          (0.352)                        (0.540)
Female householder*declining nbhd.                        -0.074                         -0.014
                                                          (0.057)                        (0.095)
Nonwhite householder*declining nbhd.                       0.002                         -0.034
                                                          (0.053)                        (0.086)
Children under 18 present*declining nbhd.                 -0.112                          0.151
                                                          (0.057)                        (0.102)
Married householder*declining nbhd.                       -0.076                          0.037
                                                          (0.079)                        (0.106)
Householder’s age*declining nbhd.                          0.001                          0.006
                                                          (0.002)                        (0.003)
Householder a HS graduate*declining nbhd.                 -0.034                          0.427
                                                          (0.065)                        (0.103)
Householder a college grad.*declining nbhd.               -0.094                          0.372
                                                          (0.117)                        (0.136)
ln(family income)*declining neighborhood                  -0.042                         -0.037
                                                          (0.033)                        (0.053)

N                                                         44,290                         47,856
Note: Table entries are probit coefficients, standard errors in parentheses. Sample consists of renter
households observed in the 1985 and 1989 waves of the American Housing Survey metro data in
neighborhoods at risk for decline. All specifications include main effects for each household
characteristic listed.




                                                    45
                            Table 11: Who exits revitalizing neighborhoods?
                                               Abandoned housing criterion Bars on windows criterion
Revitalizing neighborhood                                  -0.085                        -0.121
                                                          (0.600)                       (0.816)
Female householder*revitalizing nbhd.                      0.033                         -0.084
                                                          (0.102)                       (0.141)
Nonwhite householder*revitalizing nbhd.                    0.072                         0.040
                                                          (0.097)                       (0.133)
Children under 18 present*revitalizing                     -0.018                        0.002
nbhd.                                                     (0.103)                       (0.161)
Married householder*revitalizing nbhd.                     0.087                         0.004
                                                          (0.158)                       (0.168)
Householder’s age*revitalizing nbhd.                       -0.004                        0.006
                                                          (0.003)                       (0.005)
Householder a HS graduate*revitalizing                     -0.014                        0.105
nbhd.                                                     (0.121)                       (0.159)
Householder a college grad.*revitalizing                   -0.328                        0.483
nbhd.                                                     (0.250)                       (0.208)
ln(family income)*revitalizing nbhd.                       0.030                         -0.025
                                                          (0.057)                       (0.080)

N                                                         3,467                          1,681
Note: Table entries are probit coefficients, standard errors in parentheses. Sample consists of renter
households observed in the 1985 and 1989 waves of the American Housing Survey metro data in
neighborhoods at risk for revitalization. All specifications include main effects for each household
characteristic listed.




                                                    46
Figure 1: Equilibrium with four neighborhoods of varying quality.




                                                  47
Figure 2: Transition to a new equilibrium following a decrease in quality in neighborhood 2.




                                                   48
Figure 3: Transition to new equilibrium when neighborhood 2 “leapfrogs” neighborhood 3. Households
with indifference curves initially falling in the shaded region are at risk for utility declines in the presence
of mobility costs.




                                                      49
