NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOME PLEASANT MONETARIST ARITHMETIC

Michael R. Darby
Working

Paper No. 1295

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1984

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NEER Working Paper #1295
March 1984

Some Pleasant Monetarist Arithmetic

ABSTRACT

Contrary to the conclusion of Sargent and Wallace, it is possible to

exogenously and independently vary monetary and fiscal policy and retain

steady—state equlibrium in economies like the United States. In particular,
the central bank is not forced to monetize increased deficits either now or in

the future. This conclusion is based on the fact that the real after—tax
yield on government bonds is considerably less than the growth rate of real
income except during brief disinflationary periods.

Michael R. Darby
Department of Economics
University of California
Los Angeles, CA 90024
(213) 825-3343

1

For the Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis
Quarterly Review.

Not for quotation without
the author's permission.

D.5: February 21, 1984

SOME PLEASANT MONETARIST ARITRMETIC

Michael R. Darby*

University of California,
NatIonal

Los Angeles

Bureau of Economic Research

Sargent and Wallace (1981) are widely regarded to have demonstrated
monetary

that

policy cannot be manipulated exogenously with a fixed growth path

government

expenditures and a fixed tax structure.

of

More succinctly, the

central

bank can only

later.

This result can be viewed as a generalization of the Blinder and Solow

choose whether to monetize a government deficit now or

(1973, 1974), Tobin and Buiter (1976) and Steindi (1974) analyses of the

stationary

state when it is assumed that (base) money is increased while

government spending and the tax rate are fixed so that government borrowing is

adjusted passively via open—market operations.' The Sargent and Wallace
(1981) argument appears persuasive to such authors as King and Plosser (1983),

but I believe it is serously wrong as a guide to understanding monetary policy

in the United States. This paper first demonstrates that whether or not
money, spending, and taxes can be manipulated independently by the government

is an empirical not a theoretical question. Then in Section II, I present
evidence that at least the United States government can indeed independently
manipulate all three instruments with government debt adjusting in a passive
but stable manner.

2

I. Steady—State Equilibrium
Miller (1983) has derived a version of the govrnment budget constraint
which is useful for studying the long—run growth equilibrium of the economy.
Simplifying the notation of his equation (4), we can write this constraint as

(1)

G—T=pM+(r)D

Here, G and T are government expenditures and taxes less transfer
payments, respectively, both measured as fraction of NNP and exclusive of any

government interest payments or the taxes thereon. M and D are the money—
NNP and debt—NNP ratios, and i and

are the growth rates of nominal money

and the real government debt, respectively. Finally, r is the real after—
tax interest rate.2 That is, the excess of spending over taxes must be
financed by either base money creation or by borrowing in excess of the amount
needed to pay the real after—tax interest on the government debt.3

The question raised by Sargent and Wallace is whether there Is only one

value of money—creation revenue 1jM for which debt will be a stable fraction

of NNP.4 This is formalized as asking whether a steady—state equilibrium
exists and is stable for alternative values of

1.tM.

The steady—state

equilibrium debt—NNP ratio D is found from equation (1) to be

(2)

-G—TpM

where y, the growth rate of real NNP, must be equal to

if D is

constant. Equation (2) says that if the government is spending more than it
takes in explicit taxes and the inflationary tax, there can still be a
constant debt—NNP ratio if the growth rate of real NNP exceeds the real after—

3

interest

tax

rate. If r exceeded y, then any positive excess of

C over T + M would indeed cause D to grow without limit. Sargent and
Wallace (1981) instead simply assumed that r exceeds y and hence inevitably
came to the conclusion that the government could not independently choose
ji,

C, and T. I shall argue in Section II below that this assumption is

incorrect empirically and proceed here with the analysis on the assumption
that y is greater than r.

The basic idea is that the government will borrow more than enough to

make interest payments if D is constant and that this net borrowing5
(i —

r)D increases with D.

So higher deficits G — T —

.1M

will be

associated with higher debt—NNP ratios, but they can be financed indefinitely
as a matter of arithmetic unless the real interest rate were equal to or
greater than the growth rate of real income.

To check that the economy will in fact move toward the equilibrium debt—

income ratio, suppose that actual value of D differed from its steady—state

value D. The growth rate of D is 6 — y,

the difference in the growth

rates of its numerator and denominator. Straightforward manipulations and the
assumption of either perfect foresight or indexed government bonds yield the
growth rate relation6

(3)

That is the growth rate of the debt—income ratio will be positive if the

actual D is less than its steady—state value D and negative if D exceeds

5

So

D will gradually converge to

even if the economy were to start

from another position as might result from cyclical deficits, wars, short—run

monetary or fiscal policy, or changes in the underlying trend values of C, T,

4

or

ji

which define the the steady—state equilibrium.

Consider the following simple example:

T= 0.18

G= 0.22

r = 0.02/year
M = 0.10 year

0.04/year
= 0.10/year

y =
ii

Therefore, the steady—state debt—income ratio is

0.22—0.18—(0.10/year)(0.10 year) — 0.03

—

0.02/year

(0.04/year)—(0.02!year)

1.5

D =

year

Suppose that the Fed decided to increase money growth to p' =

that this induced M to fall to M' =

0.20/year and

0.09 year. Then the new equilibrium debt—

income ratio is

=

0.04—(0.20/year)(0.09

year) =

0.02/year

1.1 year

When this policy is initiated, the growth rate of the debt—income ratio would
be
—

—

0.02/year
1.5 year (1.1 year —

1.5 year)

y = —0.0053/year

That is, over the first year of the new policy D would fall by approximately
(1 year) (—0.0053/year) (1.5 year) = —0.0080 year to 1.492 year. The rate of
decline would decrease as D assymptotically approached D' = 1.1 year.7 Thus,
the government—budget identity does not pose any problems for the existence or

5

stability of the steady—state equilibrium as money growth is varied exoge—

nously with fiscal policy fixed. Similarly, government spending or tax rates
can be varied exogenously with the other fiscal variable and monetary policy

held unchanged. In this way the standard macroeconomic practice of varying
fiscal or monetary instruments with government borrowing adjusting passively
is shown to be consistent with a stable steady—state equilibrium.

El. Empirical Issues
Section I ——

like

Sargent and Wallace (1981) —

is

basically an

arithmetic exercise. In this section I argue that the empirical evidence
favors the relevance of Section I for the United States. There are two
substantial differences between the two arithmetic exercises: Sargent and
Wallace use before—tax real yields instead of after—tax real yields and they
assume that the relevant real yield exceeds the growth rate of real income.

II.A. Differences about the Relevant Real Yield
The differences over which yield should be compared to real income growth

are partially semantic and partially substantive. Sargent and Wallace define
an exogenous fiscal policy as a fixed path for the difference between
government spending and taxes (exclusive of money or debt creation and

interest payments) measured in terms of real goods. I hold the levels of each
of these variables (and hence their difference) constant as a fraction of real

income. Thus, if decreased money growth reduces real income, it would reduce
the level of the future real deficit on my assumption of constant deficits as
a fraction of income.

6

This difference is relevant only if lower money growth (and hence a
higher debt—income ratio) reduces real output as supposed by Sargent and

Wallace. They make a crowding—out argument because in their life—cycle
framework more government debt means that less wealth will be held in the form

of capital. Thus tax receipts on capital returns go down as tax receipts on
government debt goes up.8
Suppose instead that individuals are fully rational and care about their

children as themselves. In that kind of world, government accounts are
consolidated into those of the individuals which it represents so that whether
the government finances by taxes or bonds is irrelevant to individual choices

about consumption and accumulation of physical capital. Measured saving will
equal the unaffected capital accumulation plus however many new government

bonds are issued instead of tax receipts. But individuals will not be
concerned with how many IOIJs they are writing themselves.9 It should be noted
that on this latter view of saving behavior, the real interest rate is

unaffected by the level of the debt—income ratio.1°
In conclusion, there are good reasons to suppose that the difference in
the way in which exogenous fiscal policy is defined is not a substantive

one. The fall in private capital which Sargent and Wallace associate with
higher levels of the debt—income ratio need not occur. Nonetheless, it will
be shown in Section II.B that even the real before—tax yield on government

securities has been generally well below the growth rate of real income. In
that case even in the Sargent and Wallace world exogenous variations in the
deficit need not be monetized by the central bank.

7

II.B. Real Yields versus Real Growth
As anyone who has ever looked at real before—tax yields on government
securities is aware, it is a simple matter to show that secular real before—

tax yields have not approached corresponding growth rates of real output. It
follows directly that real after—tax yields must be even less. This is not to
suggest that the real return to capital in the economy is less than the growth
rate of real output; but the real rate of return on government bonds and bills

is clearly far below this average socIal return. Presumably the difference
reflects both nonpecuniary services and a very low correlation with the market
return, but that really is not at issue In understanding the implications of
the government budget constraint.

Ibbotson and Sinquefield (1982) have compiled (before—tax) real rates of

return for U.S. Treasury bills and bonds for the years 1926—1981. The
arithmetic (geometric) means of the yields for long—term government bonds and
Treasury bills are 0.3 and 0.1 (—0.1 and 0.0) percent per annum,

respectively. The corresponding nominal yields were 3.1 and 3.1 (3.0 and
3.0). So even if all holders were tax exempt, the experience of the last 55
years suggests that the real after—tax yield on government securities has been
nowhere near the 3.0 percent per annum average growth rate of real Income over
the same years.11

It would be possible to increase the estimated real yield somewhat, but I
have been unable to find any study that indicates an average real yield on
government securities as high as 3 percent even without any allowance for

income taxes. Taking account of income taxes would lower these estimates; so
there seems to be no doubt empirically that for the U.S. the growth rate of
real income exceeds the real after—tax yield on government securities.

8

III. A Possible Reconciliation
The point of this paper is a technical one: In the United States,
dynamic inconsistencies do not result from treating government expenditures,
taxes, and base—nioney growth as simultaneously exogenous. A current deficit
is therefore not per se inflationary in the sense of requiring future
increased money growth as claimed by Sargent and Wallace (1981).

This conclusion would not hold for all economies nor need it hold always

for the United States Suppose for example that as the ratio of government
debt to income and hence physical capital rises, the yield on government debt

rises toward that of physical capital instead of remaining constant as assumed

above and by Sargent and Wallace. Then if the equilibrium debt—income ratio
were to increase to the point that the real after—tax yield on government

securities equalled or exceeded the growth rate of real income, the economy
would cross over to the explosive character analyzed by Sargent and Wallace

(1981). While this may have occurred for other countries in the past, the
United States does not yet seem near that point.
To see this first consider the fiscal 1983 deficit estimated at $208

billion by the U.S. Council of Economic Advisers (1983, p. 26). If we allow
for a cyclical component based on moving from the assumed 10.7 to 6.0 percent

unemployment, the "structural" deficit would be about $117.5 billion less —

that

is, about $90 billion. This amount is only $5 billion more than actual

fiscal 1982 interest payments. So even without taking account of the large
offsetting state government surpluses, there is no evidence of substantial
differences between secular government spending (exclusive of interest) and

net taxes. Furthermore, current ratios of government debt to income are far
below the 1946 value of 1.1.12

9

In conclusion, the Sargent and Wallace (1981) propositions should not be
generally applied in analyses of the United States or similar economies.

Where they are applied, they should be justified by evidence that the real
after—tax yield on government bonds really does exceed the growth rate of real

income or would do so under the circumstances being considered. It is hardly
surprising that arithmetic alone cannot give a real answer to a substantive
economic question.

10

REFERENCE S

Auerbach, R. D., and Rutner, J. L., "A Negative View on the Negative Money

Multiplier: Comment," Journal of Finance, December 1977, 32: 1814—1817.
Barro, R. J., "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?", Journal of Political

Economy, November/December 1974, 82: 1095—1117.
The Impact of Social Security on Private Saving: Evidence from
the U.S. Time Series, Washington: American Enterprise Institute, 1978.
Blinder, A. S., and Solow, R. M., "Does Fiscal Policy Matter?," Journal of

Public Economics, November 1973, 2: 319—337.

_______________________________ "Analytical Foundations of Fiscal Policy,"
in A. S. Blinder, et al., The Economics of Public Finance, Washington:
Brookings Institution, 1974.

Darby, M. R., "The Financial and Tax Effects of Monetary Policy on Interest

Rates," Economic Inquiry, June 1975, 13: 266—276.
Intermediate Macroeconomics, New York: McGraw—Hill, 1979.
(1979a)

_____________

The Effects of Social Security on Income and the Capital Stock,

Washington: American Enterprise Institute, 1979. (1979b)

____________ Labor Force, Employment and Productivity in Historical
Perspective, Los

Angeles:

U.C.L.A. Institute of Industrial Relations,

1984.

____________ and Lothian, J. R., "British Economic Policy under Margaret
Thatcher: A Midterm Examination," Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series
on Public Policy, Spring 1983, 18: 157—207.
David, P. A., and Scadding, J. L., "Private Savings: Ultrarationality,
Aggregation, and 'Denison's Law'," Journal of Political Economy,

11

March/April 1974, 82: 225—249.
Fischer, S., "Comments on Tobin and Buiter," in J. L. Slein, ed., Monetarism,

Studies in Monetary Economics, vol. 1, Amsterdam: North—Holland
Publishing Co., 1976.

Ibbotson, R. G., and Sinquefield, R. A., "Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and

Inflation: The Past and the Future," 1982 Edition, Charlottesville,
Va.: The Financial Analysts Research Foundation, 1982.
Jump, G.V., "Interest Rates, Inflation Expectations, and Spurious Elements in
Measured Real Income and Saving," American Economic Review, December

1980, 70: 990—1004.
King, R. G., and Plosser, C. I., "Money, Deficits, and Inflation," paper
presented at the Conference on the Economic Effects of Government
Deficits, University of Southern California, April 21—22, 1983.

Kochin, L. A., "Are Future Taxes Anticipated by ConsumersV, Journal of Money,
Credit, and Banking, August 1974, 6: 285—94.
Kotlikoff, L. J., and Summers, L. H., "The Role of Intergenerational Transfers
in Aggregate Capital Accumulation," Journal of Political Economy, August

1981, 89: 706—732.
Miller, P.J., "Higher Deficit Policies Lead to Higher Inflation," Federal

Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Winter 1983, 7(1): 8—19.
Plosser, C.I., "Government Financing Decisions and Asset Returns," Journal of
Monetary Economics, May

1982, 9: 325—352.

Sargent, T. J., and Wallace, N., "Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic,"
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Fall 1981, 5 (3):
1—17.

Steindi, F., "Money and Income: The View from the Government Budget
Restraint," Journal of Finance, September 1974, 29: 1143—1148.

12

Tobin, J., "Money and Economic Growth," Econometrica, October 1965, 33: 671—
84.

and Buiter, W., "Long—Run Effects of Fiscal and Monetary Policy on
Aggregate Demand," in J. L. Stein, ed., Monetarism, Studies in Monetary
Economics, vol. 1, Amsterdam, North—Holland Publishing Co., 1976.

U.S. Councilof Economic Advisers, Economic Report of the President, 1983,
Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1983.
White, B. B., "Empirical Tests of the Life—Cycle Hypothesis," American

Economic Review, September 1978, 58: 547—60

13

FOOTNOTES

*The author acknowledges helpful conversations with John Haltiwanger and

Tom Sargent. The research reported here was supported in part by the National
Science Foundation (grant number SES—8207336) and by the NBER's Project on
Productivity and Industrial Change in the World Economy and is part of the

NBER's research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the NBER or the NSF. This Is not a
report of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
'This paper does not attempt to comment on the relevance of the balanced—

budget condition within the stationary state. See, however, Fischer (1976)
and Auerbach and Rutner (1977) on this point.

2See Darby (1975). See Section II for further discussion of the use of
the real after—tax yield.

3The standard national income accounting definition of the deficit counts
as government borrowing and private saving that portion of after—tax nominal
interest which represents an adjustment for decline in the real value of the

nominal debt. In those terms, we would include in equation (1) the growth
rate of the nominal debt
r + iT,

+ iT

where the inflation rate

and the nominal after—tax Interest rate
it

cancels.

See Jump (1980) and Darby and

Lothian (1983). Miller's equation (4) substitutes the steady—state condition
that the growth rates of real NNP and real debt are equal, but we leave the
equation in this form to analyze behavior out of full steady—state
ecjuilibriuin.

4The fraction of NNP

which people desire to hold as money is a decreasing

function of the nominal interest rate and hence
3'1 increases with increases in

ji,

i.

In

the relevant range

but not proportionately so.

14

alternative term for net borrowing (ry—r)D would be "negative debt
service."

6These manipulations begin with the identity
G — T —

— (i

—

+ ¶)D] which was obtained by taking the time

[(r

+ w)D +

derivative

of

the natural logarithm of D where the perfect foresight or indexing
assumption allows us to express the nominal after—tax interest rate as the sum
of the corresponding real rate and actual rather than expected inflation.
(In the steady state there is no need to distinguish actual from expected ir.)
I [G — T — iM — Dl from which equation (3) follows
—•=
Then, we have

by substitution of equation (2).
7Note however that absent perfect foresight or a prior refunding into

indexed bonds of long—term bonds — see Darby and Lothian (1983) —

this

adjustment will be much faster as the real value of the existing bonds and
debt service drops.

8Tobin (1965) proposed a different mechanism by which inflation might

reduce the private capital stock. In either case, improvements in the
aggregate production function as firms devote less inputs to conserving cash
balances would tend to offset, eliminate, or dominate this capital stock
effect so that the effect of money growth on real output is theoretically

ambiguous. I have assumed elsewhere (1979a) that the production function
effect dominates so that lower inflation rates on net increase real output.

9White (1978), Darby (l979b), and Kotlikoff and Summers (1981) all report
evidence that "bequest assets" dominate "life—cycle assets" in total U.S.

wealth, and this finding supports the assumption of concern about ones

children's welfare. Barro (1974, 1978), Kochin (1974), and David and Scadding
(1974) all present evidence in support of the "ultrarational" or "Ricardian"

view. Note that saving increases if the government finances a tax cut with

15

increased borrowing not in anticipation of future increased taxes but in
anticipation that otherwise total NNP would fall.
'°Plosser (1982), for example, finds that asset prices are unaffected by

the extent to which a given level of government expenditures is financed by
borrowing instead of taxes.

Computed from real CNP data in Darby (1984, Table A—20) and Federal
Reserve Bulletin, February 1983, p. A52.
12H1gh ex post real interest rates experienced during 1981—1982 appear to

be a result of slowing inflation (compare 1929—1933) and not a matter of a
"regime change" to unprecedentedly high deficits.

