                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              IMMIGRANTS' COMPLEMENTARITIES AND NATIVE WAGES:
                          EVIDENCE FROM CALIFORNIA

                                           Giovanni Peri

                                       Working Paper 12956
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12956


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2007




I am grateful to Hans Johnson, Jed Kolko, Ethan Lewis, David Neumark, Steven Raphael, Deborah
Reed and participants to several seminars for helpful comments. Benjamin Mandel provided extremely
competent assistance in editing the paper and very valuable comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2007 by Giovanni Peri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Immigrants' Complementarities and Native Wages: Evidence from California
Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 12956
March 2007
JEL No. F22,J31,J61,R23

                                               ABSTRACT

As of 2004 California employed almost 30% of all foreign born workers in the U.S. and was the state
with the largest percentage of immigrants in the labor force. It received a very large number of uneducated
immigrants so that two thirds of workers with no schooling degree in California were foreign-born
in 2004. If immigration harms the labor opportunities of natives, especially the least skilled ones, California
was the place where these effects should have been particularly strong. But is it possible that immigrants
raised the demand for California's native workers, rather than harming it? After all immigrants have
different skills and tend to work in different occupations then natives and hence they may raise productivity
and the demand for complementary production tasks and skills. We consider workers of different education
and age as imperfectly substitutable in production and we exploit differences in immigration across
these groups to infer their impact on US natives. In order to isolate the "supply-driven" variation of
immigrants across skills and to identify the labor market responses of natives we use a novel instrumental
variable strategy. Our estimates use migration by skill group to other U.S. states as instrument for
migration to California. Migratory flows to other states, in fact, share the same "push" factors as those
to California but clearly are not affected by the California-specific "pull" factors. We find that between
1960 and 2004 immigration did not produce a negative migratory response from natives. To the contrary,
as immigrants were imperfect substitutes for natives with similar education and age we find that they
stimulated, rather than harmed, the demand and wages of most U.S. native workers.

Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu
1     Introduction

In the year 2004, California was home to almost 30% of all foreign-born individuals working in the U.S.; in
turn, these foreign-born represented roughly one third of the almost 15 million workers employed in California,
two thirds of California workers without a high school degree and almost half of the California workers with a
doctoral degree. Many U.S.-born Californians moved out of the state during the nineties and job competition
from immigrants has sometimes been regarded as a key factor for this outflow. It stands to reason that if recent
inflows of immigrants indeed crowded out the labor market options of U.S. natives, specifically the low skilled
ones, then such an eﬀect should have been particularly strong in California. But is it possible that immigrants
actually lifted California’s wages, rather than harming them? After all, immigrants have diﬀerent skills and tend
to work in diﬀerent occupations than natives; they could make natives performing complementary production
tasks more productive, thus increasing the demand for those tasks! The present study analyzes the eﬀect of the
migratory inflow on the employment, population and wages of U.S. natives in California, using data from the
decennial U.S. Censuses and from the American Community Survey spanning the period 1960-2004.
    Our approach combines elements of a ”general equilibrium” (more structural) approach to immigration and
wages, as proposed in recent national studies (Borjas 2003; Aydemir and Borjas 2007; Ottaviano and Peri, 2006)
with the study of employment and inter-state migratory response of native workers typical of the so called ”area
approach” (exemplified in Card 1990, 2001, Lewis, 2005 and Borjas, 2006). As in Borjas (2003) we consider labor
as a diﬀerentiated input in production and we model the interactions between workers with diﬀerent education
and age using a nested CES production function. As in Ottaviano and Peri (2006) we allow for imperfect
substitution between native and foreign-born workers within an education-age group (due to diﬀerences in skills,
occupational choices and job opportunities) and we estimate the elasticity of substitution between natives and
immigrants. The degree of substitutability between these two groups is a key parameter to determine whether
immigrants increase or depress the demand for native workers. For a large degree of substitutability between
natives and immigrants, uneducated immigrants mostly depress the demand for uneducated natives and augment
the demand for highly educated natives. However, for a smaller degree of substitutability between natives and
immigrants, uneducated immigrants have a much smaller depressive eﬀect on (and may even increase) the
demand for uneducated natives while still increasing the demand for more educated natives.
    As pointed out by the critics (e.g. Borjas et al, 1997) of the ”area approach” when focussing on a state
economy it is important to account for the fact that any labor market eﬀect of immigration can be ”diﬀused” to
other states by out-migration of native workers. We carefully account for this eﬀect in our empirical analysis.
Moreover, by focussing on California over time, we are able to use a new identification strategy that addresses
the problems of unobserved demand shocks and measurement errors; these are often deemed responsible for
biased estimates of the impact of immigration on the labor market outcomes of natives in a state (e.g. Aydemir


                                                       2
and Borjas, 2006; Borjas, 2006). Specifically, we use immigration to the other U.S. states by skill group over
decades as a reasonable instrument to proxy the ”push”-driven component of immigration to California by skill
group and decade. While sharing the ”push” factors behind international migrations with California, the flows
of foreign-born workers to other U.S. states are not aﬀected by California’s specific pull factors (i.e. unobserved
demand shocks). The intuition of such identifying assumption is as follows. Suppose that immigrants with a
college degree were “pulled” to California in the 90’s by the boom in the high tech sector, which increased the
demand for workers with their qualifications. This would be a “pull factor” specific to California. The same
boom probably would also have attracted (or reduced the potential outflow of) natives in the same skill group. It
could thus create a positive correlation between foreign immigration and natives’ migration and wages–even if
foreign migrants compete with natives for the same jobs. Such pull, however, would not be shared by other states
and hence the instrument would not capture it. On the other hand take the cases of the increased international
mobility of the college-educated Chinese middle-class or the worsened job outlook for young uneducated workers
in Mexico during the nineties. Both are “push factors” that could increase immigration of some age-education
groups to California (a large receiver of Chinese and Mexican migrants) as well as to other states. Push factors
generate more migrants to California as well as to other states and are not related to changes in California’s
local demand for labor. Thus, how native employment responded to those immigration changes would correctly
estimate how immigrants aﬀect natives’ employment opportunities–for a given local demand. The second
purpose served by our instrument is to reduce the measurement error bias. As the measure of immigrants to
other states is based on large national samples (excluding California), the instrument is also largely exempt from
the measurement error aﬀecting state-level measures of immigration by skill due to the potentially small size of
cells1 . Hence, we have an instrument for the inflow of immigrants that is potentially uncorrelated (or weakly
correlated) with California-specific labor demand shocks and the measurement errors while still correlated with
the supply-driven shocks to the composition of immigrants to California. This instrumental variables strategy
that we adopt is novel for the ”area” approach and it is an improvement on the ”national” approach (e.g. Borjas,
2003) in that, while we cannot rely on some natural experiment, we have a more sophisticated way of isolating
supply-driven variations of immigrants going beyond the simple inclusion of education-age, education-year and
age-year specific eﬀects (which we still include).
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the data and shows some statistics on
the skills of foreign-born and recent immigrants to California. Section 3 presents the production function
used as framework to estimate the eﬀect of immigration on wages. The skill-structure defined in the production
function is used in the empirical estimations. Section 4 presents the identifying strategy and shows the migration
and employment responses of California’s native workers to immigration for the period 1960-2004. Section 5
   1 Recent work by Aydemir and Borjas (2006) analyzes the role of measurement error in generating potential bias in the estimates

of the impact of immigrants based on local data.



                                                                3
estimates the substitutability between U.S. and foreign born workers within education-age groups. Section 6
uses the estimated parameters to calculate the eﬀects of immigrants on wages of natives (by education) for the
1990-2004 period. Section 7 concludes.



2     Immigration to California: A Look at the Data

The data we use are from the integrated public use microdata samples (IPUMS) of the U.S. decennial Census
and of the American Community Survey (Ruggles et al, 2005). In particular, we use the general (1%) sample
for Census 1960, the 1% state sample, Form 1, for Census 1970, the 5% state sample for the Censuses 1980
and 1990, the 5% Census sample for year 2000 and the 1/239 American Community Survey (ACS) Sample for
the year 2004. As those are all weighted samples we use the variable “personal weight” to construct all the
average and aggregate statistics relative to California. We consider people aged 17 to 66 not living in group
quarters, and we included them among the workers if they worked at least one week in the previous year and
earned a positive amount in salary income. When using wage data, we converted the current wages to constant
wages (in 2000 U.S. $) using the CPI (Consumer Price Index)-based deflator across years. We define the four
schooling groups using the variable that identifies the highest grade attended (called “HIGRADEG” in IPUMS)
for census 1960 to 1980 while we use the categorical variable (called “edu99” in IPUMS) for censuses 1990 and
2000 and ACS 2004. Age groups are identified using the variable “AGE”. Finally, yearly wages are based on
the variable for salary and income wage (called “INCWAGE” in IPUMS). Weekly wages are obtained dividing
that value by the number of weeks worked2 . The status of “foreign-born” is given to those workers whose place
of birth (variable “BPL”) is not within the USA (or its territories overseas) and did not have U.S. citizenship
at birth (variable “CITIZEN”)3
    Table 1 illustrates the evolution of the percentage of foreign born in employment and population for the
period 1960-2004. Employment is defined as the sum of individuals aged 17 to 66 years old, not residing in group
quarters, who worked at least one week in the previous year. Population is defined as the sum of individual
between 17 and 66 years of age not residing in group quarters. We report the figures for California as compared
to the corresponding figures for the whole U.S.A. First, note that in California the percentages of foreign-born
already began growing in the sixties, while in the U.S. as a whole they only began to grow during the seventies.
During the seventies, eighties and nineties, California experienced increases in the share of foreign-born workers
by about 7% in each decade, with similar rates continuing after the year 2000; in the whole U.S., the increases
were far more modest over that period, amounting to 2-3% per year. Second, over the entire period considered,
   2 For Census 1960 and 1970 only a categorical variable that measures weeks worked exists, called ”WKSWRK2”. Individuals are

assigned the middle value of the interval in the variable.
   3 The variable CITIZEN is not available in Census 1960. For that year we consider all people born outside the U.S. as foreign-

born.




                                                               4
the share of foreign-born workers in employment was larger than their share of population, denoting higher
employment/population ratios of immigrants relative to natives; this was due in part to their age distribution.
Finally, notice that the percentage of immigrants in California’s population and employment as of 1980 is similar
to the percentage of immigrants in population and employment for the nation in 2004. In terms of percentages,
a continuation of the present trend would imply that the future of the nation may look like the last 25 years of
California’s experience.
   Moreover, in addition to their percentages of population and employment, the distribution of foreign-born
across education levels in California in 1980 is similar to that for the whole nation in 2004. Table 2 shows the
percentage of foreign-born workers in California by education group between 1960 and 2004. Notice the higher
concentration of foreign-born among the low (less than high school) and high (college or more) schooling levels
and the lower concentration in the intermediate education levels. Notice that, as of 2004, two thirds of high
school dropout workers in California were immigrants as well as 42% of Ph.D.’s, while only 20% of workers with
some college education but no degree were not U.S. born. The distribution of immigrants, predominantly at the
two ends of the schooling spectrum, will be dubbed ”U-shaped”. This U-shape is also a feature of the national
data; Figure 1 shows the percentage of foreign-born workers by education level in 2004, comparing California
and the whole U.S. One clearly notices the same qualitative U-shaped distribution, but each bar is much higher
for California, denoting a higher average percentage of foreign-born. We need to go back to the year 1980 (see
Table 2) to find percentages of foreign born across education groups in California similar to the ones for the
U.S. today: back then, in California, 32% of high school dropouts, 12% of high school graduates, 10% of college
dropouts4 and 14% of college graduates were foreign-born.
   The numbers presented above are relative to the ”stock” of foreign-born living in California (or nationally).
The more recent flow of immigrants to California and to the U.S. (1990-2004) also has a similar distribution over
schooling. Figure 2 shows the net growth in employment due to immigrants as percentage of initial employment
by education group for California (light shaded columns) and for the U.S. as a whole (dark shaded columns).
College graduates, Masters and Ph.D.’s flowed in much larger percentages of initial employment in the group
than college dropouts both in California and the whole U.S. At the opposite end of the schooling spectrum,
the inflow of high school dropouts was much larger as a percentage of the group than inflow of high school
graduates. Overall, aggregating across groups, immigrants to California during the 1990-2004 period equaled
20% of its total employment in 1990, while in the U.S. as a whole they were only 11% of initial employment.
These aggregate numbers provide a good sense of how large immigration has been in California.
   The focus of this paper is the eﬀect of immigration on the labor market outcomes of Californian workers. It
is useful, therefore, to start by showing the behavior of native worker real wages during the most recent fourteen
  4 For brevity, and somewhat improperly, we often use the term ”College Dropouts” to indicate those people who have some

College education but not a four-year degree.



                                                           5
years of data (1990-2004); these years correspond to the period of largest immigration flows. Figure 3 shows the
percentage change in real wage for native workers, by education group, in California (light shaded columns) and
in the U.S. as a whole (dark shaded columns) for the 1990-2004 period. We use real weekly wages calculated as
yearly wage and salary income divided by weeks worked, and convert to constant 2000 dollars by dividing for the
Consumer Price Index deflator. First of all, we notice that the real wage changes across education groups are
very similar in California compared to the whole nation; the diﬀerence in real wage growth between California
and the rest of the nation was never larger than 4% in any group. In terms of magnitude across education
groups, high school dropouts’ wages decreased in real terms over the period by as much as 17%, real wages
of high school graduates were rather stationary, while real wages of college graduates and above experienced a
substantial increase, generally above 20%. Aggregating across groups, the average real wage grew by 10.7% in
California and by 9.7% in the U.S. as a whole, again denoting a similar performance (less than 0.1% diﬀerence
in growth per year), with no apparent wage “penalty” at all for the high-immigration state of California.
    California’s closeness to the national average in terms of wage dynamics over the last 15 years denotes
substantial integration of the Californian labor market with the rest of the U.S. Implied are small costs of moving
that arbitrage away large diﬀerences in wage changes across states. The poor performance of uneducated worker
real wages, contributing to an increase in wage dispersion and income inequality, has certainly been a thorny
issue in California as well as in the rest of the nation. The question is whether it was immigration flows that
contributed to these real wage changes in California and the U.S. and by how much.



3     The Framework: Production Function and Imperfect Substitutabil-

      ity

To evaluate the eﬀects of immigrants on the wages and employment of native workers in California we use a
framework similar to Ottaviano and Peri (2006). Workers diﬀer by their education and age; diﬀerent types
of workers and physical capital are combined in a production function to produce output. The marginal
productivity (wage) of each group depends on skill-specific technology and the supply of each group is aﬀected
by immigration. We extend that framework to allow for changes in the labor supply of natives (via migration
to/from other states and in/out of employment) in response to immigration, and we estimate these responses
and corresponding wage elasticities maintaining the same groupings by skill in the production function. Then,
we use the estimated responses and the estimated wage elasticities to calculate the overall eﬀect of immigration
on the wages of U.S. natives in California.




                                                        6
3.1    Production Function

Following previous work with Gianmarco Ottaviano (Ottaviano and Peri, 2006) that, in turn, builds on Borjas
(2003), we represent output in California as produced by physical capital and diﬀerent types of labor. Labor
types are grouped according to education and age and combined in a constant elasticity of substitution (CES)
aggregate; age groups are nested within educational groups that are themselves nested into the labor composite
Lt . U.S.-born and foreign-born workers are allowed a further degree of imperfect substitutability even when
they have the same education and age. More specifically, the aggregate production function is given by the
following expression:


                                                              1−α
                                                  Yt = At Lα
                                                           t Kt                                                (1)

where Yt is aggregate output , At is total factor productivity (TFP), Kt is physical capital, Lt is a CES aggregate
of diﬀerent types of labor (described below), and α ∈ (0, 1) is the income share of labor. All variables reflect
data for the state of California in year t. The labor aggregate Lt is defined as:

                                                  " 4          # δ−1
                                                                  δ
                                                   X       δ−1
                                             Lt =     θkt Lktδ                                                 (2)
                                                     k=1


where Lkt is an aggregate measure of workers with educational level k in year t; θkt are education-specific
                                         P
productivity levels (standardized so that k θkt = 1 and thus any common multiplying factor can be absorbed
in the TFP term At ). We group educational achievements into four categories: high school dropouts (denoted
as HSD) , high school graduates (HSG), college dropouts (COD) and college graduates (COG), so that k =
{HSD, HSG, COD, COG}. The parameter δ > 0 measures the elasticity of substitution between workers with
diﬀerent educational achievements. Within each educational group we allow workers with diﬀerent experience
levels to be imperfect substitutes. In particular, following the specification used in Card and Lemieux (2001),
we write:                                           ⎡          ⎤ η−1
                                                                  η

                                                     X5    η−1
                                            Lkt             η ⎦
                                                  = ⎣ θkj Lkjt                                                 (3)
                                                     j=1


where j is an index spanning age intervals of ten years between 17 and 66, so that j = 1 captures workers 17-26
years old , j = 2 captures those who are 27-36 years old, and so on. Within an education group age groups are
identical to groups based on years of experience and sometimes we will use the terms ”age” and ”experience”
interchangeably. The reason to choose a ten year interval is that, by so doing, we can track ten year cohorts
across censuses and control for their demographic tendencies when evaluating the impact of immigration on
employment, revealing the internal migratory response of natives to foreign immigrants. The parameter η > 0
measures the elasticity of substitution between workers in the same education group with diﬀerent experience


                                                           7
                                                                                             P
levels and θkj are experience-education specific productivity levels (standardized so that    j   θkj = 1 for each k
and assumed to be invariant over time, as in Borjas, 2003) . As we expect workers within an education group
to be closer substitutes than workers across diﬀerent education groups, our prior (consistent with other findings
in the literature) is that η > δ. Finally, we define Lkjt as a CES aggregate of home-born and foreign-born
workers. Denoting the number of workers with education k and experience j who are, respectively, home-born
and foreign-born, with Hkjt and Fkjt , and the elasticity of substitution between them by σ > 0, our assumption
is that:

                                                ∙       σ−1            σ−1
                                                                           ¸ σ−1
                                                                              σ
                                                          σ             σ
                                        Lkjt   = θHkjt Hkjt + θF kjt Fkjt                                        (4)

Foreign-born workers are likely to have diﬀerent abilities pertaining to language, quantitative skills, relational
skills and so on. These characteristics, in turn, are likely to aﬀect their comparative advantages in production
and hence choices of occupation, therefore foreign-born workers should be diﬀerentiated enough to be treated
as imperfect substitutes for U.S.-born workers, even within the same education and experience group. While
in a more general specification the substitutability between U.S.- and foreign-born workers, σ, may vary across
education groups (k), the findings in Ottaviano and Peri (2006) suggest that those diﬀerences are not very
relevant; hence, herein we maintain a common elasticity. Finally, the terms θHkjt and θF kjt measure the
specific productivity levels of foreign- and home-born workers, and they may vary across groups and years (in
the empirical identification we impose a systematic structure on their variations over time) . They are also
standardized so that (θHkjt + θF kjt ) = 1.


3.2    Eﬀects of Immigration on Employment and Wages in a State Economy

Using the production function (1) we can calculate the wage response of each group to total immigration once
we know the parameters δ, η and σ, and have the data on immigration flows, wage shares and employment. In
particular, assuming a given supply of U.S.-born workers in each skill group, Hkjt , and assuming that physical
capital adjusts to immigration so as to keep its real return constant, one can easily show that the eﬀect of total
immigrants on the real wages of U.S. natives of education k and experience j (expressed in units of output Yt ,
which is taken as the numeraire) is given by the following expression:



           µ            ¶T otal               µ              ¶ µ           ¶µ ¶Xµ               ¶
               ∆wHkjt                 1 XX             ∆Fmit         1 1      1           ∆Fkit
                                  =             sF mit          +      −           sF kit         +              (5)
                wHkjt                 δ m i             Fmit         η δ     skt i
                                                                                          Fkit
                                        µ       ¶µ      ¶µ               ¶
                                          1   1      1             ∆Fkjt
                                      +     −               sF kjt
                                          σ η      skjt             Fkjt




                                                            8
and the eﬀect of immigration on wages of foreign-born (previous immigrants) of education k and experience j
is given by:



           µ             ¶T otal                  µ              ¶ µ           ¶µ ¶Xµ                   ¶
               ∆wF kjt                    1 XX             ∆Fmit         1 1       1              ∆Fkit
                                      =             sF mit          +      −               sF kit         +                   (6)
               wF kjt                     δ m i             Fmit         η δ      skt    i
                                                                                                  Fkit
                                            µ       ¶µ      ¶µ               ¶
                                              1   1      1             ∆Fkjt     1 ∆Fkjt
                                          +     −               sF kjt         −
                                              σ η      skjt             Fkjt     σ Fkjt

               ∆Fkjt
   The term    Fkjt    is the percentage change of foreign-born in skill group k, j due to immigration; the variable
                                                                                                S     S    wF kjt Fkjt
sF kjt is the wage share paid in year t to foreign workers in group k, j, namely sF kjt =                                            .
                                                                                                  m   i (wF mit Fmit +wHmit Hmit )

                         S      wF kjt Fkjt +wHkjt Hkjt
                                S
Analogously, skjt =                                             is the share of wage income in year t paid to all workers in
                            m    i (wF mit Fmit +wHmit Hmit )

skill group k, j. While appropriate when considering the overall U.S. economy, the assumption of fixed labor
supply of natives, Hkjt , may not hold when we analyze the eﬀect of immigrants on a state economy. In response
to an inflow of immigrants, ∆Fkjt , native workers may move out of or be attracted to California, depending
                                                                                       ³       ´
                                                                                         ∆Hkjt
on the eﬀect of a larger supply of immigrants on the demand for natives. We denote as Hkjt              the
                                                                                                                   response
percentage change of native employment of education k and age j in period t in response to total immigration
during period t, and we need to account for this response when evaluating the overall eﬀect of immigration
on wages. It is easy to show that, in this case, the long-run eﬀect of immigration on the wages of natives and
foreign-born would be given by the following two expressions:



               µ            ¶T otal              Ã                            µ         ¶       !
                   ∆wHkjt                1 XX             ∆Fmit                 ∆Hmit
                                       =           sF mit         + sHmit                         +                           (7)
                    wHkjt                δ m i              Fmit                 Hmit response
                                         µ      ¶µ ¶XÃ                                  µ       ¶       !
                                           1 1       1                  ∆Fkit             ∆Hkit
                                             −                   sF kit         + sHkit                   +
                                           η δ      skt     i
                                                                         Fkit              Hkit reponse
                                           µ       ¶µ       ¶Ã                          µ       ¶        !
                                             1   1      1               ∆Fkjt             ∆Hkjt
                                         +     −                sF kjt          + sHkjt
                                             σ η       skjt             Fkjt               Hkjt response
                                             µ       ¶
                                           1 ∆Hkjt
                                         −
                                           σ   Hkjt response




                                                                    9
              µ             ¶T otal             Ã                           µ        ¶        !
                  ∆wF kjt               1 XX              ∆Fmit               ∆Hmit
                                      =            sF mit        + sHmit                        +              (8)
                   wF kjt               δ m i              Fmit                Hmit response
                                          µ       ¶µ ¶XÃ                                µ       ¶       !
                                            1 1        1                 ∆Fkit            ∆Hkit
                                        +     −                   sF kit        + sHkit
                                            η δ       skt    i
                                                                          Fkit             Hkit reponse
                                          µ       ¶µ       ¶Ã                         µ       ¶        !
                                            1   1       1             ∆Fkjt             ∆Hkjt
                                        +     −                sF kjt         + sHkjt
                                            σ η       skjt             Fkjt              Hkjt response
                                              1 ∆Fkjt
                                          −
                                              σ Fkjt

                              kjt∆F
      The terms containing Fkjt   are identical to those in the formulas (5) and (6). The terms containing
³         ´
    ∆Hkit
     Hkit         account for the wage shift due to the change in native supply of labor in response to im-
          response
migration. If the induced adjustment of native employment has the opposite sign of the change in foreign-born
due to immigration and a relevant magnitude, accounting for it will attenuate the impact of immigration on
wages. On the other hand, if the induced adjustment is negligible accounting for it will not significantly change
the impact on wages obtained by the simple application of (5) and (6). The next section describes how we
                                                           ³        ´
estimate the response of native employment to immigrants, ∆H    kit
                                                              Hkit       , and the instrumental variable
                                                                                 response
strategy behind those estimates.



4      The Response of Native Labor Supply

4.1      Specification and Instrumental Variables

While we do not model in detail the mechanism producing the response of native employment to immigration,
we estimate the elasticity of Hkjt (i.e. the supply of natives in an education experience group) to changes in
Fkjt by running the following regression:

                                                                  natural
                          ∆Hkjt                     (∆Hkjt )                       ∆Fkjt
                                    = Dkj + Dkt + ϑ                         +γ               + ukjt            (9)
                        Hkjt + Fkjt                  Hkjt + Fkjt                 Hkjt + Fkjt

     ∆Hkjt is the change in native employment in cell k, j during the decade t. The left hand side of (9) measures
the change in native employment as a percentage of overall initial employment in the skill group k, j: Hkjt +Fkjt .
The regression controls for education by age (Dkj ) and education by year (Dkt ) fixed eﬀects. These controls are
supposed to capture systematic diﬀerences in employment growth across skill groups as well as those that are
education-decade specific; for instance, the latter could potentially be due to skill-biased productivity changes.
We also control for the predicted change of employment in each cell, denoted (∆Hkjt )natural , that accounts




                                                             10
for demographic trends (cohort size and mortality rates) and national employment/population ratios 5 . Any
deviation of ∆Hkjt from the predicted change (∆Hkjt )natural in employment is due either to net migration
to/from other states or changes in the employment/population ratio of the group6 . The coeﬃcient γ captures
the elasticity of native employment changes, ∆Hkjt , to immigration flows, ∆Fkjt . ukjt are zero-mean cell-
specific shocks. Once we have an estimate of the elasticity γ, we can obtain the response of native employment
                              ³        ´            ³       ´³       ´
                                                      ∆Fkjt     Fkjt
to immigration, used above as ∆H   kit
                                 Hkit          =  γ    Fkjt     Hkjt .
                                              response
    In order to obtain an estimate of the coeﬃcient γ that captures the response of native labor supply to
immigration in California we adopt the following estimation and identification strategy. First, as already
noted, we control for education-specific labor demand shocks (Dkt ), that would induce correlation between the
residual and the immigrants’ inflow. Second, we perform an instrumental variables estimation using the variable
 ∆Fkjt
Hkjt +Fkjt   over skill groups and decades calculated for the rest of the U.S. as an instrument for immigration flows
to California. The flows of immigrants to any U.S. state by education and experience groups are determined by
the interaction of ”push” (supply) factors, relative to the countries of origin of immigrants and “pull” (demand)
factors specific to the U.S. states where they move to. By using immigration by skill in the rest of the U.S. as
an instrument for its counterpart in California we are able to isolate the supply-driven variation of immigration
(common for flows to California and rest of the U.S.) from the demand-driven variation specific to California.
Furthermore, if the dependent variable is measured with error due to the fact that the size of some skill cells in
California is small and the 1% samples used may have a non-trivial measurement error, the instrument, based
on national data (excluding California) is likely to have larger size in all cells and to measure immigration much
more precisely as a percentage of initial employment. This would drastically reduce any measurement error
bias. In general, using migration by cell for the rest of the country as an instrument, we rely on the fact that the
education-age distribution of immigrants to California is correlated to the distribution for the rest of the U.S.
due to common countries of origin and push-factors. For instance, scant job opportunities for young uneducated
workers in Mexico during the nineties was a supply factor inducing a large ∆Fkjt for low education, young age
groups, both for California and the U.S. as a whole. On the other hand, good employment opportunities for
middle aged, highly educated engineers in Silicon Valley would certainly aﬀect ∆Fkjt in some education-age
groups in California, but would not aﬀect ∆Fkjt for the same groups in the rest of the country. These “pull”
factors, that also aﬀect ∆Hkjt for California, and induce correlation between ∆Fkjt and ukjt , would not aﬀect
the instrument. To our knowledge, this method isolating ”pull” factors that determine migration to California,
is novel to the area approach. At the same time, it is an improvement on the existing aggregate literature that
adopts a similar CES production structure (Borjas 2003; Borjas and Katz, 2005; Ottaviano and Peri, 2006) and
  5 The
                                natural
         construction of ∆Hkjt            is described in detail in Section 4 below.
  6 Faster or slower educational upgrading relative to the rest of the nation could also be a cause of deviation. However, we also
run the regressions using only age groups over 27 years, which reduces the extent of educational upgrading of a cohort over time
(as most people have their final degree by age 27), obtaining very similar results.



                                                               11
simply assumes that, once education by year eﬀects are accounted for, the remaining variation of immigration
over time in a skill group is supply-driven.
   Once we obtain its estimate, the interpretation of the coeﬃcient γ is very simple. If it is equal to negative one,
it implies that for each immigrant moving to California one native moves out of the state; that is, immigrants fully
displace natives. On the contrary, a coeﬃcient γ equal to 0, would imply that natives’ employment is not aﬀected
at all by immigration. Finally, a positive estimate of γ implies that immigrants are complementary enough to
native workers to augment their productivity, create new business opportunities for them and consequently
increase their demand and attract new workers to the state . In order to identify the cross-state migration
response, we run specification (9) using population measures. In order to focus more specifically on employment
eﬀects, we also run some specifications using employment and employment ratios (by education and age) as
dependent variables in regressions similar to (9).
   Finally, recall that γ estimates a relative response to immigration. Specifically, γ measures the percentage
change in native employment of group k, j in response to immigration in that group relative to changes in other
experience groups within the same education group k. Maintaining the “nested” structure described in section
1 we also estimate a response to immigration within entire education groups, γ EDU as follows:


                      ∆Hkt                         (∆Hkt )natural          ∆Fkt
                               = Dk + T rendk + ϑ1                + γ EDU           + ukt                       (10)
                     Hkt + Fkt                       Hkt + Fkt            Hkt + Fjt
                                                                                                    P
where the variables have been aggregated across experience within education groups so that: ∆Hkt = j ∆Hkjt ,
       P                P                    natural   P           natural
Hkt = j Hkjt , Fkt = j Fkjt and (∆Hkt )              = j (∆Hkjt )          .We allow fixed education eﬀects Dk
and education-specific trends T rendk to account for aggregate factors and skill-specific technological progress.
                                                      ∆Fkt
As before, we estimate γ EDU using the variable      Hkt +Fjt   for the rest of the U.S. as an instrument for the
corresponding migration to California.


4.2    Estimates

Table 3 shows the estimates of the coeﬃcients γ (first row) and ϑ (second row) in regression (9). The change in
native employment as a percentage of the initial employment (by cell) is regressed on the change in foreign-born
employment (also as a percentage of initial employment), on the predicted change in native employment and
on a set of dummies that control for education by age fixed eﬀects and education by year fixed eﬀects. The
predicted inter-census change in employment of an education-age group is calculated using the population of
that group ten years earlier and applying to it the nationwide mortality rate of that group over a decade, as
well as the national employment rate for that group in that census year. We also correct for the possibility of
education upgrading, i.e. that people in a certain education-cohort cell move to a higher education cell, using
the national upgrading rate by cohort. After 27 years of age, however, the percentage of workers upgrading


                                                        12
their skills by further formal education is very small and the results are very similar wether we account for them
or not. Hence, for instance, the population of U.S. natives in the cohort of high school educated individual, 37
to 46 years old in 1960 is used to predict the population of U.S. natives in the cohort of high school educated
individuals, 47 to 56 years old in 1970. Then, the national employment rate for U.S. natives in the 47-56 years
old group in 1970 is applied to obtain the predicted employment for that cohort in 1970. Any diﬀerences between
the actual and the predicted change in population are due to changes of native individuals in the cohort due
to cross-state migration. Any diﬀerences between actual and predicted employment changes are due either to
cross-state migrations or to changes in the state employment/population ratios relative to the national ones.
   We use ten-year age groups (five of them, between 17 and 66 years of age) and four educational attainments
over four decades 1960-2000, for a total of 80 observations. After having analyzed the overall eﬀect of immigration
on native employment (Table 3) we also analyze its components by looking separately at population, only
aﬀected by migration of natives in- or out-of-state (Table 4), and employment/population ratios, only aﬀected
by higher or lower participation into the labor market (Table 5). Regressions in Table 3 also include education
by age fixed eﬀects that account for systematic diﬀerences across groups and education by year fixed eﬀects that
account for education-specific shocks to labor demand. The basic specification 1 of Table 3 estimates the panel
by weighted least squares, using employment of each cell as its weight, specification 2 performs simple least
squares estimation, specification 3 omits the education by year eﬀects and specification 4 uses only data from
the two groups with lower education (high school graduates and high school dropouts). The elasticity of native
employment to immigration (γ in equation 9) is consistently estimated at around 0.10, not significantly diﬀerent
from 0 but usually significantly larger than -0.1. This implies that the estimates rule out even a very modest
out-migratory response of natives or employment loss of natives to immigrants (such as -0.10): native workers’
employment is unaﬀected by immigrants. Such a feature is robust across specifications, and in particular, also
holds for the groups with lowest education (see specification 4). In order to check whether omitted demand-
shock-bias plus measurement error bias aﬀects the OLS estimates, specification 5 to 8 re-estimate regressions1
to 4 using migration by skill to the rest of the U.S. (discussed above) as an instrument. The first stage of the
regression (reported in the lower portion of Table 3) reveals that the instrument has power. Moreover it reveals
that the instrument has a positive correlation with the explanatory variable. This implies that migrations to
other states and to California, are positively related, as it is implied by our assumption that they share the same
”push” determinants. To the contrary, if the correlation arose because migrants are attracted to other states
by pull factors and ”taken away” from California then it would be negative. In some specifications, however,
such as when we restrict the consideration to the lowest education groups, the first stage correlation may not
be very strong (F-test of 7.5). The most relevant finding, robust across specifications, is that the IV estimates
of the elasticity γ are insignificantly diﬀerent from their OLS counterparts, are positive and are not diﬀerent



                                                        13
from 0 at any standard significance level. Standard errors of the IV estimates are about three times as large
as those of their OLS counterparts, and the IV point estimates are generally positive and larger in absolute
value than the OLS ones, implying that the unobserved demand shock does not seem to bias the OLS estimates
upwards. Using our method to isolate supply-driven shocks to immigration we do not detect any negative eﬀects
on native employment. The size of standard errors makes inference less precise with the IV estimates, but in
general even a modest negative eﬀect (such as -0.30) can be ruled out at standard confidence levels. Notice, on
the other hand, that the coeﬃcient on the predicted employment change is always positive, close to one and
very significant. This means that the local demographic tendencies (aﬀecting supply) are very important to
predict employment changes by skill in California.
   Tables 4 and 5 reproduce the analysis and the specifications of Table 3, considering respectively population
and employment/population ratios as dependent variables. The fact that we do not find any significant eﬀects
of immigration on changes in native employment suggests that we should not find any significant eﬀect on
the individual components of this change: population change due to cross-state migration and changes in
employment/population ratios. In fact, the elasticities of these two variables to immigration are also estimated
to be insignificantly diﬀerent from 0: around 0.14 (median estimate in Table 4) for native population and
around 0.05 (median estimate in Table 5) for native employment rates. The specifications estimated in these
tables are identical to those in Table 3: the weighted least squares specification in column 1, the unweighted
OLS in column 2, a specification omitting education by year dummies in column 3 and including only the
groups of high school graduates and high school dropouts in column 4. Most of the time we are able to rule
out modest negative eﬀects on the order of -0.20 for the population change and on the order of -0.05 for the
employment rate change. Native population change in a group seems to be predicted particularly well by the
local demographics (cohort size) as the coeﬃcients on the predicted change in the second row of Table 4 are
all close to one and very precisely estimated. Similarly, the national employment/population ratios are very
good predictors of the California employment/population ratios (second row of Table 5). Notice also that the
reaction of the least educated native groups to immigrants is not diﬀerent from the reaction of the other groups,
neither for population nor for employment. The general tendencies of the IV estimates (specifications 4 and 8
in tables 4 and 5) also confirm the finding of Table 3: they are somewhat more imprecise than the OLS ones
but never significantly diﬀerent from those estimates or from 0, and are never in the negative range.
   The skill structure assumed in production, implying higher substitutability between workers with the same
education and age allows us to use age by education groups to estimate the relative elasticity γ, controlling
for education by year eﬀects. Native workers, however, may be exposed to competition from other age groups
in the same education attainment group, and such competition may also aﬀect cross-state migration and the
employment of natives. Therefore we estimate specification (10), which aggregates age groups in each education



                                                       14
category to obtain the elasticity of native employment to the flow of immigrants in the same education group,
γ EDU . We control for the predicted change in employment of the group, and for education-specific trends and
education fixed eﬀects. Table 6 presents the estimates of four diﬀerent specifications using, respectively, simple
and weighted least squares (specifications 1 and 2) and simple and weighted 2SLS (specifications 3 and 4) with
migration to other states as an instrument. The drawback of these specifications is that, as we are aggregating
over age groups, we only have 16 observations (education group by census) and hence we are not able to obtain
precise estimates. Even in this case, however, employment of natives does not respond significantly to immigrant
flows in the same education group. The estimates of γ EDU are positive, between 0.08 and 0.17 with standard
errors around 0.2; they are consistent with native employment not responding to immigration. The large
standard errors only allows us to rule out negative eﬀects on the order of -0.3 to -0.4, both for the least squares
and IV estimations. We never find negative point estimates of γ EDU , however, so it seems quite reasonable to
infer a zero response (rather than a negative response) of native employment to immigration within the same
schooling group.
    Finally, Table 7 estimates the reaction of native employment to immigration by age group. While the
production function in section 3.1 suggests that age is ”nested” into schooling as a worker’s attribute (hence
the correct groupings are those analyzed in Tables 3 to 6), one may think that workers of the same age compete
more directly with each other as they enter the labor market in the same period despite diﬀerent educational
attainments, or may have parallel career paths7 . Table 7 consider 5 age groups (17 to 66) over four census years
1960-2000, and the responses of employment (column 1 and 3) and employment/population ratios (column 2
and 4) of natives to immigrants, controlling for age group eﬀects and age-group trends. The estimates in the
first row, obtained via least squares (specifications 1 and 2) and 2SLS (specifications 3 and 4) show once more no
significant eﬀect and positive point estimates. This time the standard errors are quite large (up to 0.80) while the
point estimates range between 0.08 and 0.70. While not very informative by themselves, due to the imprecision
of the estimates, the results of Table 7 provide no evidence of migratory response of natives to immigrants and
hence they do not provide any reason to doubt the previous estimates. There is very little or no reaction of
native employment to immigration for workers in the same age group, either via cross-state migration or via
changes in employment/population ratios, just as was the case for education by age and education groupings.



5     Substitutability Between Native and Foreign-Born Workers

Summing up the evidence from section 4 above we find an insignificant reaction of native employment/population
to immigration. This may be due to a combination of small wage eﬀects of immigrants on natives and small
   7 A closer substitutability within age groups would stem from a diﬀerent type of nesting in the CES production function (i.e.

with education groups nested within age groups).




                                                              15
moving costs. Gross migration rates between U.S. states are rather large. About one third of Americans moved
between states in the decade 1990-2000. While there are certainly costs of moving, it is hard to believe that
native workers would not move in the face of large potential wage losses due to immigration. How can we
calculate the wage eﬀects of immigrants in order to check whether their size is consistent with a very small
migratory reaction? Following the framework described in section 3.1 we can use the production function and
the parameters δ, η and σ, estimated from the national economy, to evaluate the eﬀect of immigrants on the
wages of each skill group in California. We can also aggregate those changes across age groups to obtain the
eﬀects for each education group of native and foreign-born workers. As the native supply in each group Hjkt
does not seem to be systematically aﬀected by immigration we can use the more basic formulas (5) and (6)
to obtain these eﬀects . Previous estimates of δ and η at the national level are relatively standard and robust
across studies, with values of δ in the proximity of 2 (Katz and Murphy, 1992; Hamermesh, 1993; Angrist,
1995; Ciccone and Peri, 2005) and values of η around 4 (Borjas, 2003, Card and Lemieux, 2001, Ottaviano and
Peri, 2006). Hence, we use those values in this study without further ado. The estimates of the parameter
σ, however, are more controversial.    Moreover, they are crucial in evaluating the degree of substitutability
between U.S.-and foreign-born workers with important implications for the eﬀect of immigration on the wages
of natives. Ottaviano and Peri (2006a) estimate this parameter to range between 5 and 10 (median value 6.6)
using national U.S. data, Manacorda et al. (2006) applying the same framework to British data estimate a value
of σ for the U.K. of between 4 and 6.6. Our specification and the results of the previous section, however, allow
us to re-estimate σ using California data. As we established that native labor supply Hkjt does not respond
systematically to immigration, one can use variation to the supply of foreign-born, Fkjt , and the following
relationship between marginal productivity and employment to estimate σ; this equation is derived from the
production function in section 3.1, using the assumption that wages equal the marginal productivity of workers:


                                                                  1
                         ln(wHkjt /wF kjt ) = Dkj + Dkt + Djt −     ln(Hkjt /Fkjt ) + ukjt                    (11)
                                                                  σ

   Equation (11) shows that the response of log relative weekly wages (U.S.- and foreign-born) to log relative
employment, once we account for education by age, education by time and age by time fixed eﬀects, identifies
the inverse (with a negative sign) of the elasticity of substitution between U.S. and foreign-born workers in
production. The advantage of estimating this regression with California data is that we can use the variable
 US
Fkjt constructed for the rest of the nation as an instrument for Fkjt , immigration by skill to California. The
decade changes in the instrumental variable, correlated to the supply-side determinants of migration and not
to the California-specific demand side and precisely measured because of the very large size of the cells, should
                                                                           1
improve on the simple OLS estimates. Table 8 shows several estimates of    σ   using data for 5 age and 4 education
groups over the 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000 and 2004 years. Columns 1 and 2 present, respectively, the least


                                                       16
                                                  1
squares weighted and unweighted estimates of      σ   (using employment of a cell as weight) and column 3 and 4
                                                           1
show the 2SLS weighted and unweighted estimates of         σ.   Moving between rows, on the other hand, we have
specification 1 that includes all years, specification 2 excluding year 1960, as migration flows were very scant
in the 60’s, and specification 3 excluding year 2004, not a census year. Finally specification 4 includes only
observations relative to the groups of workers with an high school degree or less. The estimates range between
0.1 and 0.33 with a median of 0.30, implying σ between 3 and 10, with a median value of 3.33. This range
of estimates includes the estimates obtained at the national level by Ottaviano and Peri (2006) which were
mostly between 5 and 10. Most of the values of σ for California, however, cluster between 3 and 4 implying
an even smaller substitutability between U.S. and foreign-born than estimated at the national level. The only
noticeable diﬀerences, in the direction of finding smaller coeﬃcients, appear in the specification that omits the
year 2004. Recall, however that when omitting one year of data we are using 100 observations to estimate 65
fixed eﬀects and one coeﬃcient, hence we are subject to some imprecision. Certainly, however, these results
confirm the findings at the national level; all the estimates of 1/σ are significantly larger than 0, implying
imperfect substitutability between U.S.- and foreign-born.



6     Immigration and Wages, California 1990-2004

Equipped with the estimates of the parameters from the production function and of the elasticity of natives’
supply to immigration we can calculate the impact of immigration (1990-2004) on the wages of natives. Con-
sistent with the insignificant estimates of section 4, we evaluate the wage eﬀects of immigrants assuming zero
response of native employment. This exercise has two important objectives. First, to evaluate the actual real
wage change of each group in response to immigration, we need to combine the estimated parameters in the
formulas (5) and (6) that account for within and across skill complementarities. Second, once we know those
wage gains and losses we may check if they are logically consistent with the findings of zero mobility. Specifically,
for the group of less educated workers that is likely to have the largest loss/smallest gains it would be important
to check whether the wage impact of immigrants is compatible with no migratory response in the presence of
small migration costs.
    Assuming no significant employment response of native population through migration or change in employ-
ment rates, i.e. for γ = 0, the formulas to evaluate wage changes, expressed in (8) and (7) reduce to expressions
(5) and (6). Let us remind the reader that those formulas capture the change in wages once physical capital
has adjusted to equate its return in California with the returns it earns in the rest of the country. Assuming
perfect mobility of capital within the U.S. this adjustment should not take a long time. Table 9 shows the
calculated percentage changes of real wages for U.S.- and foreign-born workers by education group and overall
for the period 1990-2004. The percentage change for each education group is calculated by averaging the wage

                                                         17
change in the age-education sub-groups using wage shares in 1990 as weights. Similarly, the percentage changes
of real wages of U.S.- and foreign-born workers are obtained by averaging the changes for each education group
among U.S.- or foreign-born, weighting each change by the wage share of that education group among U.S.- or
foreign-born in 1990. The first column of Table 9 reports the increase in foreign-born workers for each education
group as a percentage of the total (U.S. and foreign-born) employment in that group as of 1990. As already
shown in Figure 2, the group of high school dropouts received the largest immigration as a percentage of its
initial employment (almost 30%) followed by college graduates, high school graduates and college dropouts. The
second column (specification 1) reports the calculated real wage changes due to immigration using the median
estimate of σ from section 5, σ = 3.3. The other parameters’ values are kept fixed in all calculations and are
equal to the values usually adopted in the literature, namely: α = 0.66 is based on the estimates of the share of
labor income in total GDP for the U.S., δ = 2, is based on existing estimates of substitutability of labor across
education groups and η = 4 is based on existing estimates of substitutability of labor across experience groups.
As we move to the right (specifications 2, 3 and 4) we repeat those calculations using higher estimates of σ,
corresponding to the range of values (between 5 and 10) estimated in section 5 on California data and consistent
with the national estimates in Ottaviano and Peri (2006). All eﬀects are long-run eﬀects, i.e. accounting for the
full adjustment of physical capital. First of all let us notice that using the estimate σ = 3.3, the imperfect sub-
stitutability between foreign-born and natives is strong enough to imply that immigration has a positive eﬀect
on each single education group of native workers. On average, natives gain 5% in productivity as foreign-born
provide skills and labor types which complement, rather than substitute for, their own. Even the least educated
native workers gain 1.8% of their real wages and college dropouts gain 7.2%. These are remarkable gains. While
in relative terms the group of native high school dropouts is still harmed by immigration, given wage boosts to
higher educated workers of 4 to 7%, the high complementarity between natives and immigrants and the large
inflow of immigrants increased wages in real terms for all native groups. The motivation and interpretation for
these results is that immigrants, among less educated workers, have filled those occupations, jobs and production
tasks that use heavily manual skills (e.g. repairing, cultivating, cleaning, packing), leaving native workers to
more interactive, language and communication-oriented jobs (e.g. selling, training, organizing, coordinating).
The availability of manual workers has made the productivity and demand for the tasks supplied by natives
higher. Correspondingly, the increasing supply of immigrants has partly crowded out previous immigrants who
occupied similar jobs and occupations, implying an average loss in their productivity as large as 29%. The value
of σ = 5 is consistent with the national, as well as the California estimates, and may be the most plausible of
all. Column 3 (specification 2) shows the estimated eﬀects given this parameter value. One still obtains positive
eﬀects for wages of native workers of any schooling level. High school dropouts experience almost no wage
change (+0.2%), college graduates and high school graduates experience an increase in real wages by around



                                                        18
3% and college dropouts by 6.7%. Native real wages are boosted by 4.1%, on average, by immigration. Let me
emphasize, at this point, that the calculated wage eﬀects are perfectly compatible with the estimated migratory
response of natives. Less educated workers have no incentive to move out of the state. More educated workers
might have an incentive to move in, however gains on the order of 3% of their wages may not be enough in
the presence of moving costs to attract them. Only the group with some college education (but no degree) has
more substantial gains. The small positive migratory response of native population found in section 4 may be
a sign of a moderate pull of natives due to productive complementarities. Even allowing for the highest degree
of substitutability between U.S. and foreign-born compatible with our estimates, namely σ = 10 reported in
specification 4, immigrants turn out to benefit natives by 2.2% on average, with a distribution of this eﬀect
ranging from a positive wage eﬀects equal to 5.7% for college dropouts to a negative eﬀect equal to 3% for
high school dropouts. In this case there would be some incentive for the least educated to move to avoid real
losses, however moderate costs of moving in the form of actual costs, search costs and on the job skill losses,
may easily erode the 3% gains of a move. All in all, we find it very plausible that, as found in section 4, these
very modest wage changes did not trigger any major out- (in-) migration from (to) California. On the other
hand, the negative wage eﬀects of new immigrants on other foreign-born (between -10 and -20%) may imply
that some old immigrants moved out of California as a consequence of new immigration, contributing to the
diﬀusion of immigrants (especially Latinos) across other U.S. states, a phenomenon that typically took place
during the nineties (see for instance Card and Lewis, 2005). Recall, however, that part of the large negative
eﬀect on foreign-born wages is due to the nature of the experiment, in which we keep all variables constant
as of 1990 except for immigration. The increased employment of natives between 1990 and 2004, and their
complementarity to foreign-born, certainly acted to reduce the negative eﬀect on old immigrants.



7     Conclusions

If U.S. States were independent countries, California would be the second largest receiving country for inter-
national migrants in the whole world (after Russia) with its 8.5 million foreign-born as of 2004. Moreover,
its proximity to Mexico and a porous border generated extremely large flows of uneducated Mexican workers
(documented and undocumented), at a growing rate, during the last three decades. With one third of its total
labor force made up by immigrants, two thirds of its uneducated workers coming from abroad and a rapidly
rising foreign-born population, that grew by 40% in the last 14 years, surely native Californians (particularly
the unskilled ones) must have suﬀered the most from the negative eﬀects of this ”immigration crisis”8 on their
employment opportunities and wages. The present study, that analyzes employment and wage data in Cali-
   8 The expression is paraphrased from an interview with Lou Dobbs of CNN, aired on National Public Radio on May, 1st 2006,

entitled ”Lou Dobbs and the American Immigration Crisis”.




                                                            19
fornia over the 1960-2004 period, seems to say otherwise. On one hand, immigrants do not seem to increase
the tendency of natives with similar skills (education and experience) to migrate, or to otherwise change their
likelihood of losing their jobs and dropping out of employment. On the other hand, the impact of immigration
over the 1990-2004 period has been negative on the wages of previous immigrants and positive on the wages
of U.S. natives, revealing a good degree of complementarity between U.S. and foreign-born workers that bene-
fits (rather then harms) native workers’ productivity. One plausible interpretation of these complementarities
is the following. Manual tasks in most sectors of California economy are executed by immigrants; the larger
availability of these skills has increased the demand for interactive-communication-coordination tasks needed in
production, and this latter set of skills is more likely provided by natives, even those with low education. This
mechanism has worked to help, rather than harm, the demand and wages of natives’ labor in California. Our
median estimates reveal that these complementarities of immigrants spurred wage growth of natives, once phys-
ical capital adjusted, by about 4% over fourteen years. These average wage gains for natives were distributed as
small wage changes (0.2%) for high school dropouts and significant wage gains of up to 6.7% for workers with
at least a high school degree.




                                                       20
References

Angrist, Joshua (1995) “The Economic Returns to Schooling in the West Bank and Gaza Strip,” American
Economic Review 85 (1995), 1065-1087.

Aydemir, Abdurrahman and George J. Borjas (2006) ”Attenuation Bias in Measuring the Impact of Immigra-
tion” Manuscript, Harvard University, June 2006.

Aydemir, Abdurrahman and George J. Borjas (2007) ”A comparative analysis of the Labor Market Impact of
International Migrations: Canada, Mexico and the United States” NBER Working Paper, #12327.

Borjas, George J. (2003) “The Labor Demand Curve is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the Impact of Immi-
gration on the Labor Market” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVIII (4), 1335-1374.

Borjas, George J. (2006) “Native Internal Migration and the Labor Market Impact of Immigration” Journal of
Human Resources XLI.(2), 221-258.

Borjas, George J., Freeman, Richard and Katz, Larry (1997) “How Much do Immigration and Trade Aﬀect
Labor Market Outcomes?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1997 (1), 1-90

Card, David (1990) “The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market” Industrial and Labor
Relation Review, XLIII, 245-257.Card, David (2001) “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local labor
Market Impacts of Higher Immigration” Journal of Labor Economics, XIX (2001), 22-64.

Card, David and Lemieux, Thomas (2001) “Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising Returns to College for
Younger Men? A Cohort Based Analysis” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. CXVI, pag. 705-746.

Card, David and Ethan Lewis (2005) “The Diﬀusion of Mexican Immigrants During the 1990s: Explanations
and Impacts,” NBER Working Paper #11552, August 2005.

Ciccone, Antonio and Peri, Giovanni (2005) “Long-Run Substitutability between More and Less Educated
Workers: Evidence from U.S. States 1950-1990” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 87, Issue 4.

Hamermesh, Daniel (1993), ”Labor Demand”, Princeton University Press, Princeton New Jersey, 1993.

Katz, Larry and Murphy, Kevin (1992) “Change in Relative Wages 1963-1987: Supply and Demand Factors,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 35-78.

Lewis, Ethan (2005) “Immigration, Skill Mix, and the Choice of Technique,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadel-
phia Working Paper #05-08, May 2005




                                                    21
Manacorda, Marco, Alan Manning and Jonathan Wadsworth (2006) ”The Impact of Immigration on the Struc-
ture of Male Wages: Theory and Evidence from Britain” manuscript, London School of Economics, June 2006.

Ottaviano, Gianmarco I.P. and Peri Giovanni (2006) ”Rethinking the Eﬀects of Immigration on Wages” NBER
Working Paper, #12497.

Ruggles, Steven , Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken, Patricia Kelly
Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander (2006). Integrated Public Use Microdata Series:          Version 3.0
[Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center [producer and distributor], 2004.
http://www.ipums.org.




                                                    22
                                            Table 1:
              Percentage of Foreign-Born in Employment and Population 1960-2004

                                                                                                   2004
                                                                                                 American
                                          1960   1970   1980              1990        2000      Community
Years of Schooling:                      Census Census Census            Census      Census       Survey
Total Employment, California             9.4%   10.0% 16.1%              24.6%       32.0%        33.2%
Total Employment, U.S.A.                  5.9%   5.1%   6.4%              8.9%       13.0%        14.4%
Total Population, California              8.6%   8.7%  15.6%             24.6%       29.9%        29.9%
Total Population, U.S.A.                  5.2%   4.3%   6.0%              8.7%       12.5%        13.4%

Note: Author’s calculation using Census 1960-2000 and ACS 2004 IPUMS data. Employment is
calculated as the sum of individuals of ages between 17 and 66, not residing in group quarters, and who
worked at least one week during the preceding year. Population is calculated as the sum of all
individuals aged 17 to 66 not residing in group quarters.




                                           Table 2:
             Percentage of foreign Born Workers by Schooling, California 1960-2004

                                                                                               2004
                                                                                             American
                                          1960   1970   1980              1990        2000  Community
Years of Schooling:                      Census Census Census            Census      Census   Survey
0 to 11 years                             13.0% 15.7% 33.7%              52.2%       63.4%    66.8%
12 years (High School Grads)               6.4%   7.4% 11.3%             19.1%       27.6%    31.2%
13 to 15 years                             7.4%   7.8% 11.0%             15.4%       20.6%    20.7%
16 years (College Graduates)               7.7%   8.3% 13.9%             18.7%       24.9%    27.9%
Master, Professional Degree                n.a.   n.a.   n.a.            19.9%       26.7%    28.9%
Doctoral Degree                            n.a.   n.a.   n.a.            28.5%       37.2%    42.1%
Average California                         9.4% 10.0% 16.1%               24.6%       32.0%   33.2%

Note: Author’s calculation using Census 1960-2000 and ACS 2004 IPUMS data. Workers included are
individuals aged 17-66, not residing in group quarters, and who worked at least one week during the
preceding year.




                                                     23
                                                        Table 3:
                                    Response of Native Employment to Immigration:
                                    By Education-Age groups, California 1960-2000


 Method of                   Least Squares                                   2 Stage Least Squares
 Estimation
                             1           2          3             4          5          6            7           8
                             Basic       Un-        No            HS or      Basic      Un-          No          HS or
                             Least       weighted   Fixed         Less,      IV         weighted     Fixed       Less,
                             Squares     Least      Effects,      Least                 IV           Effects,    IV
                                         Squares    Least         Squares                            IV
 Specification                                      Squares
 Immigration flow            0.13        0.16       0.07          0.09       0.26       0.28         0.18        0.05
 ΔFkjt /( Fkjt + H kjt ) ,   (0.09)      (0.11)     (0.06)        (0.10)     (0.25)     (0.28)       (0.18)      (0.15)
 workers
 Predicted                   0.85**      0.85**     0.98**        0.80**     0.83**     0.84**       0.98**      0.81**
 Employment                  (0.03)      (0.03)     (0.02)        (0.05)     (0.03)     (0.03)       (0.03)      (0.05)
 Change
 Education by Age            Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
 Effects

 Education by year           Yes         Yes        No            Yes        Yes        Yes          No          Yes
 Effects

 R2                          0.94        0.96       0.89          0.95       0.95       0.95         0.88        0.94
 First Stage
 Immigration Flow to         n.a.        n.a.       n.a.       n.a.          2.38**     2.11**       1.7**       2.5**
 Other U.S. States                                                           (0.59)     (0.38)       (0.57)      (0.9)
 F-test of exclusion         n.a.        n.a.       n.a.       n.a.          16.4       33.6         9.24        7.52
 Observations                80          80         80         40            80         80           80          40


Notes: The dependent variable is the change in employment of U.S.-born workers as a percentage of the initial
total employment in the group: ΔH kjt /( Fkjt + H kjt ) . Groups are: 4 education by 5 age groups (17 to 66 by ten years
of age) over 4 inter-census periods (four decades between 1960 and 2000). Employment is measured as total
number of individuals who worked for at least one week in the previous year. Foreign-born are those individuals
who were born outside the United States and were not U.S. citizens at birth. Standard errors are clustered by
education-age group. Specifications 1 to 4 use OLS as the method of estimation, weighting each observation by
the total employment in the cell (except for the unweighted specification 2). Specifications 5 to 8 use 2SLS as the
method of estimation adopting immigration by skill group relative to the rest of the U.S. ΔFkjtUS /( FkjtUS + H kjt
                                                                                                                US
                                                                                                                    ) as an
instrument for immigration ΔFkjt /( Fkjt + H kjt ) relative to California. The variable “Predicted Employment” is the
total employment constructed for each age-education group using the demographics in California (i.e. the size of
each cohort measured a decade earlier) and accounting for national rates of mortality and national rates of
employment by cohort.


                                                             24
                                                     Table 4:
                                  Response of Native Population to Immigration:
                                  By Education-Age Groups, California 1960-2000




Method of Estimation         Least Squares                                    2 Stage Least Squares
                            1         2              3             4          5        6          7                 8
                            Basic     Un-            No            HS or      Basic    Un-        No Fixed          HS or
                            Least     weighted       Fixed         Less,      IV       weighted Effects,            Less,
                            Squares Least            Effects,      Least               IV         IV                IV
                                      Squares        Least         Squares
Specification                                        Squares
Immigration flow            0.13       0.14          0.01          0.08       0.29       0.27         0.15          0.05
ΔFkjt /( Fkjt + H kjt ) ,   (0.09)     (0.11)        (0.04)        (0.06)     (0.24)     (0.28)       (0.15)        (0.13)
Population
Predicted                   0.90**     0.90**        1.02**        0.81**     0.87**     0.88**       1.03**        0.83**
Population                  (0.04)     (0.04)        (0.03)        (0.07)     (0.04)     (0.04)       (0.04)        (0.07)
Change
Education by Age            Yes        Yes           Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes
Effects

Education by Year           Yes        Yes           No            Yes        Yes        Yes          No            Yes
Effects

R2                          0.95       0.94          0.88          0.93       0.94       0.95         0.87          0.93
Observations                 80        80            80            40         80         80           80            40


Notes: The dependent variable is the change in population of U.S.-born workers as a percentage of the initial total
population in the group: ΔH kjt /( Fkjt + H kjt ) . Groups are: 4 education by 5 age groups (17 to 66 by ten years of age)
over 4 inter-census periods (four decades between 1960 and 2000). Foreign-born are those individuals who were
born outside the United States and not U.S. citizen at birth. Standard errors are clustered by education-age group.
Specifications 1 to 4 use OLS as method of estimation, weighting each observation by the total employment in the
cell (except for the not weighted specification 2). Specifications 5 to 8 use 2SLS as method of estimation adopting
immigration by skill group relative to the rest of the US ΔFkjtUS /( FkjtUS + H kjt
                                                                                US
                                                                                    ) as an instrument for immigration
 ΔFkjt /( Fkjt + H kjt ) relative to California. The variable “Predicted Population” is the total population constructed for
each age-education group using the demographics in California (i.e. the size of each cohort measured a decade
earlier) and accounting for national rates of mortality by cohort.



                                                              25
                                                   Table 5:
                        Response of Native Employment/Population Ratios to Immigration:
                                 By Education-Age groups, California 1960-2000




Method of                    Least Squares                                         2 Stage Least Squares
Estimation
                            1         2               3                4           5           6              7           8
                            Basic     Un-             No               HS or       Basic       Un-            No Fixed    HS or
                            Least     weighted        Fixed            Less,       IV          weighted       Effects,    Less,
                            Squares   Least           Effects,         Least                   IV             IV          IV
                                      Squares         Least            Squares
Specification                                         Squares
Immigration flow            0.05      0.02            0.05             0.08        0.02        0.01           0.06*       0.08
ΔFkjt /( Fkjt + H kjt ) ,   (0.05)    (0.05)          (0.03)           (0.06)      (0.05)      (0.05)         (0.03)      (0.05)
population
National         0.88**               0.91**          0.88**           0.91**      0.87**      0.91**         0.89**      0.92**
Employment/      (0.06)               (0.06)          (0.07)           (0.10)      (0.08)      (0.07)         (0.08)      (0.10)
Population Ratio
Change
Education by Age Yes                  Yes             Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes
Effects

Education by Year Yes                 Yes             No               Yes         Yes         Yes            No          Yes
Effects

R2                          0.88      0.88            0.78             0.88        0.88        0.88           0.78        0.87
Observations                 80       80              80               40          80          80             80          40


Notes: The dependent variable is the change of employment/population ratios of U.S.-born workers during each
inter-census period. Employment/population ratios are defined as the number of individuals working divided by
total population in each age-education group. Groups are: 4 education by 5 age groups (17 to 66 by ten years of
age) over 4 inter-census periods (four decades between 1960 and 2000). Foreign-born are those individuals who
were born outside the United States and not U.S. citizen at birth. Standard errors are clustered by education-age
group. Specifications 1 to 4 use OLS as the method of estimation, weighting each observation by the total
employment in the cell (except for the not weighted specification 2). Specifications 5 to 8 use 2SLS as the method
of estimation adopting immigration by skill group relative to the rest of the U.S. ΔFkjtUS /( FkjtUS + H kjt
                                                                                                         US
                                                                                                             ) as an
instrument        for        immigration     ΔFkjt /( Fkjt + H kjt )    relative   to    California.    The    variable   “National
Employment/Population Ratio” is relative to the group in the U.S, it captures the employment tendencies at the
national level.




                                                                       26
                                                  Table 6:
                              Response of Native Employment to Immigration:
                                By Education Groups, California 1960-2000




Method of Estimation                   Least Squares                      2 Stage Least Squares
                                      1              2                    3                4
                                      Employment     Employment           Employment       Employment
Specification                                        Rate                                  Rate
Immigration flow                      0.17           0.15                 0.08             0.15
ΔFkt /( Fkt + H kt ) , population     (0.19)         (0.19)               (0.24)           (0.22)
Predicted Employment                  0.86**         0.77**               1.22**           1.23**
(Employment Rate)                     (0.19)         (0.28)               (0.19)           (0.34)
Change
Age-Specific Time Trend               Yes              Yes                Yes                 Yes

Age-Specific Fixed Effect             Yes              Yes                Yes                 Yes

R2                                    0.97             0.88               0.98                0.99
Observations                          16               16                 16                  16


 Note: The dependent variable is the change in employment of U.S.-born workers as percentage of the
 initial total employment in the education group: ΔH kt /( Fkt + H kt ) . Groups are: 4 education groups (high
 school dropouts, high school graduates, college dropouts and college graduates) over 4 inter-census
 periods (four decades between 1960 and 2000). We only include individuals 27 to 66 years old who are
 likely to have completed their studies. Standard errors are clustered by education group. The variable
 “Predicted Employment” is the total employment constructed for each education group using the
 demographics in California (i.e. the size of each cohort measured a decade earlier), accounting for
 national rates of mortality and national rates of employment. The IV strategy used in specification 3 and
 4 uses migration to the rest of the U.S. by age group as an instrument for California immigration.




                                                      27
                                                    Table 7:
                                Response of Native Employment to Immigration:
                                     By Age Groups, California 1960-2000




Method of Estimation                     Least Squares                       2 Stage Least Squares
Dependent Variable:                     1              2                     3                4
                                        Employment     Employment            Employment       Employment
                                                       Rate                                   Rate
Immigration flow                        0.08           0.14                  0.70             0.18
ΔF jt /( F jt + H jt ) , population     (0.77)         (0.14)                (0.80)           (0.20)
Predicted Employment                    0.82**           0.85**              0.91**              0.76**
(Employment Rate)                       (0.16)           (0.14)              (0.15)              (0.14)
Change
Age-Specific Time Trend                 Yes              Yes                 Yes                 Yes

Age-Specific Fixed Effect               Yes              Yes                 Yes                 Yes

R2                                      0.84             0.82                0.90                0.45
Observations                            20               20                  20                  20


 Note: The dependent variable in specifications 1 and 3 is the change in employment of U.S.-born workers
 as a percentage of the initial total employment in the age group: ΔH jt /( F jt + H jt ) . The dependent variable
 in specifications 2 and 4 is the change in employment rate. Groups are: 5 age groups (17 to 66 by ten
 years of age) over 4 inter-census periods (four decades between 1960 and 2000). Standard errors are
 clustered by age group. The variable “Predicted Employment” is the total employment constructed for
 each age group using the demographics in California (i.e. the size of each cohort measured a decade
 earlier), accounting for national rates of mortality and national rates of employment. The IV strategy used
 in specifications 3 and 4 uses migration to the rest of the U.S. by age group as an instrument for
 California immigration.




                                                        28
                                        Table 8:
     Estimates of Relative Wage Elasticity of U.S.- and Foreign-born workers (1/σ),
                                California, 1960-2004




Estimates of 1/σ         Ordinary Least Squares               2 Stage Least Squares
                         Weighted        Unweighted           Weighted         Unweighted
1: Basic                 0.33**          0.28**               0.33**           0.24**
                         (0.10)          (0.10)               (0.12)           (0.12)
2: Omitting Year 1960    0.33**          0.31**               0.33**           0.31**
                         (0.09)          (0.09)               (0.11)           (0.11)
3: Omitting Year 2004    0.14**          0.13**               0.10**           0.10**
                         (0.04)          (0.03)               (0.04)           (0.04)
4: High School or Less   0.28**          0.26**               0.38**           0.36**
                         (0.07)          (0.08)               (0.08)           (0.09)




Note: Each cell corresponds to the estimate of the coefficient 1/σ from a separate regression
of (9) in the main text. The dependent variable in each regression is the relative log weekly
wage between U.S.-born and foreign-born workers in the group. The explanatory variable is
the relative employment of U.S.- and foreign-born workers in the group. The regressions
control for age by education, age by year and education by year fixed effects. Groups are: 5
age groups by 4 education groups over 5 census years (1960-2000) plus 2004. The total
number of observations for row 1 is 120, for rows 2 and 3 is 100 and for row 4 is 60. The
method of estimation for the first and second column is least squares. For the third and fourth
column we use two stage least squares using the supply of immigrants relative to natives in
the rest of the country as an instrument for their supply in California. The instrument has an
F-test equal to 92 in the first stage of the IV regression. In the specifications of column 1 and
3 we weight each cell by total employment.




                                               29
                                                              Table 9:
                       Calculated Percentage Changes in Real Wages of California due to Immigrant Inflows:
                                     Effects with Full Physical Capital Adjustment, 1990-2004.

Estimates of σ                    Immigration as a               1                         2                      3                       4
                                 Percentage of 1990        Median estimate           Low National          Median National          Upper bound
                                      Group                for California              estimate               estimate              National and
                                    Employment                 σ=3.3                     σ=5                   σ=6.6                 California
                                                                                                                                       σ =10
                                                                      % Real Wage Change of US-Born Workers due to immigration
HS dropouts U.S.-born                      --                   +1.8%                    +0.2%                   -1.3%                  -3.0%
HS graduates, U.S.-born                    --                   +3.9%                    +2.9%                   +1.8%                  +0.6%
CO dropouts, U.S.-born                     --                   +7.2%                    +6.7%                   +6.2%                  +5.7%
CO graduates, U.S.-born                    --                   +4.0%                    +3.0%                   +1.9%                  +0.7%
Average, U.S.-born                         --                   +5.0%                    +4.1%                    +3.2                  +2.2%
                                                                   % Real Wage Change of Foreign- Born Workers due to immigration
HS dropouts Foreign-born                29.8%                   -13.1%                   -12.1%                  -10.5%                 -8.9%
HS graduates, Foreign-born              24.9%                   -31.1%                   -25.2%                  -19.5%                -13.4%
CO dropouts, Foreign-born               10.1%                   -10.7%                    -7.1%                   -4.6%                 -1.1%
CO graduates, Foreign-born              26.0%                   -29.4%                   -24.2%                  -18.1%                -12.3%
Average Foreign-born                    20.1%                   -20.3%                   -16.8%                  -13.1%                 -9.1%
Overall Average:                          --                      0%                       0%                      0%                    0%
U.S.- and Foreign-Born

Note: Values of the other parameters used in the calculations: δ=2, η=4, α=0.66. The percentage change for the wage of each worker in group k, j
is calculated using formula (5) for U.S.-born and (6) for foreign-born from the main text. Then percentage wage changes are averaged across age
groups using the wage-share of the group in 1990 to obtain the table entries. The averages for U.S.- and Foreign-born are obtained by averaging
the wage change of each education group weighted by its share in wage in 1990. The overall average wage change adds the change of U.S.- and
foreign-born weighted for the relative wage shares in 1990. As physical capital adjusts to maintain the capital labor ratio fixed, the effects on
overall average wage (in the last row) are always 0.




                                                                       30
                                                      Figure 1:
                               Percentage of Foreign-Born Workers by Education Group, 2004

                                                                                Year 2004


               70.0%                    66.8%
                                                                                                                                              USA
               60.0%                                                                                                                          California


               50.0%

                                                                                                                                                                42.1%
  Percentage




               40.0%

                                  31.8%                          31.2%
               30.0%                                                                                           27.8%                     28.9%         28.1%

                                                                                     20.7%
               20.0%
                                                                                                                                    15.8%
                                                         12.0%                                           12.9%
               10.0%
                                                                                9.3%


                0.0%
                                                         es




                                                                                                                                    ls
                                  ts




                                                                                                        es
                                                                               ts




                                                                                                                                                         es
                                                                                                                                  na
                                ou




                                                                             ou
                                                       at




                                                                                                      at




                                                                                                                                                       at
                                                     du




                                                                                                                                io
                              op




                                                                                                    du
                                                                           op




                                                                                                                                                     or
                                                                                                                              ss
                                                   ra
                            Dr




                                                                                                  ra
                                                                         Dr




                                                                                                                                                   ct
                                                                                                                            fe
                                                  G




                                                                                                 G




                                                                                                                                                 Do
                                                                                                                          ro
                         ol




                                                                        ge
                                               ol




                                                                                                ge
                       ho




                                                                                                                        /P
                                                                     lle
                                             ho




                                                                                             lle
                     Sc




                                                                                                                      rs
                                                                   Co
                                           Sc




                                                                                                                    te
                                                                                           Co
                  g




                                                                                                                  as
                                          gh
                Hi




                                                                                                                 M
                                        Hi




                                                                                     Schooling group




                                                          Figure 2:
                                       Immigration Flows by Education Group, 1990-2004

                                       Immigrants 1990-2004 as percentage of Employment in 1990


               45.00%
                                                                                                                                         USA                               43.23%
                                                                                                                                         California
               40.00%


               35.00%

                                        29.79%
               30.00%                                                                                                                                              28.07%
                                                                  24.89%                                                                      24.34%
               25.00%                                                                                                  23.23%
Rate
               20.00%              17.90%
                                                                                                                                         15.42%
               15.00%
                                                                                                              12.81%
                                                              9.81%                        10.13%
               10.00%
                                                                                    6.57%
               5.00%


               0.00%
                                 ut
                                   s                        es                        s                         es                      al
                                                                                                                                          s
                                                          at                        ut                        at
                                                                                                                                                                       s
                               po                       du                        po                                                  on                             te
                             ro                       ra                        ro                          du                     ssi                             ra
                            D                        G                         D                          ra                     fe                             cto
                         ol                       ol                      ge
                                                                                                         G                     ro                             D
                                                                                                                                                               o
                       ho                       ho                      le                          ge                       /P
                     Sc                        c                      ol                          le                       rs
                                              S                      C                          ol                       te
                ig                        h                                                    C                       as
               H                        ig                                                                            M
                                       H
                                                                                                 Schooling




                                                                                          31
                                Figure 3:
 Change in the Real Wage of U.S. Natives, by Education Group, 1990-2004.

                                Real Wage Change of U.S. natives, 1990-2004


         30.0%
                                                                                         California        USA      26.8%
                                                                                                                 26.3%
         25.0%                                                                                     22.8%
                                                                            21.7%
                                                                               21.6%
         20.0%                                                                                        19.3%

         15.0%

         10.0%                                              7.7%
                                                               7.2%
Change    5.0%
                                                4.7%
                                          0.8%
          0.0%

          -5.0%

         -10.0%

         -15.0%          -15.1%
                      -17.8%
         -20.0%
                                            s




                                                                                                     als
                        ts




                                                                               s
                                                             ts




                                                                                                                     s
                                          te




                                                                             te




                                                                                                                   te
                      ou




                                                           ou
                                        ua




                                                                                                  ion
                                                                           ua




                                                                                                                 ra
                    op




                                                         op
                                      ad




                                                                                                              cto
                                                                         ad




                                                                                                ss
                  Dr




                                                       Dr
                                    Gr




                                                                                              fe
                                                                       Gr




                                                                                                            Do
                 ol




                                                       ge




                                                                                            ro
                                    ol




                                                                       ge
               ho




                                                                                          /P
                                                    lle
                                  ho




                                                                    lle
             Sc




                                                                                        rs
                                                  Co
                                Sc




                                                                  Co




                                                                                      te
             g




                                                                                    as
                               gh
           Hi




                                                                                   M
                             Hi




                                                                  Education




                                                             32
