                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 WORKER SORTING, COMPENSATING DIFFERENTIALS AND HEALTH INSURANCE:
                 EVIDENCE FROM DISPLACED WORKERS

                                          Steven F. Lehrer
                                         Nuno Sousa Pereira

                                        Working Paper 12951
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12951


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2007




We are grateful to one anonymous referee, Daniel Parent and seminar participants at the 2003 iHEA
Conference and Fudan University for helpful comments and suggestions that have substantially improved
the paper. We would also like to thank Kosali Simon for providing code that helped to generate a portion
of the dataset used in this study. Lehrer wishes to thank SSHRC for research support. Pereira gratefully
acknowledges support from CETE. CETE, Research Center on Industrial, Labour and Managerial
Economics, is supported by the Fundacao para a Ciencia e a Tecnologia, Programa de Financiamento
Plurianual, through the Programa Operacional Ciencia, Tecnologia e Inovacao (POCTI) of the Quadro
Comunitario de Apoio III, which is financed by FEDER and Portuguese funds. The usual caveat applies.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Steven F. Lehrer and Nuno Sousa Pereira. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Worker Sorting, Compensating Differentials and Health Insurance: Evidence from Displaced
Workers
Steven F. Lehrer and Nuno Sousa Pereira
NBER Working Paper No. 12951
March 2007
JEL No. I11,J30

                                              ABSTRACT

This article introduces an empirical strategy to the compensating differentials literature that i) allows
both individual observed and unobserved characteristics to be rewarded differently in firms based
on health insurance provision, and ii) selection to jobs that provide benefits to operate on both sides
of the labor market. Estimates of this model are used to directly test empirical assumptions that are
made with popular econometric strategies in the health economics literature. Our estimates reject the
assumptions underlying numerous cross sectional and longitudinal estimators. We find that the provision
of health insurance has influenced wage inequality. Finally, our results suggest there have been substantial
changes in how displaced workers sort to firms that offer health insurance benefits over the past two
decades. We discuss the implications of our findings for the compensating differentials literature.

Steven F. Lehrer
School of Policy Studies
and Department of Economics
Queen's University
Kingston, Ontario
K7L, 3N6 CANADA
and NBER
lehrers@post.queensu.ca

Nuno Sousa Pereira
Department of Economics, University of Porto
Rua Dr. Roberto Frias
4200-464 Porto, Portugal
npereira@fep.up.pt
1     Introduction
Without a national health insurance system most Americans receive health benefits from
their employers. As recent years have been characterized by rapid inflation in health care
costs and health insurance premiums,1 there are increasing reports that employers have
either reduced or even stopped oﬀering coverage, increasing the ranks of the uninsured.2
In aggregate, the percentage of workers with employment-based health insurance has
dropped from 70.0% in 1987 to 59.8% in 2004.
    Economists generally argue that profit maximizing employers would respond to the
costs associated with the provision of health insurance by reducing wages, thus maintain-
ing the total reward paid to the employees. Whether employers truly adjust wages for
the provision of health insurance is a long-standing question in health economics. Evi-
dence of a wage / fringe benefit tradeoﬀ has been diﬃcult to establish empirically, in part
because jobs that oﬀer health insurance may diﬀer substantially from those where this
benefit is not provided.3 Empirical researchers have traditionally attempted to answer
this question using wage regressions. Researchers arrive at conclusions by examining the
sign and significance of the estimated coeﬃcient on the health insurance receipt variable.
Studies generally diﬀer in the source of variation used to identify health insurance receipt
in these regressions. The early literature on this topic typically did not explicitly contain
a discussion of the source of variation in the health insurance variable and researchers
implicitly assume that employees have implicitly made these choices when accepting a job
oﬀer. Using cross-sectional data researchers typically recover wrong signed estimates of
the compensating wage diﬀerential particularly if they ignore the inherent endogeneity of
health insurance receipt. Longitudinal data that explicitly account for individual specific
permanent unobserved heterogeneity have also been used, yet results from these studies
also do not support the theoretical prediction of a significant negative compensating dif-
ferential.4 To identify the tradeoﬀ, many of these studies must overcome the endogeneity
of job switching. In particular, if job lock is an important factor in the labor market, then


                                             3
the sample used in the analysis for identification will disproportionately contain those in-
dividuals who do not feel locked into their job, possibly attributable to a lower valuation
of health insurance. To overcome this empirical challenge, Simon (2001) uses panel data
on displaced workers who switch jobs for exogenous reasons, but also fails to find evidence
of compensating wage diﬀerentials, which she attributes to diﬃculty in empirically dealing
with the heterogeneity of job-skill matching.
   In contrast, a recent literature attempts to use a credible source of variation in the
costs of health insurance, which is arguably exogenous to workers employment decisions, to
identify whether these additional costs are borne by workers. These studies generally find
evidence consistent with the theory. For example, Gruber (1994), exploiting changes in
state legislation that made coverage for childbirth a mandatory part of all health insurance
policies, finds that the wages of workers expected to benefit from this policy were shifted
down by 59-90%. Sheiner (1999) uses variation in health care costs across cities and finds
that older workers in cities with higher health costs earn lower wages. While these studies
are unable to disentangle whether the shifting of health insurance costs is on the group at
the workplace or on the individual, Pauly and Herring (1999) find a flatter wage-tenure
profile among job-insured workers presenting evidence consistent with an individual wage
adjustment for health insurance.
   In his review of the compensating diﬀerentials literature, Pauly (2001) sustains the ex-
isting studies do not provide compelling evidence, either in favor, or against the existence
of this trade-oﬀ. The interest in achieving a more solid answer to whether this trade-oﬀ
truly exists is unquestionable, given the numerous implications for public policy. To shed
light on this issue as well as provide an explanation for the diversity of the findings in this
literature, we introduce a new panel data estimator to the health economics literature
and reexamine the experience of displaced workers who change jobs for arguably exoge-
nous reasons over a eighteen year period. The estimation strategy originally developed in
Lemieux (1998) allows observed and unobserved characteristics to be rewarded diﬀerently



                                              4
in firms that provide and do not provide health insurance, and it generates estimates
robust to both employer and employee selection on unobservables. Estimates from our
model are used to first, evaluate the existence and robustness of any potential wage and
health insurance trade-oﬀ and second, to decompose the wage gap between firms that oﬀer
and do not oﬀer health insurance. Our approach additionally allows us to test implicit
assumptions underlying conventional empirical approaches used in the health economics
literature.
   Examining the wage decomposition provides an opportunity to understand how dis-
placed workers sort into new positions in the labor market. The equalizing diﬀerences lit-
erature that underlies the wage health insurance trade-oﬀ implicitly assumes that workers
should sort into jobs with diﬀerent attributes based on their preferences for those at-
tributes.5 In contrast, comparative advantage would suggest that workers sort into firms
or sectors in which they would perform relatively better than other potential employees in
the labor market. Understanding the sorting process potentially could yield insights into
how the labor market functions and how inequality develops.6 For example, if the under-
lying distribution of skills among displaced workers were stable over time, any changes in
the manner in which these workers sort to new jobs would lead to a potentially diﬀerent
allocation of these skills across firms over time.7
   While it is well known that displaced workers experience large and persistent earnings
loss,8 this group is becoming a topic of increased policy relevance. Since many Americans
are a pink slip away from losing their health insurance coverage,9 numerous policies have
been introduced in the last five years to promote the continuation of health insurance
coverage for displaced workers. For example, the Health Coverage Tax Credit introduced
federally in 2002 covers 65 percent of the premium amount paid by eligible displaced
individuals for health insurance coverage, where eligibility is primarily based on prior
industry. By reducing the costs of health insurance while unemployed, these polices
may alter the search behavior for newly displaced workers by increasing the take-up



                                              5
of unemployment benefits and the length of unemployment spells. In addition, several
individual states have introduced health plans for displaced workers and new policies are
being continually debated at both the federal and state level. To provide some guidance
for policymakers regarding the impacts of such programs, we use our data and estimates
from the wage decomposition to ascertain whether there have been any changes in how
displaced workers search for and sort into a new job following displacement (based on the
provision of employer provided health insurance) over the last two decades.
   Our analysis yields three major findings for the health economic literature on the
impacts of employer based health insurance provision.
   1) We find that the diversity of results in the health economics literature on the
existence of a compensating wage diﬀerential may be more a consequence of imposing
too stringent assumptions on the empirical model rather than a failure of the underlying
theory. Our empirical estimates reject assumptions that underlie single index control func-
tion, OLS, matching, fixed eﬀects and first diﬀerence strategies. Specifically, we clearly
reject the assumptions that permanent individual specific unobserved (to the analyst)
heterogeneity is constant and that selection of jobs by displaced workers can be explained
by variables observed to the analyst. Further, since selection of this new job is based in
part on factors unobserved to the analyst, our results suggest that this does not operate
exclusively on the workers’ side of the labor market but also aﬀects hiring decisions by
firms. Researchers in this area must account for both employee and employer decisions
regarding employer provision of health insurance.
   2) Our empirical results indicate substantial changes have occurred over the past two
decades both in how displaced workers sort across firms when seeking reemployment
and how firms select workers for employment. We observe that, if on one hand, the
importance of selection bias in explaining the unadjusted wage gap has diminished by
over 40%, on the other hand, the portion of this bias due only to unobserved (to the
analyst) characteristics, such as ability or innate health status has more than doubled.



                                            6
Finally, we find that recently displaced workers are searching nearly three weeks longer
for jobs that provide health benefits, suggesting that those who need health insurance
shop for it.
   3) We find that the provision of health insurance has substantially influenced wage
inequality. Similar to the large established literature that has explored the determinants
of wage structure in the U.S. labor market,10 we estimate that, in the past decade, firms
that provide health insurance are oﬀering increasingly larger returns to observed individual
characteristics. In particular, we find that there is nearly a 30% increase in the returns
to a college education in firms that provide health benefits. Residual wage dispersion
has also increased over the past two decades as our results indicate that the return to
unobservable skills, such as motivation, innate health status or cognitive ability has risen.
   While we do not find any evidence of a health insurance compensating wage diﬀerential,
we find that the eﬀect of health insurance on wage of workers in firms providing health
insurance has increased by 50% between decades. In addition, we present evidence that the
role of unobserved characteristics is increasingly aﬀecting the dispersion of wages between
sectors. Our results suggest that a larger fraction of the displaced work force is seeking jobs
with health insurance benefits and, faced with a more heterogeneous pool of applicants,
employers in the health insurance sector are increasingly rewarding observed skills. We
hypothesize that the inability to identify the impact of health insurance on wage levels
is likely a consequence of omitting firm characteristics that arise from aggregate worker
sorting rather than the heterogeneity of individual job-skill matching.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we introduce the
economic model and empirical method that we employ to estimate the parameters of the
model. Section 3 describes the data used in our analysis. Estimates of our model and
other empirical results are presented and discussed in section 4. A concluding section
discusses what our findings on worker sorting imply for the compensating diﬀerentials
literature and suggests avenues for further research.



                                              7
2     Economic Model
We consider a two sector model of the economy with diﬀerences in the provision of health
insurance. The expected log wage of worker i at time t in the sector that does not oﬀer
health insurance is given by


                                                     0
                                   ln witN = αN + xit β N + εN
                                                             it                                  (1)

where xit is a vector of observed (to the market and the econometrician) characteristics.
The corresponding log wage for someone in the health insurance sector is

                                                     0
                                   ln witH = αH + xit β H + εH
                                                             it                                  (2)

                         0
where αH = αN + HIit β HI , and HIit is an indicator variable that equals one when the
individual is employed in the sector of firms that oﬀers health insurance. We explicitly
permit the returns to observed and unobserved characteristics to vary across sectors. The
residuals in each sector follow a one way error component structure

                                εN
                                 it = θN                        2
                                       i + η it , η it ˜IID(0, σ )                               (3)
                                εH
                                 it = θH                        2
                                       i + η it , η it ˜IID(0, σ )


where θN       H
       i and θ i are the return of the individual time invariant unobserved (to the econo-

metrician) characteristics in the respective sectors.11 We do not impose any restrictions on
the joint distribution of (θN               H
                            i , xit ) or (θ i , xit ), allowing for arbitrary correlations. This for-

mulation allows for both absolute advantage and comparative advantage since individual
heterogeneity can respectively aﬀect both the intercept and slope of the wage function.12
    As in the program evaluation literature, an individual’s actual wage can be expressed
as a function of two potential wages via the following equation

                         ln Wit = HIit ln witH + (1 − HIit ) ln witN + ν it                      (4)


                                                 8
where vit is an idiosyncratic error term that captures diﬀerences between the observed
wage and the wage expected on the basis of skills and sector choice. Substituting equations
(1) - (3) into equation (4) yields
                        0                      0          0
       ln Wit = αN + xit β N + θN     0
                                i + HIit [HIit β
                                                 HI
                                                    + xit (β H − β N ) + θH     N
                                                                          i − θ i ] + ξ it   (5)

where ξ it = η it + vit . Lemieux (1998) demonstrates that the wage diﬀerential between
sectors can be decomposed into two main terms, given by
             h       0 ¡ H        ¢           i h³ 0    0
                                                          ´   ¡ ¢i
                HI              N                           N
      W G = β + xH β − β + (ψ − 1) θH + xH − xN β + θH − θN                                  (6)

where β HI is the direct compensating wage diﬀerential. The first term in square brackets of
equation (6) reflects the mechanism by which workers pay for receiving health insurance,
while the second term in square brackets reflects average skill diﬀerences between the
workers that select jobs that oﬀer health insurance and the workers that prefer jobs
without health insurance as part of the compensation package. Similarly, the variance of
the wage gap can be decomposed into three components, given by
          h¡                        ¢ ¡ 2      ¢ 2      ¡ H        ¢      i
             H0      H    N0      N                              N 0
 VG =       β ΣXH β − β ΣXN β + ψ − 1 σ θH + 2 ψβ − β                 ΣXθH +       (7)
          £ H0                   ¡           ¢                      ¤   £         ¤
           β (ΣXH − ΣXN ) β H + σ 2θH − σ 2θN + 2β H0 (ΣXθH − ΣXθN ) + σ 2H − σ 2N .

The components in square brackets respectively reflect, the impact of health insurance on
the dispersion of wages in that sector, the diﬀerential heterogeneity in workers between
sectors, and the diﬀerence in residual variance.
   Unlike control function or selection correction estimation strategies, this model permits
selection of workers to a job to be on both sides of the market. Employers in the health
insurance sector may prefer to select individuals who have higher values of θH
                                                                             i , which

could represent among other factors ability, motivation and health status. This creates a
wedge in the labor market as individuals with low values of θH
                                                             i may seek jobs with health

insurance provision, but employers prefer healthier individuals and / or individuals with
higher ability who can respectively help reduce the cost of providing health insurance and
/ or potentially increase output.13

                                               9
2.1      Empirical Method
To estimate the structural parameters in equation (5), Lemieux (1998) proposes the fol-
lowing GMM procedure. A common unobserved attribute θi that is a function of θH
                                                                              i and

θN
 i is defined and included in equation (5), so it can be reexpressed as
                                                                       14


                             0                       0         0
        ln Wit = αN + xit β N + θi + HIit0 [HIit β HI + xit (β H − β N ) + (Ψ − 1)θi ] + ξ it    (8)

where Ψ is a coeﬃcient vector that captures diﬀerentials rewards to unobserved skills
across sectors. Similarly, the wage equation in period t−1 can be rearranged as a function
of θi , yielding
                                 0                       0               0
        ln Wit−1 − αN + xit−1 β N − HIit−1
                                       0
                                           [HIit β HI ] + HIit−1
                                                            0
                                                                 xit−1 (β H − β N ) − ξ it−1
   θi =                                                                                          (9)
                                     1 + HIit−1 (Ψ − 1)

Direct substitution of equation (9) into equation (8), quasi diﬀerences and removes θi
from the wage equation at time t. This yields

                                         1 + HIit (Ψ − 1)
             ln Wit = g(zit ) + ξ it                       {ln Wit−1 − g(zit−1 ) − ξ it−1 }     (10)
                                        1 + HIit−1 (Ψ − 1)
                         0N               HI  0          0
where g(zis ) = αN             0
                 s + xis β + HIis [HIit β    + xis (β H − β N )]. Direct non linear least squares
estimation of equation (10) will yield biased and inconsistent parameter estimates of
Ψ, which stems from the correlation of the lagged dependent variable (Wit−1 ) with the
                                      1+HIit (Ψ−1)
transformed residual (ξ it +                       ξ ).15
                                     1+HIit−1 (Ψ−1) it−1

    Consistent estimates of equation (10) can be obtained by GMM provided one has
access to an instrumental variable for Wit−1 . While instruments could be chosen using
the strict exogeneity identification assumption for estimation of traditional panel data
equations, we use annual state level information on the previous job’s union coverage rate
at the industry level. We hypothesize that industries with higher union coverage rates
should be associated with higher wages in the jobs prior to displacement. At the firm
level, Buchmueller et al. (2002) suggest that reduction in union density accounts for 20-
35% of the reduction in health insurance coverage. Further, it is unlikely that these state

                                                     10
level aggregate measures are related to the individual specific time varying unobservables
in equation (10).16
    To identify the structural parameters, the unobserved time invariant individual specific
component of the residual must be normalized to zero. Formally, this demands imposing
the restriction
                                     1 XX
                                            θit = 0                                    (11)
                                   T ∗N i t
as a constraint on the optimization of equation (10), and ensure θit satisfies equation (9).
With estimates of the structural parameters, the wage gap (as expressed in equation (6))
can be decomposed into the true eﬀect of health insurance on wages and diﬀerences in
the characteristics of workers between sectors.17



3     Data
The data used in this study comes from the Displaced Worker Supplement (DWS) of
the Current Population Survey (CPS). The CPS is a comprehensive, cross-sectional sur-
vey of approximately 50,000 households in the United States. The DWS is a biennial
supplement to the CPS presenting a nationally representative cross-sectional survey of
displaced workers (those who have lost jobs because of plant closings, business failures,
and layoﬀs) and includes retrospective data several years prior to the administration of
the survey. Among these workers, their job loss resulted from exogenous decisions that
were unrelated to both their particular performance and preferences over the structure of
the compensation package.18 Most important for this study, the DWS contains informa-
tion on wage rates and health insurance status, both on their job prior to and following
displacement.19 The DWS also includes detailed information on demographic character-
istics and individual labor market variables pre and post displacement for a large sample
of displaced workers.
    We use data from DWS supplements collected from 1984 to 2002 and largely follow the


                                             11
sampling criteria used in Simon (2001), deleting observations where workers were either
employed part-time, self-employed or held seasonal jobs.20 Relative to the nationally
representative CPS, displaced workers are disproportionately male, previously employed
in semi-skilled blue collar labor and are less likely to be a college graduate (particularly
in the 1980s). The data was supplemented with information from both the January and
March CPS to obtain additional controls in our analysis. For instance, tenure information
comes from the January Basic dataset, and is calculated as the number of years the
individual have been employed in the current job.
   Despite the many advantages of using the DWS data for estimating wage/health in-
surance trade-oﬀs, there are a number of limitations that should be noted. First, the
DWS treats health insurance as a homogeneous good and there are many dimensions
across which plans vary such as annual deductible, and co-payments. We cannot accu-
rately measure the cost of health insurance or the part paid by the employee.21 Second,
the data set lacks information on other fringe benefits such as employer provided pen-
sion plans, employer provided retirement health insurance that are likely correlated with
health insurance benefits. Third, data on pre-displacement firm characteristics such as
firm size and profitability are not collected. As we will discuss, this limitation is likely
the most severe. Fourth, the data lacks information on skill transferability. Fifth, the
survey only asks whether a person has private health insurance coverage but does not
ask the source that provides these benefits which could lead to biases, particularly for
individuals that have spouses with family health benefits. To mitigate these biases we use
the March CPS supplement as it contains more detailed information on whether employer
insurance is in their own name allowing us to verify whether this insurance is really from
their own primary employer. Unfortunately, due to the rotational structure of the CPS
we lose approximately 43% of our sample when we match respondents.22
   An additional potential concern with the DWS is whether the responses subjects made
are valid or subject to recall error, since it relies heavily on retroactive questions. Oyer



                                            12
(2004) conducts a fascinating examination of the presence of recall error in the DWS
and finds that, while displaced workers report the reason for job loss quite accurately,
respondents may overstate only their pre-layoﬀ wages. Overall, he concludes that DWS
recall error is not dramatic and that it has little, if any, relationship with other variables
in the survey. In our analysis, we use an instrumental variables procedure to correct for
the endogeneity of pre-displacement wages, which should further reduce concerns of biases
attributable to measurement error.
   Another important feature of the DWS worth noting is that there was a change in
the recall period for which information on job loss was collected. Until 1994 workers were
asked if they had lost a job in the last five years, while, after 1994, the time frame was
limited to three years only. This change, together with a shift in the political and health
sector environment, will permit us to use the samples pre and post 1994 separately in our
analysis.23
   Table 1 presents summary statistics for portions of the sample used in this study. In
the top panel, the full sample is divided into four groups, based on their health insurance
provision pre and post displacement. The majority of the sample (64%) corresponds to
workers that received health insurance on both jobs and are called "Always". Workers
gaining health insurance following displacement constitute 14% of the sample, similarly
12% of the sample lost health insurance benefits with displacement and the remaining
10% did not receive health insurance at either job.
   There are substantial diﬀerences between these groups in terms of their level of ed-
ucation, earnings, race and probability of switching industry and occupation following
displacement. The two groups of the sample that did not receive health insurance prior
to displacement have, on average, a lower level of education, a lower pre-displacement wage
and are more likely to be African American than groups which received health insurance
in both periods. Further, losing health insurance following displacement is associated with
both large wage losses and a higher likelihood of switching industry or occupation. Notice



                                             13
that jobs pre and post displacement that oﬀer health insurance provide higher wages.24
The usual explanation for this finding is that those employed in good jobs are likely to
diﬀer from those in worse jobs on both observable and unobservable characteristics.25
    In the second part of Table 1, we examine how the characteristics of the sample
diﬀer between 1984-92 and 1994 onwards. Notice that, after 1994, the displaced workers
are more educated, slightly older and contain more females. Further, displaced workers
after 1994 are less likely to have children or receive unemployment benefits following
displacement. While age and education would suggest an increase in the propensity
to receive health benefits, not having children could serve to reduce the benefits from
receiving health coverage from an employer. Interestingly, more workers in our sample over
the last decade received health insurance following displacement, which is the opposite of
the pattern in the general labor market.



4     Results
GMM estimates of equation (10) are displayed in Table 2. The full sample is presented
in column one, while columns two and three respectively present the subsamples for the
periods 1984-92 and 1994-2002. Health insurance is not significantly related to workers
wage in any of the samples. Only in the most recent decade is the sign of the coeﬃcient
estimate consistent with the compensating wage diﬀerential theory. While this result
does not diﬀer from most estimates found in the compensating diﬀerential literature, our
empirical strategy allows us to test some implicit assumptions within that literature.
    The assumption that unobserved heterogeneity has a constant impact across sectors
underlies fixed eﬀects, first diﬀerence and diﬀerence in diﬀerence propensity score match-
ing estimators. Our model treats the returns to this unobserved term in a more flexible
manner and parameter estimates of Ψ are presented in the second row of Table 2. For the
full pooled sample (presented in column one), Ψ is statistically diﬀerent from one at the
1% confidence level, suggesting that we can directly reject the assumption that θN    H
                                                                                 i = θi ,


                                           14
implying that unobserved skills are rewarded diﬀerently in the two sectors of the economy.
However, the constraint that Ψ is statistically diﬀerent from one cannot be rejected at
the 1% confidence level for the 1984-1992 sample in the second column. The presence of
this omitted selection eﬀect may be biasing the impacts reported in several longitudinal
studies. This suggests that, conditional on characteristics, some workers may have a com-
parative advantage in the health insurance sector, which, based on the diﬀerences in the
magnitude of the coeﬃcient between columns two and three, appears to be of increasing
importance in recent years.
   Further, consistent with earlier studies on the incidence of health insurance costs
on worker wages, there are substantial diﬀerences in how characteristics are rewarded
across the two sectors.26 There are lower returns to pre-displacement tenure and being
African American in firms that provide health insurance benefits. On the other hand,
being married, being older and being more educated yield higher returns in firms that
oﬀer these benefits. While the positive return to marriage decreased slightly between
the sample periods, there was an approximate 27% increase in the returns to a college
education relative to 12 years of education or less in firms that provide benefits. In total,
the gap in the health insurance sector between college degree holders and individuals who
have fewer than 12 years of education rose over 30%, from 0.538 to 0.716. The wage gap
between males and females became smaller in both sectors following 1994. It is interesting
to note that while older workers received significant wage decreases in the sector that
does not provide health insurance prior to 1994, the relationship becomes statistically
insignificant for the period between 1994 and 2002. Finally, while the diﬀerential to being
African American increased after 1994, there is no additional wage oﬀset in the health
insurance sector.
   The estimates from Table 2 are used to decompose the unadjusted health insurance
wage gap into a true eﬀect of health insurance on wages and a selection bias component
following equation (6). The first column of Table 3 presents the decomposition for the



                                             15
entire sample period. Health insurance has substantial impacts on workers in the health
insurance sector that primarily operate through diﬀerential returns to observed charac-
teristics. For the full sample, over 80% of the eﬀect of health insurance on workers in the
health insurance sector operates through this channel. Further, the role of unobserved
factors is limited.
   The change in the components of the wage decomposition between 1984-1992 and 1994-
2002 in columns two and three of Table 3 presents several interesting findings. Between
these periods, the unadjusted wage gap has grown, which is, in part, (and consistent with
Farber and Levy (2000)) due to firms which stopped oﬀering benefits over this time period
tended to be clustered in low-paying industries. The prime component that explains the
growth in the unadjusted wage gap between sectors is the substantial increase in the
returns to observed skills. The returns to these skills have more than doubled between
periods. Examining the second and third columns of Table 2, it is clear that these rewards
are being driven by the increased returns to a college education as well as returns to age,
which may proxy for total labor market experience.
   Not only did the returns to observed skills rise across periods, but there was also a large
decrease in the amount of the gap that is attributable to selection bias. Overall selection
bias dropped by nearly 30%, from 0.179 to 0.127 driven by the diﬀerences in observed skills
across sectors. Information on the portion of selection bias attributable to observables and
unobservables is presented in rows six and seven of Table 3, respectively. Selection bias
due to unobservables measures the similarity in average unobserved attributes between
workers in the two sectors (i.e. θH and θN ). The fifth row of Table 4 indicates that the gap
in these attributes has become smaller between the two sub-sample periods. On average,
workers employed in firms that oﬀer health insurance have larger values associated with
                                             ¡ ¢
unobserved attributes related to productivity θH than those employed in firms that do
                       ¡ ¢
not oﬀer these benefits θN . Yet, the portion of selection bias due to unobserved skills
that cannot be accounted for by estimators such as OLS and matching rose by nearly 15%



                                             16
between decades. Since θH > θN , and the health insurance wage gap is slightly higher for
individuals with higher unobserved skills, we would predict that the OLS estimates of the
compensating wage diﬀerential would be biased upwards.27
   Our estimates are also used to decompose the unadjusted gap in variance of wages
between sectors. The results are presented in Table 4. The unadjusted gap appears small
and indicates that health insurance reduces the dispersion of wages between sectors.28
While the overall size of the diﬀerence between the variance of wages between sectors
becomes smaller after 1994, the role of the two major components of the decomposition,
the eﬀect of health insurance on health insurance workers and selection bias, increases
markedly. In particular, the portion of selection bias due to diﬀerences in unobserved
skills and the direct eﬀect of both observed and unobserved skills on the variance of
wages increase by over 50% between the periods. While workers appeared on average
to be increasingly more homogeneous across sectors in Table 3, the results in the fifth
row suggest that there is substantially more heterogeneity in the unobserved skills of
individuals working in the health insurance sector (relative to the other sector) after
1994.
   In Table 3, we found that employers in the health insurance sector did not pay workers
diﬀerently on the basis of these unobserved skills and increasingly rewarded observed skills.
If employers assume that observed productivity skills are highly positively correlated with
unobserved skills it may be the case that this heterogeneity has led employers to increase
the reward to observed characteristics. While this should suggest that the variance in
the wages between the sectors would increase across the two sample periods, there is,
as reported in the second row of Table 4, a large oﬀset since unobserved skills have
significantly reduced the variance of wages for health insurance workers in the health
insurance sector.
   The findings in Table 4 are also consistent with selection operating on both sides
of the labor market, which rules out traditional selection correction or control function



                                             17
estimators. The negative covariance in the sixth row indicates that observed and unob-
served skills are positively correlated in the sector that does not provide health insurance,
but negatively correlated in the health insurance sector. This is consistent with positive
selection among workers with low unobserved skills in the health insurance sector and
negative selection among workers with high observed skills. This selection becomes more
important over time as the size of the covariance terms increases by over 50% between
the sample periods. This positive selection may be a result of increased worker shopping
for positions that oﬀer health insurance benefits and may have partially contributed to
the recent health insurance cost spiral for employers.
   In our estimation, we used the average unionization rate in the industry the worker
was employed in pre-displacement to instrument for previous period wage. To assess
the suitability of our instrument we consider a simple OLS regression of the first stage
regression and run an F-test for the joint significance of the instrument. The results
are presented in Table 5 for the case with information on unionization coverage rates.
We ignore the specifications with interaction terms included in the instrument set since
overidentification tests occasionally reject the hypothesis that the instruments are valid.29
Coeﬃcients on the instrument and exogenous regressors in both columns are reasonable
in sign and magnitude. The instruments are statistically significant predictors of pre-
displacement wages and the F-statistics on its significance is respectively above current
cutoﬀs (i.e. Staiger and Stock (1997)) for weak instruments for both the full sample and
pre-1994 sample.
   Since the reliability of our estimates depends directly on the validity of our instrument,
the low F-statistic over post 1994 period is a concern, since it may indicate weak identifi-
cation. Weak identification could result in i) the GMM estimates being inconsistent and
biased towards the NLLS estimates,30 and ii) the test statistics for inference are inaccu-
rate. Regarding the first problem, not only is the coeﬃcient on the instrument reported in
Table 5 significant at the 1% level but also a Hausman test rejects the consistency of the



                                             18
NLLS estimates. Further, we attempted to correct the statistical inference problem using
Moreira (2003) conditional approach to construct tests of coeﬃcients based on the con-
ditional distributions of nonpivotal statistics. If the instruments have low strength then
the confidence intervals should increase relative to those based on standard asymptotic
theory. We find that the length of the 95% confidence interval increased by only 16.8%,
a small margin which increases our confidence in the validity of the instrument. Taken
together, these diagnostics suggest that it is unlikely that the second period estimates are
due to a poor instrument.
   An additional concern is that the average unionization rate in the industry the worker
was employed in pre-displacement may not be a suitable instrument, since it is related to
an individual’s own union status, which is implicitly contained in the residual. To examine
the robustness of our results, we replicated the full analysis accounting for individual union
status both pre and post displacement for the portion of the sample that provided this
information and our results did not change neither qualitatively, nor quantitatively.31


4.1     Worker Sorting and Health Insurance
4.1.1   Are Search Patterns in the DWS Consistent with Increased Worker
        Sorting?

Testing directly for worker sorting is diﬃcult without more detailed information on firms.
To present additional evidence that is consistent with the hypothesis of an increase in
worker sorting we contrast job search patterns between post displacement health insur-
ance receipt conditional on pre displacement health insurance receipt over time. We
hypothesize that if worker shopping has increased then individuals who gain health in-
surance following displacement should have longer searches. Due to the sampling criteria
change after 1994, it is hard to compare these past histories between the two sampling
periods and the results should be biased against our hypothesis, since longer job searches
are possible in the earlier data collections.

                                                19
   To draw comparisons we consider a diﬀerence in diﬀerence strategy. First, we con-
trast the length of job search between new health insurance recipients with individuals
who never receive health insurance. Second, we compare individuals who receive health
insurance pre and post displacement to individuals who lose health insurance after dis-
placement. The implicit assumption underlying this strategy is common trend, that is
that any changes in outcomes between these groups must be the result of health insurance
status post displacement. Essentially we estimate a regression model of the form

                                 0
                   Yit = γ 1 + xit γ 2 + HIit0 γ 3 + (HIit ∗ t2 )0 γ 4 + t2 + vit    (12)

where Yit is weeks of job search and t2 is a dummy for the period after 1994. If γ 4 > 0,
this would support the hypothesis that individuals who receive health insurance following
displacement post 1994 are associated with an increase in job search. We estimate equa-
tion (12) separately for individuals who had health insurance prior to displacement and
for those who did not have these benefits.
   Column one of Table 6 presents diﬀerences in the experiences between jobs for in-
dividuals who lost health insurance following displacement versus those who had health
insurance in both jobs. Consistent with a story of increased job search, workers who found
employment in firms that oﬀered health insurance search for approximately three more
weeks. Since the average job search in this period is 10.586 weeks, this is an increase of
approximately 30% from the mean. However, the results presented in column two that
compare new health insurance recipients to individuals who never received health insur-
ance, do not find any significant diﬀerences in length of job search after 1994 for new
recipients. As shown in Table 1, on average, the workers who gain health insurance post
displacement have the shortest searches. Not surprisingly, older workers search longer in
both subsamples as do workers with more tenure on the earlier job and less education, as
they may have been most scarred from the displacement.




                                                20
4.1.2   Is the link between unobserved productivity attributes and health in-
        surance coverage homogenous?

Understanding if individuals with lower unobserved productivity attributes are increas-
ingly sorting to jobs that provide health insurance benefits is clearly a question of policy
interest. While our data cannot directly address whether these individuals truly have lower
health status to determine if sorting may have contributed to the recent rise in health
insurance costs, we can examine whether the unobserved productivity characteristics of
workers are increasingly correlated with post-displacement jobs that provide benefits. We
consider estimation of

                         b
                         θi = γ 1 + HIit0 γ 2 + (HIit ∗ t2 )0 γ 3 + t02 γ 4 + vit      (13)

where t2 is a dummy for the period after 1994 and b
                                                  θi is the predicted individual time
invariant characteristics obtained from OLS estimation of the following equation

                                      θit = δ 1 + θit−1 δ 2 +     it                   (14)

where    it   is a random unobservable, θit is calculated using equation (9) and GMM es-
timates from the first column of Table 2.32 Table 7 present estimates of equation (13)
based on samples defined by pre-displacement health insurance status and age.
   For the full sample in column one, we notice that, while health insurance is associated
with higher unobserved attributes (γ 2 > 0), the recipients in the second time period
actually have lower values of θi (γ 4 < 0). This indicates that individuals who have health
insurance in the second period have on average values of θi that are 0.043 lower then
the earlier time period. This eﬀect is large and approximately equal to a 5% of the
standard deviation of θi . Columns four and seven present evidence that the magnitude
of this negative impact is not heterogeneous with respect to whether or not an individual
had health insurance pre-displacement. When we examine subsamples that are defined
by age several interesting patterns emerge. The estimates of γ 3 in the third, sixth and

                                                   21
ninth columns demonstrate that there is a large decrease in θi associated with receiving
health insurance after 1994 for workers above 45. In contrast workers under the age of
45 either have γ 3 estimates that are statistically insignificant (column eight) or of limited
economic significance (columns two and five). The results in Table 7 suggest that while on
average unobserved productivity attributes are greater in the period following 1994, there
is a significant negative association between these unobserved productivity attributes and
receiving employer provided health insurance after 1994. This eﬀect is driven by workers
that are at least 45 years of age.33
    Taken together, the results in this section suggest that, among individuals who have
health insurance in the period post 1994, they have i) lower values of θi , unobserved
productivity attributes that may include health status, and ii) the search for another
position that provides these benefits lasted an additional two weeks. We hypothesize that
these individuals are most likely familiar with health insurance benefits and increasingly
seek out jobs that oﬀer this amenity. As we discuss in the concluding section, such non-
random sorting is likely the primary reason why we cannot find evidence of a compensating
diﬀerential in Table 4.



5     Conclusions
Surveys of workers consistently rank health insurance as far and away the most important
among all benefits oﬀered in the workplace (Salisbury, 2001). Intuitively, health insurance
has the potential to influence numerous labor market decisions and many individuals may
be reluctant to consider working for companies that do not provide health benefits.34 At
the same time, employers are increasingly facing large increases in the costs of providing
these benefits. Hence, understanding how the provision of these benefits aﬀects the labor
market has substantial policy and human resource implications.
    In this paper, we extended the health economics literature on compensating diﬀeren-
tials by introducing an empirical approach that allows 1) both individual observed and

                                             22
unobserved (to the econometrician) characteristics to be rewarded diﬀerently in diﬀerent
sectors of the economy, and 2) selection to operate on both sides of the labor market. An
important feature of this model is that the estimates enable us to test several assump-
tions that are made with existing empirical strategies. We find that the assumption that
unobserved attributes are rewarded equally in both sectors which underlies fixed eﬀects
and traditional diﬀerencing strategies is rejected. In addition, we find evidence that there
is substantial selection on unobserved characteristics, which rules out matching and OLS
strategies. Finally, we find that selection operates on both sides of the labor market, a
feature that cannot be accounted for by traditional control function estimators.
   While we do not find any evidence of a health insurance compensating wage diﬀerential,
we observe that health insurance has increasingly influenced wage inequality. We present
evidence that the provision of health insurance is increasingly aﬀecting the dispersion of
wages across sectors, which is consistent with the findings in the compensating diﬀerentials
literature that have explored the incidence question from the perspective of employers.
Estimates from our model are also used to decompose the wage gap between the sectors
and we find there are substantial changes in the selection of workers to firms that provide
health insurance benefits. Specifically, we observe that there has been increasing sorting
based on comparative advantage. Finally, we find that recently displaced workers are
searching nearly three weeks longer for jobs that provide health benefits and that these
workers on average have lower unobserved productivity attributes.
   An important limitation of this study is that the impacts we estimate are applicable to
displaced workers only. The composition of displaced workers not only diﬀers from other
workers in the labor market, but has also changed over time.35 Yet, it should be noted
that our finding of an increasing role of health insurance on wages is consistent with the
recent health economics literature that indicates that the recent rise in health insurance
premiums aﬀects a variety of labor market outcomes.36 Consequently, it is likely our
findings have some limited external validity.



                                            23
   We do not view our failure to find evidence of a compensating diﬀerential despite
using a more general estimation approach as a rejection of the underlying theory. The
simple compensating diﬀerentials theory remains inconsistent with two empirical features
of the U.S. labor market. First, there is large variability in costs of health insurance
across similar firms. Understanding the sources of this variability may suggest additional
variables that may need to be accounted for in wage regressions. In this study, we find
strong evidence that the sorting of workers to jobs is consistent with comparative advan-
tage.37 While, sorting in the labor market is likely to lead to strong correlations between
observed and unobserved attributes of the individual with the corresponding variables of
their co-workers, our evidence also indicates that in recent years the distribution of these
unobserved attributes is more heterogeneous in the health insurance sector. Thus, sorting
to firms on the basis of preferences for health insurance is not perfect and there still may
remain heterogeneity at the firm level that is not a function of these individual specific
heterogeneities, suggesting that frictions exist in the labor market. Accounting for such
heterogeneity in addition to individual heterogeneity as well as the identification of the
impacts of endogenous group formation at firms has typically been ignored (in part due
to data limitations) in the health insurance compensating diﬀerentials literature.38
   Second, employers cannot set employee specific compensation packages. An increasing
body of evidence suggests that there is likely substantial heterogeneity regarding prefer-
ences for health insurance benefits among workers within firms. For example, Gruber
and Lettau (2004) find that within firms, the median worker and workers in the highest
quantiles of salary exhibit a disproportionate amount of influence on decisions related to
health insurance coverage. These workers may also be willing to bear a disproportionate
amount of the costs through lower wages, and if these tastes can indeed be proxied by
observables such as salary, it may be useful to examine whether the tradeoﬀ exists by
examining those most likely aﬀected. For example, with longitudinal matched employee
and employer data it is possible to examine within firms how the estimated trade-oﬀ varies



                                            24
across the salary distribution and how the distribution of residual wage dispersion varies
across firms that diﬀer in both benefit provision and the cost of benefits.39 In conclusion,
future research needs to consider general empirical models with richer data sources to
determine whether the compensating diﬀerential truly exists as well as shed more light
on how health insurance provision aﬀects the labor market.




                                            25
Notes
   1
       Between 2001 and 2004, premiums for family coverage shot up by 59 percent, com-
pared to a 9.7 percent gain in inflation and a 12.3 percent wage growth rate. See Kaiser
Family Foundation and Health Research and Educational Trust (2004) for details.
   2
       The Kaiser Family Foundation (2005) reports that only 60% of companies oﬀered
health insurance to their employees in 2005, down from 69% in 2000. Gruber and McK-
night (2003) report that, in 1982, 44% of those who were covered by their employer-
provided health insurance had their costs fully financed by their employer, but by 1998
this had fallen to 28%. Cutler (2002) finds that the increasing employee costs for health
insurance resulted in employees declining coverage in the 1990s. Increased anecdotal
evidence suggests that this trade-oﬀ exists, and there are reports in the popular press
that firms have even made termination decisions based strictly on an individual’s health
behavior, such as smoking, in an eﬀort to reduce health insurance costs (Armour (2005)).
   3
       Bundorf (2002) shows that higher wage workers are more likely to receive health in-
surance benefits. Gruber and Lettau (2004) find that the decision to oﬀer health insurance
at the firm level depends on the prices faced by both the median worker and highly com-
pensated workers. Wiatrowski (1995) reports that medium and large establishments were
20% more likely to oﬀer health insurance to full time employees relative to small establish-
ments. Dranove, Spier and Baker (2000) show that spousal coverage aﬀects employment
decisions.
   4
       Currie and Madrian (1999) present a survey of the early cross sectional and longitu-
dinal compensating diﬀerential studies in the health economics literature. They conclude
that many of these studies did not have the appropriate data to estimate the magnitude
of the compensating diﬀerential.
   5
       Pauly (1986) suggests that the sorting of workers based on these tastes across sectors
is imperfect. Changes in the sorting process over time could partially explain the more
rapid increases in health insurance costs that may simultaneously aﬀect the levels and


                                              26
dispersion of salaries within firms that provide health insurance benefits. We discuss the
implications of imperfect sorting for the compensating diﬀerentials literature in the final
section.
   6
       The implications of absolute and comparative advantage as sorting mechanisms are
outlined in Willis (1986) and Sattinger (1993).
   7
       More generally, worker sorting could have profound impacts on the macroeconomy if
non market interactions exist, such as peer eﬀects (e. g. Benabou (1996) and Kremer
(1993)).
   8
       See Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan (1993) for a careful analysis of earnings loss
following displacement and Farber (2003) for a survey of research on the experiences of
displaced workers.
   9
       Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Louisiana estimated that 200,000 residents who had
health insurance through the workplace lost their benefits due to Hurricane Katrina.
  10
       See Katz and Autor (1999) for an extensive overview of recent changes in the U.S.
wage structure.
  11
       An explicit characterization that would generate equations (1)-(4) in the context of
unions is provided in Robinson (1989). The model considered in this paper is based on
and discussed in further detail in Lemieux (1998). As noted by Lemieux (1998), the model
rules out individuals who change work voluntarily and focuses on involuntarily job loss.
  12
       Most econometric approaches assume constant slope coeﬃcients which rules out com-
parative advantage.
  13
       Cutler (1995) reports that there exists huge variation in health insurance premiums
among otherwise identical firms that is partially the result of heterogeneity in the work-
force along health dimensions.
                                  θH
  14
       Let θi = θN
                 i −ζ and θ i =
                                   i−ζ
                                    ϕ
                                         where ζ is an orthogonal error component as in Lemieux
(1998).
  15
       Note that if one sets the Ψ = 1, this is equivalent to a first diﬀerenced estimation



                                                  27
procedure and imposes the assumption that unobserved attributes are rewarded in exactly
the same manner in both sectors. This assumption of constant rewards to unobserved
attributes also underlies fixed eﬀects strategies. Note NLLS estimates of Ψ would be
biased even if the residuals are not serially correlated
  16
       Note as we discuss in the subsequent section our results do not change if we include
individual’s own union status pre and post displacement in the estimating equation. The
state level aggregates are also likely to be correlated with any firm level residual.
  17
       The estimates of β HI , β H , β N and ψ are obtained from equation (10) and summary sta-
tistics provide information on xH = E[xit |HIit = 1] and xN = E[xit |HIit = 0]. Similarly,
θH = E[θi |HIit = 1] and θN = E[θi |HIit = 0] where θi is calculated using the pre-
dicted regressors via equation (9). The gap in the variance of wages can also be de-
composed using the same information, and considering that ΣXH = V ar[xit |HIit =
1], ΣXN = V ar[xit |HIit = 0], σ 2θH = V ar[θi |HIit = 1], σ 2θN = V ar[θi |HIit = 0],
ΣXθH = Cov[xit , θi |HIit = 1], ΣXθN = Cov[xit , θi |HIit = 0], σ 2H = V ar[ it |HIit = 1],
and σ 2N = V ar[ it |HIit = 0].
  18
       Hammermesh (1987) presents evidence from early DWS surveys that these displace-
ments indeed come as a surprise to the worker and firm.
  19
       The DWS does not contain hourly wage rates and we had to calculate this variable.
We assumed that health insurance is obtained from an individual’s primary position
and calculated the hourly wage rate for this position using information in the DWS.
Specifically, we took the diﬀerence between total wages and earnings from other jobs and
divided that by the average hours worked per week *weeks worked in a year.
  20
       Simon (2001) used data from 1984 to 2000 in her analysis. The CPS 2004 data
diﬀer in their industry and occupation codes, which makes their addition to the analysis
impossible, since we use the average unionization rate in the industry as instrument.
Besides from the fact that we include an additional wave, the CPS 2002, our final sample
diﬀers slightly from that in Simon (2001) as we apply a stricter definition of full time



                                               28
work at the previous job. Note that the diﬀerences in the sample do not aﬀect any of the
conclusions in Simon (2001).
  21
       In all waves of the survey, the health insurance information about the old job refers to
health insurance from the worker’s own employer. From 1984 to 1992, the new job health
insurance variable asked for whether any group health insurance was held, and from 1994
onwards asked whether any private health insurance was held at the present time.
  22
       Approximately 6% of matched individuals privately purchased insurance and nearly
31% received health insurance from a spouse. This subsample was removed from the
analysis. Note, our qualitative and quantitative results were robust if this subsample were
included in the estimation sample. This should reduce concerns regarding our implicit
assumption that for those individuals who could not be matched with the March CPS,
health insurance reported in the DWS was obtained from the primary employer.
  23
       Health care reform was a major component of Bill Clinton’s campaign in 1992. This
year also saw a marked slowdown in medical spending and the end to a period of rapid
growth in enrollment in managed care plan. While 5% of the privately insured were in
managed care in 1980 it had risen to approximately 75% in 1992 and that percentage has
been fairly stable since 1992.
  24
       More generally, there is substantial heterogeneity in unemployment spans and post
displacement job outcomes for displaced workers. Seitchik (1991) reports that while ap-
                1                                                                    1
proximately     3
                    of all displaced workers were reemployed within 5 weeks, about   3
                                                                                         were not
reemployed until after more than 6 months. He also reports that 43% of workers displaced
between 1981 and 1986 had higher earnings on reemployed jobs in 1986 whereas over 30%
                                       3
of workers were earning less than      4
                                           of their former wages.
  25
       The diﬀerence in the tax treatment of wage and non-wage compensation also means
that highly compensated workers will equally be those who most value non-wage compen-
sation.
  26
       For example, Pauly and Herring (1999) report lower returns to experience in firms



                                                  29
that provide health insurance benefits, whereas Olson (2002) reports that being married
reduced wages for women working full time with health insurance.
  27
       In fact, the OLS estimate of the impact of health insurance in a simple wage equation
does exceed the true eﬀect of health insurance on wages presented in Table 3. Note, the
OLS estimate may also suﬀer from bias if there are correlations between observed and
unobserved attributes.
  28
       Recall this is the gap in the variance of log hourly wages. This gap is small relative
to the gap in average log hourly wages.
  29
       As a robustness check we explored four alternative instrument sets. These sets were
chosen based on a suggestion in Lemieux (1998) to exploit the strict exogeneity condition
on the regressors of the model and use higher order terms and interaction terms of the
explanatory variables as instruments. While some of the instrument sets had slightly
better first stage properties the general pattern of our results (available from the authors)
were robust to the diﬀerent instrument sets. Note, the selection of these instrument sets
relies on the plausibility of the strict exogeneity condition for identification.
  30
       The inconsistency of the GMM estimates depends on the relevance of the instrumental
variable. Hahn and Hausman (2003) show that the finite sample bias of these estimates
is inversely related to the first stage F-statistic.
  31
       Note that the inclusion of individual union status reduces eﬃciency as we use a smaller
sample and may also lead to additional concerns regarding endogeneity. Also note that
our underlying model has individuals choosing between sectors that diﬀer only in their
health insurance provision and not union status.
  32
       Note that θis is measured with error since ξ is is included on the right hand side
of equation (9). Since the model assumes that η is in equation (3) is distributed iid
over time, this regression intuitively corresponds to regressing two variables with classical
measurement error on each other and obtaining the true signal by calculating the predicted
outcome (b
         θi ).



                                               30
  33
       We investigated the sensitivity of our results to the definition of t2 . We found that for
workers above 45 the estimates of γ 3 increase in absolute value as t2 indicates later time
periods (i.e. 1998 onwards).
  34
       Madrian (1994) finds that among married men with pregnant wives, those without
health insurance are twice as likely to switch jobs.
  35
       Farber (2001) describes how the characteristics of displaced workers have changed
over time.
  36
       For example, Cutler and Madrian (1998) and Baicker and Chandra (2006) find impacts
on hours worked and employment rates whereas Gruber and Krueger (1991) using similar
identification strategies with data from earlier time periods find no impacts.
  37
       There is, indeed, some evidence of worker sorting in the context of health insur-
ance within the health economics literature. Several studies (Marquis and Long (1995),
Monheit and Vistnes (1999) and Levy (1998)) show that workers with low preferences
for health insurance are disproportionately employed in firms that do not oﬀer coverage.
Similarly evidence of employees sorting to firms based on health insurance benefits is
shown in Scott, Berger and Black (1989), Dranove, Spier and Baker (2000), and Levy
(1998). Yet, the evidence also indicates that sorting of workers to firms on the basis of
preferences for the compensation package is imperfect.
  38
       Since the individual unobserved attributes of wokers that sort into a firm are likely to
be similar, a negative within group correlation between observed and unobserved charac-
teristics of individuals will arise, even if these variables are uncorrelated in the population.
Using a general model to estimate hedonic equations, Epple (1987) demonstrates that
simply using group fixed eﬀects is unlikely to be suﬃcient to overcome potential biases.
  39
       Alternatively one could examine the tradeoﬀ over the age or tenure distribution within
firms. For example, one could hypothesize that consistent with the findings in Pauly and
Herring (1999), workers with high tenure may have lower labor market mobility and be
more willing to accept increased shares of health insurance costs over time.



                                                31
References
 [1] Armour, S., 2005. Trend, You smoke?          You’re fired!. USA Today.
     http,//www.usatoday.com/money/companies/management/2005-05-11-smoke-
     usat_x.htm.

 [2] Baicker, K. and Chandra A. 2006. The Labor Market Eﬀects of Rising Health Insur-
     ance Premiums. Journal of Labor Economics 24, 609—634.

 [3] Benabou, R., 1996. Heterogeneity, Stratification, and Growth, Macroeconomic Im-
     plications of Community Structure and School Finance. American Economic Review
     86, 584—609.

 [4] Buchmueller, T. C., DiNardo, J., Valletta, R. G., 2002. Union Eﬀects on Health In-
     surance Provision and Coverage in the United States. Industrial and Labor Relations
     Review 55, 610—627.

 [5] Bundorf, K. M., 2002. Employee Demand for Health Insurance and Employer Health
     Plan Choices. Journal of Health Economics 21, 65—88.

 [6] Currie, J., Madrian, B., 1999. "Health, Health Insurance and the Labor Market in
     D. Card and O. Ashenfelter (eds), Handbook of Labor Economics 3C, 3309-3407.

 [7] Cutler, D. M., 2002. Employee Costs and the Decline in Health Care Coverage.
     NBER Working Paper No. 9036.

 [8] Cutler, D. M. and Madrian, B. 1998. Labor Market Responses to Rising Health
     Insurance Costs: Evidence on Hours Worked. RAND Journal of Economics 29, 509—
     30.

 [9] Cutler, D. M., 1995. The Incidence of Adverse Medical Outcomes Under Prospective
     Payment. Econometrica 63, 29—50.

[10] Dranove, D., Spier, K. E., Baker, L., 2000. Competition Among Employers Oﬀering
     Health Insurance. Journal of Health Economics 19, 121—140.

[11] Employee Benefit Research Institute, 2002. Databook on Employee Benefits. 4th ed.
     http,//www.ebri.org/publications/books/index.cfm?fa=databook

[12] Epple, D. 1987. Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Estimating Demand and Sup-
     ply Functions for Diﬀerentiated Products. Journal of Political Economy 95, 59-80.

[13] Farber, H. S., 2003. Job Loss in the United States, 1981-2001. NBER Working Paper
     No. 9707.

                                          32
[14] Farber, H. S., Levy, H., 2000. Recent Trends in Employer-Sponsored Health Insur-
     ance, Are Bad Jobs Getting Worse?. Journal of Health Economics 19, 93—119.
[15] Gruber, J., Lettau, M., 2004. How Elastic is the Firm’s Demand for Health Insurance.
     Journal of Public Economics 88, 1273—1293.
[16] Gruber, J., McKnight, R., 2003. Why Did Employee Health Insurance Contributions
     Rise?. Journal of Health Economics 22, 1085—1104.
[17] Gruber, J., 1994. The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits. American Economic
     Review 84, 622-641.
[18] Gruber, J., and Krueger, A. B., 1991. The incidence of mandated employer-provided
     insurance: Lessons from workers’ compensation insurance. Tax Policy and the Econ-
     omy 5:111—43.
[19] Hahn, J., Hausman, J. 2003. Instrumental Variable Estimation with Valid and Invalid
     Instruments., MIT Department of Economics Working Paper No. 03-26.
[20] Hamermesh, D. S. 1987. The Costs of Worker Displacement. Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 102, 51-75.
[21] Jacobson, L., LaLonde, R., Sullivan, D., 1993. Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers.
     American Economic Review 83, 685—709.
[22] Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research and Educational Trust, 2005. Em-
     ployer Health Benefits Survey. www.kﬀ.org.
[23] Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research and Educational Trust, 2004. Em-
     ployer Health Benefits Survey. www.kﬀ.org.
[24] Katz L. F., Autor, D. H. 1999. Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings In-
     equality, in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics 3A,
     1463-1555.
[25] Kremer, M., 1993. The O-Ring Theory of Economic Development. Quarterly Journal
     of Economics 108, 551—576.
[26] Lemieux, T., 1998. Estimating the Eﬀects of Unions on Wage Inequality in a Panel
     Data Model with Comparative Advantage and Nonrandom Selection. Journal of La-
     bor Economics 16, 261—291.
[27] Levy, H., 1998. Who Pays for Health Insurance? Employee Contributions to Health
     Insurance Premiums. Princeton University Industrial Relations Section Working Pa-
     per 398.

                                           33
[28] Madrian, B. C., 1994. Employment-Based Health Insurance and Job Mobility: Is
     There Evidence of Job-Lock? Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 27-54.
[29] Marquis, M. S., Long, S. H., 1995. Worker Demand for Health Insurance in the
     Non-Group Market. Journal of Health Economics 14, 47—63.
[30] Monheit, A. C., Vistnes, J.C., 1999. Health Insurance Availability at the Workplace,
     How Important are Workers Preferences. Journal of Human Resources 34, 770—785.
[31] Moreira, Marcelo. 2003. A conditional likelihood ratio test for structural models.
     Econometrica 71, no. 4:1027—48.
[32] Olson, C. A., 2002. Do Workers Accept Lower Wages in Exchange for Health Benefits.
     Journal of Labor Economics 20, S91—S114.
[33] Oyer, P., 2004. Recall Bias Among Displaced Workers. Economics Letters 82, 392—
     397.
[34] Pauly, M. V., 2001. Making Sense of a Complex System, Empirical Studies of
     Employment-Based Health Insurance. International Journal of Health Care Finance
     and Economics 1, 333—339.
[35] Pauly, M., Herring, B., 1999. Pooling Health Insurance Risks. American Enterprise
     Institute Press, Washington, DC.
[36] Pauly, M. V. 1986. Taxation, Health Insurance, and Market Failure in the Medical
     Economy. Journal of Economic Literature 24, 629-675.
[37] Robinson, C., 1989. The Joint Determination of Union Status and Union Wage Ef-
     fects, Some Tests of Alternative Models. Journal of Political Economy 97, 639—67.
[38] Salisbury, D. L. 2001. EBRI Research Highlights: Retirement and Health Data Em-
     ployee Benefit Research Institute (EBRI) EBRI Special Report SR-36, and EBRI
     Issue Brief No. 229.
[39] Sattinger, M, 1993. Assignment Models of the Distribution of Earnings. Journal of
     Economic Literature 31 831-880.
[40] Scott, F., Berger, M. C., Black, D., 1989. Eﬀects of the Tax Treatment of Fringe
     Benefits on Labor Market Segmentation. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 42,
     216—229.
[41] Seitchik, A. 1991. Who Are Displaced Workers? in J. T. Addison, ed., Job 51 Dis-
     placement: Consequences and Implications for Policy. Detroit: Wayne State Univer-
     sity Press.

                                           34
[42] Sheiner L. (1999), “Health Care Costs, Wages and Aging,” Federal Reserve Board of
     Governors #99-19, Washington D. C.

[43] Simon, K., 2001. Involuntary Job Change and Employer Provided Health Insurance;
     Evidence of a Wage/Fringe Benefit Tradeoﬀ?. International Journal of Health Care
     Finance and Economics 1, 249—271.

[44] Staiger, D., Stock, J.H., 1997. Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak Instru-
     ments. Econometrica 65, 557—586.

[45] Wiatrowski, W. J., 1995. Who Really Has Access to Employer-Provided Health Ben-
     efits?. Monthly Labor Review 118, 36—44.

[46] Willis, R. J. 1986. Wage Determinants: A Survey and Reinterpretation of Human
     Capital Earnings Functions. in O Ashenfelter and R Layard (eds), Handbook of Labor
     Economics 1, 525-602.




                                          35
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
    By Health                                   Never Have            Always Have
                    Gainers of HI                                                               Losers of HI
 Insurance Status Post displacement job        Neither job has       Both jobs provided       Pre displacement job
   on Both Jobs has Health Insurance           Health Insurance       Health Insurance        has Health Insurance
                    Mean        SD             Mean        SD         Mean          SD          Mean         SD
 Real weekly wage
after displacement in
         US$          519.347 317.878          367.226 247.435       658.127 383.147           415.652 262.314
Real weekly wage pre
displacement in US$ 526.384 345.894            417.867 278.890       733.458 419.259           579.383 326.019
         Age           36.816 10.357            35.277 10.778         38.856 10.071             36.749 10.267
 Level of education
    below college       0.498  0.500            0.648      0.478      0.440         0.496       0.583        0.493
        Female          0.467  0.499            0.479      0.500      0.374         0.484       0.406        0.491
      Married          0.675       0.468        0.484      0.500      0.680         0.466       0.530        0.499
       Black           0.076       0.266        0.125      0.331      0.074         0.262       0.116        0.320
 Years of tenure pre
   displacement        3.669       4.231        3.262      3.856      6.857         6.851       5.459        5.642
  Same Industry        0.417       0.493        0.459      0.498      0.470         0.499       0.340        0.474
  Same Occupation      0.369       0.483        0.349      0.477      0.372         0.483       0.268        0.443
     Number of
                            2228                    1555                    9395                      1878
    Observations
 By Time Period                  1984-2002                     1984-1992                      1994-2002
                               Mean      SD                  Mean      SD                   Mean      SD
 Log of Pre Displacement
 Real Weekly Wage in US$       6.323            0.561        6.296          0.536           6.369          0.599
 Log of Post-Displacement
 Real Weekly Wage in US$       6.182            0.618        6.120          0.615           6.287          0.609
 Insurance in Old Job          0.749            0.433        0.766          0.423           0.721          0.449
 Insurance in New Job          0.772            0.419        0.762          0.426           0.790          0.407
 Female                        0.403            0.491        0.386          0.487           0.433          0.496
 Married                       0.641            0.480        0.659          0.474           0.609          0.488
 Black                         0.085            0.278        0.087          0.283           0.080          0.271
 Age between 35 and 44         0.304            0.460        0.296          0.456           0.318          0.466
 Age between 45 and 54         0.192            0.394        0.165          0.372           0.236          0.425
 Age over 55                   0.078            0.268        0.079          0.270           0.076          0.266
 High School Education         0.384            0.486        0.423          0.494           0.317          0.466
 Some College Education        0.279            0.448        0.249          0.432           0.330          0.470
 College                       0.233            0.423        0.202          0.401           0.286          0.452
 Children                      0.666            0.472        0.790          0.407           0.455          0.498
 Collected Unemployment
 Benefits while Displaced      0.556            0.497        0.609          0.488           0.464          0.499
 Tenure on Job Pre-
 Displacement (in years)       5.852            6.293        5.747          6.181           6.029          6.474
 Observations                              14968                     9429                           5539




                                                    36
Table 2: GMM Estimates of the Wage Equation
                                                                       1984-2002        1984-1992         1994-2002
                                                                         0.046              0.054             -0.021
 Health Insurance
                                                                        (0.054)            (0.064)           (0.093)
 Point estimates of the differential returns to unobserved               0.788a             0.892a            0.790a
 skills between insured and uninsured workers (ψ)                       (0.041)            (0.053)           (0.060)
                                                                        -0.062a            -0.071a           -0.052a
 Female
                                                                        (0.007)            (0.009)           (0.012)
                                                                         0.035a             0.039a            0.011
 Married
                                                                        (0.008)            (0.011)           (0.013)
                                                                        -0.039a            -0.025c           -0.079a
 Black
                                                                        (0.012)            (0.014)           (0.021)
                                                                         0.020a             0.015             0.003
 Age between 35 and 44
                                                                        (0.008)            (0.010)           (0.014)
                                                                         -0.003            -0.027b            0.009
 Age between 45 and 54
                                                                        (0.010)            (0.012)           (0.016)
                                                                        -0.065a            -0.091a            -0.017
 Over 55 years old
                                                                        (0.014)            (0.017)           (0.025)
                                                                         0.086a             0.068a            0.105a
 High School Graduate
                                                                        (0.011)            (0.013)           (0.022)
                                                                         0.133a             0.100a            0.149a
 Some College
                                                                        (0.012)            (0.014)           (0.022)
                                                                         0.196a             0.172a            0.211a
 College Degree and above
                                                                        (0.013)            (0.015)           (0.023)
                                                                        -0.030a            -0.029b            0.015
 Number of children
                                                                        (0.008)            (0.013)           (0.013)
                                                                         0.040a             0.046a            0.030a
 Pre Displacement Tenure
                                                                        (0.004)            (0.005)           (0.007)
                                                                        -0.001a            -0.001a           -0.001b
 Pre Displacement Tenure Squared
                                                                        (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)
                                                                        -0.171a            -0.177a           -0.153a
 Female*health insurance
                                                                        (0.010)            (0.012)           (0.016)
                                                                         0.042a             0.052a            0.044a
 Married*health insurance
                                                                        (0.011)            (0.015)           (0.017)
                                                                        -0.054a            -0.072a            0.003
 Black*health insurance
                                                                        (0.016)            (0.019)           (0.028)
                                                                         0.096a             0.088a            0.124a
 (Age between 35 and 44)*health insurance
                                                                        (0.011)            (0.014)           (0.019)
                                                                         0.127a             0.132a            0.134a
 (Age between 45 and 54)*health insurance
                                                                        (0.013)            (0.018)           (0.022)
                                                                         0.120a             0.119a            0.141a
 (Over 55 years old)*health insurance
                                                                        (0.019)            (0.023)           (0.033)
                                                                         0.094a             0.094a            0.114a
 High School Graduate*health insurance
                                                                        (0.015)            (0.018)           (0.032)
                                                                         0.177a             0.176a            0.207a
 Some College*health insurance
                                                                        (0.016)            (0.020)           (0.032)
                                                                         0.422a             0.366a            0.505a
 College*health insurance
                                                                        (0.017)            (0.021)           (0.035)
                                                                         -0.007            -0.042b            0.016
 Number of children*health insurance
                                                                        (0.011)            (0.018)           (0.017)
                                                                        -0.023a            -0.033a            -0.007
 Pre Displacement Tenure* health insurance
                                                                        (0.004)            (0.005)           (0.007)
                                                                         0.001a             0.001a            0.000
 Pre Displacement Tenure Squared* health insurance
                                                                        (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)
 Observations                                                            14908               9387              5521
Note: Regressions also include indicators on employer industry and region of residence and their interactions with
health insurance. Standard errors in parentheses, a, b and c denote statistically different from zero at the 1%, 5% and
10% confidence levels, respectively.


                                                            37
Table 3: Decomposition of the Unadjusted Weekly Wage Gap
                                                1984-2002        1984-1992    1994-2002
Effect of health insurance on workers in health
insurance sector:
  1. Compensating Wage Differential, β HI         0.046            0.054        -0.021
                                  '
                                   (
  2. Effect of observed skills, x H β − β
                                     H
                                             )
                                             N    0.203            0.156         0.318
  3. Effect of unobserved skills, (ψ − 1)θ H      0.008            0.000         0.015
       Total effect                                   0.257        0.210         0.312

Selection bias:
                                       (         )
 4. Differences in observed skills, x H' − x N' β N   0.112        0.132         0.089
 5. Differences in unobserved skills, (θ H − θ N )    0.035        0.047         0.038
       Total bias                                     0.147        0.179         0.127
              Unadjusted wage gap (WG)                0.404        0.389         0.439


Note: The decomposition is based on equation (6) and we use the estimates presented in
Table 2 to construct each component.




                                              38
Table 4: Decomposition of the Unadjusted Variance of Weekly Wages Gap
                                                   1984-2002 1984-1992        1994-2002
Effect of health insurance on workers in health
insurance sector:
  1. Effect of observed skills,                       0.058     0.043            0.074
 β Σ XH β − β Σ XN β
  H'       H     N'     N


  2. Effect of unobserved skills, (ψ 2 − 1)σ θ2
                                             H
                                                     -0.119    -0.047           -0.129
                        (             )
 3. Covariance term, 2 ψβ H − β N ' Σ XθH             0.004        0.005         0.006
      Total effect                                    -0.056       0.002        -0.049

Selection bias:
 4. Differences in observed skills,                   0.001        0.002         0.000
β N ' (Σ XH − Σ XN )β N
 5. Differences in unobserved skills, σ θ2H − σ θ2N   0.065        0.000         0.064
 6. Covariance term, 2 β N ' (Σ XθH − Σ XθN )         -0.022       -0.015       -0.024
       Total bias                                      0.044       -0.014        0.039
Difference in residual variance, σ H2 − σ N2          -0.001       -0.002        0.000
               Unadjusted variance gap (WG)           -0.013       -0.014       -0.009

Note: The decomposition is based on equation (7) and we use the estimates presented in
Table 2 to construct each component.




                                                 39
 Table 5: First Stage Regressions of Pre Displacement Wage Assuming ψ = 1
Time Period                                       1984-2002 1984-1992         1994-2002
Unionization Rate in Pre-Displacement             1.27*10E-3a   2.32*10E-3a   -1.62*10E-3a
Industry                                          (3.0*10E-4)   (3.5*10E-4)    (6.6*10E-4)
                                                     0.236a         0.230a         0.160a
Health Insurance Pre Displacement
                                                     (0.035)       (0.044)        (0.062)
                                                      0.061a        0.088a         0.054
Married
                                                     (0.022)       (0.028)        (0.037)
                                                      -0.037       -0.087a         0.069
Black
                                                     (0.027)       (0.033)        (0.049)
                                                      0.067a        0.072a        0.066c
Age between 35 and 44
                                                     (0.022)       (0.028)        (0.039)
                                                      0.105a        0.113a         0.122b
Age between 45 and 54
                                                     (0.031)       (0.038)        (0.053)
                                                      0.045         0.028          0.080
Over 55 years old
                                                     (0.045)       (0.053)        (0.079)
                                                      0.134a        0.118a         0.154a
High School Graduate
                                                     (0.023)       (0.029)        (0.043)
                                                      0.252a        0.241a         0.281a
Some College
                                                     (0.027)       (0.035)        (0.041)
                                                      0.447a        0.387a         0.537a
College Degree and above
                                                     (0.035)       (0.045)        (0.056)
                                                      0.028a        0.030a         0.022b
Pre Displacement Tenure
                                                     (0.005)       (0.006)        (0.009)
                                                  -7.4*10E-4a   -8.8*10E-4a    -4.2*10E-4
Pre Displacement Tenure Squared
                                                  (2.0*10E-4)   (2.2*10E-4)    (4.3*10E-4)
                                                      0.030         0.017          0.024
Married* health insurance
                                                     (0.021)       (0.029)        (0.035)
                                                      -0.011        -0.018         0.042
Black* health insurance
                                                     (0.029)       (0.035)        (0.052)
                                                      0.018         -0.006         0.062c
(Age between 35 and 44)* health insurance
                                                     (0.022)       (0.027)        (0.038)
                                                      0.018         -0.041         0.102b
(Age between 45 and 54)* health insurance
                                                     (0.028)       (0.036)        (0.044)
                                                      -0.019        -0.037         0.053
(Over 55 years old)* health insurance
                                                     (0.040)       (0.049)        (0.068)
                                                      0.003         0.003          0.045
High School Graduate* health insurance
                                                     (0.026)       (0.031)        (0.051)
                                                      -0.026        -0.043         0.020
Some College* health insurance
                                                     (0.029)       (0.037)        (0.051)
                                                      0.048         0.051          0.095c
College degree* health insurance
                                                     (0.033)       (0.042)        (0.058)
                                                      -0.006       -0.011c      2.1*10E-3
Pre Displacement Tenure* health insurance
                                                     (0.005)       (0.006)        (0.010)
Pre Displacement Tenure Squared* health            2.6*10E-4     4.6*10E-4b   -1.32*10E-4
insurance                                         (2.1*10E-4)   (2.3*10E-4)    (4.5*10E-4)
                                                      5.678a        5.816a         5.755a
Constant
                                                     (0.045)       (0.060)        (0.072)
Observations                                          14908          9387           5521
R-Squared                                             0.378         0.374          0.400
First Stage F- statistic on the Instrument            16.06         39.84           6.09
 Note: Regressions include information on gender, Hispanic, family composition, employer
 industry, unemployment insurance use, region of residence indicators and their interactions
 with health insurance. Robust standard errors in parentheses and . a, b and c denote
 statistically different from zero at the 1%, 5% and 10% confidence levels, respectively.



                                             40
Table 6: Linear Difference in Difference Estimates of the Impact of Health
Insurance Receipt Post 1994 on Job Search Activity Following Displacement
Sample                                        Health        No Health
                                          Insurance Pre Insurance Pre
                                          Displacement      Displacement
                                               -5.480a               0.393
Health Insurance (γ2)
                                               (0.803)             (0.925)
                                               -9.346a             -5.284a
Post 1994 (γ3)
                                               (1.216)             (1.045)
                                                2.761b              -1.981
Health Insurance * Post 1994 (γ4)
                                               (1.282)             (1.347)
                                                -0.112              1.362b
Married
                                               (0.450)             (0.689)
                                                -0.071               0.024
Black
                                               (0.565)             (0.820)
                                                4.589a              4.291a
Age between 35 and 44
                                               (0.907)             (1.466)
                                                1.050b              1.490c
Age between 45 and 54
                                               (0.515)             (0.827)
                                                2.520a              2.037b
Over 55 years old
                                               (0.644)             (1.000)
                                                4.734a               2.219
High School Graduate
                                               (0.963)             (1.494)
                                               -6.068a             -2.019c
Some College
                                               (0.958)             (1.150)
                                               -7.233a             -2.189c
College Degree and Above
                                               (0.957)             (1.256)
                                                0.480a              0.735a
Pre Displacement Tenure
                                               (0.095)             (0.206)
                                               -0.012a             -0.025a
Pre Displacement Tenure Squared
                                               (0.003)             (0.008)
                                               23.112a             11.683a
Constant
                                               (1.242)             (1.408)
Observations                                    10037                3242
Adjusted R-Squared                               0.065               0.045
Note: Regressions include information on gender, Hispanic, family composition,
employer industry, unemployment insurance use and region of residence indicators.
Robust standard errors in parentheses, a, b and c denote statistically different from
zero at the 1%, 5% and 10% confidence levels, respectively.




                                      41
Table 7: Nonparametric difference in difference estimates of the impact of health insurance receipt after 1994 on individual specific
time invariant unobserved productivity attributes θi
Sample                                   Full Sample                    Health Insurance Pre                No Health Insurance Pre
                                                                            Displacement                        Displacement
                                All Ages Aged 20- Aged 45- All Ages Aged 20- Aged 45- All Ages Aged 20- Aged 45-
                                               44         64                      44          64                      44          64
Health Insurance post             0.031a     0.030a     0.038a      0.029a      0.029a     0.034b        -0.010     -0.013      0.001
displacement (γ2)                (0.568)    (0.625)    (1.323)     (0.732)     (0.816)     (1.630)      (0.976) (1.060)        (2.414)
Health Insurance post            -0.042a    -0.023a    -0.100a     -0.045a     -0.035b     -0.077a      -0.044a     -0.012     -0.138a
displacement after 1994 (γ3)     (0.887)    (0.995)    (1.921)     (1.190)     (1.352)     (2.479)      (1.433)    (1.579)     (3.274)
Indicator variable for Period     0.063a     0.043a     0.127a      0.071a      0.057a      0.115a       0.061a     0.036a      0.147a
Following 1994 (γ4)              (0.763)    (0.846)    (1.704)     (1.074)     (1.214)     (2.273)      (1.079)    (1.165)     (2.608)
Number of Observations          14968      10930      4038        11216       8064        3152        3752        2866        886
Adjusted R-squared              0.0063     0.0053     0.0140      0.0064      0.0053      0.0118      0.0117      0.0062      0.0454
                                                        a b     c
Note: Robust standard errors *10E-3 are in parentheses. , and denote statistically different from zero at the 1%, 5% and 10%
confidence levels, respectively.




                                                              42
