NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PROJECTING BEHAVIORAL RESPONSES TO THE NEXT GENERATION OF
RETIREMENT POLICIES
Alan L. Gustman
Thomas Steinmeier
Working Paper 12958
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12958

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2007

The research reported herein was conducted pursuant to grants UM03-03, UM04-01, and UM05-02,
from the U.S. Social Security Administration (SSA) to the Michigan Retirement Research Center (MRRC),
with subcontracts to the National Bureau of Economic Research. The findings and conclusions expressed
are solely those of the authors and do not represent the views of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government,
the MRRC or the NBER. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Alan L. Gustman and Thomas Steinmeier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Projecting Behavioral Responses to the Next Generation of Retirement Policies
Alan L. Gustman and Thomas Steinmeier
NBER Working Paper No. 12958
March 2007
JEL No. D31,D91,E21,H55,I3,J08,J14,J26,J32,J38
ABSTRACT
This paper examines retirement and related behavioral responses to policies that on average are actuarially
neutral. Many conventional models predict that actuarially neutral policies will not affect retirement
behavior. In contrast, our model allows those with high time preference rates to find that the promise
of an actuarially fair increase in future rewards does not balance the loss from foregone current benefits.
Using data from the Health and Retirement Study, we find that from age 62 through full retirement
age, the earnings test reduces full-time work by married men by about four percentage points, or by
about ten percent of married men at full-time work. Abolishing the requirements on many jobs that
an individual work full-time or not at all, what we term a minimum hours constraint on employment,
would induce more than twice as many people to enter partial retirement as would leave full-time work,
so that total full-time equivalent (FTE) employment would increase, although by a modest amount.
If all benefits from personal accounts could be taken as a lump sum, the fraction not retired at age
62 would fall by about 5 percentage points compared to a system where there is mandatory annuitization
of benefits.
Alan L. Gustman
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755-3514
and NBER
ALAN.L.GUSTMAN@DARTMOUTH.EDU
Thomas Steinmeier
Department of Economics
Texas Tech University
Lubbock, TX 79409
thomas.steinmeier@ttu.edu

Until the 1980s, both the federal government and employer policies encouraged workers
to retire by age 65. Employers were free to mandate retirement by age 65, and many did. In
addition, the dominant type of pension plan, the defined benefit plan, often stopped crediting
work at age 65. When a person worked an additional year, one year’s pension was lost, but
future pension payments were not increased to compensate. Similarly with Social Security,
when a person worked after age 65 and lost benefits to the retirement test, future Social Security
benefits were not increased by an amount that would compensate for the lost benefits. Other
features of pensions, including availability of early benefits, and supplements to pensions taken
at early ages, encouraged even earlier retirement.
However, with the baby boomers approaching retirement age, in the past few decades
both the government and employers have done an about face. They not only eliminated policies
that encouraged retirement by age 65 or earlier, but adopting policies to encourage older persons
to delay their retirements. Some of these policies, such as the 1983 Social Security reforms,
increase adjustments in future benefits to compensate for benefit payments lost to the earnings
test, or to otherwise compensate when benefit claiming is delayed. Other public policies
encourage later retirement by outlawing age discrimination, mandatory retirement, and by
requiring that pension benefits give credit for work after normal retirement age, or that they are
otherwise adjusted on an actuarially fair basis.1 The trend from defined benefit to defined
contribution plans and the adoption of hybrid plans also encourage delayed retirement.2 Today,
benefit structures in pensions and Social Security are now roughly actuarially fair, in that
1

The 1983 Social Security reforms significantly increased the incentive to postpone retirement after age 65. Among
other things, the delayed retirement credit was gradually increased from 3 percent to 8 percent, and the normal
retirement age was raised. Subsequently, the earnings test was abolished for those over the normal retirement age.
Age discrimination rules abolished mandatory retirement at age 65 for most jobs, and eliminated certain (but not all)
actuarial penalties found in defined benefit pensions that effectively reduced the reward to work after age 65.
2
Anderson, Gustman and Steinmeier (1999) quantify the effects on retirement of changes in Social Security rules,
abolition of mandatory retirement, changes in defined benefit structures and substitution of DC for DB plans. See
also Friedberg and Webb (2003).

1

disincentives from inadequate benefit accrual rates for those who postpone retirement have been
eliminated.
Now a new generation of retirement policies is under consideration. Although actuarially
neutral, these policies are likely to affect retirement outcomes. One such policy follows on the
elimination of the Social Security earnings test for those over normal retirement age, and would
eliminate the earnings test between early and normal retirement age. Another of these policies
would increase the ages of benefit entitlement. Still another such policy emerges from a central
focus of the past few years on the adoption of personal accounts. Although Social Security
benefits are currently paid in the form of an annuity, benefits from either defined benefit plans or
from personal accounts may be made available as an annuity or as a lump sum of equivalent
actuarial value. A related policy choice between actuarially equivalent benefits emerges on the
pension side. There has been discussion of relaxing current IRS prohibition against paying a
pension benefit when a person remains at work, instead allowing partial pension benefits to be
paid to those who partially retire on a job.
Unfortunately, when it comes to distinguishing between these and other policies offering
choices between actuarially equivalent outcomes, many of the tools that have been used to
analyze the effects of retirement policies on retirement behavior either fall silent, or suggest
counter to their likely effects that these policies will have no impact on retirements. In
particular, a central feature of many retirement equations is the pension or Social Security delta,
the change in present value of benefits with continued work. In the case of actuarially fair
policies, these deltas are zero, so the prediction is that the policies will have no effect on
retirement.

2

This paper examines the effects on retirement of certain proposals that are part of the new
generation of actuarially neutral policies. As we show, contrary to predictions from simple
retirement equations, these policies will nevertheless affect retirement, primarily as a result of a
mismatch between certain person’s rate of time preference and the discount rate implicit in the
design of the pension or Social Security. Consider some of the policies noted above. Although
the earnings test taxes away benefits from earnings above the disregard amount, subsequent
yearly benefits are increased to compensate for benefits lost. Compensation carries an implicit
interest rate specified in the law. However, among those with high time preference rates, that
interest rate is not adequate. Under current law they are not adequately compensated for
postponing retirement, so they don’t. Once the earnings test is abolished, in this case between
the early and normal retirement age, they are no longer subject to inadequate compensation for
postponing retirement, and therefore they may delay their retirement. Similarly, allowing
benefits from pensions or Social Security to be paid as a lump sum encourages those with high
time preference rates to accelerate their retirement. Those with high time preference rates and
consequently little saving will prefer a lump sum settlement, even though the annuities are
actuarially equivalent in value. Increasing the age of eligibility for benefits will reduce
retirements as those with high time preference rates who retire to avoid waiting for benefits
under the current system will instead find postponing retirement no longer reduces their Social
Security benefits while still at work (Gustman and Steinmeier, 2005a).
Of course, these substitution effects will not always dominate. If there are wealth effects,
or assets become available at particular ages to a person who is liquidity constrained, these
effects must also be considered. Once again, most retirement equations will fall silent, especially
about any liquidity effects.

3

A key to analyzing this next generation of policy initiatives is to incorporate differences
in time preference rates into the underlying behavioral model of retirement. To do that, one must
relax the assumption of perfectly operating capital markets and consider the joint determination
of retirement and saving. As long as one cannot borrow extensively on the basis of future
pension and Social Security payments, those with different time preference rates may have
different valuations for benefits received at different times, even if the benefits are actuarially
equivalent, e.g., for lump sum vs. an annuity or other deferred payouts. This type of distinction
is not included in the first generation of retirement models.
We will estimate and apply an extended version of a model developed in Gustman and
Steinmeier (2005a) to analyze the retirement implications of these newer policies. Outcomes
analyzed in the model we estimate include the decisions to fully or partially retire, to save, to
claim benefits, to participate in personal accounts, the choice of whether to take benefits as an
annuity or lump sum, and the course of benefit and tax payouts.
Section II discusses our retirement model and its estimation. Section III analyzes the
likely effects of abolishing the retirement earnings test between early and normal retirement age,
and compares the effect of abolishing the earnings test with the policy of raising the Social
Security early entitlement age. We then turn in Section IV to an analysis of the differential
effects on retirement of actuarially equivalent lump sum and annuity payouts to systems of
personal accounts, as well as the effects of adopting various structural components of personal
account schemes. Section V changes the focus somewhat and asks about the changes in
behavioral outcomes that may result from the adoption by firms and the IRS of policies that
would permit flexible retirement on most jobs where minimum hours constraints and pension
rules now prohibit them.

4

II A. The retirement model.
The model estimated here jointly explains retirement and saving, and allows for
heterogeneity in both time preference and in tastes for leisure. In the basic model, the individual
is assumed to maximize a utility function of consumption and leisure over time. The constraints
include an asset accumulation equation and an uncertain lifetime.3
This model extends in a number of directions a structural, dynamic model of retirement
and saving that we have developed in previous work (Gustman and Steinmeier, 2005a and b).
One extension allows individuals to choose optimally when to register for Social Security
benefits. Another extension more systematically specifies the role of minimum hours
constraints. A third modification introduces the value of employer provided health insurance
into compensation, while allowing the value of own and spouse insurance to go to zero at age 65
as the relevant covered person becomes eligible for Medicare.
In this paper, retirement is not, however, modeled stochastically. The two paths open are
full-time work to full-retirement, and full-time work to partial retirement to full retirement.
There are no reversals from states of lesser to states of greater work. For a similar model that
includes reversals from full-retirement to full-time work, but does not allow partial retirement,
see Gustman and Steinmeier (2002).

3

Structural models in the spirit of the present model, where capital markets are not operating perfectly,
have been estimated by Rust and Phalen (1997), French (2005), van der Klaauw and Wolpin (2006) and Bound,
Stinebrickner and Waidmann (2006). These models have different purposes than the one we estimate here, and
develop those aspects of the model that are aimed at the question at hand in greater detail than we do. However,
given their different emphases, each assumes away one or another feature that is central to the present analysis,
simplifying the representation of incentives from defined benefit pensions, ability to borrow, joint determination of
saving and retirement, or inclusion of partial retirement, among others. None of these models fully analyzes joint
decision making within the household. Our model takes the labor market decision of the spouse as exogenous. For
models of joint decision making by couples, which simplify other dimensions of retirement and retirement decision
making in comparison to the present model, see Gustman and Steinmeier (2004) and Blau and Gilleskie (2006).

5

Utility. In the model, the individual is assumed to maximize a utility function of
consumption and leisure over time:

U =

⎧ −ρ t
⎨e
∑
t =0 ⎩
T

∑ [s ( α C α
3

m ,t

1

m ,t

+ e Xt β +ε

m =1

1

γ

Lγm,t

) ]⎫⎬
⎭

α ,γ < 1

In this equation, T is the maximum lifespan and m refers to the family structure at time t
(both spouses alive, only the husband alive, or only the wife alive). sm,t is the probability of
family structure m at time t, C is consumption, and L is the leisure, which takes on a value
of 0 for full-time work, 1 for full retirement, and ½ for partial retirement, assuming that
partial retirement involves half time work.4 X includes a constant, age, health status, and
vintage. The age variable in X causes leisure to become gradually more attractive as the
individual ages, reflecting the gradual wear and tear that makes the rigors of work relatively less
attractive. As the value of leisure increases for this reason and perhaps also because of
worsening health, at some point the utility of leisure surpasses the utility of the consumption that
continued work makes possible, and the individual retires. It is important to note explicitly that
X does not contain any binary age variables or splines in age which might encourage retirement
at a particular age.
Heterogeneous Elements of Utility. These preferences allow for three types of
heterogeneity. The time preference term ρ is a fixed effect, and the leisure preference term ε
is a random effect drawn from a normal distribution. The parameter γ , which governs how
desirable partial retirement is relative to full retirement or full-time work, is also a random effect.
It is taken so that the term (½)γ comes from the exponential distribution f [( 1 2 ) γ ] = ke δ (
4

1

2)

γ

In recognition that consumption is more valuable while both spouses are alive, the consumption function is
adjusted so that the marginal utility for a surviving spouse is approximately equal to that for a couple consuming
40% more.

6

defined over (½)γ ∈ [½, 1], which is the theoretically acceptable range of (½)γ for γ ∈ [0, 1].
k is the constant necessary for the density function to integrate to unity, as it must. If γ is close
to unity, then full-time leisure has about half the value of half-time leisure, and the individual
regards the utility of an hour of leisure (and the disutility of an hour of work) as about the same
regardless of whether the work is full-time or part-time. If γ is close to zero, then part-time
leisure is almost as valuable as full-time leisure. In this case, the individual does not mind parttime work too much but really dislikes having to work full-time. Since partial retirement seems
to become relatively more attractive as the individuals age, we specify δ to be increasing in age:
δ = δo + δa × Age.

The Budget Constraint. The asset accumulation over time is given by
Am, t = (1 + r) Ak, t-1 + Wm, t (1 - Lm, t) + Em, t + Bm, t - Cm, t,

with Am,t  $ 0,

where Am, t is the level of real assets at time t in survival state m, r is the real interest rate,
Wm, t is the real wage rate, Em, t is the earnings of the spouse, and Bm, t is the level of Social
Security and/or pension benefits at time t. The equation must hold for any legitimate transition
between survival state k at time t-1 and survival state m at time t. If the individual is
working, the wage rate may depend on whether the work is full-time or part-time. Workers are
allowed to partially retire, usually in different jobs from those held in prime working age. Work
when partially retired on a new job reduces firm specific human capital to zero, and may involve
relaxation of other job requirements. As a result, partial retirement on a job not held during
prime working years typically pays a lower wage rate (Gustman and Steinmeier, 1983, 1985).
Social Security enters as income in the asset accumulation equation in the years that benefits are
received. We also include the effects of health insurance on retirement, expecting the effect to
be most observable at age 65. Specifically, we include an estimate of the value of employer

7

provided health insurance in the budget constraint, but note that the net value of this insurance
declines at age 65 when a person who is not employed becomes eligible for Medicare as the
primary payer. The earnings and pension benefits of the spouse are treated as exogenous in this
paper.
The level of benefits Bm,t at time t depends on the previous decisions of the individual
as to when to leave full-time employment and when to retire fully, as well as the current survival
state. Note that this model does not calculate the value of accruals to Social Security and
pensions directly, but the value of the accruals is implicit in the model because work during one
period will affect the value of Social Security and pension benefits in later periods. The implicit
value of these accruals, of course, depends strongly on the time preference rate. It also depends
on the decision of the individual as to when to apply for Social Security benefits; obviously, no
benefits can be paid until the individual has applied for them. This means that a delay in the
application will result in increased benefits later.
II B. Estimation.

Estimation is based on the general method of simulated moments.5 The calculation of the
simulated moments follows from the following decomposition of the utility function:
⎡T
U = ⎢∑
⎣ t =0

∑ (e
3

m =1

−ρ t

s m ,t

1
α

⎤
⎡ T
C αm ,t ⎥ + ⎢ ∑
⎦
⎣ t =0

)

∑ (e
3

m =1

−ρ t

s m,t e X t β

1
γ

)

⎤
Lγm ,t ⎥ e ε
⎦

A crucial observation is that the first part of the utility function does not depend on the random
effects ε and γ, and the second part does not depend on consumption or the budget set. For all
possible combinations of partial and full retirement ages, and for all possible ages for initial
Social Security claims, the budget set is calculated. Given the budget set, and given values of α
and ρ, optimal consumption is calculated by solving the dynamic programming model. The
5

For a more detailed description, see Pakes and Pollard (1989), Duffie and Singelton (1993), and Greene (2000).

8

associated utility of the optimal consumption stream is UC(r1, r2, a; α, ρ), where r1 is the age of
partial retirement, r2 is the age of full retirement, and a is the claiming age. If there is no
partial retirement, r1 = r2. The optimal claiming behavior for particular values of r1 and r2 is
just the value of a which maximizes UC: UC(r1, r2; α, ρ) = max UC(r1, r2, a; α, ρ).
a

Next, 10,000 random values of ε and γ are chosen, and for each set the value of the
second part of the utility function is evaluated for each combination of r1 and r2. This utility
depends on the retirement dates and the value of β: UL(r1, r2; ε, γ, β, ρ). Note that the
calculation of UL does not require the solution of a dynamic programming model and hence can
be done quickly. For each set of ε and γ, the total utility is evaluated for each set of retirement
dates r1 and r2, and the retirement dates are the ones which maximize the total utility:
U(ε, γ, ρ; α, β) = max [UC(r1, r2; α, ρ) + UL(r1, r2; ε, γ, β, ρ)]. Thus, given ρ and values for
r1 , r2

the parameters α and β, the distribution of retirement ages is built up from the 10,000 values
of ε and γ.
The next issue is: where do we get the value for the fixed effect ρ? To resolve this, we
use the actual retirement dates (if retirement occurs within the sample) or the individual’s
reported expected retirement dates (if it does not). Given a value of α, we then pick a value of
ρ and solve the consumption problem described above. Using the optimal consumption values

and the asset accumulation equation, we can solve for assets at the beginning of the sample
period, which is 1992 for the HRS. If these assets are larger than the assets actually observed,
we adjust ρ upward; otherwise we adjust ρ downward. The fixed effect is the value of ρ for

9

which the calculated accumulation just matches the actual assets.6 Note that this fixed value
depends on the value of α and so must be recalculated each time the estimation procedure
considers a new value of α.7
For a given set of parameters, these simulations give simulated sample moments. In the
generalized method of simulated moments, these simulated sample moments are compared to the
actual sample moments, and the procedure adjusts the parameters to minimize the differences
between the simulated moments and the actual moments. In the minimization, the moments are
weighted so as to provide the most precise estimates possible with the data. The estimation is
based on 46 moments. Thirteen of the moments are the percentages working full-time at each
age between 54 and 66. The remaining moments are calculated at ages 55, 58, 60, 62 and 65 and
include five moments for the percentage fully retired at the indicated ages, the percent of those
with a health problem who are working full-time, the percent of those with a health problem who
are fully retired, the percent of those born before 1934 who are working full-time, the percent of
those born after 1938 who are working full-time, the percent of those with lifetime incomes
below $1,250,000 who are working full-time, and the percent of those with lifetime incomes
above $1,900,000 who are working full-time. The income figures and vintages are chosen to
divide the sample roughly into thirds. Two moments are lost because those born before 1934
could not have been 55 in the survey time frame, and those born after 1938 could not have
reached 65 within this time frame.
The model has 8 parameters to be estimated. These include the consumption parameter
6

This calculation is slightly modified in the cases of extremely high, or zero wealth. When an individual has more
assets than would be calculated even at a zero time preference rate, this is taken as a signal of a low time preference
rate, and a value of zero for the time preference rate is assigned. An individual who has zero assets, even allowing
for a defined contribution lump sum which would be available at retirement, is at a corner solution with regard to
assets. Although the time preference rate for such an individual cannot be completely determined, only an
individual with a very high time preference rate would have zero assets on the verge of retirement. Such an
individual is assigned an arbitrarily high time preference rate, causing each period’s income to be fully consumed.
7
Samwick (1998) uses a similar approach and finds wide heterogeneity in time preference rates.

10

α, four elements of β including the constant and coefficients for age, poor health, and birth
year, two elements of δ including a constant and a coefficient of age, and the standard deviation
of retirement preferences given by σε.
The simulations proceed in almost exactly the same manner as the estimates, except that
only the estimated values of the parameters need be considered. Tallies can be made for almost
any aspect of the model, including the percentages fully retired and partially retired at different
ages, the percentage claiming Social Security benefits, the distribution of time preference rates,
and the amount of Social Security taxes and benefits by age. Simulations are accomplished by
simply making the appropriate changes in the budget sets and simulating the results. Simulations
include married men only. The simulations use a real interest rate of 4.31 percent per year as the
assumed return on investments in personal accounts. This is the average compounded rate from
1926-2002 of an asset basket of 50 percent large cap stocks, 5 percent long-term bonds (treasury
bonds) and 45 percent treasury notes, as measured by Ibbotson Associates (2002).
II. C. Data used in the model estimation.

The model is estimated for married men who are career workers from the original cohorts
of the Health and Retirement Study, using observations from the first eight waves of the survey,
every other year from 1992 through 2004, including restricted Social Security and pension data
collected in the initial year of the survey. The selection of the sample, and reasons for deleting
observations, are reported in Appendix Table 1.
The definition of retirement in this study is a hybrid one relying both on objective and
subjective measures. Individuals working at least 30 hours per week and 1560 hours per year are
counted as full-time. Individuals working at least 100 hours per year but no more than 25 hours
per week or 1250 hours per year are counted as part-time, and individuals not doing any work at

11

all are counted as fully retired. Individuals who fall between full-time and part-time or between
part-time and retired are classified on the basis of self reports.
Earnings profiles are taken from Social Security records or, if these are not available, from
the retrospective information in the respondent surveys. Future potential earnings are projected
on the basis of tenure and experience coefficients of earnings regressions. Pension benefits,
conditional on tenure in the job providing the pension, are based on information in the summary
pension descriptions, provided by the employers. Social Security benefits are based on the
earnings histories and figured according to the Social Security rules.
II. D. Parameter Estimates

Table 1 reports parameter estimates. There are 46 moments in the estimation, leaving 38
degrees of freedom. The cutoff points of the chi-squared distribution are 53.15 for 5 percent, so
the model is not rejected at the 5% significance level. The coefficients are of similar magnitudes
to those in our earlier estimates. Everything except the vintage coefficient is significant. A key
to understanding these results is in the time preference rates. These rates are heterogeneous, with
45 percent of the population exhibiting time preference rates above 5 percent, and one third
exhibiting time preference rates of 20 percent or greater.8 These rates are consistent with
Samwick (1998).
II. E. Comparison of observed and predicted outcomes.

As is well known, in recent years, the most prominent spike in retirement occurs around
8

Distribution of Time Preference Rates
Rate
No. Obs.
Rate
0-.05
474
.3-.35
.05-.1
759
.35-.4
.1-.15
170
.4-.45
.15-.2
59
.45-.5
.2-.25
29
.5-.55
.25-.3
22
.55-.6

No. Obs.
12
10
4
8
4
2

Rate
.6-.65
.65-.7
.7-.75
.75-.8
.8-.85
.85-.9

12

No. Obs.
1
4
2
1
1
2

Rate
.9-.95
.95-1
>1

No. Obs.
1
2
664

the age of early entitlement to Social Security benefits, age 62. Roughly 15 percent of the
relevant sample of males retires at age 62, about 9 percent more than those retiring in
surrounding years. About 9 percent of the population retires from full-time work at age 65,
about 3.5 percent more than those retiring in neighboring years. Note that these percentages are
percentages of the population retiring at different ages, not the hazard rates for retirement at
particular ages.
Table 2 reports observed retirement outcomes, and predicted retirement outcomes under
the current program, with each included individual having the work history actually experienced,
and reflected in own Social Security earnings record and reported job history. An indication of
the ability of the model to fit the data can be seen by comparing the baseline simulations of the
retirement outcomes at different ages.
The spike in retirements from full-time work at age 62 and 65 are approximately the right
height. Comparing the flow into full retirement, the spikes at both 62 and 65 are a couple of
points too low. More specifically, comparing the retirement rates from full-time in the baseline
simulation results, with the observed retirement rates, the simulations catch the spike in
retirements at age 62, where 14.8 percent of the population is simulated to retire from full-time
work, where 15.1 percent actually retire at age 62. At 65 the actual spike in retirements from
full-time work is 9.1 percent, while the simulations generate a peak of 6 percent. With regard to
the numbers completely retiring from the labor force, the simulations catch 10.3 percent out of
the 12.5 percent found to retire in the raw data at age 62, and 5.3 percent out of 6.7 percent at age
65.
One reason for the accelerated flow of retirements at 65 should be noted. As indicated
earlier, most pension plans and Social Security are now actuarially fair. Health insurance may

13

affect the flows into retirement. Specifically, the availability of Medicare at age 65 reduces the
value of employer provided health insurance after that age. At 65, there essentially is a reduction
in the wage of an employed person with health insurance. It is important to recognize that the
influence of health insurance does not reflect the effect of health insurance coverage per se.
Those who are sufficiently well informed could obtain Cobra coverage at age 63.5 that would
last until they became eligible for Medicare. So if the absence of coverage were the key
determinant of retirement, instead of the net wage, and if workers were sufficiently well
informed about COBRA, there would be a secondary spike in retirement at age 63.5, rather than
at age 65.9
Table 3 presents descriptive statistics on benefit claiming by age and Table 4 presents the
simulated values obtained from the model. The model tracks the fraction of the population
claiming Social Security benefits between ages 62 and 65 fairly well, understating claiming
behavior on average by a modest amount, and missing the mark most severely at age 63.
According to the last column of Table 3, 47.5 percent of all married men claim their benefits at
age 62. The last column of Table 4 projects a claiming rate of 41.3 percent at age 62. While the
claiming rate at age 62 is affected by the fact that it is a transition year (see Olson, 1999), the
projected claiming rate for the full sample at age 63 is 48.1 percent, compared to an actual
claiming rate of 61.7 percent. For ages 64 and 65, the claiming rates are 68.4 and 84.6 percent,
while the projected claiming rates are 60.1 percent at age 64, and 84.7 percent at age 65. Again
it is at age 63 that the projected claiming behavior falls furthest below the mark.
Tables 3 and 4 also project the claiming rate conditional on retirement status. For
9

We have investigated the role of employer provided retiree health insurance and found that role
to be minor. This finding has been supported in the work of Blau and Gilleskie (2006) and
others.

14

example, from Table 3, first column, the actual claiming rates for those who have left full-time
work are 72.0, 83.7 and 86.1 percent for those 62, 63 and 64 respectively, while from the first
column in Table 4, the projections are 59.9, 65.1 and 77.1 percent respectively.
III. Abolishing the retirement earnings test between early and normal retirement age.

The Senior Citizens Freedom to Work Act of 2000 (PL 106-182) abolished the Social
Security earnings test for those between the full retirement age and 70 years of age.10 It is
expected that abolishing the earnings test for those between the early and full retirement age
would further encourage later retirement.11 This is despite the fact that postponing benefits
results in increases in future benefits that are, for many individuals, better than actuarially fair.12
IIIA. Overview of the earnings test issue.

To understand the effects of abolishing the earnings test for those between 62 and the
normal retirement age, one must understand not only how retirement responds to the immediate
reward for work against the benefit payments that would be received should the person retire, but
how different people in the population value the increased benefit payments in future years that
are paid when one postpones retirement. The valuation of the tradeoff between current and
future benefit payments may not be determined by the market interest rate alone. As we have
seen in the discussion of the retirement model above, a person with a high rate of time preference
10

Under current Social Security law, benefits are reduced for each year one claims benefits before the full retirement
age. This means that for every year benefits are not claimed after age 62, future benefits are adjusted upward. For
example, a person born by January 1, 1938, who has a full retirement age of 65, would receive 80 percent of full
benefits upon retiring at age 62. Therefore, postponing benefit receipt until age 63 would increase yearly benefits by
8.38 percent (.067/.8) for the rest of his life. The earnings test has a similar effect. For those between ages entitling
them to early and full benefits, the Social Security earnings test reduces benefits received by fifty cents for every
dollar earned over the exempt amount ($11,520 in 2003). A person expecting a yearly Social Security pension of
$10,000 at age 62 would find the entire benefit reduced to zero if earnings reached $31,520. Benefits lost to the
earnings test are restored in future years, again at a rate that for many is better than on an actuarially fair basis.
11
For those born in 1937 or earlier, who attained age 62 by 1999, the full retirement age is 65. The full retirement
age is then increased two months per year until reaching 66 for those born in 1943, staying at 66 between 1943 and
1954, and increasing in two month increments per year of birth between 1955 and 1960, where it reaches age 67.
12
At a 3 percent real interest rate, and for many taking into account the effect of postponing own benefits on
benefits paid to their spouse, given current life tables this adjustment is better than actuarially fair (Gordon and
Blinder, 1980; Feldstein and Samwick, 1992).

15

and no ability to borrow at the lower rate said to obtain in the market will discount future benefit
adjustments more heavily than the market rate suggests.13
Heterogeneity in time preference rates may help to explain the prevalence of benefit
claiming at the early entitlement age, a phenomenon that researchers have had difficulty
explaining (Coile et al., 2002).14 Although policy analysts are well aware of the relation of the
earnings test to the timing of benefit claiming (Gruber and Orzag, 1999), empirical studies of the
role of the earnings test have not focused on its implications for the timing of benefit claiming.
Rather, much of the discussion of the earnings test has focused on the labor market behavior of
those who are collecting benefits. In particular, it has long been recognized that many people
who are collecting Social Security benefits, but who work part-time, stop working when their
earnings just reach the annual exempt amount (Gordon and Blinder, 1980; Burtless and Moffitt,
1984).
Abolishing the earnings test is simulated by allowing immediate benefit claiming
between the early and full retirement age without reducing benefits in accordance with a person’s
earnings. For those who have a high discount rate, there will be an interaction between the
earnings test, benefit claiming and retirement. Because benefits can be claimed immediately, the
opportunity cost of continued work is reduced. Before the abolition of the earnings test, the
current benefit is lost, and the increase in future benefits is inadequate to compensate, so the
individual with a high discount rate may choose to retire. After the earnings test is abolished, the
same individual will be able to continue at work without having to forego the benefit payment,
13

Studies of the effects of abolishing the earnings test rely either on changes in the earnings test kink point
(Friedberg, 2000), or on the observed change in employment patterns between workers affected by the abolition of
the earnings test and those who are not. Disney and Smith (2002) examine the effects of the abolition of the
earnings test in Britain. Song (2002), Song and Manchester (2006) and Tran (2002) examine the effects of
abolishing the earnings test for those over the normal retirement age in the U.S.
14
Friedberg (2000) produces a reduced form analysis of the retirement earnings test. Her analysis falls silent on the
question of benefit acceptance and the wide distributions of time preferences that characterize the population.

16

and so may choose to stay at work. The resulting changes in full-time and part-time work among
other things depend on the distributions of time and leisure preference, as well as the opportunity
set, all of which are estimated by the model.
III B. Descriptive data on the earnings test and benefit claiming.

Table 5 shows that data from the 1992-2004 waves of the Health and Retirement Study
(HRS) duplicate the findings from earlier studies regarding the bunching of work effort around
the earnings test limit. For example, consider those who are partially retired. As seen in the
middle panel, grouping partially retired respondents by their earning bracket, and using brackets
defined in ten percentage point intervals, the brackets from 50 percent to 100 percent of the
earnings test amount each contains roughtly 7 percent to 9 percent of the 62 to 69 year olds in the
survey. Each bracket from 110 percent to 150 percent of the earnings test amount contains 1
percent to 3 percent of the population.
In the year 2000 the earnings test was abolished for those over age 65, and it should be
possible to see if this had any effect on work. Table 6 presents data for full-time work by HRS
respondents in the survey years 1996, 1998, 2000, and 2002. Since 2000 was the year the
earnings test was abolished, and there was some confusion in that year, we can compare 2002,
after the test was abolished, with 1998, before the test was abolished. The next to the last
column calculates the difference in the percentages between 2002 and 1998. For instance, 32.7%
of 62 year olds were working in 2002, compared to 29.4% in 1998, for an increase of 3.3
percentage points. For 65-67 year olds, for whom the test was abolished, the increase in fulltime work was 3.1 percentage points, while for 62-64 year olds, for whom the test remained in
effect, the increase in full-time work was 2.8 percentage points. By this metric, it appears that
abolishing the test for those over 65 did not have much of an effect, since they behaved very

17

similarly to those under 65, for whom the test was not abolished.
However, this approach ignores the fact that there were many fewer individuals working
at ages 65-67, so the percentage point changes come from a much smaller base in that age range.
The final column of Table 6 presents the ratio of the 2002 full-time workers to the 1998 full-time
workers. For 62-64 year olds, the rate of full-time work increased by about 11 percent, while for
65-67 year olds it increased by about 22 percent. By this measure, abolishing the earnings test
had a non-trivial effect, since the increase in full-time work was greater for those for whom the
test was eliminated than for those for whom it remained in effect.
IIIC. Simulations of the effects of abolishing the retirement earnings test between 62 and
full retirement age.

In this section we use the model, including the modification in which people are free to
choose when to claim their benefits, to simulate the effects of abolishing the earnings test. This
affects all respondents before age 65 and, for a substantial fraction of the sample, respondents
who had already reached age 65 before the year 2000. Outcomes simulated include the effects of
the earnings test on full and partial retirement and benefit claiming.
To briefly summarize our overall findings, from age 62 through the full retirement age,
the remaining earnings test reduces the share of married men who work full-time by about four
percentage points, which entails a reduction of about ten percent in the number of married men
of that age at full-time work. In terms of the cash flow of the system, abolishing the earnings test
would have an adverse effect, at least initially. If the earnings test were abolished between the
early and full retirement ages, the share of married men claiming Social Security benefits would
increase by about 10 percentage points, and the average benefit payments would increase by
about $1,800 per recipient. The initial increase in benefit payments would eventually be

18

reversed, over a time span of decades, because the annual benefit amounts would eventually be
reduced by more than an actuarially fair amount due to the earlier collection of benefits.
Our model also allows us to compare the effects of abolishing the earnings test with a
policy that has a more favorable effect on the cash flow of the system. Instead of increasing the
employment of older persons by abolishing the earnings test, their employment can be increased
(by an even greater amount) by raising the early entitlement age under Social Security. A major
difference on the funding side is that abolishing the earning test results in an earlier flow of
benefit payments from Social Security, worsening the cash-flow problems of the system, while
increasing the early entitlement age delays the flow of benefit payments from the system,
improving its liquidity.
Implications for retirement outcomes.

Table 7 reports the differences in retirement outcomes between a simulation in which the
earnings test is eliminated and the baseline results. There are two notable effects on retirement
from abolishing the earnings test. As seen in the next to last column, from ages 62 to 65, the
percentage retired from full-time work is reduced by about four percentage points per year. With
less than half the labor force still at full-time work, this entails an increase of about ten percent in
full-time work by that population.
Some of those who remain at full-time work came from the ranks of the partially retired.
As a result, there is a much smaller effect on the fraction of the labor force that is completely
retired, ranging between a 1 and 2 percentage point decrease.
Notice the effect on the retirement spike at age 62 from abolishing the earnings test. The
earnings test creates a link between the reward to work from continuing at full-time employment
and the desire to claim Social Security benefits at age 62 for those with a high discount rate or

19

low actuarial reward to postponed benefit receipt. This link encourages 3.8 percent of the
population to retire at age 62 who would not otherwise retire if that link were not there.
Therefore abolishing the earnings test would reduce the spike in retirements at age 62 by about
3.8 percentage points.
One other finding should be noted. In these simulations, abolishing the earnings test
between early and full retirement age increases by 2 to 3 percentage points the fraction at fulltime work throughout the age range from 66 to 69. There are two reasons for this finding. First,
a number of those in the sample were born too soon to benefit from the abolition of the earnings
test for those over the age of 65 in 2000. Second, others in the sample who were born in later
years are facing an age 66 age of entitlement for full benefits.
Implications for the percent collecting Social Security benefits by age and the flow of Social
Security benefits and taxes.

Table 8 projects the likely effect of abolishing the retirement earnings test on benefit
claiming. The increase in claiming by the population ages 62 to 64, seen in the last column of
Table 8, is ten to thirteen percent of the sample. By far the bulk of the increase in benefit
payments are projected to come from the ranks of those holding full-time jobs, with 20 to 40
percent of persons remaining at full-time work claiming benefits at each year of age between 62
and 64 should the earnings test be abolished, with claiming increased through the age of 69.
Table 9 details the changes in Social Security taxes paid and benefits received between
simulations with and without the earnings test. Both taxes and benefits are weighted by the
probability the individual survives to pay or collect them. The changes in Social Security taxes
paid and benefits received are dependent both on changes in claiming behavior and on changes
in employment induced by the removal of the earnings test. For those between the ages of 62
and 66, benefits are increased substantially after the abolition of the earnings test, ranging from

20

$1,000 to $2,300 in additional benefits at each year of age. To attain actuarial balance, from age
70 onward, benefits are substantially reduced. Thus the abolition of the earnings test accelerates
benefit payments by the Social Security Administration forward, and although reclaimed from a
generation within the span of its lifetime, these payments are not reclaimed for the system for
many years. That is, because the system is actuarially fair or more than actuarially fair, there is
no loss to the system in present value terms from abolishing the earnings test, and perhaps even a
small gain over the individual’s lifetime. However, by the time the accelerated payments made
to the first generation are recaptured, younger cohorts will be enjoying accelerated payments.
Thus the system will take a hit to its liquidity on a one time basis that in a simple steady state
would perhaps never be offset.
III D. Abolish the retirement earnings test between early and normal ages or raise the
early entitlement age to 64?

In an earlier paper we examined the effects of increasing the early entitlement age for
Social Security benefits from 62 to 64 (Gustman and Steinmeier, 2005a). This is a policy that
we expect to have similar effects on retirement as eliminating the earnings test between early and
full retirement age. But we also expect raising the early entitlement age to have a more favorable
effect on the liquidity of Social Security finances.15
Implications for retirement outcomes.

Column 3 of Table 10 indicates that increasing the early entitlement age to 64, leaving
the earning test in place, would reduce the ranks of those retired from full-time work by over 7
15

Gruber and Orzag (1999) suggest that eliminating the earnings test will have unfavorable effects on the
distribution of benefits because those who claim their benefits early are left with lower benefits in later years, and
those with lower lifetime earnings are more likely to claim their benefits early. Indeed, one consideration that
mitigated against eliminating the earnings test between early and full retirement age by the Clinton Administration
in 2000 was the specter of poor widows whose low benefits reflected the fact that their husband’s elected to receive
benefits early. Gruber and Orzag provide relevant descriptive numbers. They also note that the earnings test may
favor high income individuals if their life expectancy is longer than those who are entitled to lower benefits. In the
latter case, abolishing the earnings test may have a progressive impact on the distribution of benefits paid over the
lifetime.

21

percentage points at ages 62 and 63. In contrast, Table 7 suggested that eliminating the earnings
test would reduce the ranks of the retired by about 4 percentage points at each year of age from
62 to 66, and by a smaller amount at older ages. Counting the labor market effects after age 66,
eliminating the earnings test appears to have a more powerful effect on the percentage at fulltime work, primarily due to the fact that the earnings test still affected many in the HRS sample
who turned 65 before the year 2000. On the other hand, raising the early entitlement age appears
to have a larger effect on the rolls of those who are completely retired.
These differences can be readily seen in Table 11. Entries in this table are the differences
in retirement outcomes between a regime with an early entitlement age of 64 vs. a regime with
no earnings test. For instance, at age 65 eliminating the earnings test would decrease the
percentage retired from full-time work (increase full-time work) by 4.2 percentage points, as
indicated in the third column of Table 7. At the same age, changing the early entitlement age
would decrease the percentage retired from full-time work (increase full-time work) by 0.4
percentage points, as indicated in the third column of Table 10. The difference between these
two scenarios is 3.8 percentage points, as indicated in the third column of Table 11. Overall, the
percent retired from full-time work will be higher with an age 64 early entitlement age than
under a regime where the earnings test is abolished. Compared to a regime with no earnings test,
a regime with age 64 early entitlement would have 3.4 and 3.6 percentage points fewer people
retired at ages 62 and 63, an additional 3.7 and 3.8 percentage points retired at 64 and 65, and
would exhibit a 2.4 to 3.2 percentage point increase in the percentage retired from full-time work
at each year of age from 66 to 69.
Implications for benefit claiming.

Table 12 shows the strong and obvious effect on benefit claiming of raising the early
entitlement age to 64. Table 13 shows the difference in benefit claiming between two regimes,
22

the first where the early entitlement age is increased to age 64, and the second where the earnings
test is abolished. This table is the difference between the entries in Table 12 and the
corresponding entries in Table 8, with negative numbers indicating that benefit claiming is
higher if the earnings test is eliminated than if the early entitlement age is increased. From the
last column in Tables 12 and 13, we see that raising the early entitlement age to 64 would reduce
the overall claiming by more than 40 percentage points at ages 62 and 63, and by more than 50
percentage points as compared to a scenario where the earnings test is eliminated. In Table 13,
the numbers continue to be negative after age 64, largely because the elimination of the earnings
test increases benefit claiming by those who remain at full-time work.
Implications for the flow of taxes and benefits.

In Table 14, we see the effect of increasing the age of early entitlement on the flow of
taxes and benefits. The impact on the flow of taxes is relatively minor. However, postponing
the early entitlement age to 64 would result in a reduction in benefit payouts. It would take
fifteen or twenty years before the missed benefits are compensated for by higher subsequent
benefit payments, thus working in the direction of reducing, at least for a time, the cash flow
problems of the system.
IV. Effects of changing minimum hours constraints.

A minimum hours constraint is a limitation imposed by the firm requiring a minimum
number of hours of work for a specified job. It has been known for some time that most jobs do
not permit a person to retire gradually by reducing hours of work.16 The choice facing most
workers on their long term jobs is to work full-time or not at all. Theory tells us that in the
absence of any constraints (minimum hours constraints or a fixed cost of work), most people
16

Gustman and Steinmeier (1983, 1984a) document the existence of minimum hours constraints facing retirement
age workers. Even and Macpherson (2004) use HRS data to discuss the relation between coverage by pension plans
of different types and minimum hours constraints.

23

would prefer to reduce their time at work gradually as they age. Moreover, given the higher
wage paid on jobs held for a long time, they would prefer to partially retire on their long term
jobs. As a result of the minimum hours constraints imposed by their employers, however, they
are not free to do so.17 Consequently, the predominant retirement path is from full-time work to
complete retirement, with a significant fraction, but still a minority, passing through partial
retirement (Gustman and Steinmeier, 1984b, 2000).18 Should tighter labor markets encourage
firms to relax their minimum hours constraints, the frequency of partial retirement will increase,
while both full retirement and full-time work will become less common.
To simulate the effects of removing minimum hours constraints, all individuals are
assumed to be able to switch to partial retirement in their full-time job with no change in wage
rate, so they are paid half the earnings for half the work. This affects all respondents except
those in full-time jobs which began prior to age 50 and which would allow half-time work in
those jobs. Implicitly, this assumes that respondents could collect their full pensions at the age
they change from full-time work to part-time work. Thus the simulation assumes the policy
change deals with two of the major issues limiting part-time work: hours constraints are relaxed
and in addition, the current law prohibiting paying a pension to a person who continues to work
for the firm is eliminated.19

17

Gustman and Steinemeier (1983) and Hurd (1996) list a number of reasons why firms choose to adopt minimum
hours constraints, including fixed costs of employment, team production and other factors.

18

Gustman and Steinmeier (1986) demonstrate the importance of including minimum hours constraints in structural
retirement models. When these constraints are the reason most workers proceed directly from full-time work to
complete retirement, but a model assumes workers are free to work part-time on their main job but choose not to, the
resulting estimates will suggest that work and leisure are very close substitutes. Thus the model will generate corner
solutions, with most individuals moving immediately from the corner with full-time work to the corner with full
retirement. Once it is recognized that minimum hours constraints prohibit most older workers from phasing
smoothly into retirement, preference estimates will show that in the absence of these constraints, most people would
prefer to reduce their time at work smoothly as they phase into retirement, but their firms’ policies prevent them
from doing so.
19
The simulations also eliminate the disincentive to partial retirement by those with DB plans who might find their
benefits reduced when part-time wages earned at the end of the life cycle are counted when computing the average

24

A comparison of panel 2 with panel 1 of Table 15 clearly indicates that if demand side
changes persuaded firms to allow partial retirement at the same hourly wage as earned on the
long term job, this would generate a major change in retirement outcomes. The percent of the
labor force that passed through partial retirement would increase from about three tenths to about
two thirds. To make the differences easier to follow, the first panel of Table 16 reports the
difference in retirement outcomes between a simulation where there are no constraints on partial
retirement and a simulation with the current restrictions on partial retirement. From the first row,
when partial retirement is unconstrained, the fraction completely retired declines by 4.7 to 14.1
percentage points at each year of age between 58 and 65. For ages 67 and 69, the number who
are completely retired falls by 15.3 and 13.8 percentage points respectively. From row three, the
percent who are not retired at all also declines. The percentage not retired falls at each age, from
a reduction of 7.5 percentage points at age 58 to a reduction of 8 percentage points at age 65.
The reductions in full-time work and in complete retirement flow into the ranks of the partially
retired.
Comparing the change in the percent completely retired from full-time work with the
change in the percent partially retired, the effect on total earnings is roughly a wash, or perhaps
suggests a slight decline. The increase in partial retirement is roughly twice the reduction in fulltime work. Since the simulation suggests twice as many hours worked in a full-time job as when
partially retired, this change suggests that work lost through acceleration of retiring from fulltime work is roughly balanced by the fact that twice as many people now work part-time. On
wage measure used in a final average salary benefit formula. When we abolish the hours constraint and let
individuals draw on pensions when they partially retire, the pensions are calculated as though they quit at that point.
Earnings and service during the period of partial retirement are not included in the pension calculation. For further
discussions of the ERISA rule prohibiting a person from working part-time while collecting a pension benefit from a
long term employer, see Fields and Hutchens (2002), Even and Macpherson (2004), and Penner, Perun and Steurle
(2002).

25

balance, roughly half the increase in partial retirement comes from full-time work, and half
comes from full retirement, but the amount coming from full retirement increases with age, while
the amount coming from the ranks of the not retired is greatest in the age range from 58 to 65.
For those 65 to 69, the opportunity to work part-time increases the number partially
retired by about 20 percentage points. It reduces the number working full-time by 8, 5.9 and 3.1
percentage points at ages 65, 67 and 69 respectively. Consequently, for those 65 and above, the
increase in part-time workers is much greater than twice the decline in full-time workers,
suggesting a 3 to 5 percentage point increase in full-time work equivalents from ages 65 to 69.
In this age range, partial retirement becomes three or four times more common than full-time
work, as compared to being roughly equally common in the current environment.
V. How do provisions of personal accounts affect retirement?

To simulate behavioral responses to personal accounts, we use current law projections,
meaning that the population is assumed to have been covered over their full lifetimes by the final
set of Social Security rules now on the books. These rules include a normal retirement age of 67,
a delayed retirement credit of 8 percent, and a payroll tax contribution of 10.6% of wages.
The policies are simulated by altering the budget constraint described above to build a
baseline partial, voluntary personal account system, and then to simulate the effects of changing
various features of the system. The incentives created by each alternative proposal generate
behavioral responses. Given the resulting earnings histories and the choice to participate in a
personal account, there is a string of tax contributions to the conventional system and to the
personal accounts. The course of the conventional benefits depends both on the offset rule
adopted for reducing conventional benefits when a person chooses to participate in a personal
account, and on claiming behavior.

26

Alternative policies will create different substitution and wealth effects. Under the
current system, benefit recomputation means that a person who has been working 35 years
enjoys a gain in benefits from another year of work that depends on the relation of earnings in
the marginal year to the lowest indexed earnings used in computing Average Indexed Monthly
Earnings among all previous years of work. After discounting, the marginal value of any
additional future benefits less the value of foregone benefits will be added to the wage to
determine the value of total compensation from continued work. If there are partial personal
accounts, and if the interest rate earned on assets in the personal account is high enough, the
substitution effect from a personal account may encourage a further delay in retirement. As long
as benefits are higher with the personal account than without it, there also will be a wealth effect;
but that will encourage earlier retirement.
A major caveat pertains to the absence of adjustments for risk. The additional benefits
resulting from the higher return on personal accounts are not risk adjusted. We use a long run
historical return for a mixed stock and bond portfolio that is meant to be reasonably conservative.
Thus we assume that 45 percent of the portfolio is invested in treasury notes. However, we do
not assume here that participants treat the equity premium, any additional returns to stocks over
bonds, as due solely to risk. As a first approach to dealing with risk, we vary the discount rate.
In particular, we use a lower interest rate than 4.31 percent real. Thus one way to interpret these
results is as a sensitivity analysis to risk adjustment of the returns to the portfolio. Another is as
a sensitivity analysis to the assumed level of returns in the absence of risk adjustment. It is
important to note that because we ignore the risk of further declines in Social Security benefits,
there is some balance in our assumptions. That is, although there is no risk adjustment in the
returns to the personal accounts, there also is no risk adjustment to Social Security benefits under

27

to reflect perceived political risk. Only one type of risk is explicitly taken into account.
Respondents do value the insurance provided by the annuity.
VA. Structure of baseline personal accounts

We begin by specifying a baseline personal account, and then explore the effects of
changing some of its key characteristics. The baseline personal accounts are presumed to work
the following way. At the time the individual registers for benefits, the Primary Insurance
Amount (PIA) is reduced to take into account the contributions to the personal accounts.20 The
resulting amount is the modified PIA. The personal account is divided into two parts. One part
is required to be annuitized into a real annuity at the real interest rate and brings the total of the
PIA plus the required annuity up to a minimal level. The other part is allowed either to be taken
as a lump sum or annuitized, as the individual prefers. Further details of the process are
contained in the following paragraphs.
The baseline accounts are financed with a 4 percentage point payroll tax rate taken from
current payroll taxes. It is assumed that the accounts are voluntary. Accordingly, total utility is
calculated both with and without the personal accounts, and the individual is presumed to choose
whichever yields the most utility. This is an either / or decision; either the individual eschews
personal accounts completely or invests in them to the permissible amount. We do not examine
the case where the contribution decisions can differ year to year. Nor do we examine cases
where the wife’s participation decision is different from the husband; if the husband chooses
personal accounts, the wife does as well.
20

We assume that benefits in the traditional account are reduced via a prorata method. The pro-rata
method uses two hypothetical accounts. The first accumulates cumulatively the contributions to the private accounts
at the offset rate of 2.5 percent real, which is the interest rate specified in the President’s Commission’s model 3.
The second accumulates cumulatively the contributions to the traditional system, also at 2.5 percent real. Benefits
are reduced by the percentage of the sum of the cumulative accounts that is due to the contributions to the private
accounts. In the current law projection case, with partial accounts this is 4.0 / 10.6 = 37.7%, which is the amount by
which traditional benefits are reduced. This applies to the individual’s own benefits and the spouse’s spouse and
survivor benefits which are due to the individual’s earnings.

28

In the baseline package, there is a minimum required annuity. The sum of the traditional
benefit (PIA) plus required annuities from the personal accounts for the two spouses must reach
the family poverty level. After that the beneficiary is free to take the payment as a lump sum,
beginning at age 62.21 At the time of the individual’s application, the sum of the individual’s PIA
plus the spouse’s then current PIA is subtracted from the family poverty level. The difference is
what the two required annuities must cover. The required annuity for the individual is the total
required annuity times the ratio of the individual’s PIA to the sum of the two PIA’s.
There are other assumptions underlying the specification of the basic package of personal
accounts. The earnings test is assumed to apply proportionately to the two benefits. That is, the
test is applied to the sum of the traditional benefits plus the required annuities to calculate the
percent of benefits that are lost.22
Any sum accumulated in the personal accounts above the required level of annuitization
is presumed to be available as a lump sum payment at age 62.23

21

We also consider the effects of requiring the sum of the adjusted traditional PIA plus the required
annuities to reach the single person poverty level; or the sum of the adjusted traditional PIA plus the required
annuities to reach the unadjusted traditional PIA level (which is the amount that would be calculated from the
current formula). The larger the required annuity, the less influential lump sum benefits are on retirement and
retirement benefits.
22
It is difficult to conceive of a system that would apply the earnings test to the lump sums, since the lump
sums are almost by definition amounts that are above the amounts required to achieve the desired level of annual
benefits. Similarly, the fate of any new contributions to the personal accounts depends on the status of the accounts.
If the required annuities do not exhaust the accounts, then the contributions would be available, plus
interest, in the next year. If, however, the accounts are insufficient to bring the total annuities up to the required
levels, then any new contributions would go to purchase additional annuities to narrow the shortfall. For instance,
suppose that traditional benefits are $8,000 and the required annuities from the personal accounts are $4000. If the
earnings test limit is $6,000 with a $1 reduction for every $2 in earnings above that amount, and if earnings are
$20,000, then $7,000 [ = 0.5 * (20,000 – 6,000)] in benefits are lost. Two thirds of this ($4,667) are lost from the
traditional benefits and one third ($2,333) is lost from the required annuities from the personal accounts, since the
unreduced traditional benefits are two-thirds [ = 8,000 / (8,000 + 4,000)] of total unreduced benefits. The lost
traditional benefits increase later traditional benefits in the usual fashion. For the benefits that are lost from the
required annuity, the lost benefits are invested at the real rate of return, and the following year the amount is
annuitized and added to the previous required annuity.
23

We also analyzed whether the required and optional annuities purchased from the personal accounts are
to be single life or joint and two-thirds annuities. The presumption is that the eventual regulations would probably
require joint annuities, but this investigates whether there is any substantial change in behavior as a result. When

29

VB. Participation in Personal Accounts

Each simulation is done twice, one in which personal accounts are available and one in
which they are not. The one with the highest lifetime total utility is presumed to be chosen.
Since there is no uncertainty regarding the returns, almost all of the middle and high income
households choose personal accounts, and most of the low income households do as well,
especially those who retire at younger ages.
Participation in these personal accounts is very high. This is not a behavioral outcome,
but is the result of construction of the model. We have assumed away uncertainty in the returns
to the account. When we tabulate the proportion choosing personal accounts, since there is no
stock market investment risk in this model, most people choose to participate. Only about 2
percent of all husbands from two-earner households choose not to participate, and among the
bottom third of earners, 5 percent choose not to participate. When the individual is allowed to
fully withdraw benefits in the form of a lump sum, participation in personal accounts rises to
above 99 percent, with 98 percent of the low earners choosing to participate.
VC. Personal accounts and retirement outcomes

Table 17 presents retirement outcomes at age 62 under alternative specifications of
systems of personal accounts. The first three columns report the cumulative levels of the
fractions of married men who are not retired, partially retired and fully retired. The last column
reports the percent retiring from full-time work at age 62.
For purposes of comparison, line 1 of Table 17, and subsequent tables, report retirement
outcomes assuming provisions of current law were fully implemented for the entire work lives of

single annuities are permitted, there is little change in retirement. But total benefits are higher under single
annuities. A disproportionate amount of these benefits are taken at age 62, so that benefits received in one’s late
70’s or 80’s are lower than in the basic package, despite the fact that total benefits are higher.

30

the sample of married HRS respondents. By age 62, almost 44 percent of the population of
married men is projected to be fully retired, with almost 42 percent reporting themselves as not
retired. At age 62, column 4 indicates that 15.6 percent of married men are retiring from fulltime work.
Line 2 indicates retirement under the baseline reform package of personal accounts. As
seen by comparing lines 1 and 2 of Table 17, the base package of personal accounts substantially
increases retirements by age 62, raising the percent fully retired from 43.8 percent to 57.6
percent, while reducing the fraction not retired by 9.1 percentage points, and reducing the
fraction partially retired by 4.7 percentage points.24
There are a number of major forces operating to influence retirement under the baseline
system of personal accounts. First, there are the conventional substitution and income effects.
Given the higher return to investment, the system of personal accounts raises total benefits in
retirement, creating an income effect encouraging earlier retirement. On the other hand, under a
system of personal accounts, there is a greater reward to continued work for higher income
people who otherwise would be in the 15 percent PIA bracket.
Row 3 of Table 17 reports retirement outcomes under a system where the conventional
Social Security payroll tax may be entirely converted to a personal account. Comparing lines 2
and 3 thus allows comparison of a system with partial conversion to personal accounts, that is a

24

There is a secondary spike at age 70, but that is an artifact of the simulations, which assume that all
individuals retired at that age.
Although the returns on personal accounts can average out over time, there is a problem when the accounts
are annuitized. If the annuities are variable annuities, similar to the annuities TIAA-CREF offers, the value of the
benefits will fluctuate year to year, sometimes by substantial amounts, and this runs counter to having a reliable
income stream during retirement. If the annuities are fixed in real terms, then it may make a great deal of difference
when the annuitization takes place. An individual who annuitized in 2000, for instance, would have twice the
annuity as another individual with similar lifetime earnings and contributions who annuitized in 2003. The unequal
treatment of roughly equal individuals would make the differences involved in the “notch generation” debate small
by comparison, and that debate generated a fair amount of heat. This annuitization problem may be substantial.

31

system based on 4 percentage points of a payroll tax, with a system where the full 10.6 percent
payroll tax may be converted to a personal account. While the fraction fully retired at age 62 is
57.6% under a system where the account may include up to 4 percentage points of the payroll
tax, it is 63.2% where the full payroll tax may be included in the account. The fraction not retired
would decline from 32.8% under a partial system of personal accounts, to 27.9% if the full
payroll tax could be included in the personal account, and there would be a .7% difference in the
fraction partially retired.
VD. The choice between lump sum payments and annuitized benefits

Defined contribution pension plans often offer the option of a lump sum. Indeed, DC
plans rarely offer the option of annuitizing benefits. In the case of personal accounts, the
presumption is that even though the system is switching from a defined benefit to a defined
contribution approach, the defined contribution plan will come with an annuity.
Retirement may be affected by whether benefits are offered only as an annuity as under
the conventional Social Security program, or whether benefits may be taken as a lump sum.
Those with high time preference rates, especially those in the population with a time preference
rate well above the interest rate, who are more likely to accrue little saving, are more likely to
value a lump sum benefit over an annuity that is of equal present value. For these people,
allowing lump sum payouts may create a stronger incentive to retire early. When a lump sum is
claimed by those with little other saving, it is likely to be consumed over the next few years,
driving down the marginal utility of income from work. As a result, many of those with a high
rate of time preference will leave work at age 62.
Lines 4 and 5 of Table 17 clarify the effects on retirement of allowing lump sum benefits.
The simulation in line 4 pertains to a system requiring that all benefits from personal accounts be

32

fully annuitized. The higher return to personal accounts creates a wealth effect that exceeds the
substitution effect, and thus encourages earlier retirement. The underlying interest rate is well
below the time preference rates estimated above for an important fraction of the population, so
these individuals will retire early just as they did when facing the conventional benefit structure.
However, they do not receive a lump sum benefit, and thus place a higher value on work around
age 62 than they would if a lump sum benefit were available. Requiring complete annuitization
of benefits from the personal account would reduce the fraction fully retired at age 62 down to
48.3 percent.
Remember that the availability of lump sum benefits at age 62 is not conditioned on
whether a person is working. The earnings test applies only to benefits from the conventional
system plus benefits from the annuities paid out of the personal account. The present simulations
do not provide a mechanism for clawing back any lump sum payments at age 62 should the
individual continue working in a job offering long term employment.
Comparing rows 1, 2 and 4 helps us to decompose the decrease in retirement when
transitioning from the current system to the baseline system of partial personal accounts. This
comparison suggests that 9.3 percentage points of the increase in the fraction fully retired
(column 3, row 2 minus row 4) results from the depressing effect of the lump sum payment at
age 62 on the marginal utility of work, and 4.5 percentage points of the increase in retirements
(row 4 minus row 1) is due to the income effect from receiving higher retirement benefits, net of
substitution effect resulting from a higher reward to work at later ages. Analogously, the fraction
retiring at age 62 is 18.9 percent when full annuitization is required, up from 15.6 percent under
the current system, but would rise to 21.6 percent under the basic, voluntary partial personal
account plan. There is a further effect from introducing personal accounts. Specifically, a 4.7

33

percentage point reduction in the fraction partially retired appears to be almost entirely due to the
effects of making lump sum payments available at age 62, with their depressing effects on the
marginal utility of consumption for those with high discount rates, rather than to the wealth
effect of the higher returns to personal accounts. When the package of personal accounts is
introduced, partial retirement falls from 14.3 percent to 9.6 percent. Accordingly, introducing
personal accounts reduces work effort by reducing both full-time work and partial retirement.25
However, 15 percent of the population chooses partial retirement when personal accounts are
introduced, but lump sum benefits are not available, so the income effect from personal accounts
explains almost none of the decline in partial retirement.
Column 4 of Table 17 shows that the fraction leaving full-time work increases from 15.6
percent under the current system to 21.6 percent under the basic voluntary system. Alternatively,
as seen in Row 5 of Table 17, if complete lump sum withdrawals were permitted, that is, even
those with below poverty incomes were not forced to annuitize a minimum benefit, full
retirement would rise to 60.3 percent, with only 31.2 percent not retired at age 62.
We also conducted a number of other simulations. One result is that the choice of offset
method used to reduce traditional benefits has little effect on retirement outcomes. 26 Further

25

The increase in the lifetime value of personal account benefits when the personal account must be fully
annuitized is a reflection of the effect of additional work on earnings, and thus on benefits.
26
Using an alternative offset method similar to that used by the President’s Commission did not have major
effects on the findings. In simulations with offsets, it was assumed that the personal accounts were mandatory.
With certain returns in the personal accounts that were higher than the offset interest rate, the model would show
that everyone would prefer the personal accounts were they voluntary. Here the contributions to the personal
accounts are cumulated at the offset rate of 2.5 percent real. The resulting amount is then discounted to the normal
retirement age at 2.5 percent real and transformed into a single annuity at the same interest rate. This puts the offset
computations on a comparable basis with the PIA, which is the traditional benefit available at normal retirement.
Traditional benefits are then reduced by the ratio of this annuity to the PIA. The reduction applies to the
individual’s own benefit only, and not to any spouse or survivor benefits which depend on the individual’s earnings
record, since the offset account is annuitized with a single life annuity. A joint annuity would be very difficult to
compute, since the spouse benefits depend on the relation of half of the individual’s PIA to the spouse’s PIA, and
the applicable spouse’s PIA may well not have been determined at the time the individual applies for benefits. For
further discussion of alternative offset methods, see Gustman and Steinmeier (2005c). There we show that the offset
method adopted by the President’s Commission essentially taxes away the principal created in the private account

34

simulations show the larger the required annuitization, and thus the smaller the lump sum
benefits that can be claimed, the lower the retirement rate as a result of adopting personal
accounts.
To provide symmetric results for saving behavior, Table 18 shows the total value of nonpension, non-Social Security wealth that is accumulated under alternative plans. Components of
wealth measured by the HRS include retirement assets such as IRAs, real estate, business and
financial assets, and other forms of wealth (see Gustman and Steinmeier, 1999 for a detailed
analysis). Comparing rows 1 to 3 at various ages, total wealth is lower where personal accounts
are more valuable, suggesting there is some substitution between personal accounts and these
other forms of wealth.
As seen in Table 19, simulations for the basic package of personal accounts suggests that
46.2 percent will choose a lump sum payment, 48.5 percent will choose a voluntary annuity, and
5.4 percent will not have sufficient annuitized benefits to allow them to take a lump sum. That
is, they will not have an annuity equal to the family poverty level. The earlier one retires the
greater the proportion choosing to accept a lump sum payment from their personal accounts
rather than annuitizing funds available for a voluntary annuity. For example, as seen in Table
19, for the base package of personal accounts, almost two thirds of those retiring in their early
fifties choose to take a lump sum settlement when they reach age 62, while 40 to 47 percent of
those retiring between 58 and 62 choose a lump sum settlement. Seventy percent of those
retiring at exactly 62 choose a lump sum settlement. Among those retiring from age 63 on, only
about a fifth will choose a lump sum settlement over annuitized benefits.

from payroll tax deposits made in the name of the covered individual. That reduces the insurance the account would
otherwise provide against unforeseen changes in Social Security benefits that might be adopted in the future.

35

Table 2 in the Appendix shows how the proportion choosing lump sum vs. voluntary
annuities out of the discretionary funds in the personal accounts varies among the different plans.
Discretionary funds are those in excess of any annuity that is required to ensure that retirement
income meets the minimum level specified in the plan. For most variations of the personal
account plans, about half of participants choose to take their benefits from the personal account
as a lump sum. We will see below that the decision to accept a lump sum benefit will affect the
distribution of retirement income at different ages.
VE. Benefits by Age

Despite having only modest effects on retirement, the features of these alternative
systems have major effects on retirement incomes of the covered populations. Where
annuitization is not mandatory, as noted in Table 19, many will choose to take lump sum
payments at age 62. Thus we see in Table 20A in those programs where lump sum payments are
permitted, i.e., in rows 2, 3 and 5, the average benefit taken at age 62 (in 1992 dollars) is equal in
dollar amount to two to four times the average yearly annuitized benefit paid at age 70.
In contrast, as seen in row 4 of Table 20A, in plans for personal accounts where full
annuitization is required, the average benefit taken at age 62 is much lower than the average
benefit at age 70, as many put off benefit claiming until a later age. Moreover, within those
plans allowing a lump sum payment, the lower the required annuity, and the higher the permitted
lump sum, the smaller the yearly benefit at older ages compared to the benefit at age 62.
One issue is how widows will fare if lump sum benefits are claimed at age 62, either by
the family when both spouses are alive, or by the widow. Table 20B shows that spouses on
average will be just as well off under the baseline system of partial privatization as under the
current program, assuming the 4.31% real return to the personal account portfolio. Scanning

36

down the benefits by program for 85 year olds, widow’s benefits will be higher than under the
current program only if there is complete conversion of the current system to personal accounts,
or if under a plan with partial personal accounts, annuitization is mandatory.
The average benefits by program and by age do not tell the full story. There will be a
distribution of benefits at each age that depends on the distribution of choices made as to whether
to participate in the personal account (most will), and as to whether to take a lump sum benefit,
or to fully annuitize the assets in the personal account.
VF. Taxes and Benefits Under Personal Accounts

Total taxes and benefits over the lifetime are shown in Table 21, where taxes and benefits
are shown in 1992 dollars, adjusted for mortality, but not discounted. Total taxes paid decline by
1.2 percent under the baseline personal account program, compared to the current law
projections for traditional Social Security benefits. In addition to the decline in total taxes paid,
there is a much larger decline in taxes paid into the trust fund as taxes are diverted to personal
accounts. For the baseline personal account program, the maximum decline in taxes paid into
the trust fund due to diversion of taxes from conventional benefits to personal accounts is 37.7
percent (4/10.6).27
Table 21 also shows the decline in lifetime benefits from $328,955 to $199,878, or
almost 40 percent. Thus the decline in benefits and taxes from adoption of personal accounts are
roughly of the same proportion. However, because taxes are reduced years before benefits are
reduced, the movement to personal accounts does present a solvency problem. Given the
assumption of a real return to the personal account portfolio of 4.31 percent per year, and the
heavy pattern of participation in these accounts, the increase in total benefits, i.e. the sum of
benefits from the traditional system and from personal accounts, is substantial, rising from
$328,955 to $410,434.28
VI. Conclusions

27

The actual decline in taxes is slightly less than 37.7 percent since 5 percent of covered workers will
choose not to accept the personal account, and these will mainly come from the ranks of low income workers.
28
This calculation does not take into account any risk premium either for stock market investment, or the
political risk to current Social Security promises.

37

This paper has examined retirement and related responses to a number of policies. We
call these the next generation of policies because the changes they introduce are, on average,
roughly actuarially neutral. They are in contrast to decades of policy changes that removed
disincentives to continued work from unfair actuarial adjustments. Nevertheless, retirement is
affected by these actuarially neutral policies as those with high time preference rates do not find
the promise of additional future rewards to balance the loss in current benefits.
We can summarize our findings with regard to four different types of policy initiatives,
none of which involves a primary manipulation of the actuarial reward to deferred benefit
receipt.
VI A. Abolishing the retirement earnings test.

For persons between the early entitlement and full retirement age, the earnings test is
actuarially fair, or better than fair. Future benefits are increased so that at the interest rate used in
the calculation, they at least compensate for any benefit reductions from the earnings test for
earnings that exceed the annual exempt amount. Consequently, a prediction of life cycle models
with perfectly operating capital markets is that the earnings test should not affect retirement
behavior. Nevertheless, we have found that a number of people have high rates of time
preference, and they do not consider the restoration of benefits on an actuarially fair basis, using
the government’s interest rate, to be an attractive tradeoff.
From age 62 through the full retirement age, the earnings test reduces the share of
married men who work full-time by about four percentage points, which entails a reduction of
about ten percent in the number of married men of that age at full-time work. In terms of the
cash flow of the system, abolishing the earnings test would have an adverse effect, at least
initially. If the earnings test were abolished between the early and full retirement ages, the share

38

of married men claiming Social Security benefits would increase by about 10 percentage points,
and the average benefit payments would increase by about $1,800 per recipient. The initial
increase in benefit payments would eventually be reversed, over a time span of decades, because
the annual benefit amounts would eventually be reduced by more than an actuarially fair amount
due to the earlier collection of benefits.
As an alternative to increasing work effort by abolishing the earnings test, one can
increase the employment of older persons by increasing the early entitlement age under Social
Security. A major difference on the funding side is that abolishing the earning test results in an
earlier flow of benefit payments from Social Security, worsening the cash flow problems of the
system, while increasing the early entitlement age delays the flow of benefit payments from the
system, improving its cash flow.
VI B. Minimum hours constraints

Minimum hours constraints, that is the requirements on many jobs that an individual
work full-time or not at all, are a major firm-side factor affecting the course of retirements.
Should minimum hours constraints be abolished, among the population ages 62 to 69 that has a
long term commitment to the labor market, the percentage completely retired will decline by 10
to 15 percentage points, depending on age. The fraction in this age group working in partial
retirement jobs will increase by roughly twenty percentage points. Were minimum hours
constraints abolished, more than twice as many people would enter partial retirement as would
leave full-time work, so that total full-time equivalent (FTE) employment would increase. But
the change in FTE employment is much smaller than the increase in partial retirement
employment.

39

When firms decide whether to relax minimum hours constraints, they will consider not
just the very modest effect on FTE employment from relaxing these constraints. They will also
consider how minimum hours constraints contribute to productivity and reduce costs. Fixed
costs of employment to the firm, the role of interdependence in production and many other
factors have encouraged firms to adopt minimum hours constraints in the first place. Moreover,
although our simulations have assumed that constraints on partial retirement from current
pension rules are eliminated, health insurance and other benefits made available on a per
employee, rather than per hour basis, increase costs when firms provide a partial retirement
option.
Our findings also suggest that if firms relaxed minimum hours constraints, this would
have conflicting effects on the flow of funds from Social Security. Relaxing minimum hours
constraints would encourage individuals to leave full-time work at younger ages to enter partial
retirement. As a result, they would begin to draw down their benefits at an earlier age,
increasing the flow of funds out of Social Security. However, they would remain in partial
retirement jobs past the point where they currently retire, and during this period they would draw
fewer benefits. The proportion of earnings subject to the earnings test will also be subject to
conflicting forces. The fraction of earnings exempt from the earnings test will increase, but the
fraction of earnings beyond the reaches of the earnings test will decline. Lastly, behavior would
change under proposed reforms that would include personal accounts as part of Social Security.
Should firms relax minimum hours constraints to encourage more partial retirement by older
individuals, demand for early withdrawals from personal accounts would increase. This would
increase the importance of terms and conditions regulating the timing of withdrawals from
personal accounts.

40

VI C. Introducing partial personal accounts.

Particular features of personal accounts will affect retirement behavior, saving, and
participation in personal accounts. These choices in turn will affect the flow of benefits and
taxes, and ultimately the adequacy of benefits.
Among our findings, under a system of partial personal accounts, with higher average
returns on portfolios than under the current formula (unadjusted for risk), total retirement
benefits would increase by about a quarter, while the fraction of 62 year olds at full-time work
would decline by about 22 percent compared to the current system. If the current system were
replaced completely by personal accounts, total retirement benefits would increase by about 75
percent and the fraction at full-time work would decline by about a third.
Retirement responses are relatively modest, but the predicted increase in retirements from
adopting partial personal accounts should nevertheless be of concern to policy makers. Increased
retirements will further reduce the labor supply of older workers beyond the decline caused by
the retirement of the baby boom.
VI. D. Annuities vs. lump sums.

If all benefits from personal accounts could be taken as a lump sum, the fraction not
retired at age 62 would fall by about 5 percentage points compared to a system where there is
mandatory annuitization of benefits. When annuitization is voluntary, there will be substantial
diversion of benefits to age 62. When annuitization is mandatory, benefits received in one’s 70s
and 80s may be increased by 20 percent or more. These findings suggest that the ongoing
transition from annuitized benefits to systems with increased availability of lump sum payouts
will encourage increased retirement. This side effect of transitions to plans offering lump sum

41

payouts will act to undermine the thrust of the first generation of policies designed to encourage
later retirements.
VI E. In summary

As we have emphasized throughout this paper, a key to understanding the effects on
retirement of this next generation of policies is to understand saving and the role of heterogeneity
in time preference. A significant fraction of people in the labor market has a high time
preference rate. These people will not find tradeoffs between foregone present benefits and
increased future benefits at actuarially fair rates to be an attractive bargain. Some policies that
are expected to have a large effect on retirements by introducing actuarially fair benefit
adjustments will have smaller effects than expected. Other policies that are expected to have no
effect on retirement because they involve transitioning from one actuarially fair benefit structure
to another, such as abolishing the retirement earnings test between early and full retirement ages,
nevertheless will affect retirements. In the case of abolishing the retirement earnings test, that
policy will increase labor force activity and accordingly will encourage postponed retirements.
On the other hand, some policy changes, which again appear to be actuarially neutral, such as the
trend to paying out retirement plan benefits as a lump sum instead of an actuarially equivalent
annuity, will have the effect of encouraging earlier rather than later retirements. Models that
jointly explain retirement and saving, and allow for heterogeneity of time preference rates, are
required to understand the direction and size of the effects of these and related policies on
retirement.

42

Table 1
Estimated Results
Symbol
α

Description

Coefficient
Value

Consumption parameter

t-statistic

-0.16

2.60

Parameters in β
β0

Constant

-10.01

246.52

βa

Coefficient of Agea

0.084

4.78

βh

Coefficient of Healthd

4.71

4.54

βc

Coefficient of Cohortb,d (Year of Birth)

0.03

0.28

Parameters in δ
δ0

Constant

-3.75

5.93

δa

Coefficient of Agec

0.56

2.66

σε

Standard Deviation of εd

5.11

6.06

q value

52.11

Number of observations

2231

Several variables are differenced from their approximate means in the sample in order to
facilitate estimation. They are:
a
The actual variable is age - 62.
b
The actual variable is cohort - 1936.
c
The actual variable is age - 65.
d
These coefficients are all relative to the age coefficient, again to facilitate estimation.

43

Table 2: Observed and Projected Retirement Percentages
Observed Retirement Percentages
Projected Retirement Percentages
Percentage Retiring
Percentage Retired
Percentage Retiring
Percentage Retired
From FT
From FT
From FT
From FT
Age
Work Completely
Work Completely Observations
Work Completely
Work Completely
50
4.1
3.3
4.1
3.3
243
4.5
3.1
4.5
3.1
51
0.9
0.0
5.0
3.3
361
1.4
0.9
5.9
4.1
52
2.7
2.2
7.6
5.5
510
1.7
1.2
7.6
5.3
53
2.0
1.1
9.7
6.6
621
1.5
1.1
9.1
6.4
54
2.1
1.3
11.8
7.9
712
1.9
1.4
11.0
7.8
55
3.1
2.7
14.9
10.6
801
3.2
2.4
14.2
10.2
56
1.9
2.1
16.8
12.7
907
3.2
2.4
17.4
12.6
57
4.0
3.2
20.8
15.9
990
3.5
2.8
20.9
15.4
58
3.0
2.1
23.8
18.0
1064
4.2
3.4
25.1
18.8
59
3.6
2.1
27.4
20.1
1132
4.5
3.6
29.6
22.4
60
6.0
6.4
33.4
26.4
1121
6.5
5.3
36.1
27.6
61
6.3
5.5
39.7
31.9
1043
5.4
4.3
41.4
32.0
62
15.1
12.5
54.8
44.4
986
14.8
10.3
56.2
42.2
63
5.6
3.4
60.4
47.9
909
6.2
4.9
62.4
47.1
64
6.7
6.7
67.1
54.6
843
5.9
4.9
68.2
52.0
65
9.1
6.7
76.2
61.3
744
6.0
5.3
74.2
57.3
66
4.5
3.9
80.7
65.2
658
4.5
4.1
78.7
61.3
67
2.8
2.9
83.5
68.1
565
4.2
4.0
82.9
65.3
68
3.1
3.3
86.7
71.4
472
3.7
3.3
86.6
68.6
69
1.7
4.6
88.4
76.0
379
3.0
2.6
89.7
71.3
Total number of observed respondents: 2231

44

Age
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

Table 3: Social Security Benefit Receipt by Age and Retirement Status, 1994 to 2002
Retirees from FullFully Retired
Partially Retired
Full-Time Working
time Work

72.0
83.7
86.1
92.2
92.9
95.4
92.7
94.4

75.1
86.5
87.3
91.9
93.0
94.7
93.6
95.2

60.8
73.1
80.9
93.5
92.6
98.1
89.1
90.8

9.8
17.3
24.6
59.9
74.8
76.6
79.1
81.7

All
47.5
61.7
68.4
84.6
89.4
92.0
91.1
93.1

Observations for 1992 were excluded because unlike the questions in later years, the 1992 question on Social Security benefit receipt
referred to receipt in the previous year.

45

Table 4: Baseline Projections of the Percent of Married Men Collecting Social Security Benefits
(Assuming the Earnings Test Is in Place and People Optimally Apply for Benefits)

Age

Retirees From
Full-Time Work

62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

59.9
65.1
77.1
92.3
94.8
97.2
98.5
99.2

Percent Collecting Social Security
Completely
Partially Retired
Retired
53.5
60.0
74.8
92.0
94.4
97.1
98.4
99.1

76.4
79.0
84.0
93.3
96.1
97.7
98.7
99.2

46

Full-Time Work

All

19.4
22.7
27.8
65.8
79.2
87.0
92.3
94.7

41.3
48.1
60.1
84.7
91.0
95.2
97.4
98.5

Table 5
Distribution of Observations Around Earnings Test Limit
(Percentage of observations reported in cells)
50- 60- 70- 8090100- 110- 120- 130- 140<50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% 110% 120% 130% 140% 150% >150%

All

Age Range
All observations with wage earnings
62-69
62-64
65-69

14.0%
10.5
27.7

3.7
3.1
5.9

3.3
2.6
6.2

3.3
3.1
4.0

3.7
3.0
6.3

4.2
4.0
5.0

3.0
2.8
3.7

2.5
2.5
2.3

2.5
2.5
2.9

1.5
1.7
0.9

2.2
2.4
1.3

56.0
61.8
33.6

100%
100
100

2.5
3.1
1.1

1.7
2.1
0.7

1.3
1.7
0.4

16.6
19.4
9.8

100
100
100

2.6
2.2
4.8

1.5
1.5
1.2

2.7
2.8
2.4

80.2
83.6
61.2

100
100
100

Partially retired workers
62-69
62-64
65-69

32.5
26.9
46.4

8.8 7.8
8.3 6.7
10.1 10.3

7.1
8.3
4.4

7.2
6.7
8.3

7.2
8.3
4.6

4.2
5.2
1.8

2.9
3.2
2.2

Full-time workers
62-69
62-64
65-69

1.9
1.4
4.6

0.6
0.4
1.4

0.7
0.5
1.9

1.1
0.6
3.8

1.7
1.2
4.6

2.5
1.9
5.8

2.3
1.6
6.0

47

2.2
2.2
2.4

Table 6
Percentages Working Full-Time by Age and Year

Age

1996

1998

2000

2002

2002-1998
Difference

2002/1998 Ratio

62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

28.7%
25.3
21.2
14.2
13.7
15.2
10.6
9.4

29.4%
25.8
21.9
16.2
14.0
11.4
10.3
9.3

32.4%
28.1
23.2
18.8
13.7
11.5
10.8
8.8

32.7%
27.5
25.3
20.7
16.4
13.9
12.2
10.3

3.3%
1.7
3.4
4.5
2.4
2.5
1.9
1.0

1.11
1.07
1.16
1.28
1.17
1.22
1.18
1.11

48

Table 7
Differences in Retirement Outcomes Between Simulations After Eliminating the Earnings Test and Simulations with the Earnings
Test

Age
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

Percentage Retiring
From Full-time
Completely
Work
0.0
0.0
-3.8
-0.3
-0.1
0.1
0.8
0.5
0.5
0.4

0.0
0.0
-1.3
0
-0.2
-0.1
0.3
0.0
0.1
0.1

Percentage Retired
From Full-time
Completely
Work
0.0
-0.1
-3.9
-4.2
-4.3
-4.2
-3.5
-2.9
-2.5
-2.2

49

-0.1
-0.1
-1.3
-1.3
-1.6
-1.7
-1.4
-1.3
-1.2
-1.1

Table 8: Differences in Percent Collecting Social Security Benefits Between Simulations After Eliminating the Earnings Test and
Simulations with the Earnings Test

Age
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

Differences in Percent Collecting Social Security
Retirees From
Completely
Partially Retired
Full-Time Work
Full-Time Work
Retired
-2.1
-1.6
-0.5
0.3
0.0
0.2
0.1
0.0

-1.5
-1.0
-0.8
-0.1
-0.1
0.0
0.1
0.1

-1.3
-0.8
1.6
1.9
0.9
0.8
0.6
0.3

50

26.2
30.8
40.2
22.4
12.9
9.1
6.4
4.8

All
10.5
11.0
13.2
6.4
3.1
1.9
1.2
0.8

Table 9
Differences in Social Security Taxes and Benefits Between Simulations After Eliminating the Earnings Test and Simulations with the
Earnings Test
Age

Taxes

Benefits

50
55
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
75
80
85
90
95

0
3
2
3
84
90
101
111
90
79
67
57

4
34
98
161
1487
1813
2322
1722
1020
674
310
-80
-503
-809
-750
-574
-380
-210

51

Table 10
Effect on Retirement of Increasing the Early Entitlement Age to 64

Age
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

Percentage Retiring
From Full-time
Completely
Work
-0.1
-0.1
-0.2
-0.4
-6.5
-0.5
7.3
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.1

-0.1
-0.1
-0.2
-0.4
-4.1
-0.4
5.1
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2

Percentage Retired
From Full-time
Completely
Work
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
-0.8
-7.3
-7.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.3
0.0
0.1
0.2

52

-0.3
-0.3
-0.5
-0.8
-4.8
-5.2
-0.2
-0.1
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7

Table 11
Difference in Retirement Outcomes Between Regime with Age 64 Early Entitlement and Regime with No Earnings Test

Age
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

Percentage Retiring
From Full-time
Completely
Work
-0.1
-0.1
-0.2
-0.4
-2.7
-0.2
7.4
0.1
-0.6
-0.3
-0.3
-0.3

-0.1
-0.1
-0.2
-0.4
-2.8
-0.4
5.3
0.2
-0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1

Percentage Retired
From Full-time
Completely
Work
-0.2
-0.2
-0.4
-0.7
-3.4
-3.6
3.7
3.8
3.2
2.9
2.6
2.4

53

-0.2
-0.2
-0.4
-0.7
-3.5
-3.9
1.4
1.6
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8

Table 12
Effect on Benefit Claiming of Increasing the Early Entitlement Age to 64

Age
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

Differences in Percent Collecting Social Security
Retirees From
Completely
Partially Retired
Full-Time Work
Full-Time Work
Retired
-59.9
-65.1
-0.6
-0.2
-0.1
-0.1
0.0
0.0

-53.5
-60.0
-0.6
-0.2
-0.1
-0.1
0.0
0.0

-76.4
-79.0
-0.6
-0.3
-0.3
-0.1
0.0
0.0

54

-19.4
-22.7
0.7
0.5
0.1
0.0
-0.2
-0.2

All
-41.3
-48.1
-0.5
-0.1
-0.1
-0.1
0.0
0.0

Table 13
Difference in Benefit Claiming Between a Regime with Age 64 Early Entitlement and a Regime with No Earnings Test

Age
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

Differences in Percent Collecting Social Security
Retirees From
Completely
Partially Retired
Full-Time Work
Full-Time Work
Retired
-57.8
-63.5
-0.1
-0.5
-0.1
-0.3
-0.1
0.0

-52.0
-59.0
0.2
-0.1
0.0
-0.1
-0.1
-0.1

-75.1
-78.2
-2.2
-2.2
-1.2
-0.9
-0.6
-0.3

55

-45.6
-53.5
-39.5
-21.9
-12.8
-9.1
-6.6
-5.0

All
-51.8
-59.1
-13.7
-6.5
-3.2
-2.0
-1.2
-0.8

Table 14
Effect on Social Security Taxes and Benefits Claiming
of Increasing the Early Entitlement Age to 64
Age

Taxes

Benefits

50
55
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
75
80
85
90
95

0
1
13
23
166
176
10
6
2
-3
-8
-10

-5
-42
-175
-313
-2738
-3532
-529
-502
-436
-82
249
433
545
825
774
609
420
239

56

Table 15
Results of Retirement Simulations from Relaxing the Indicated Factor
(Numbers reported are in percentages)
Age

Percent into
partial
retirement

55

58

60

62

65

67

69

Full Sample Baseline
percent completely retired
percent partially retired
percent not retired

8.8
4.1
87.1

17.5
6.4
76.1

26.5
8.7
64.8

40.2
13.5
46.3

56.5
15.7
27.8

66.1
15.5
18.4

76.7
13.0
10.3

29.9

No Hours Limits
percent completely retired
percent partially retired
percent not retired

6.4
11.9
81.7

12.8
18.6
68.6

19.6
24.8
55.6

29.7
33.5
36.8

42.4
37.8
19.8

50.8
36.7
12.5

62.9
29.9
7.2

66.9

Sample size 2231. Based on model with parameter estimates shown in Table 3.

57

Table 16
Retirement Outcomes: No Constraints on Partial Retirement vs. Current Restrictions
(Numbers reported are in percentages)
Age
percent completely retired
percent partially retired
percent not retired

55

58

60

62

65

67

69

Percent into
Partial
Retirement

-2.4
7.8
-5.4

-4.7
12.2
-7.5

-6.9
16.1
-9.2

-10.5
20.0
-9.5

-14.1
22.1
-8.0

-15.3
21.2
-5.9

-13.8
16.9
-3.1

37.0

58

Table 17: Retirement Outcomes Under Alternative Systems of Personal Accounts
Retirement Status at Age 62
Not
Partially
Fully
Retired
Retired
Retired
Program Features (variation from base package)
1. Current law projections of traditional Social Security
Revised Systems with Personal Accounts
2. Base package of personal accounts
3. Total conversion to personal accounts
4. Full annuitization required
5. Annuitization optional, full lump sum withdrawal permitted

59

Retirement
Rate From
FT Work

41.9

14.3

43.8

15.6

32.8
27.9
36.7
31.2

9.6
8.9
15.0
8.5

57.6
63.2
48.3
60.3

21.6
23.3
18.9
23.0

Table 18: Wealth by Age Conditional on Both Spouses Living (in 1992 dollars, unadjusted for mortality)
61
62
70
75
80
Program Features (variation from base package)
1. Current law Social Security
140028
148305
155113
122812
88634
2. Base package of personal accounts
111601
138839
123891
95909
67239
3. Total conversion to personal accounts
83907
132864
115582
88687
61425
4. Full annuitization required
113228
120313
111607
87957
62797
5. Annuitization optional, full lump sum permitted
111600
140271
124077
96008
67277

85

90

56404
41430
37339
39205
41448

29148
20545
18108
19528
20551

Base package = Current law traditional benefits, voluntary, partial (4% of contribution) accounts, prorated traditional benefits,
annuitize to family poverty level, joint and 2/3 annuity, required personal accounts subject to earnings test.

60

Table 19: Percent Choosing Voluntary Annuities Under Base Package of Personal Accounts
Age Retired From FT
Work

No Funds Available

Lump Sum

Voluntary Annuity

50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70

9.0
3.9
3.9
1.1
1.5
1.6
3.0
1.6
2.7
3.0
3.2
3.8
7.2
8.3
8.9
6.5
5.5
3.0
4.6
6.2
8.8

60.9
64.9
64.2
63.3
57.3
56.5
49.5
50.4
45.5
46.7
40.1
46.4
69.7
20.5
18.8
20.6
19.9
20.6
22.0
22.7
37.0

30.1
31.2
31.9
35.6
41.2
41.8
47.5
48.1
51.8
50.2
56.7
49.8
23.1
71.1
72.3
72.8
74.6
76.4
73.4
71.1
54.2

All

5.4

46.2

48.5

61

Table 20A: Traditional Social Security Benefits Plus Benefit From Personal Accounts by Age of Receipt,
Assuming Husband and Wife are Alive
(Unadjusted for mortality, in 1992 dollars)
62
70
75
Program Features (variation from base package)
1. Current law projections of traditional Social Security
3679
16139
16906
2. Base package of personal accounts
48147
18665
17444
3. Total conversion to personal accounts
92830
21791
21432
4. Full annuitization required
7044
20978
21898
5. Annuitization optional, full lump sum withdrawal permitted
52012
18386
17110

80

85

17059
17347
21113
22078
16999

17059
17407
21192
22128
17061

Base package = Current law traditional benefits, voluntary, partial (4% of contribution) accounts, prorated traditional benefits,
annuitize to family poverty level, joint and 2/3 annuity, required personal accounts subject to earnings test.

Table 20B: Traditional Social Security Benefits Plus Benefit From Personal Accounts by Age of Receipt,
Assuming Wife Only Is Alive
(Unadjusted for mortality, in 1992 dollars)
62
70
75
Program Features (variation from base package)
1. Current law projections of traditional Social Security
1061
9546
10780
2. Base package of personal accounts
45127
12400
11364
3. Total conversion to personal accounts
89992
15091
14469
4. Full annuitization required
3861
13304
14244
5. Annuitization optional, full lump sum withdrawal permitted
49001
12237
11149

80

85

10999
11296
14098
14413
11067

11061
11367
14166
14461
11140

Base package = Current law traditional benefits, voluntary, partial (4% of contribution) accounts, prorated traditional benefits,
annuitize to family poverty level, joint and 2/3 annuity, required personal accounts subject to earnings test.

62

Table 21: Taxes and Expected Family Benefits from Social Security and Personal Accounts
(In 1992 dollars, adjusted for mortality, but not discounted)
Sum Over Lifetime
Social Personal
Sum Security Account
Taxes Benefits Benefits
Program Features (variation from base package)
1. Current law projections of traditional Social Security
171428
328955
0
2. Base package of personal accounts
169304
199878
210556
3. Total conversion to personal accounts
167331
0
574346
4. Full annuitization required
169886
199540
251026
5. Annuitization optional, full lump sum withdrawal permitted
169151
199330
207820

Total
Benefits
328955
410434
577009
450566
407150

Base package = Current law traditional benefits, voluntary, partial (4% of contribution) accounts, prorated traditional benefits,
annuitize to family poverty level, joint and 2/3 annuity, required personal accounts subject to earnings test.

63

Appendix

Appendix Table 1: Reasons for Deletions of Observations

Total sample individuals
Not specified gender
Not specified marital status
Spouse not interviewed if married
Not a career worker
Ambiguity about whether jobs are ss
covered
No FT earnings in ss record or self report
No sr earnings, and ss earnings over limit
Relatively large business assets
No Pension Provider record in last job
FT years unavailable for spouse

Observations Observations
Dropped
Left
12652
6785
5867
1578
4289
133
4156
497
3659
49
36
31
291
865
156

3610
3574
3543
3252
2387
2231

64

Appendix Table 2: Percent Choosing Lump Sum vs. Voluntary Annuities

Program Features (variation from base package)
1. Current law projections of traditional Social Security
Revised Systems with Personal Accounts
2. Base package of personal accounts
3. Full annuitization required
4. Annuitization optional, full lump sum withdrawal permitted
5. Total conversion to personal accounts
6. Mandatory personal accounts, using offset accounts
7. Mandatory personal accounts
8. Annuitize to single person poverty level
9. Annuitization up to currently scheduled PIA
10. Single annuities
11. Required personal accounts not subject to earnings test

No Funds
Available

Lump Sum

Voluntary
Annuity

100.0

0.0

0.0

5.4
100.0
0.6
4.8
5.0
4.8
7.0
4.8
4.5
5.4

46.2
0.0
50.1
45.9
50.9
46.5
45.6
52.9
63.1
45.9

48.5
0.0
49.3
49.2
44.1
48.7
47.4
42.4
32.4
48.6

Base package = Current law traditional benefits, voluntary, partial (4% of contribution) accounts, prorated
traditional benefits, annuitize to family poverty level, joint and 2/3 annuity, required personal accounts subject
to earnings test.

65

References
Anderson, Patricia M., Alan L. Gustman and Thomas L. Steinmeier. 1999. “Trends in
Male Labor Force Participation and Retirement: Some Evidence on the Role of Pension and
Social Security in the 1970s and 1980s”. Journal of Labor Economics 17(4), Part 1: 757-783.
Blau, David M. and Donna B. Gilleskie. 2006. AHealth Insurance and Retirement of Married
Couples@. Journal of Applied Econometrics, in Press, available on line, November,
http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/cgi-bin/fulltext/113453619/PDFSTART
Bound, J., T.R. Stinebrickner and T. Waidmann. 2006. “Health, Economic Resources and
the Work Decisions of Older Men”. Paper presented at NBER Summer Institute on Aging.
Burtless, Gary and Robert Moffitt. 1984. “The Joint Choice of Retirement Age and
Postretirement Hours of Work.” Journal of Labor Economics 3(2): 209-236.
Cagan, Phillip. 1965. The Effect of Pension Plans on Aggregate Savings. New York:
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Coile, Courtney, Peter Diamond, Jonathan Gruber and Alain Jousten. 2002. “Delays in
claiming Social Security benefits”. Journal of Public Economics 84: 357-385.
Disney, Richard and Sarah Smith. 2002. “The Labor Supply Effects of the Abolition of
the Earnings Rule for Older Workers in the United States”. The Economic Journal 112: C136C152.
Duffie, Darrell and Kenneth J. Singleton. 1993. Econometrica 61(4): 929-952.
Feldstein, Martin and Andrew Samwick. 1992. “Social Security Rules and Marginal Tax
Rates”. National Tax Journal 45: 1-22.
Even, William E. and David A. Macpherson. 2004. “Do Pensions Impede Phased
Retirement?” September, Xeroxed.
Fields, Vivian and Robert Hutchens. 2002. “Regulatory Obstacles to Phased Retirement
in the For-Profit Sector”. Benefits Quarterly 18(3): 35-41.
French, Eric. 2005. “The Effects of Health, Wealth and Wages on Labor Supply and
Retirement Behavior”. Review of Economic Studies 72: 395–427.
Friedberg, Leora. 2000. "The Labor Supply Effects of the Social Security Earnings
Test." The Review of Economics and Statistics 82 (1): 48-63.
Friedberg, Leora and Anthony Webb. 2003. “Retirement and the Evolution of the
Pension Structure”. NBER Working Paper 9999.
Gordon, Roger H. and Alan S. Blinder. 1980. "Market Wages, Reservation Wages and
Retirement". Journal of Public Economics 14: 277-308.
Greene, William H. 2000. Econometric Analysis, Fourth Edition. Upper Saddle River:
Prentice Hall.
Gruber, Jonathan and Peter Orszag. 1999. “What to Do About the Social Security
Earnings Test? Issue Brief. Center for Retirement Research at Boston College. July.
Gustman, Alan L. and Thomas L. Steinmeier. 1983. "Minimum Hours Constraints and
Retirement Behavior". Contemporary Policy Issues, a supplement to Economic Inquiry, No. 3
(April): 77-91.
_______________. 1984a. "Partial Retirement and the Analysis of Retirement
Behavior". Industrial and Labor Relations Review 37(3): 403-415.
_______________. 1984b. "Modeling the Retirement Process for Policy Evaluation and
Research". Monthly Labor Review 107(7): 26-33.
_______________. 1985. "The 1983 Social Security Reforms and Labor Supply
Adjustments of Older Individuals in the Long Run". Journal of Labor Economics 3(2): 237-253.

66

_______________. 1986. "A Structural Retirement Model." Econometrica 54(3): 555584.
_______________. 1999. “Effects of Pensions on Savings: Analysis with Data from the
Health and Retirement Study”. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 50: 271324.
_______________. 2000. “Retirement Outcomes In The Health and Retirement Study”.
Social Security Bulletin, Perspectives 63(4): 3-17.
_______________. 2002. “Retirement and the Stock Market Bubble”. NBER Working
Paper 9404, December.
_______________. 2004. “Social Security, Pensions and Retirement Behavior Within
the Family”. Journal of Applied Econometrics.
_______________. 2005a. “The Social Security Early Retirement Age In A Structural
Model of Retirement and Wealth.” Journal of Public Economics 89(2-3): 441-463.
_______________. 2005b. “Retirement Effects of Proposals by the President’s
Commission to Strengthen Social Security.” National Tax Journal 58(1): 27-49.
_______________. 2005c. “Offsetting the Principal in the New Social Security
Accounts.” Tax Notes 107(1): 109-114.
Hurd, Michael D. 1996. “The Effect of Labor Market Rigidities on the Labor Force
Behavior of Older Workers”. In David A. Wise, editor. Advances in the Economics of Aging.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press: 11 - 58.
Ibbotson Associates. 2002. Valuation Edition 2002 Yearbook. Chicago: Ibbotson
Associates.
Katona, George. 1965. Private Pensions and Individual Savings. Ann Arbor: Survey
Research Center, Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan.
Olson, Janice A. 1999. “Who is “62 Enough”? Identifying Respondents Eligible for
Social Security Early Retirement Benefits in the Health and Retirement Study”. Social Security
Bulletin 62(3): 51-56.
Pakes, Ariel and David Pollard. 1989. “Simulation and the Asymptotics of Optimization
Estimators”. Econometrica 57(5): 1027-1057.
Penner, Rudolph G., Pamela Perun and C. Eugene Steuerle. 2002. “Legal and
Institutional Impediments to Partial Retirement and Part-Time Work by Older Workers”.
http//www.urban.org/url.cfm?ID=410587.
President’s Commission to Strengthen Social Security. 2001. “Strengthening Social
Security and Creating Personal Wealth for All Americans”. Washington, D.C..
http://www.commtostrengthensocsec.gov/reports/Final_report.pdf.
Rust, John and Christopher Phalen. 1997. “How Social Security and Medicare Affect
Retirement”. Econometrica 65(4):781-831.
Samwick, Andrew. 1998. “Discount Rate Heterogeneity and Social Security Reform”.
Journal of Development Economics 57: 117-146.
Song, Jae G. 2002. “Evaluating the Effects of the Removal of the Retirement Earnings
Test in 2000”. Mimeo. Social Security Administration. November.
Song, Jae G. and Joyce Manchester. 2006. “New Evidence on Earnings and Benefit
Claims Following Changes in the Retirement Earnings Test in 2000”. U.S. Social Security
Administration, Office of Policy. ORES Working Paper No. 107, June.
Tran, Bac V.. 2002. “The Effect of the Repeal of the Retirement Earnings Test on the
Labor Supply of Older Workers”. Xeorx. University of Maryland at College Park. November.

67

Trustees Report. 2003. The 2003 Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of the Old
Age Survivors Insurance and Disability Insurance Trust Funds. Washington, D.C..
van der Klaauw, Wilbert and Kenneth I. Wolpin. 2006. “Social Security and the
Retirement and Savings Behavior of Low Income Households”. Mimeo.

68

