                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               INCOMPLETE COST PASS-THROUGH UNDER DEEP HABITS

                                          Morten Ravn
                                     Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe
                                          Martin Uribe

                                       Working Paper 12961
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12961


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2007




We thank for comments seminar participants at Duke University. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Morten Ravn, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe, and Martin Uribe. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Incomplete Cost Pass-Through Under Deep Habits
Morten Ravn, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe, and Martin Uribe
NBER Working Paper No. 12961
March 2007
JEL No. D11,D4,L1

                                              ABSTRACT

A number of empirical studies document that marginal cost shocks are not fully passed through to
prices at the firm level and that prices are substantially less volatile than costs. We show that in the
relative-deep-habits model of Ravn, Schmitt-Grohe, and Uribe (2006), firm-specific marginal cost
shocks are not fully passed through to product prices. That is, in response to a firm-specific increase
in marginal costs, prices rise, but by less than marginal costs leading to a decline in the firm-specific
markup of prices over marginal costs. Pass-through is predicted to be even lower when shocks to marginal
costs are anticipated by firms. In our model, unanticipated firm-specific cost shocks lead to incomplete
pass-through (or a decline in markups) of about 20 percent and anticipated cost shocks are associated
with incomplete pass-through of about 50 percent. The model predicts that cost pass-through is increasing
in the persistence of marginal cost shocks and U-shaped in the strength of habits. The relative-deep-habits
model implies that conditional on marginal cost disturbances, prices are less volatile than marginal
costs.

Morten Ravn                                          Martin Uribe
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
European University Institute                        Duke University
Villa San Paolo                                      Durham, NC 27708-0097
Via della Piazzuola 43                               and NBER
50133 Florence                                       uribe@duke.edu
Italy
morten.ravn@eui.eu

Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe
Department of Economics
Duke University
P.O. Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
grohe@duke.edu
1     Introduction
A number of empirical studies document that marginal cost shocks are not fully passed
through to prices at the firm level. The observed sluggish response of prices to cost distur-
bances is also reflected in prices being substantially less volatile than costs. See for instance
Goldberg (1995) for the automobile industry, Kadiyali (1997) for the photographic film in-
dustry, Hellerstein (2004) for the beer industry, and Nakamura (2006) for the coffee industry.
   This paper develops a theoretical explanation for the observed incomplete pass-through
of marginal cost disturbances to prices. The central element of our proposed theory is habit
formation at the level of individual goods. In particular, we consider the model of external
relative deep habits due to Ravn, Schmitt-Grohé, and Uribe (2006). When habits are formed
on a good-by-good basis, the demand function for an individual good depends not only upon
its relative price but also on past consumption of that good. This is because demand depends
positively on the stock of habit, and the stock of habit, in turn, is an increasing function of
past consumptions. A consequence of allowing for good-specific habit formation is that the
profit maximization problem of the firm becomes dynamic. For higher current sales generate
revenue not only in the current period but also in future periods by raising future habitual
demand. Firms take this intertemporal connection of revenues into account in their price
setting decision.
    We show that a temporary increase in marginal costs induces firms to increase prices less
than proportionally resulting in lowered markups. Firms find it optimal to narrow profit
margins in the current period to limit the decline in future habitual demand triggered by the
price increase. It follows that firms pass on only a fraction of the increase in marginal costs
they experience. That is, in the deep habit model developed in this paper cost pass-through
is incomplete. The dampened response of prices to marginal cost shocks results in prices
being less volatile than marginal costs. Our emphasis on markup adjustments in explaining
incomplete pass-through is in line with the available empirical evidence. Hellerstein (2004),
for instance, finds that 68 percent of incomplete cost pass-through in the beer industry is
explained by markup adjustments. Nakamura (2006) attributes a smaller but still sizable
role to markup adjustments in explaining the response of prices to marginal cost shocks in
the coffee industry.
   We find that pass-through increases with the persistence of marginal cost shocks. The
reason is that when the cost increase is more persistent, it is less valuable for the firm to main-
tain the size of its customer base, as production conditions are expected to be unfavorable for
a number of periods. A consequence of the positive relationship between pass-through and
the persistence of cost shocks is that the ratio of price volatility to marginal-cost volatility


                                                1
also increases with the persistence of cost shocks.
    Our deep-habit model predicts that anticipation of marginal cost disturbances exacer-
bates incomplete pass-through. The reason is that when firms learn about a future cost
increase they find it optimal to gradually adjust prices upward as a way to disinvest in cus-
tomer base. Consequently, the required increase in prices at the time the shock is actually
realized is smaller than it would have been had the shock been unanticipated.
    Our theoretical model of incomplete cost pass-through is related to a number of existing
studies. All of these studies share as the central transmission mechanism a demand function
that depends proportionally on a measure of past sales. Phelps and Winter (1970) develop
a model of customer markets, by assuming that current demand is proportional to the
firm’s market share in the previous period. Klemperer (1987, 1995), Froot and Klemperer
(1989), and Kleshchelski and Vincent (2007) assume that customers face a fixed cost of
switching suppliers. Thus, the current propensity to consume a particular good depends
in part on past consumption of that good. Of these papers, the one most closely related
to our study is Kleshchelski and Vincent (2007), as it focuses on the effects of firm-specific
marginal cost shocks. An important difference between switching cost models and our deep-
habit formulation is that in the deep habit model there is gradual substitution between
differentiated goods, rather than discrete switches among suppliers. One advantage of this,
from the point of view of analytical tractability, is that under the deep-habit formulation
one does not face an aggregation problem. Buyers can distribute their purchases identically
and still suppliers face a gradual loss of customers if they raise their relative prices.
   In all of the related theoretical studies just cited as well as in ours, it is important for the
prediction of incomplete cost pass-through that past sales (or a function thereof) enter the
demand function in a multiplicative fashion. In fact, we show that if past sales enter in an
additive rather than multiplicative fashion, the model no longer predicts incomplete pass-
through. The reason is that under an additive specification the aforementioned intertemporal
effect of deep habits is offset by a static price-elasticity effect.
    The remainder of the paper is organized in five sections. Section 2 presents a preference
specification in which habits are good-specific, external to the household, and relative. It
also derives the demand functions for individual goods. Section 3 characterizes the dynamic
pricing problem of the firm. Section 4 presents the main results of the paper regarding
incomplete pass-through of marginal cost shocks. Section 5 establishes that when habits
enter additively in the demand for individual goods, incomplete pass-through fails to obtain.
Section 6 concludes.




                                                2
2    Demand with Good-Specific Habits
Consider an economy populated by a continuum of identical households of measure one
indexed by j ∈ [0, 1]. Each household j has preferences defined over consumption of a
continuum of differentiated consumption goods, cjit indexed by i ∈ [0, 1]. Following Ravn,
Schmitt-Grohé, and Uribe (2006), preferences feature habit formation at the level of individ-
ual goods, or deep habits. We assume that habits are of the relative external type. That is,
for each good variety i, households derive utility from a quasi-ratio of current consumption
to a measure of lagged aggregate consumption. Specifically, household j derives utility from
an object xjt defined by
                                                 !1− η1  1−1 1
                                      Z 1      j               η
                                             cit
                              xjt =                    di      ,                        (1)
                                       0   sθit−1

where sit−1 denotes the stock of external habit in good i in period t − 1, which the household
takes as exogenously given. The parameter η > 0 denotes the intratemporal elasticity of
substitution of habit-adjusted consumption of different varieties. The parameter θ measures
the degree of time nonseparability in consumption of each variety. When θ = 0, we have the
benchmark case of time separable preferences.
   The stock of habit is assumed to evolve according to the following law of motion

                                   sit = ρsit−1 + (1 − ρ)cit ,                             (2)

where                                                  Z       1
                                        cit ≡                      cjit dj
                                                           0

denotes the aggregate per capita level of consumption of variety i, which the household takes
as exogenously given. The parameter ρ ∈ [0, 1) measures the speed of adjustment of the stock
of external habit to variations in the cross-sectional average level of consumption of variety
i. When ρ takes the value zero, the stock of habit is simply given by past consumption of
good i.
   For any given level of xjt , purchases of each variety i ∈ [0, 1] in period t must solve the
problem of minimizing total expenditure,
                                          Z       1
                                                      Pit cjit di,
                                              0


subject to the aggregation constraint (1), where Pit denotes the price of good i. The optimal




                                                        3
level of cjit for i ∈ [0, 1] is then given by
                                                                −η
                                                           Pit                  θ(1−η)
                                       cjit   =                               sit−1 xjt ,             (3)
                                                           Pt

where
                                              Z                                              1−η
                                                                                                1
                                                       1               1−η
                                   Pt ≡                     Pit sθit−1                  di
                                                   0

is a price index such that at the cost-minimizing consumption allocation
                                                                 Z       1
                                              Pt xjt       =                 Pit cjit di.
                                                                     0


The case of habit formation emerges when, ceteris paribus, the demand for a particular
variety is increasing in the stock of habit associated with that variety. That is, when θ(1 −
η) > 0. In the absence of deep habits, η must be greater than one in order for the monopolist
problem to be well defined. We maintain this assumption here in order to be able to compare
the dynamic implications of our model with and without deep habits. It follows that habit
formation obtains only if θ is negative.
   An alternative way to visualize that habit formation requires θ(1 − η) > 0 is to examine
the household optimality condition according to which the marginal rate of substitution of
good i for good k is equated to their relative price. For the preferences given in equation (1)
this optimality condition takes the form
                                            !− η1                            θ(1−η)
                                     cjit                   sit−1                 η
                                                                                              Pit
                                                                                        =         .
                                     cjkt                   skt−1                             Pkt

Clearly, for the marginal rate of substitution of good i for good k to be increasing in the stock
of habit of good i, it is necessary that θ(1 − η) be positive. Accordingly, for the remainder
of this paper we will assume that θ ≤ 0.
    Integrating the individual demand functions for good i over all households, one obtains
the following aggregate demand function for good i:
                                                                −η
                                                           Pit                  θ(1−η)
                                       cit =                                  sit−1 xt ,              (4)
                                                           Pt
             R1
where xt ≡    0
                  xjt dj is a measure of aggregate demand.




                                                                     4
3       Pricing To Habits
We assume that each variety of goods is produced by a monopolistically competitive firm.
The producer of good i faces the demand function given in equation (4). Firms take the
aggregate price index Pt and the measure of aggregate demand xt as exogenously given.
At the same time, firms internalize the fact that current sales affect the strength of future
demand through the habit stock sit .
   Because we are interested only in firm dynamics taking as given the aggregate state of
the economy, given by Pt and xt , we simplify the demand function to:

                                                           θ(1−η)
                                             cit = APit−η sit−1 ,                                    (5)

where A is a positive constant.
   The marginal cost of producing good i, denoted by MCit , is assumed to be exogenous
and independent of scale. Then period profits of firm i can be written as:

                                              (Pit − MCit )cit .

   An important implication of the presence of deep habits is that the pricing problem
at the firm level becomes dynamic. Firms are assumed to discount future profits at the
constant rate β ∈ (0, 1).1 The firm’s problem consists in choosing processes for prices Pit
and quantities cit so as to maximize the present discounted value of profits, given by

                                      X
                                      ∞
                                             β t E0 (Pit − MCit )cit ,
                                       t=0


subject to the law of motion for the stock of habit and the demand function for good i, given
in equations (2) and (5), respectively, and taking as given the exogenous process for MCit
and the initial stock of habit si−1 .
    To gain insight into the nature of the firm’s incentives, we now concentrate on the simple
case that the stock of habits fully depreciates after one period. That is, we focus on the case
ρ = 0 in equation (2), which implies that sit−1 = cit−1 . The first-order conditions associated
with the firm’s problem are the demand function

                                                           θ(1−η)
                                             cit = APit−η cit−1                                      (6)
    1
    In Ravn, Schmitt-Grohé, and Uribe (2005, 2006) we analyze a general equilibrium model with relative
deep habits. There, the discount factor of the firm is an endogenous variable given by the representative
household’s intertemporal marginal rate of substitution.



                                                      5
and                                      
                                      1                1−η          cit+1
                         Pit       1−         + βθ         Et Pit+1       = MCit .            (7)
                                      η                 η            cit
Optimality condition (7) can be interpreted as follows. The first term on the left-hand side,
Pit (1 − 1/η), is the classical expression for marginal revenue in the static monopoly problem.
In the absence of deep habits (i.e., when θ = 0), this standard measure of marginal revenue
is equated to the marginal cost, MCit , appearing on the right-hand side. The second term
on the left-hand side, βθ 1−η
                           η
                              Et Pit+1 cit+1
                                        cit
                                             , can be interpreted as the future marginal revenue
stemming from a sale today. This extra marginal revenue is habitual in nature. For higher
current sales increase the stock of habits thereby raising future demand. Specifically, the
second term on the left-hand side represents the present value of profits in period t + 1
generated by a unit increase in cit holding constant cit+j for all j ≥ 1, and Pit+j for all j ≥ 2,
and increasing Pit+1 appropriately. Because under this calculus of variation argument future
expected sales are held constant, no future marginal costs enter in the optimality condition.
   It follows from equation (7) that the markup of prices over marginal cost, which we
denote by
                                               µit ≡ Pit /MCit

is time varying. That is, deep habits gives rise to a theory of endogenous markup determina-
tion at the firm level. Rearranging optimality condition (7), yields the following expression
for the markup:
                                                1
                              µit =                              .
                                    1 − η + βθ η Et Pit+1
                                        1      1−η         cit+1
                                                       Pit cit

According to this expression, firms set markups below average whenever sales revenues are
expected to grow. The sensitivity of the markup to expected future revenue growth is higher
the higher the degree of habit formation—i.e., the larger is θ in absolute value—and the
more patient firms are—i.e., the larger is the discount factor β.


3.1    Steady-State Markup
Under deep habits the steady-state markup is no longer governed by a single parameter,
namely the price elasticity of demand η, but depends on the degree of habit formation θ as
well as on the discount factor β. Specifically, the steady-state markup is given by

                                                       1           1
                                     µ=                    1−η <        .
                                              1−   1
                                                   η
                                                       + βθ η    1 − η1




                                                          6
The inequality highlights that under deep habits the steady-state markup is smaller than in
the standard static monopolistic case, in which the markup equals 1/(1 − 1/η). The reason
the markup is lower is that under deep habits the long-run price elasticity of demand is
larger than the short-run, or static, price elasticity. This is because under deep habits a
price increase leads to demand losses not only in the current period but also in the future,
as the weakening in habitual demand entails a loss in customer base. For sufficiently large
absolute values of θ, the steady-state markup becomes less than unity, implying long-run
pricing below marginal cost. We rule out this possibility and require that µ be larger than
one. This restriction imposes the following constraint on the habit parameter θ:

                                                                 1
                                            θ(1 − η) <             ,                        (8)
                                                                 β

which we maintain throughout our analysis.


3.2    Stability of Firm Dynamics
In this section we derive the set of values of the parameter θ, measuring the strength of
good-specific habits, for which pricing dynamics are locally unique.
    Combining optimality conditions (6) and (7) one obtains a second-order stochastic dif-
ference equation in cit driven by the exogenous forcing process MCit . The variable cit−1 is a
predetermined state in period t.
    We limit the characterization of price and sales dynamics to stationary stochastic fluctu-
ations that are expected to remain forever in a vicinity of and converge to the deterministic
steady sate. Letting x̂t ≡ ln(xt /x) denote the log deviation of the variable xt from its de-
terministic steady-state value x, the evolution of the quantity sold can be written up to a
first-order approximation as
                            "               #        "            #
                                Et ĉit+1                 ĉit             d it .
                                                =A                     + B MC
                                  ĉit                   ĉit−1

Local uniqueness of the firm’s pricing dynamics requires that the matrix A have one root
inside the unit circle and one root outside the unit circle. One can show that if the steady-
state markup is greater than one (i.e., if restriction (8) holds), then local uniqueness of firm
dynamics obtains if and only if:
                                                θ(1 − η) < 1.                               (9)

The left-hand side of this condition represents the elasticity of current demand with respect
to the stock of habit (see equation (4)). Thus, the restriction says that an increase in current

                                                     7
demand must raise future demand less than proportionally, holding future prices constant.


4    Incomplete Pass-Through
Pass-through of marginal cost shocks is said to be incomplete if a one-percent increase
in marginal cost leads to a less-than-one-percent increase in prices. Equivalently, pass-
through is incomplete when markups decline in response to an increase in marginal costs. To
ascertain whether in our pricing-to-habit model pass-through is incomplete, we characterize
the impulse response of prices and markups to innovations in marginal costs.
   We assume that the logarithm of marginal costs follows a univariate autoregressive process
of order one. Formally,
                                   d it+1 = λMC
                                   MC        d it + t+1 ,                                 (10)

where λ ∈ [0, 1) denotes the serial correlation of marginal costs and t is an i.i.d. shock with
mean zero and standard deviation σ .
   We parameterize the model using a quarter as the time unit. We set the firm’s discount
factor β equal to 0.99, so that the rate at which profits are discounted is 4 percent per
year. We assume a value of 6 for η, the intratemporal elasticity of substitution across goods
varieties. This value implies that in the absence of pricing to habits (i.e., when θ = 0), the
steady-state markup equals 20 percent, or µ = 1.2. We set the deep-habit parameter θ to
-0.1. This value together with the one assigned to η implies that the elasticity of demand
with respect to the stock of habit is 1/2 and that the steady-state markup is 9 percent.
   To highlight the role of pricing to habits in propagating the effect of marginal cost
disturbances, we initially restrict attention to a purely temporary increase in MCit by setting
the parameter λ equal to zero. We approximate the firm’s price dynamics by log-linearizing
the firm’s optimality conditions around the nonstochastic steady state.
   Table 1 displays the response of prices and marginal costs to a purely temporary one-
percent increase in marginal costs. In the period of impact, the firm increases prices but
proportionally less than the increase in the marginal cost. Only 81 percent of the increase
in marginal costs are passed through to product prices. As a result, the markup of prices
over marginal cots declines by 19 percent. The resulting incomplete pass-through is the
consequence of an intertemporal tradeoff: Increasing current prices prevents the erosion of
current profit margins. At the same time, it leads to a decline in current sales and hence a
corresponding reduction in the stock of habits, which weakens the strength of future demand.
One period after the shock, marginal costs are back to their steady-state value. However,
markups are not. Firms need to rebuild their customers’ stock of habit, which had declined


                                               8
               Table 1: Response to a Temporary Increase in Marginal Cost

                                          Pricing To Habits      No Habits
                                              (θ = −0.1)           (θ = 0)
               Period    Marginal Cost    Price    Markup      Price Markup
                 0             1          0.81      -0.19       1         0
                 1             0          -0.11     -0.11       0         0
                 2             0          -0.04     -0.04       0         0
                 3             0          -0.01     -0.01       0         0

      Note: Marginal costs, prices, and markups are measured in percent deviations
      from their respective steady-state values.


after the initial price hike. To this end, firms keep markups below average along the entire
transition. This transition can be interpreted as a pure investment in customer base. The
cost of this investment is a sequence of below-average per unit profits.
   The firm’s dynamics in the absence of habits is quite different. As shown in the last two
columns of table 1, prices move one for one with marginal costs and markups are unaffected
by the cost disturbance. Without a habit stock to maintain, the firm faces no intertemporal
tradeoff, but simply a static, isoelastic demand function. Thus, in the absence of habits
markups are constant at all times and dictated by the price elasticity of demand η.


4.1    Anticipated Cost Shocks
Pass-through can appear to be even more incomplete when marginal cost disturbances are
anticipated. This is because firms find it optimal to increase prices already at the time they
learn about the arrival of a future cost shock. By the time the shock is actually realized,
demand is already weakened by a smaller habit stock, mitigating the incentive to contain
sales via higher prices. Table 2 displays the response of prices and markups to an anticipated
temporary one-percent increase in marginal costs. The table also reproduces from table 1
the responses of prices and marginal costs when the cost shock is unanticipated. The shock
is realized in period 0. At that date, prices increase by only 0.48 percent with respect to
period -1 in response to a one-percent anticipated increase in marginal costs. By contrast,
when the shock is unanticipated, the increase in prices in period 0 is 0.81 percent. It follows
that in this example when the cost increase is anticipated pass-through falls significantly.
Finally, we note that in the absence of good-specific habit formation, pass-through is perfect,
regardless of whether the cost shock is anticipated or unanticipated.



                                              9
        Table 2: Response to an Anticipated Temporary Increase in Marginal Cost

                                              Anticipated      Unanticipated
                 Period   Marginal Cost     Price Markup      Price Markup
                   -1           0           0.29     0.29       0        0
                   0            1           0.77     -0.23     0.81    -0.19
                   1            0           -0.12    -0.12    -0.11    -0.11
                   2            0           -0.05    -0.05    -0.04    -0.04
                   3            0           -0.02    -0.02    -0.01    -0.01

      Note: Marginal costs, prices, and markups are measured in percent deviations
      from their respective steady-state values.


4.2    Persistent Cost Shocks
Thus far, we have limited attention to the case of purely temporary cost shocks. We now
explore the relationship between pass-through and the degree of persistence in the marginal
cost process. In the AR(1) specification given in equation (10), persistence is governed by
the parameter λ. Figure 1 displays the impact effect of a one-percent increase in marginal
costs on the markup as a function of λ. Pass-through is increasing in the persistence of the
shock: the more persistent the shock is, the larger is the initial price increase in response to
a one-percent increase in marginal costs. Intuitively, if marginal cost shocks are temporary,
firms are reluctant to pass the cost increase on to prices to avoid erosion of their customer
base, as they expect costs to go back down quickly to their normal level. On the other hand,
if the cost shock is persistent, firms do not mind losing customers because cost conditions are
not favorable for production. For this reason, they choose to pass on a larger fraction of the
marginal cost increase to prices. If the cost shock is sufficiently persistent (in our example
when λ is greater than 0.5), then firms find it optimal to pass through to prices more than
the entire increase in marginal costs, resulting in an increase in markups.


4.3    The Price-Cost Volatility Ratio
Empirical studies have documented that marginal costs tend to be more volatile than product
prices. Nakamura (2006), for instance, studies pass through of changes in coffee commodity
costs to coffee retail and wholesale prices. She finds that over the past decade commodity
coffee prices have exhibited much higher volatility than retail and wholesale coffee prices.
    The fact that under good-specific habit formation pass-through of marginal costs to
prices is incomplete, suggests that prices might be less volatile than marginal costs at the


                                              10
                   Figure 1: Pass-Through and Persistence of Cost Shocks
                                          0.2



                                         0.15



                                          0.1



                                         0.05


                        ln µ − ln µss
                                           0
                                 0




                                        −0.05



                                         −0.1



                                        −0.15



                                         −0.2
                                                0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4       0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9
                                                                            λ




      Note: The vertical axis measures the percent deviation of the markup from steady
      state in the period of impact of a one-percent increase in marginal cost. The
      horizontal axis measures the degree of persistence of marginal costs.


firm level. This is indeed the case. Figure 2 displays the ratio of the standard deviation of
prices, denoted σp , to the standard deviation of marginal costs, denoted σmc , as a function
of the serial correlation of marginal costs, λ. When the cost shock is purely temporary, the
price-cost volatility ratio is 0.82, implying that prices are about 20 percent less volatile than
marginal cots. The price-cost volatility ratio increases with the persistence of the shock,
but remains below unity for all values of λ in [0, 1). It is remarkable that prices are less
volatile than marginal costs for values of λ above 0.5, because for this range of values firms
pass-through more than one hundred percent of marginal cost innovations on impact (see
figure 1). The reason why prices continue to be less volatile than marginal costs when
marginal costs are highly persistent is that although markups increase on impact when the
firm is hit with an unexpected increase in marginal cost, prices converge to their long-run
value faster than marginal costs resulting in the latter being above the former along most of
the transition. The reason for the faster convergence of prices is the firm’s desire to rebuild
the stock of habits by charging below-average markups shortly after a shock realization.


4.4    Pass-Through and the Strength of Habits
Figure 3 displays the impact effect on the markup of a temporary increase in marginal cost
as a function of the parameter governing the strength of habits, |θ|. Habits are stronger the


                                                                      11
                                Figure 2: The Price-Cost Volatility Ratio
                                  1


                                0.98


                                0.96


                                0.94


                                0.92
                 σP/σMC



                                 0.9


                                0.88


                                0.86


                                0.84


                                0.82


                                 0.8
                                       0       0.1     0.2     0.3      0.4         0.5          0.6          0.7     0.8    0.9
                                                                              λ




Note: σp and σmc denote, respectively, the standard deviations of prices and
marginal costs. The parameter λ measures the persistence of the marginal-cost
shock.




              Figure 3: Pass-Through and the Strength of Habits
                                       0


                                −0.02


                                −0.04


                                −0.06


                                −0.08
                  ss
                  ln µ − ln µ




                                 −0.1
                         0




                                −0.12


                                −0.14


                                −0.16


                                −0.18


                                 −0.2
                                           0   0.02   0.04   0.06    0.08     0.1         0.12         0.14    0.16   0.18   0.2
                                                                              |θ|




Note: The vertical axis measures the percent deviation of the markup from steady
state in the period of impact of a one-percent temporary increase in marginal cost.
The horizontal axis measures the degree of habit persistence.



                                                                        12
larger is θ in absolute value. The largest possible value of |θ| for which the firm’s dynamics are
locally unique and the long-run markup is positive is 1/(η − 1), which under our calibration
imposes an upper bound of 0.2 on |θ|. This range of values of |θ| may seem narrow. However,
recall that the habit elasticity of demand is given by θ(1 − η), rather than just θ. Therefore,
as |θ| varies from 0 to 0.2, the habit elasticity of demand ranges from 0 to 1.
    The figure shows that for |θ| = 0, or in the absence of deep habits, pass-through is com-
plete. In this case, the markup of prices over marginal cost is unchanged by the innovation in
marginal cost, implying that prices increase proportionally with marginal costs. The figure
also shows that for all positive admissible values of |θ|, the markup falls in response to an
increase in marginal costs. That is, under deep habits cost pass-through is incomplete for
the entire admissible range of |θ|.
   Notably, there is a nonmonotone relationship between the extent of incomplete pass-
through and the degree of habit formation. When habit formation is weak (i.e., at low
absolute values of θ) pass-though becomes more incomplete as |θ| increases. At a value of
|θ| of about 0.1 incomplete pass-through reaches a maximum. When habits are strong (i.e.,
for values of |θ| > 0.1) pass-through becomes less incomplete as |θ| increases.
    The nonmonotonic relationship between the strength of habit formation and the incom-
pleteness of pass-through is due to the interaction of two opposing effects: the habit-elasticity
effect and the price-elasticity effect. The habit-elasticity effect is given by the fact that as |θ|
increases, the habit elasticity of demand, given by θ(1 − η) rises, and therefore passing cost
increases on to prices has a stronger negative effect on future demand. The habit-elasticity
effect therefore tends to make pass-through more incomplete as |θ| rises. The price-elasticity
effect is more subtle. It arises because when |θ| increases, the short-run price elasticity of
demand, given by η, becomes relatively smaller than the long-run price elasticity of demand,
given by η/(1 − θ(1 − η)). This relative decrease in the short-run price elasticity of demand
creates an incentive for firms to charge larger current markups, that is, to pass on to prices
a larger fraction of marginal cost increases. The habit-elasticity and price-elasticity effects
work in opposite directions. At low absolute values of θ the former effect dominates the
latter, whereas at high absolute values of θ the latter dominates the former. The reason why
the price-elasticity effect dominates for large values of |θ| is that the long-run price elasticity
becomes arbitrarily large as |θ| approaches its upper limit 1/(η − 1).


4.5    Perverse Pass-Through
There are parameterization of the model for which the firm’s response to an increase in
marginal costs is a reduction in the price. Froot and Klemperer (1989) refer to such a


                                                13
response of prices to a marginal cost shock as ‘perverse pass-through.’ In the context of our
model, perverse pass-through is a pathological case in the sense that it occurs only under
parameterizations for which the steady-state markup is negative. Formally, one can establish
the following result: If η > 1/β and µ > 1, then perverse pass-through cannot be supported
as a stationary solution to the firm’s profit maximization problem.2 The condition η > 1/β
is quite weak. For example, in the calibration exercise of this section, it is satisfied whenever
the markup is below nine thousand percent, an astronomically large number. It follows
from this result that firms will always increase prices in response to an upward innovation
in marginal costs.


5         Additive Habits
It is of interest to ascertain whether the incomplete pass-through prediction of the model
analyzed thus far depends on the particular way in which past sales affect current demand
conditions. Froot and Klemperer (1989), for instance state that quite generally any model
in which past sales increase current demand will generate the prediction of incomplete pass
through. In their words, “we need not impose a specific demand function or reason why
market share matters. The effects that we isolate in this way are therefore very general and
transcend the particularities of simple models that can be solved explicitly” (p. 640).
   We examine the sensitivity of our incomplete pass-through result to an alternative spec-
ification of the demand function. This alternative specification originates in a different
assumption about the way habits affect period utility than the one maintained in section 2.
Specifically, following Ravn, Schmitt-Grohé, and Uribe (2006), we assume that habits are of
the additive external type. That is, for each good variety i, households derive utility from
a quasi-difference of current consumption to a measure of lagged aggregate consumption.
Household j derives utility from an object xjt defined by
                                               Z                                               1
                                                        1                     1− η1               1
                                                                                                1− η
                                     xjt   =                cjit   − θsit−1            di              ,
                                                    0


where θ ∈ [0, 1) defines the degree of habit persistence. The optimal level of cjit for i ∈ [0, 1]
is then given by                          −η
                                    j      Pit
                                   cit =           xjt + θsit−1 ,
                                           Pt
            hR             i 1−η
                              1
               1      1−η
where Pt ≡ 0 (Pit ) di           is a price index. This individual demand function for good i
    2
        The proof of this claim is available from the authors on request.


                                                                     14
                  Figure 4: Lack of Pass-Through Under Additive Habits
                                              0.8


                                                               λ = 0.5
                                              0.7
                                                               λ=0


                                              0.6




                        ss
                                              0.5

                        Markup, ln µ − ln µ
                                     0
                                              0.4



                                              0.3



                                              0.2



                                              0.1



                                               0
                                                    0   0.02    0.04     0.06     0.08    0.1    0.12   0.14   0.16   0.18   0.2
                                                                                           θ




     Note: The vertical axis measures the percent deviation of the markup from steady
     state in the period of impact of a one-percent increase in marginal cost. The
     horizontal axis measures the degree of habit persistence.


gives rise to the following aggregate demand for good i:
                                                                                     −η
                                                                                Pit
                                                               cit =                          xt + θsit−1 .                        (11)
                                                                                Pt

   The firm’s optimization problem is identical to the one studied in section 3. Figure 4
displays with a solid line the impact effect on the markup of a one-percent increase in the
marginal cost. The broken line displays the case of a persistent marginal-cost shock (λ = 0.5).
The firm’s dynamics are stable for values of θ between 0 and 0.25. Contrary to what happens
under relative habits, under additive habits, regardless of whether the shock is persistent or
transitory, firms pass through on to prices more than the full increase in marginal cost. As
a result, the markup increases in response to the innovation in marginal cost.
    The intuition for why pass-through is predicted to be more than complete under additive
habits can be developed by inspecting the demand function given in equation (11). The
                                                                −η
aggregate demand for good i is the sum of a price elastic term, PPitt xt , with elasticity η,
and a price inelastic term, θsit−1 . The price inelastic term stems from the additive structure
of habit formation. The price elasticity of demand is a weighted average of η and 0, with the
weight on η determined by the share of the price-elastic component of demand. Naturally, in
response to the increase in marginal cost, the firm increases the price. To understand whether


                                                                                         15
the price increase should be proportionally larger or smaller than the cost hike, notice that
any increase in price reduces the relative size of the price elastic term in total demand. As a
consequence, the price elasticity falls. Because the markup is inversely related to the price
elasticity, the increase in marginal cost is associated with an increase in the desired markup.
    The intertemporal effect of deep habits stressed in the relative-habit formulation of sec-
tion 4 is still present in the additive-habit model. That is, firms have an incentive not to
pass the full increase in costs on to price, to avoid losing customer base in the future, due to
the erosion in habits. However, this intertemporal effect is dominated by the price-elasticity
effect described in the previous paragraph, causing prices to rise by more than marginal
costs.


6     Discussion and Conclusion
In this paper, we present a model of cost pass-through at the firm level that can explain
qualitatively the empirical regularity that firm-specific cost disturbances are passed on to
prices incompletely. Our explanation is based on the assumption of external, relative, deep
habits in consumption. When habits are deeply rooted, firms face demand functions that
depend not only on the current price but also on the stock of habits, which in turn is a
function of all past sales of the good the firm produces. The firm’s optimal pricing problem
becomes dynamic and firms no longer set prices so as to equate marginal revenue to marginal
costs in the current period. Instead, firms take into account the future marginal revenues
that will be generated by a sale today due the fact that a current sale increases the future
stock of habits.
    We show that an unanticipated firm-specific cost shock leads to incomplete pass-through
(or a decline in markup) of about 20 percent, and that an anticipated cost shock is associated
with incomplete pass-through of about 50 percent.
   Our theoretical analysis is concerned with the pass-through of firm-specific marginal cost
shocks. The predictions of our model could be applied to interpret the vast empirical evidence
on incomplete pass-through of nominal exchange-rate changes. The reason why cost pass-
through and exchange-rate pass-through may appear to be related can best be illustrated
with an example. Consider a German exporter of cars to the United States. Assume that
marginal cost of that exporter are in Euro and are unaffected by a change in the Euro-dollar
exchange rate. Further assume that the exporter faces no local or distribution costs in the
United States. Then one can express period profits of the German exporter in U.S. dollar
terms as (Pit − MCit /St )qit , where Pit is the dollar price at which the German exporter offers
the car for sale in the United States, MCit is the marginal cost denominated in Euro, St

                                               16
is the Euro price of one dollar, and qit is the demand for a particular type of German car
in the United States. Suppose now that the U.S. dollar depreciates, that is, St decreases.
Then one could interpret the U.S. dollar depreciation as an increase in marginal cost of the
exporter of German cars, and one might consider using our deep habit model to study the
effects of a dollar depreciation on the dollar price of the German car in the U.S. market.
    In interpreting an exchange rate change as a firm-specific marginal cost shock, the fol-
lowing issues emerge. One of the assumptions we maintain throughout the paper is that
all variables that are not firm-specific such as the aggregate price level and the level of ag-
gregate demand are unaffected by the firm-specific marginal cost shock. This assumption
may not be compelling if one were to identify a marginal cost shock with an exchange-rate
change. For the exchange-rate change may have an effect on the aggregate price level and on
aggregate demand, Pt and xt , respectively, in terms of the notations of the demand function
given in equation (4). Furthermore, we assume that the discount factor that firms apply
to future profits, β, is unaffected by the firm-specific marginal cost change. If the source
of the marginal cost change is an exchange-rate rate change, then this assumption might
be incorrect. For example, Froot and Klemperer (1989) in their classic study on exchange
rate pass-through attribute part of the observed incomplete exchange-rate pass-through to
an interest rate effect, whereby a dollar depreciation leads to an increase in the discount
factor, increasing the rate of return on investment in market share. When firms invest more
in market share they let their profit margins dip. And lower profit margins are associated
with lower markups or incomplete pass-through.
    At the same time, given the encouraging results on limited cost pass-through presented
in this paper, we believe that it would be a worthwhile project to estimate our model on
firm-specific price and cost data.




                                              17
References
Froot, Kenneth A. and Paul Klemperer, “Exchange Rate Pass-Through When Market Share
   Matters,” American Economic Review 79, September 1989, 637-654.
Goldberg, Pinelope K., “Product Differentiation and Oligopoly in International Markets:
   The Case of the US Automobile Industry,” Econometrica 63, July 1995, 891-951.
Hellerstein, Rebecca, “Who Bears the Cost of a Change in the Exchange Rate? The Case of
  Imported Beer,” Federal Reserve Bank New York Staff Report #179, February 2004.
Kadiyali, Vrinda, “Exchange Rate Pass-Through for Strategic Pricing and Advertising: An
  Empirical Analysis of the US Photographic Film Industry,” Journal of International
   Economics 43, November 1997, 437-461.
Klemperer, Paul, “Markets With Consumer Switching Costs,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
   nomics 102, May 1987, 375-394.
Klemperer, Paul, “Competition when Consumers have Switching Costs: An Overview with
   Applications to Industrial Organization, Macroeconomics, and International Trade,” Re-
   view of Economic Studies 62, 1995, 515-539.
Kleshchelski, Isaac and Nicolas Vincent, “Market Share and Price Rigidity,” manuscript,
   Northwestern University, January 2007.
Nakamura, Emi, “Accounting for Incomplete Pass-Through,” manuscript, Harvard Univer-
   sity, November 2006.
Phelps, Edmund S. and Sidney G. Winter, “Optimal Price Policy under Atomistic Com-
   petition,” in Edmund S. Phelps, Ed., Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and
   Inflation Theory, New York, NY: W.W. Norton, 1970, 309-337.
Ravn, Morten, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, and Martı́n Uribe, “Relative Deep Habits,” man-
   uscript, Duke University, May 5, 2005.
Ravn, Morten, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, and Martı́n Uribe, “Deep Habits,” Review of
   Economic Studies 73, January 2006, 195-218.




                                           18
