NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO HOUSEHOLDS BENEFIT FROM FINANCIAL DEREGULATION AND INNOVATION?
THE CASE OF THE MORTGAGE MARKET
Kristopher Gerardi
Harvey S. Rosen
Paul Willen
Working Paper 12967
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12967

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2007

The authors thank seminar audiences at Boston University, Boston College, the Federal Reserve Banks
of Boston and San Francisco, the 2006 Applied Micro System Meeting, the Fall 2006 Macro System
Meeting and Princeton's Public Finance working group for useful comments. We are especially grateful
to Mark Aguiar, Alan Blinder, Mark Doms, Karen Dynan, Wendy Edelberg, Jean Grossman, Bob
King, Yolanda Kodrzycki, Wayne Passmore, Julio Rotemberg, Scott Schuh, Frank Vannerson and
Mark Watson for helpful suggestions. Finally, we thank Jeff Fuhrer for providing us with computer
programs. This research has been supported by Princeton's Center for Economic Policy Studies. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Kristopher Gerardi, Harvey S. Rosen, and Paul Willen. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Households Benefit from Financial Deregulation and Innovation? The Case of the Mortgage
Market
Kristopher Gerardi, Harvey S. Rosen, and Paul Willen
NBER Working Paper No. 12967
March 2007
JEL No. D14,G21,H89
ABSTRACT
The U.S. mortgage market has experienced phenomenal change over the last 35 years. This paper
develops and implements a technique for assessing the impact of changes in the mortgage market on
households. Our framework, which is based on the permanent income hypothesis, that allows us to
gauge the importance of borrowing constraints by estimating the empirical relationship between the
value of a household's home purchase and its future income. We find that over the past several decades,
housing markets have become less imperfect in the sense that households are now more able to buy
homes whose values are consistent with their long-term income prospects. One issue that has received
particular attention is the role that the housing Government Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs), Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac, have played in improving the market for housing finance. We find no evidence
that the GSEs' activities have contributed to this phenomenon. This is true whether we look at all homebuyers,
or at subsamples of the population whom we might expect to benefit particularly from GSE activity,
such as low-income households and first-time homebuyers.
Kristopher Gerardi
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
Boston, MA 02205
Kristopher.Gerardi@bos.frb.org
Harvey S. Rosen
Department of Economics
Fisher Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
HSR@princeton.edu

Paul Willen
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
P.O. Box 55882
Boston, MA 02205
and NBER
willen968@yahoo.com

1. Introduction
The U.S. mortgage market has experienced phenomenal change over the last 35 years.
Gone are the days when most households got a cookie-cutter, 30-year, fixed-rate, level-payment
mortgage from a savings and loan that took deposits at 3 percent and lent out at 6 percent. And
gone are the days when the typical lender held that mortgage on its books until the maturity of
the loan. Today, consumers choose from an extensive menu of mortgages offering flexibility
along almost every dimension. Furthermore, most lenders hold the mortgage for a very short
time; typically, they sell the mortgage on the secondary market and, more often than not,
financial intermediaries then pool that mortgage with many other mortgages and sell the cash
flow in a complex security called a collateralized mortgage obligation.
As noted below, many researchers have argued that this transformation has enhanced
efficiency by integrating the mortgage market with the broader financial markets. But there has
been comparatively little research investigating how or even whether the transformation of
mortgage markets has directly benefited the average homeowner. This question is obviously
pertinent to both government agencies and consumer advocacy groups that have significant
concerns about housing finance at the family level. However, it may also be of interest to a much
wider group of researchers and policymakers who are concerned with monetary and fiscal policy.
For example, some macroeconomists argue that the well-documented decrease in business-cycle
volatility can be partially attributed to the increasing ease with which households can obtain
mortgage financing as well as access their existing home equity. Stock and Watson (2003) state,
“One explanation for the decreased volatility in residential, but not nonresidential, construction is
the increased ability of individuals to obtain nonthrift mortgage financing…” Indeed, Dynan,
Elmendorf, and Sichel (2005) have documented that financial innovation more generally played
an important role in the reduction of the volatility of economic activity that began in the mid
1980s.
In this paper, we use a novel technique to assess the impact of changes in the mortgage
market on individual households. Our analysis starts with an implication of the permanent
income hypothesis: that the higher a household's expected future income, the more it desires to
spend and consume, ceteris paribus. If perfect credit markets exist, desired consumption matches
actual consumption and current spending should forecast future income. Since credit market

1

imperfections mute this effect, we view the strength of the relationship between house spending
and future income as a measure of the “imperfectness” of mortgage markets.
We apply this methodology using household-level data from the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics (PSID) and consider the forecasting ability of a newly purchased home on future
income. We find that households buying bigger houses have higher future incomes, all else being
equal. Furthermore, we find that the forecasting relationship of housing purchases and future
income has changed over time. The estimated sensitivity of future income to current housing
expenditures more than doubled over the length of our sample, from 1969 to 1999. Further, the
change was not smooth over time—the application of econometric techniques for locating
unknown structural breaks suggests that the relationship changed discretely in the mid 1980s.
Following the logic of the previous paragraph, we view the increased sensitivity of future income
to house spending as evidence that mortgage markets have become less imperfect over time.
With this finding in hand, we set out to accomplish two goals. First, as success has many
fathers, we attempt to establish paternity of the improved system of housing finance. Was it
deregulation? Was it the creation of a secondary market? Or was it the activities of the
Government Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs), Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, whose mission is to
help families realize the “American dream” of owning a home? Assessment of paternity presents
particular difficulties for us, as many of the changes in mortgage markets occurred
simultaneously, during the period from 1977 to 1983. To skirt these problems, we focus on the
period after 1983 when mortgage market deregulation had mostly run its course and secondary
markets were in place, but during which activities by the GSEs fluctuated considerably. We find
that the activities of the GSEs had little or no impact on the imperfectness of mortgage markets.
Our second task is to assess the consequences of the new mortgage market for various
groups in the population. Advocates for the GSEs, in particular, argue that the transformation of
the mortgage market has improved opportunities for the less-well-off and for first-time
homebuyers, claiming that the more efficient allocation of risk has enabled lenders to lend to
more-marginal borrowers. While we do in fact find evidence of relaxed credit constraints for
marginal borrowers, including first-time homebuyers, younger households, and financially
impoverished households, we are not able to attribute these improvements directly to GSE
activities.

2

In Section 2, we provide a brief review of the transformation of the mortgage market
from 1970 to 1999, the period that we study. Section 3 presents a simple model that illustrates
the possible effects of changes in borrowing constraints on the relationship between spending on
housing and future income. Section 4 then describes our empirical specification and the data. In
Section 5 we present results for our main sample of home purchasers from the PSID as well as
results for various subsamples. Section 6 includes an assessment of the sensitivity of our findings
to alternative specifications of the model. Section 7 investigates the role of the Government
Sponsored Enterprises and is followed by a brief conclusion.

2. The Mortgage Market 1970–1999
This section briefly reviews developments in the U.S. mortgage market from 1970 to
1999. We look first at the deregulation and securitization of the mortgage market, next at the
development of new mortgage designs, and then at other developments, including the emergence
of the subprime market and the introduction of anti-discriminatory legislation. We conclude the
section by reviewing earlier research on innovations in mortgage markets.

2.1 Deregulation and securitization
From the Depression through the late 1970s, deposits in savings accounts provided
almost all financing for home loans. Depression-era regulations, updated at various points,
channeled low-cost deposits to the thrift industry (Mason 2004). Regulations took many forms
and included usury ceilings, interstate banking prohibitions, limits on branching, and perhaps
most infamously, Regulation Q, which capped deposit rates and forbade banks from paying
interest on checking deposits (England 1992, Gilbert 1986). While these regulations provided
some stability, they also, predictably, led to major inefficiencies. Most significantly, by making
bank deposits the principal source of funds for mortgages, regulators forced lenders to finance
long-term assets with short-term liabilities, a situation referred to in the industry as the mismatch
problem (Modigliani and Lessard 1975).
Despite its flaws, the system basically worked until the mid 1960s. Low inflation and
stable interest rates meant that the usury ceilings, interest-rate caps, and the mismatch problem
did not generate major difficulties. However, starting in the mid 1960s, inflation and interest
rates rose, driving up the cost of funds for the savings and loan industry. This forced Congress to

3

act, beginning a process that would culminate, 20 years later, in the transformation of the U.S.
mortgage market from a largely deposit-financed system to a largely capital-markets-financed
system.
In 1968, Congress moved aggressively to develop a secondary market for mortgages, that
is, a market in which banks could sell mortgages they had originated to other investors. It took an
old government agency charged with creating a secondary market, the Federal National
Mortgage Association (FNMA, founded in 1938 and now known as Fannie Mae) and divided it
into two separate entities. The first was a government agency called GNMA (Government
National Mortgage Association, later known as Ginnie Mae), which bought mortgages
guaranteed by the Federal Housing Authority and Veterans Administration, and the second was a
shareholder-owned but government-sponsored enterprise still called FNMA, which bought other
mortgages. The Federal Home Loan Bank Board (FHLBB) created the Federal Home Loan
Mortgage Corporation (later known as Freddie Mac) in 1970, with a mandate to buy loans from
members of the Federal Home Loan Bank system. This period also saw the emergence of the
mortgage-backed security, a bond whose cash flows are backed by homeowners’ mortgage
payments. Ginnie Mae issued its first security of this kind in 1970, and Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac followed shortly thereafter (Bartlett 1989). Within a couple of decades, this innovation
would transform the industry.
Despite these moves by Congress, the problems continued to mount. Boston Fed
President Frank Morris described efforts to stabilize mortgage finance over the 1966–1975
period as a “decade of failure” (Morris 1975). Secondary markets were slow to develop; deposits
into banks and savings and loans remained the chief source of funds for home mortgage lending.
Secondary markets seem an obvious solution to the mismatch problem now, but they did not
appear that way to contemporary observers, even to brilliant economists. Franco Modigliani
assumed that the solution to the mismatch problem lay in mortgage design, and not one
participant at a conference he organized in 1975 to explore the issue made any mention of
secondary markets in the accompanying conference volume (Modigliani and Lessard 1975). The
first privately issued mortgage-backed security appeared in 1977 and was generally considered a
failure (Ranieri 1996).
Continued instability and high interest rates in the late 1970s initiated the final phase of
the reinvention of housing finance in America. In 1977, Merrill Lynch invented the Cash

4

Management Account, in effect allowing non-banks to circumvent Regulation Q (Cocheo 2003).
This innovation, combined with many others, severely reduced the availability of funds for the
thrift industry, which was still bound by Regulation Q. Even when regulators finally allowed
them to pay competitive interest rates, thrifts confronted state usury laws. These laws often
meant that the thrifts could not lend profitably, and so they simply stopped lending altogether
(Shaman 1979).
The impending collapse of the thrift industry spurred Congress and regulators to action,
and over the next six years, legal and regulatory changes transformed mortgage lending (Bartlett
1989). The Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act of 1980 ordered the
phase-out of Regulation Q over the next six years and overrode or pre-empted state usury
ceilings. In 1982, Congress passed the Garn-St. Germain Depository Institutions Act, which
extended the 1980 act, pre-empting state laws that constrained the types of mortgage products
originators could offer. In 1984, the Secondary Mortgage Market Enhancement Act solved many
of the technical problems facing mortgage-backed securities. Finally, the Tax Reform Act of
1986 created an investment vehicle called a REMIC (Real Estate Mortgage Investment Conduit)
that allowed securitizers to divide the flows of principal and interest from mortgage-backed
securities into different classes (“tranche securities”) tailored to the needs of different investors.
Two key events dramatically accelerated the development of a secondary market. The
first occurred in October 1981, when the FHLBB, the main regulator of thrifts, introduced a
change in accounting rules that had the effect of allowing lenders to sell mortgages on the
secondary market without booking a large accounting loss (Mason 2004). This change created a
liquid secondary market for mortgages virtually overnight (Lewis 1989). Secondary market sales
of mortgages increased more than four-fold, from $12 billion in 1981 to $52 billion in 1982
(Bartlett 1989).
The second influential event was the realization that issuers could skirt many of the
problems that had bedeviled early mortgage-backed securities, by enlisting one of the
Government Sponsored Enterprises (Ranieri 1994). The GSEs’ federal charters meant, for
example, that their securities were exempt from state investor protection laws. In addition,
investors believed, perhaps erroneously, that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac securities were
backed by the full faith and credit of the federal government. Freddie Mac, initially, and later

5

Fannie Mae, worked closely with Wall Street firms and became the largest issuers of mortgagebacked securities.
Figures 1 displays the evolution of GSE securitization activity from 1970 to 2003. The
figure shows a direct measure, the value of mortgage-backed securities (MBS) securitized by
Fannie and Freddie. The top panel of Figure 1 (solid line) displays the stock of MBS normalized
by total home mortgage debt outstanding, while the bottom panel (solid line) displays the
corresponding flow normalized by originations of home mortgages. These ratios have grown
substantially over time. The percentage of the stock of MBS securitized by the GSEs increased
dramatically from approximately 0 in 1975 to almost 30 percent by 2003. In addition to
securitizing mortgages, the GSEs issue debt to purchase mortgages and mortgage-based
securities. This “retained portfolio” of mortgages and mortgage-related securities held internally
by the GSEs, whose time path is also displayed in Figure 1, has increased enormously over time
as well. We discuss issues related to the retained portfolio below.

2.2 Innovation in mortgage design
The menu of available mortgage choices in 1999 vastly exceeded the options that were
available in the 1970s. In the 1970s, because of a combination of regulation and inertia, the
mortgages available to borrowers consisted almost exclusively of fixed-rate, level-payment
instruments. Among other things, consumer groups, as they do to this day, viewed features like
variable interest rates as dangerous, and they worked assiduously to prevent adoption (Guttentag
1984). Even when they allowed variable-rate mortgages, regulators established restrictions that
severely limited their usefulness. For example, the FHLBB allowed variable-rate mortgages, but
the rate could not change by more than 50 basis points every six months, nor could it rise by
more than 2.5 percentage points over the life of the loan (Macauley 1980).
However, the 30-year, fixed-rate mortgage was particularly unsuitable for the highinflation, high-volatility environment of the 1970s. The combination of high nominal interest
rates and fixed payments over time meant that households faced very high real payments early in
the life of the loan. Some borrowers would have been better served by mortgage designs that
allowed relatively lower nominal payments early in the life of the loan, so that the real burden
would be distributed more evenly over time. Regulators eventually relented in their opposition to
alternative mortgage designs and allowed lenders to offer innovations, including the Graduated-

6

Payment Mortgage (GPM, first offered in 1977) and the forerunner of today’s Option ARM (first
offered in 1980), both of which allow borrowers to make a monthly payment that falls short of
the interest due on the mortgage (Phalan 1977, Harrigan 1981). These alternative mortgage
designs have been popular since the 1980s, and by no means confined to very financially
sophisticated households. For example, the Option ARM accounted for a significant share of
mortgages in California during the 1980s (Kettell, 2006). In 1996, so-called COFI ARMS (a
common term for Option ARMs originated in California) accounted for approximately one half
of adjustable-rate mortgages outstanding in California as well as a significant portion of
originations (Stahl, 1996).
Initially, new mortgage designs merely inoculated borrowers against high inflation. With
high inflation, a graduated-payment mortgage offered a flow of real payments comparable to that
of a traditional mortgage with low inflation. However, although the appearance of high inflation
enlarged the mortgage menu, its disappearance in the mid 1980s did not shrink the menu.
Regulators made no effort to prohibit the alternative mortgages developed in the late 1970s and
early 1980s. The use of these new products in a low-inflationary environment allowed lenders to
offer borrowers much less rigorous repayment schedules than had prevailed even in the 1950s
and 1960s. In other words, the net effect of regulators’ responses to high inflation was to
liberalize mortgage markets considerably when compared to the traditional system of the 1950s
and 1960s.

2.3 Other changes
Three other changes in mortgage markets in this period are worth noting. First, concerns
emerged in the early 1970s of race and gender-based discrimination in mortgage markets,
leading to the passage of the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA). The original ECOA, passed
in 1974, prohibited discrimination on the basis of sex and marital status. In 1976, Congress
substantially expanded the law, adding age, race, color, religion, and national origin to the list of
factors on which lenders could not discriminate (Elliehausen and Durkin 1989). Subsequent
research on the impact of ECOA has yielded mixed conclusions with respect to its effects (see,
for example, Ladd 1982 and Munnell et al. 1996).
Second, in the mid 1990s, lenders adopted automated underwriting procedures, which
reduced the cost of originating new mortgages (Straka 2000). This change was driven, at least

7

partly, by two things. The successful experience of credit-card issuers with numerical credit
scores allowed lenders to substitute these scores for loan officer judgment in the analysis of the
creditworthiness of the borrower. Also, the anonymity of automated underwriting procedures
allowed lenders to refute claims of racial discrimination more easily.
Third, the subprime market, the part of the mortgage business dedicated to borrowers
with less-than-perfect credit histories, emerged in the mid 1990s, following the development of
credit scoring. Until the mid 1990s, a borrower was either prime and got a loan at the going rate,
or was subprime and did not get a loan at all (Munnell et al. 1996). In the mid 1990s, a new
generation of lenders began to offer loans to subprime borrowers, but they demanded much
higher interest rates as compensation for the added risk. Subprime originations grew from $65
billion in 1995 to $332 billion in 2003 (Chomsisengphet and Pennington-Cross 2006).

2.4. Prior research on innovations in the mortgage market
What was the impact of all these institutional changes in the mortgage market? Empirical
researchers have approached this question in two ways. The first examines the extent to which
mortgage markets and capital markets have become integrated over time. The second focuses on
the role that new activities of the GSEs and various institutional changes have played in these
developments. We now discuss them in turn.
One way to investigate the extent to which mortgage markets and capital markets are
integrated is to look at the time-series relationship between interest rates on mortgages and
Treasury yields. The idea is that if capital can flow freely in and out of the mortgage market, then
Treasury yields and mortgage-market yields should move together over time. A variety of studies
using this general approach have found that, in fact, the correlation between Treasury yields and
mortgage yields was greater in the 1980s than in the 1970s. (See, for example, Devaney and
Pickerill 1990, Hendershott and Van Order 1989, Goebal and Ma 1993, and Devaney, Pickerill,
and Krause 1992).1
An alternative approach is to examine mortgage markets across regions. The idea here is
that in a well-functioning mortgage market, regional conditions should reflect credit availability
in the national capital market rather than in a particular region. Of course, other characteristics
1

Statistical models based upon the Arbitrage Pricing Theory from finance suggest that integration of the mortgage
market with traditional capital markets increased during the 1980s. See Bubnys, Khaksari, and Tarimcilar (1993).

8

that might affect mortgage rates and that vary systematically across regions must also be taken
into account. Rudolph and Griffin (1997) found that the coefficient of variation of mortgage rates
across Metropolitan Statistical Areas decreased from 1963 to 1993, a finding that is consistent
with more integration over time.2 In the same spirit, in a well-functioning mortgage market, the
terms of a family’s mortgage should be independent of the particular institution that originates
the mortgage. Loutskina and Strahan (2006) show that, at least in certain segments of the
mortgage market, this has in fact become the case.3
In short, then, both strains of the empirical literature point in the same direction—over
time, the mortgage market has become more integrated with national capital markets, and from
this perspective, the mortgage market has become a better-functioning market.
While the improvement in the operation of housing finance markets has been welldocumented, the contribution of the GSEs’ securitization activities has received little attention.4
Interestingly, several papers run counter to the widely held view that securitization played a
major role. As we mentioned above, some securitization occurred in the 1970s, but Rudolph,
Zumpano, and Karson (1982) found that regional variation in contract rates did not decrease over
this period and concluded that “the secondary market has not significantly reduced differences in
local markets.” In this context, a paper by Goebel and Ma (1993) is of more relevance, because
their sample period encompasses the 1980s, which, as noted above, witnessed the huge
expansion of Fannie's and Freddie’s securitization activities. Goebel and Ma’s vector
autoregression analysis of the relationship between Treasury and mortgage-market yields
suggests that “the two markets were already integrated before the full development of the
secondary mortgage markets between 1984 and 1987.”
An important aspect of all the studies discussed above is the centrality of the relationship
between Treasury rates and mortgage rates. While important and interesting, this tack removes
the focus from where we believe it really belongs, which is the impact of securitization on
2

Rudolph, Zumpano, and Karson (1982) examine how a variety of attributes of mortgage contracts (contract rate,
loan initiation fees, maturity, and loan-to-value ratio) varied by Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area between 1968
and 1978. They find that while the variability of fees and charges and loan maturity declined over this period, the
contract rate and loan-to-value ratio did not change. This period predates both the big increase in GSE securitization
activity and other important changes in housing finance institutions.
3
They highlight the role of securitization, arguing that credit supply evolves independently of conditions at
particular banks in the highly securitized “conforming” loan market (the part of the market for which the GSEs are
permitted to buy up mortgages).
4
In contrast, there has been a great deal of attention focused on the impact of the GSEs on the level of mortgage rates.
See, for example, Ambrose and Thibodeau (2004) and Passmore, Sparks, and Ingpen (2002).

9

households. What we care about ultimately is not the correlation between Treasury rates and
mortgage rates per se. Rather, the key question is whether securitization (or any other
development in the housing finance market) enhanced the likelihood that households could
borrow enough to buy a home that maximized their utility, given their lifetime income.5 To
address this question, we develop a model that allows us to investigate the impact of mortgagemarket innovations at the household level.

3. Model
In this section, we develop a model of how changes in the market for housing finance
affect individual households. We first present a simple model with two types of households and
two types of houses. A key result is that relaxing constraints on mortgage lending increases the
coefficient in a regression of future income on housing expenditures.6 This particular implication
of the model is significant because it provides us with an interpretation of the results from our
empirical analysis below. We then present a necessary condition for obtaining such a result in a
more general model with any number of house types and household types. We also show that,
contrary to what one might guess, relaxing borrowing constraints also increases the coefficient in
a regression of house spending on future income.
Suppose we have two types of families who differ in future income, low ( YLf ) or high
( YHf ), and who face a choice between two types of house, small ( H S ) or big ( H B ).7 Assume
further that households have different levels of wealth and that they can borrow to finance their
home purchase. Otherwise, the families are identical; in particular, they have the same level of

current income, so that we can use “high future income” and “high future income growth”
interchangeably. For purposes of this example, we assume that, if allowed to borrow an
5

Linneman and Wachter (1989) is the only study to our knowledge that attempts to assess the impacts of mortgagemarket developments at the household level. They find a diminished impact of borrowing constraints on tenure
choice over time, and they attribute their findings to the development of adjustable rate mortgages (ARMs) and the
increased use of seller financing and other “non-traditional” financing schemes. Campbell and Cocco (2003)

examine the effects of different mortgage designs in a dynamic life-cycle model with borrowing constraints.
6

See Artle and Varaiya (1978) for the first theoretical analysis of the implications of borrowing constraints on
homeownership, Brueckner (1986) for a 2-period version of the same model in discrete time, and Engelhardt (1996)
for an empirical implementation. For a discussion of the user cost of housing in a model without borrowing

constraints, see Himmelberg, Mayer, and Sinai (2005).

7

This discussion implicitly assumes that housing is entirely a consumption decision. In fact, housing is also
purchased for investment purposes. However, under the conditions we assume, the basic results are independent of
whether the motive is consumption or investment.

10

unlimited amount, the low-income-growth families would choose small houses, while the highincome-growth families would choose big houses. However, in the presence of credit constraints,
this separation of types might not emerge. For example, lenders typically require that monthly
housing expenditures fall below a certain percentage of current income. Thus, current income
fixes some maximal amount the household can borrow. This need not limit the size of the house
the family can buy if the family has access to sufficient other assets such as its own wealth or the
wealth of its close relatives. If not, even a high-income-growth household ends up buying a small
house.
In this example, credit constraints reduce the difference in average, observed incomegrowth rates between small- and big-house buyers. To see why, recall that under our
assumptions, in the absence of credit-market constraints, every high-income-growth family
purchases a big house and every low-income-growth family purchases a small house. In the
presence of constraints, some high-income-growth families instead purchase small houses, and
thereby drive up the average income growth associated with small-house buyers.8 On the other
hand, the income growth of large-house buyers stays the same. Hence, the borrowing constraints
attenuate the observed relationship between income growth and the size of current home
purchases.
This argument is laid out more formally in Figure 2. Suppose initially that 2/3 of the
high-income-growth families buy a small house and that all of the low-income-growth families
also buy a small house, so that the average future income of the small-house buyers is

2
3
Y ( H S ) = YHf + YLf . On the other hand, only high-income-growth families buy a big house,
5
5
implying that Y ( H B ) = YHf . Now, suppose we relax the constraint so that only 1/3 of the highincome-growth families buy a small house. In this case, the average future income of small1
3
house buyers falls to Y ( H S ) = YHf + YLf , whereas the future income of big-house buyers stays
4
4
the same. Figure 2 illustrates how the movement of high-income-growth families from small
houses to big houses as the credit market constraint is relaxed raises the sensitivity of average
8

Holding current income and wealth constant, households with higher expected future income
f

likely to be constrained than those with lower expected future income (YL

(YHf )

are more

) . This is because high-income-growth

households would like to borrow more than low-income-growth households in order to smooth consumption and
consume more today, but their borrowing is limited by current income.

11

future income to house size—that is, line AC is flatter than line BC. In an econometric context,
this means that if we estimate a regression of future income on the value of current house
purchases, then the less constrained the borrowing environment, the greater the coefficient on the
value of current house purchases, ceteris paribus. As shown below, this is precisely what we find
in the data. We present a formal, algebraic version of this argument in Appendix B.9
This simple model also illustrates that if we choose instead to estimate a regression of
housing purchase expenditures on expected future income, we should also expect to obtain an
increase in the sensitivity of the size of home purchases to future income when borrowing
constraints are relaxed, ceteris paribus. The argument is laid out in Figure 3, and is virtually
identical to the argument described in Figure 2. Assuming initially, as we did in Figure 2, that
2/3 of the high-income-growth families buy a small house, implies that the average house size of
high-income-growth households is H (YHf ) =

2
1
H S + H B . Since we assume that all low-income3
3

growth households purchase small houses, we have H (YLf ) = H S . Again, suppose we relax the
constraint so that only 1/3 of the high-income-growth families buy a small house. In this case,

1
2
the house size of high-income-growth families increases to H (YHf ) = H S + H B , whereas the
3
3
house size of low-income-growth families stays the same. As Figure 3 illustrates, this results in
an increased slope of the line connecting the two points corresponding to the average house sizes
of low-income-growth and high-income-growth households, respectively. In a regression
context, this implies that the less constrained the borrowing environment, the greater the
responsiveness of house value to expected future income, ceteris paribus. In fact, when we
estimate such a regression we obtain results consistent with Figure 3 (see Section 6.4).
The two-type model is intuitively appealing because of its simplicity. However, one may
wonder whether the conclusion continues to hold in a model with more types of individuals and
houses. In fact, we can provide a very general expression that links changes in borrowing
constraints to changes in regression coefficients. This expression provides us with a necessary
9

Our simple model assumes that households with a given level of income growth face the same borrowing
constraints; they differ only by wealth. However, the analysis extends to any variable that affects a family’s ability to
buy a house, not just wealth. In particular, one could show that when families have the same wealth but differ in the
borrowing limits they face, then if individuals’ borrowing limits are all relaxed, the relationship between current
house value and expected future income strengthens. This case is particularly important given the evidence in
Munnell et al. (1996).

12

condition for obtaining an increasing regression coefficient in response to the relaxation of
borrowing constraints.
Denote the least-squares estimate from a regression of future income on the value of
current house purchases as βˆ , and δ as a credit-market constraint (for example, a debt-to-income
constraint). We want to sign the impact on βˆ of relaxing the borrowing constraint, which
corresponds to an increase in δ. In Appendix B, we derive the following expression for the
partial derivative of βˆ with respect to δ:
∂βˆ
1 ⎧
⎛ f ∂H ⎞
⎛ ∂H ⎞ ⎫
ˆ
(3.1)
=
⎨cov ⎜ Y ,
⎟ − 2β cov ⎜ H ,
⎟⎬
∂δ var( H ) ⎩
∂δ ⎠
∂δ ⎠ ⎭
⎝
⎝
where Yf is future income and H is expenditure on a home. Equation (3.1) implies that the
relaxation of borrowing constraints generates an increase in βˆ if

∂H ⎞
⎛
⎛ ∂H ⎞
ˆ
cov ⎜ Y f ,
(3.2)
⎟ > 2β cov ⎜ H ,
⎟.
∂δ ⎠
∂δ ⎠
⎝
⎝
In order to interpret this condition, it is useful to begin by seeing how it applies to our
simple 2-type model. Consider first the left-hand-side, which measures the relationship between
future income and the impact of loosening the borrowing constraint on the size of house
purchased. This term is positive, because the high future income households are the ones who
increase their house size when liquidity constraints are relaxed (some of the high-future income
households move from small houses into big houses when δ increases, while none of the lowfuture income households switch). Thus, the covariance between future income and house
movements is positive. Next consider the right-hand-side, which measures the association
between the value of current house purchases and the impact of loosening the borrowing
constraint on house size. This term is negative in the 2-type model. Households initially living in
big houses are not affected by changes in borrowing constraints, because by assumption they are
all unconstrained, high-future income types. However, a portion of the high-future income
households initially constrained and living in small houses become unconstrained and move into
big houses, in response to lower constraints. This implies that the covariance between the value
of current housing purchases and the response of housing to changes in borrowing constraints is
negative. The parameter estimate, βˆ , is nonnegative, since we expect a positive correlation

13

between house purchase expenditures and future income. Given a positive left-hand-side and a
negative right-hand-side, condition (3.2) clearly holds.
However, economic theory suggests that we should expect condition (3.2) to hold even in
a more general model. The left-hand-side should be positive because the permanent income
model of consumption tells us that ceteris paribus, households with higher expected future
income growth want to do more consumption smoothing than households with lower expected
income growth. Thus, households expecting high income growth are more likely to find
themselves borrowing constrained than households expecting lower income growth. This implies
that households who are expecting higher income growth will be more affected by the relaxation
of constraints, that is, the covariance on the left-hand-side is positive. In the same way, theory
suggests that the right-hand-side of condition (3.2) should be negative. If housing consumption is
a positive function of permanent income, then ceteris paribus, families with higher wealth will
prefer to live in more expensive houses. Because households with higher levels of wealth are less
likely to be borrowing constrained, then we would expect that on average, households living in
bigger houses are less likely to buy larger homes in response to a change in constraints.
Figure 4 provides a diagrammatic summary of these arguments. Holding house value
fixed, as we move in the vertical direction, toward increasing values of future income, the
probability of a household facing borrowing constraints increases. On the other hand, holding
future income fixed, as we move left horizontally, toward decreasing house values, the
probability of a household facing borrowing constraints increases. In short, theoretical
considerations suggest that, in general, the left hand side of (3.2) is positive and the right hand
side is negative. Hence, we expect condition (3.2) to hold in a general model with multiple types
of households and house values. Thus, such a model predicts an increase in the responsiveness of
future income to the value of housing purchased when credit-market constraints are relaxed.10

10

In Appendix B, we show that in a regression of the value of housing purchased on expected future income, the
condition that ensures an increase in the regression coefficient in response to lower credit constraints is weaker than
condition (3.2). Assuming that the least-squares estimate in such a regression is given by γˆ , the condition ensuring

that

∂γˆ
> 0 is
∂δ

∂H
⎛
cov ⎜ Y f ,
∂δ
⎝

14

⎞
⎟ > 0.
⎠

4. Empirical Setup

The previous section provided a simple model to explain why imperfections in housing
finance like borrowing constraints can weaken the observed relationship between housing
purchases and future income and, conversely, how relaxing credit constraints can strengthen this
relationship. Thus, by examining how the relationship between current home purchases and
future income has changed over time, we can infer whether the market for housing finance has
become less imperfect. This section develops an econometric model to implement this idea. We
then discuss the data used to estimate the model. Finally, we provide a straightforward graphical
summary of the evolution of the relationship between house values (normalized by current
income) and income growth in our data and show that it is consistent with our theoretical
framework.

4.1 Econometric specification

Basic setup. We begin by writing down a fairly standard model for forecasting future
income in panel data. Specifically, suppose that it is period t and we want to predict household
i’s real income in f periods, Yi,t+f . The forecasting model is
lnYit+f = α0 + α1lnYit + α2lnHit + βXit + Dt + ξi,t+f

(4.1)

where Yit is current real income,11 , Hit is the real value of the home that the household purchases
in year t, Xit is a vector of socio-demographic variables such as age, education, race, and sex , Dt
is a set of time effects,12 and ξi,t+f is household i's forecast error of future income at time t.
The only real difference from typical forecasting models is that the model here is
augmented with the value of housing purchases on the right-hand-side. According to the
permanent income model, consumption and expenditure should reflect households’ information
about future income. By this logic, if households have better information about their future
income than is contained in income’s own history, then consumption and expenditure variables
should help to forecast income. Housing expenditures are a natural choice in this context,
11

In other specifications we also inserted lagged values of income along with current income as explanatory
variables. This did not affect the estimated coefficient on the value of the house, but reduced the estimated coefficient
on current income. Because including lagged income values reduces our sample size and because our main concern is
the estimated coefficient on house value, we include only current income.
12
We include time effects to control for aggregate influences such as business-cycle effects.

15

because for most households the purchase of a home is the largest purchase that it will make over
its lifetime.
If we were to confront equation (4.1) with data, we would view a rejection of the
hypothesis that α2 = 0 as evidence in favor of the joint hypothesis of forward-looking behavior
and the ability of households to make reasonably accurate income forecasts.13 Furthermore, a
higher sensitivity of future income with respect to housing expenditures implies a greater value
for α2. As discussed in the previous section, this is critical for our purposes, because it suggests
that the impact of changes in the housing finance system on households can be assessed by the
estimated elasticity of future income with respect to housing expenditures. This observation
allows us to examine from the household’s standpoint the widespread belief that the housing
finance market has become less imperfect over time.
Specifically, in the context of our model, a less imperfect housing finance system
suggests an increased observed elasticity of future income with respect to housing purchase
expenditures. Hence, if housing market innovations over time have relaxed borrowing
constraints, we expect the coefficient on housing expenditures in equation (4.1) to increase over
time, ceteris paribus. Algebraically, this translates into the value of α2 growing in magnitude
over time. To test this notion, we begin by augmenting equation (4.1) with an interaction term
between a linear time-trend and house value:
lnYit+f = α0 + α1lnYit + α2lnHit + α3*t lnHit + βXit + Dt + ξi,t+f.

(4.2)

If the relationship between housing expenditures and future income is in fact becoming stronger
over time, then α3 should be positive.14
When it comes to making equations (4.1) and (4.2) operational, the first question one
must confront is how to measure the left hand side variable, future income.15 Including the sum
13

If households are forward-looking in their housing decisions but are very bad at predicting their future income, we
will not find a statistically significant relationship between the value of a newly purchased house and future income.
In effect, then, we are testing the joint hypotheses that households are forward-looking and that they can predict their
future incomes with some accuracy.
14
For purposes of clarity, we interact house value with a time trend rather than interacting each time effect with
house value. A linear time trend is a simple way to summarize whether the magnitude of the house value coefficient
changes over time. Interacting with a full set of time effects would produce results that would be difficult to interpret.
15
At least as far back as Friedman (1957, pp. 23–25), empirical investigators have been forced to deal with the
ambiguous nature of the time horizon that is appropriate in the permanent income model. Friedman discarded both
mean lifetime income and the short-term mean of the anticipated probability distribution of income as proxies for
permanent income, instead advocating a measure based on an intermediate time horizon.

16

of the entire stream of future earnings is clearly infeasible. Instead, we use several alternative
measures of future income: realized income two years in the future, realized income 4 years in
the future, the average of realized income 2 years and 4 years in the future, and the average of
income for each of the 5 years in the future. The advantage of the measures based on averages is
that they mitigate concerns that our results will be biased by a change over time in the mix of
transitory versus permanent income or in the degree of random measurement error in
households’ responses. On the other hand, due to the structure of our data set (see below), we
have a larger sample size if we use single years rather than averages.
An alternative to equation (4.1) would be to put housing purchase expenditures on the
left-hand-side, and expected future income on the right hand side. This is similar to a
conventional housing demand equation (see Mayo 1981). The theory laid out in Section 3
suggests that financial innovations should increase the estimated coefficient on future income in
such a regression. A serious problem with the housing demand specification is that, as just
mentioned, we do not directly observe expected future income and have to rely on various
proxies. While virtually every variable is mismeasured to some extent, the measurement of
expected future income is particularly problematic, and can lead to an inconsistent estimate of its
coefficient. In contrast, when expected future income is put on the left hand side, at least under
reasonable assumptions, the effect is to increase the standard error of the regression but not
render the parameter estimates inconsistent.16 In any case, as shown in Section 6.4 below, when
we estimate the housing demand specification, our substantive results are essentially unchanged.

4.2 Data

Our primary data come from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) for 1968 to
2001. The PSID is an annual panel data survey, which contains, among other things, detailed
information on family income and demographic variables. In addition, it includes information on
home purchases and their value. Some of the issues involved in using the PSID to estimate our
model, including the reliability of the data on homeownership and housing finance, are discussed
in Appendix A.

16

However, in such a regression, measurement error in the housing variable becomes a relevant concern. See
Section 6.2 for a test for potential measurement error in the house value variable, and its effects on our results.

17

Our basic sample includes all households that purchased a home in the period spanning
1969–1999.17 This includes both first-time homeowners making the transition from renting to
owning a home and existing homeowners who are moving into new houses. The PSID’s measure
of the purchase price is the value of the home as reported by the household during the first year
of occupancy.18
For some of our specifications, we distinguish between first-time house purchasers and
purchasers who were already homeowners. If the household reported in the previous interview
that it was renting, and reports in the current interview that it owns a home, then we characterize
it as a home-purchaser. Furthermore, if the household has never reported owning a home in
previous interviews, then we label it as a first-time homebuyer. There is a subtle issue regarding
households for which we do not have a complete tenure history, either because the head was
already an adult in the first wave of the PSID in 1968 or because the head entered the PSID in
subsequent waves. If such a household owns a house but then buys another house, we can clearly
classify it as a repeat buyer. However, if such a household does not own a home and then buys
one, we cannot be certain that they are a first-time buyer as the head may have owned and then
sold a house prior to accession into the PSID. To address this problem, we adopt the following
rule: If the head of the household enters the PSID as a non-home owner and is less than 30 years
old, then we assume that the head never owned a home before and thus consider the house
purchase part of the first-time homebuyer sample. If the head enters the PSID as a nonhomeowner and is over 30, then we assume that the household previously owned a home at some
point in the past, and we label it as a repeat-homebuyer. Our results are not sensitive to this
cutoff age: We tried decreasing the cutoff to 25, and while it reduced our first-time homebuyer
sample by approximately 200 observations, it did not change any of the results.
Altogether, we identify 14,755 house purchases over this period. In several cases, the
reported value of the purchased house is extremely low, even after converting from nominal to
17

We excluded 1968, the first year of the PSID, because of problems with the question pertaining to whether the
household had moved within the past year.
18
The PSID has two variables that allow us to identify house purchases. The first is a question regarding the tenure
choice of the household (that is, renting versus owning a home), and the second identifies households that have
changed residence between the current and previous interviews. We use information from the house value question
to double-check the accuracy of the tenure choice question. The value of the house is one of the few PSID questions
that is imputed and thus does not have any missing observations for homeowners. Since this question is missing for
renters, we are able to double-check that households that reported a tenure switch from renting to owning did in fact
purchase a house in the time between interviews.

18

real values. In the majority of these cases, the household reports not having taken a mortgage,
leading us to believe that these may be inheritances or transactions between family members that
are not particularly relevant to our study. Therefore, we eliminate all observations for which the
house’s real value is less than $5,000. This reduces our sample of house purchases to 14,495.
After deleting observations with missing values for income (current and future), demographic
variables, and observations that were part of the Survey of Economic Opportunity (SEO) portion
of the PSID,19 we end up with a baseline sample of 5,277 for our 2-year average future income
measure and 4,349 for our 5-year average future income measure. The percentage of households
purchasing a home as a share of the total number of households in our baseline PSID sample
fluctuates between 5.6 percent (1983) and 9.6 percent (1978) for the 30-year span of our data,
and it displays no noticeable patterns.
Our income measure is total income, including both labor and capital income and
transfers, received by both the husband and wife and any other individuals in the household. In
order to correct for changes in the price level over time, we deflate the income and house value
variables by the Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE) Chain-Type Index, with 2000 as the
base year.
Our left-hand-side variable is income f years in the future. As discussed above, we use
several alternative measures: realized income two years in the future, realized income four years
in the future, the average of realized income 2 years and 4 years in the future, and the average of
income for each of the 5 years in the future. These choices are dictated in part by the structure of
the data set. Because the PSID switched from an annual to a biennial survey in 1997, it turns out
that values for f of 2 and 4 maximize our sample size.20 As far as demographic variables,21 the Xvector of equation (4.1), we include: a cubic in age, education (a series of dichotomous

19

The SEO sample is not a nationally representative sample as it over-samples poor and immigrant families; studies
based on the PSID typically exclude it.
20
Because of the 1997 change, we do not have data for the years 1998 and 2000. Therefore, we must discard house
purchase data for the observations for which future income, Yit+f, lies in 1998, 2000, or after 2001. For example, if we
were looking at income three years into the future, we would need to eliminate house purchases in 1995, 1997, 1999,
and 2001; if we were looking five years ahead, we would be forced to throw away 1993, 1995, 1997, 1999, and 2001.
Thus, using the average of two and four years as well as each of the individual years themselves, allows us to
maximize the sample size. For the case of f = 2, we need to discard only 1996 and 2001, while for f = 4, we need to
discard only 1994, 1996, 1999, and 2001.
21
All variables pertain to the head of the household, except the education variables, which correspond to whichever
spouse has the highest level of education.

19

variables), race, whether the head of the household is female, and family size.22 The means and
standard deviations of the variables for the different samples are reported in Table 1.

4.3 A Preliminary Look at the Data

Our model posits that to the extent that the market for housing finance has become less
imperfect over time, the relationship between income growth and the value of current house
purchases should strengthen. To see whether such a relationship is present in the data, we began
by computing for each household that purchased a home the ratio of the value of the home to
family income. We then computed the mean ratio for each octile of the distribution as well as the
mean value of income growth (over a 2-year period) for the families in the respective octiles.
Figure 5 contains plots of house value relative to current income (in logs) against income growth
for both the first half of our sample (pre-1985) and the second half of our sample (post-1985,
inclusive).
Several features of the graph are of interest. First, the relationship between house value
relative to current income and income growth during both the beginning and end of our sample
period is positive. This is consistent with the notion of forward-looking behavior of households.
Second, over time income growth has become more sensitive to normalized house value for
households with relatively low levels of housing, but has stayed the same for households with
relatively high levels of housing. This makes sense in terms of our theory—the families who
bought large homes at the beginning of our sample period presumably were less constrained than
those who bought small homes. Therefore, the loosening of constraints that took place over time
likely affected their behavior less.
A third and related observation is suggested by a comparison of income growth at the low
end of the house value distribution pre- and post-1985. Average income growth for the lowhousing group was lower in the post-1985 period. Our framework provides a straightforward
explanation for this phenomenon. In the presence of the relatively severe capital market
constraints during the pre-1985 period, some households consumed little housing because their
expected income growth was low, and some consumed little housing because their expected
income growth was high but they couldn’t borrow. In effect, there was a mixture of low- and
22

To conserve space, we omit the coefficients on age-squared and age-cubed, both of which are statistically
significant at the 1-percent significance level for all of the specifications. The estimated coefficient on age-squared is
negative, which is consistent with the hump-shaped income profile commonly estimated in the literature.

20

high-income growth households at the low end of the housing expenditure distribution. But, with
the less severe constraints of the post-1985 period, fewer high-income growth individuals ended
up spending relatively little on housing, so there were fewer high-income growth households in
this part of the housing distribution. Thus, when we average over income growth rates in this part
of the distribution pre- and post-1985, there are more low-growth households post-1985, which
accounts for the relative positions of the two graphs.
While it is encouraging that Figure 5 is consistent with our theoretical framework, we
must be careful not to place too much stock in it, because it does not take into account effects
from other variables that could be contributing to such a pattern in the data. A multivariable
analysis is required, to which we now turn.

5. Results

This section presents the results of our basic model, including a specification that allows
for the possibility of structural breaks in the relationship between the value of a current house
purchase and future income. We then examine how the parameter estimates differ across various
subsets of the population and whether the substantive findings are robust to alternative
specifications.

5.1 Basic results

The results for estimating equation (4.2) with future income defined as the average of
income two and four years ahead are in columns (1) through (5) of Table 2. Consider first the
estimated coefficient on the log of house value, α2. For our baseline sample (column (1)), the
estimate is 0.131. It is significantly different from zero at conventional levels. The implication is
that every 10-percent increase in the value of a new home is associated with a roughly 1.3
percent increase in future income.
Our main interest is the coefficient on the interaction of the linear time-trend with house
value, α3, which tells us whether the relationship between house value and future income has
become stronger over time. In column (1) we find that the estimated coefficient on the
interaction term for the baseline sample is significant, with a value of 0.004. An estimate of
0.004 implies that in 1969, a 10-percent increase in the value of the house corresponded to a 1.3percent increase in future income, while in 1999, a 10-percent increase in the value of the house

21

was associated with a 2.5 percent increase in future income. Thus, the relationship between the
value of housing purchases and future income approximately doubled. Within our conceptual
framework, this suggests that for the baseline sample, constraints loosened over time, consistent
with the notion that developments in housing finance made it easier for households to purchase
homes in line with their future income prospects. While this does not constitute a formal test of
our model, it is comforting that the result is the same as that suggested by both casual
observation and previous econometric work that followed a very different approach.
We now discuss briefly the other coefficients in our basic model in column (1). Most of
the demographic variables have statistically significant effects, with signs that are consistent with
prior research. The coefficient of 0.358 on current income replicates the usual result that income
has an autoregressive component. Future income is increasing in age, ceteris paribus, consistent
with typical analyses of age-income profiles. The coefficient estimates on the education variables
imply that future income is approximately 16 percent higher for high school graduates with some
college experience than for high school drop-outs, and about 26 percent higher for college
graduates. Households that are neither Caucasian nor Black (other race) have future income
realizations that are approximately 16 percent lower than those of white households. Femaleheaded households have future incomes that are almost 34 percent lower than those of maleheaded households. Size of household is also statistically significant and positive, although the
coefficient’s magnitude is small. It suggests that for each one-person increase in the size of a
household, its income in the future is approximately 2 percent higher. The coefficient estimates
for the time effects are omitted from the table to conserve space; however, they are included in
all of the regression models. For the most part, they are statistically significant.
Are these findings sensitive to the way in which future income is measured? In Table 3,
we report for each definition of future income the estimated coefficient on the log of house value
(α2) and a time trend interacted with the log of house value (α3) (To conserve space, we do not
report the other coefficients; they are available upon request.). Each panel of Table 3 corresponds
to an alternative definition of future income. The first and second rows in each panel show the
estimates of α2 and α3, respectively. Comparing the coefficients as we move down the table, we
see that the results corresponding to alternative definitions of future income (5-year average, two
years ahead, and four years ahead) are virtually identical. Thus, as hypothesized, and consistent

22

with forward-looking behavior, the value of a newly purchased house has power in predicting
future income, even conditional on current income.

5.2 Breakpoint analysis

Our approach so far has been to use the interaction of time and house value to determine
whether the observed elasticity of future income with respect to current housing purchases has
increased over time. An alternative approach is to let the data determine whether there was a
discrete structural change in the relationship between future income and housing purchase
expenditures, and if so, to see whether the timing of the change can be related to changes in the
operation of the mortgage market. In terms of our basic model, equation (4.4), the question is
whether at some point in time there was a discrete change in α2, the coefficient on house value.
To implement this idea, we use Bai’s (1999) likelihood-ratio-type test for multiple
structural changes in regression models. The test determines both the number of structural breaks
and the location of each break in the data. The particularly novel aspect of the test is that both the
null and alternative hypotheses allow for the possibility of breakpoints.23 This implies that one
can use the methodology to test for multiple breakpoints against the null hypothesis of a single
(or multiple) breakpoint(s). For example, one can test for three versus two breakpoints. The
intuition behind the test is fairly simple. Essentially, it consists of calculating the sum of squared
residuals (SSR) for each possible partition of the data corresponding to the number of
breakpoints under the null hypothesis, n0, and taking the smallest value. Then, one does the same
for each possible partition of the data corresponding to the number of breaks under the
alternative hypothesis, n1 ,= n0 + 1 and compares the minimum SSR under the null to the
minimum SSR under the alternative. If the SSRs are not “significantly” different from each
other, then the null hypothesis is not rejected and it is assumed that the data contain n0 breaks. If
they are different, then the null hypothesis changes to n1 breaks, the alternative hypothesis to n2 =
n1 + 1, and the procedure repeats itself until the null is not rejected. For a more detailed
explanation of the methodology, the reader is directed to Bai’s paper.
The findings from the breakpoint analysis for the baseline sample are reported in Table 3.
In each panel, the third row, which is labeled “Breakpoint,” shows the estimated breakpoint for
23

The limiting distribution of the test statistics for tests of only a single structural break are derived assuming the
absence of breaks. Thus, when the null hypothesis is rejected for such a test, only a single breakpoint is estimated.

23

the corresponding definition of future income. For example, when future income is measured as
the average of income two and four years ahead, the breakpoint in the baseline sample is in 1985.
We find a single breakpoint in 1982 for the 5-year-average specification (panel 2), and single
breakpoints in 1985 and in 1984 for the models that predict income two years (panel 3) and four
years (panel 4) into the future, respectively. The fact that the locations for the breakpoints are so
close across all of the models shows that the algorithm for finding the breakpoints is robust to at
least minor changes in specification.
Importantly, when we estimate equation 4.2 separately before and after the breakpoint,
we find that the interaction between the time-trend and the value of house purchases is not
significantly different from zero in either subsample. This is consistent with the result of only a
single breakpoint from Bai’s test, which indicates that the ability of house purchases to forecast
income was not increasing gradually. This finding sets a high bar for any explanation that
depends on a phenomenon that changed gradually over time.
The mid 1980s breakpoint suggests that changes in consumer behavior were caused by
structural changes in financial markets as opposed to, say, the anti-discrimination laws (which
were passed 10 years earlier) or the development of the sub-prime market (which occurred 10
years later). The 1985 timing might at first glance seem surprising, given that Congress passed
the two main acts that deregulated the savings and loan industry in 1980 and 1982. However, the
acts explicitly provided for a gradual phase-out of regulations. For example, Regulation Q was
not fully eliminated until 1986. In the same way, there were substantial lags in the development
of the secondary market. Although nascent secondary markets emerged in the 1970s, they did not
really mature until 1986, when the Tax Reform Act of 1986 established the legal framework for
mortgage markets that exists today. There was also a lag between the emergence of new
mortgage designs (which occurred in the late 1970s and early 1980s) and a serious augmentation
of the mortgage choice set. When the new designs originally appeared, they merely maintained
reasonable mortgage choices in a high-inflationary environment. Meaningful expansion of the
menu of mortgage types required both alternative prototypes and lower nominal interest rates
and inflation, and this combination did not occur until 1986, when single-digit mortgage rates
appeared for the first time since 1978. In short, given the realities of the evolution of the market
for housing finance, a breakpoint in the mid 1980s seems perfectly reasonable.

24

5.2.A Quantitative magnitude of the break

We turn now from the timing of the structural breaks to an assessment of their
quantitative impact. To do this, we augment equation (4.1) with an interaction term between
house value and a dichotomous variable that takes a value of 1 for the year of the break and the
years thereafter. For example, for the specification using the average of income two and four
years ahead on the left-hand-side, in which we find a breakpoint in 1985, the regression model is:
lnYit+f = α0 + α1lnYit + α2 ln Hit + α3’(d8501* ln Hit) + βXit + Dt + ξi,t+f,

(5.1)

where d8501 takes the value of 1 for years between 1985 and 2001, and 0 for years between
1969 and 1984. In the spirit of the breakpoint analysis, equation (5.1) does not include
interaction terms between time and house value.
The parameter estimates for equation (5.1) using the baseline sample are shown in
column (6) of Table 2. The results reinforce the findings from the breakpoint analysis. The
estimate of α3’ is positive (0.064) and statistically significant at the 1-percent level. This means
that prior to 1985 the estimated elasticity of future income with respect to house value, α2, was
0.161,

while after 1985 it increased to 0.225 (= 0.161 + 0.064). This is a substantial increase in

the forecasting relationship between house purchases and future income, and it confirms the
notion that mortgage markets became much less imperfect sometime in the mid 1980s. As
before, we summarize in Table 3 the key results when the model is estimated using alternative
definitions of future income. In each panel, the fourth row shows the estimate of α2, the
estimated responsiveness before the corresponding breakpoint, and the fifth row shows α3’, the
change in the estimated sensitivity after the breakpoint. The results are not very sensitive to the
choice of definition of future income.

5.2.B Alternative explanations for the breakpoint

A potential problem with our interpretation of the breakpoint is that the broader
macroeconomic environment was changing at around the same time. First, the mid 1980s saw the
end of the high-inflation, high-interest-rate environment as well as the end of the great
disinflation of the early 1980s.24 Second, as we mentioned in the introduction, macroeconomic
24

For a detailed discussion and documentation of this disinflation and its effects on the macroeconomy, see
Goodfriend and King (2005). In addition, recent research suggests that the 1980s saw a secular reduction in
macroeconomic activity. See McConnell and Quiros (2002).

25

volatility appears to have fallen in the 1980s. Third, the skill premium widened considerably.
And finally, some economists have argued recently that while macroeconomic volatility fell in
the 1980s, household level income volatility actually rose.
Changes in interest rates. The problem arises because our theory suggests that a fall in
nominal rates, holding real rates constant, would have the same effect as a relaxation of
borrowing constraints. To see why, recall that with traditional mortgages, a high nominal rate
drives up the real value of initial monthly payments without raising the real interest cost. High
nominal rates increase the monthly payment for a given home, and if the lender’s allowable
maximum fraction of monthly income that can be spent on housing remains constant, then this
effectively makes the borrowing constraint more stringent. However, we doubt that the reduction
in nominal interest rates during the mid 1980s is driving our results. If that were the case, we
would expect to see two structural breaks, because relatively low nominal rates prevailed both
before 1979 and after 1985. The notion that nominal interest rates are driving the process is also
implausible given our previous results that found a positive time-trend in the relationship
between future income and house value (see Table 3). Given that nominal rates were relatively
low at the beginning of our sample period and again at the end, such a time trend would not have
emerged if these rates were the driving mechanism.25
Reduction in macroeconomic volatility. Changes in higher moments of the income
profile are another possible source of bias in our estimates of α3, and α3’. There is substantial
evidence that aggregate income volatility has declined over the past few decades, a phenomenon
referred to as the “Great Moderation” in the literature. How might our results be affected if
income volatility has also decreased at the household-level, so that households have become
more certain about their future incomes or better able to predict them? To explore this issue,
suppose that there is considerable uncertainty with respect to future income. Precautionary
saving will therefore be strong, and individuals will therefore tend to demand relatively small
homes. However, if homes are small (relative to income), then the probability of being credit
constrained is relatively low. Now suppose that uncertainty falls. Consequently, precautionary
saving decreases, households want to spend more on housing, and credit market constraints are
more likely to be binding. In our model, the slope of the relationship between house value and
25

From 1969 to 1977, the average nominal interest rate on a 10-year Treasury bill was 7.09 percent; from 1978 to 1985
it was 11.30 percent; and from 1986 to 2001 it was 6.94 percent.

26

future income falls, but this is just the opposite of what we find in the data. In short, a reduction
in income volatility and/or a better ability to forecast income does not explain our findings.
Changes in the distribution of income: Much research has documented the substantial
increase in the dispersion of income over time, particularly between those with and without a
college education.26 Although economists differ about the exact timing and extent of the change,
most believe that widening of the gap started sometime in the early 1980s. Could this account for
the breakpoint we find in the data? It is hard to come up with a convincing story. In the first
place, the focus of our model is on the growth of income rather than its level, and it is not clear
what has been happening to the dispersion of growth rates over time. More fundamentally,
though, there is no reason why a change in the distribution of a right-hand-side variable per se
should bias its estimate as long as the underlying relationship with the left-hand-side variable
remains the same.
Increase in household level income volatility: Some research suggests that, despite the
decrease in aggregate income volatility, there has been an increase in household-level volatility
(Dynan et. al. 2007). Now, we argued above that a reduction in volatility would result in an
increased fraction of the population facing binding constraints and make it less likely that we
would find a breakpoint. The same reasoning therefore suggests that an increase in volatility
would have the opposite effect and present a plausible alternative explanation for our finding.
However, we can distinguish between the hypothesis of financial innovation and the hypothesis
of increased household-level volatility because they have opposite implications regarding the
magnitude of spending on housing purchases. Specifically, if increased income volatility were
driving our results, we would see a reduction in spending on housing because of precautionary
saving. On the other hand, as already noted, if financial innovation were at work, we would
observe an increase in spending, other things being the same. To determine which view is more
correct, we estimate a regression of house purchase values on a time-trend, including current
income and all of our demographic variables as well. We find that the time-trend is positive and
statistically significant. This indicates that the value of real house purchases has been increasing
over time, ceteris paribus, which is consistent with the financial innovation hypothesis.

5.3 Potential bias due to omitted variables
26

See Card and DiNardo (2002) for a review of the literature on wage inequality.

27

In virtually any regression analysis there is a possibility of omitting a key variable that is
correlated with both the dependent variable as well as the right-hand-side variables of interest.
The omission of such a variable leads to biased estimates of the coefficients on the relevant righthand-side variables. In our context, we first note that any omitted variables that are correlated
with both house purchase expenditures and income growth can result in a biased estimate of α2
(the coefficient on the value of house purchases), but not necessary a biased estimate of α3, or α3’
(which measure how the relationship between the value of house purchases and future income
changed over time). This is an important point, because our theoretical framework focuses us
primarily on the change in the sensitivity of future income to house purchase expenditures (α3,
and α3’), and not on the level of the sensitivity (α2). Put another way, in order to create a bias in
the estimates of the parameters that are our main concern, α3, or α3’, an omitted variable would
have to generate a change in the correlation between the value of house purchases and income
growth over time. Moreover, because we find substantial evidence of a single breakpoint in our
estimates of α2, the change in the omitted variable would have to be discrete. We assess below
the potential importance of the omission of several specific variables from our empirical model.

5.4 Differences across sub-groups

Much of the public policy discussion of housing finance has focused on the ability of
disadvantaged households to buy homes. In this context, we are particularly interested in the
impact of the development of mortgage markets on poor families, female-headed households,
black households, and younger households. As well, there have been concerns about first-time
homebuyers. In this section, we present the results when the model is estimated separately for
each of these sub-groups.
Poverty, race and gender. To investigate the evolution of the housing finance situation
facing the poor, we estimate our model using only data from the SEO poverty sample in the
PSID, which we refer to as the “poverty sample” hereafter. Summary statistics for the poverty
sample are reported in panel 2 of Table 1.
The results when we use only observations from the poverty sample to estimate equation
(4.2) are reported in column (2) of Table 2, and are very similar to their counterparts estimated
using the baseline sample in column (1). The estimated coefficient on house value in the second
column of the table is slightly higher than the corresponding estimate in the first column,

28

indicating that, for the poverty sample, the relationship between the value of the house purchase
and the average of income over two and four years into the future is slightly stronger. The
estimated coefficient on the interaction term, time*loghvalit, is similar in magnitude to its
counterpart in the baseline sample, although it is significant at the 10 percent level as opposed to
the 1 percent level for the baseline sample. Thus, poorer families exhibit similar forward-looking
behavior in their housing purchase decisions, and this behavior has also become stronger over
time. In Table 3, the first two rows of each panel in column (2) show how the estimated
coefficient on log of house value and its interaction with time vary with the definition of future
income. The results are very similar across our different income definitions. For the four-year
ahead specification (panel 4), the estimated coefficient on log of house value is 0.142, while for
the five-year average (panel 2) and two-year ahead (panel 3) specifications, the estimated
coefficient on log of house value is slightly smaller (0.114 and 0.119 respectively). The
estimated coefficient on the interaction term is positive and statistically significant at the one
percent level for the five-year average and two-year ahead specifications. However, it is not
significant for the four-year ahead specification (although the sign is positive).
Breakpoint analysis results for the poverty sample are also reported in column (2) of
Table 3. The breakpoints for each definition of future income are in the third row of the
respective panels. A single structural break in 1978 (significant at the 10-percent level) is found
for the model with future income averaged over two and four years; one break in 1977 for the
model using a five-year average of future income; one break in 1980 for the 2-year model, and
one break in 1981 for the 4-year model.
The quantitative magnitudes of the various breaks (based on estimation of equation (5.1))
are also displayed in column (2) of Table 3. The shifts are similar in magnitude to those for the
baseline sample, with values of 0.09 for the average of two and four years ahead; and 0.10, 0.11
and 0.12, for the 5-year average, 2-year, and 4-year definitions, respectively. These results
suggest that the decrease in market imperfectness for poorer households was similar in
magnitude to that in our baseline sample.
This begs the question of why the breakpoint for the poverty subsample occurred earlier
than for the sample as a whole. Given that the key financial market innovations mostly took
effect later, we searched for alternative stories. Because poor families are disproportionately

29

headed by women and blacks (see Table 1), a natural starting point for such an investigation
would be to estimate the model separately by gender and race.
For female-headed households, we find minor evidence of a breakpoint in 1978 for the
average of income two and four years ahead, minor evidence of a breakpoint in 1976 for the 5year-average specification, minor evidence of a breakpoint in 1981 for the 2-year specification
and minor evidence of a breakpoint in 1976 for the 4-year specification. We do not find evidence
of a breakpoint for black households in any specification.27
A possible explanation for the findings of female-headed households relates to legislation
passed in the mid 1970s. In Section 2 we noted that concerns about possible discrimination based
on race and gender led to the passage of the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) and its
amendment in the mid 1970s. Whether or not legislative measures were effective in helping
minorities and women was (and still is) a controversial topic. That said, expanded opportunities
for women could explain our findings of a breakpoint in the late 1970s and early 1980s, given
that some have argued that ECOA was implemented with a lag (see, for example, Munnell et al.
1996). Because households in the poverty sample were twice as likely to be headed by women as
in the baseline sample, this could explain our poverty sample results as well. The failure to find a
breakpoint in the black subsample could reflect the stubbornness of racial discrimination in
lending markets. As we mentioned above, some researchers argue that racial discrimination
remained pervasive in mortgage markets as late as 1990.
First-time homebuyers. Another group of people who may be relatively disadvantaged
when it comes to housing finance are first-time homebuyers. We expect families who currently
own or previously owned a home to have advantages over first-time homebuyers when it comes
to financing the purchase of a new house and obtaining a mortgage. For example, existing
homeowners have an established credit history and often have a cushion of available equity.
Therefore, this group would stand to benefit least from a less imperfect mortgage market, since
they are less likely to be borrowing-constrained in the first place. The other side of the same coin
is that if mortgage-market improvements really are efficacious, they should have a relatively
large impact on first-time homebuyers. To investigate these issues, we construct a first-time
homebuyer sample and estimate our models separately for this sample. Because we are interested
in households that are most likely to have been borrowing constrained, we restrict our sample of
27

These results are available upon request.

30

first-time homebuyers to households who financed their purchase with a non-trivial mortgage.
Thus, we define a first-time homebuyer as a household that had not previously purchased a
home, and had financed their first purchase by obtaining a loan at least half of the value of the
purchase price (loan-to-value ratio of greater than or equal to 0.5).28 Summary statistics for these
samples are shown in Table 1.
The third column in Table 2 shows the parameter estimates from the basic equation (4.2)
for first-time homebuyers. The estimated coefficient on house value is small (0.036) and
statistically insignificant, however the estimated coefficient on the interaction term,
time*loghvalit is large (0.006) and statistically significant at the 1 percent level. This implies that
by 1999, a 10-percent increase in the value of the house was associated with a 2.2 percent
increase in future income for the first-time homebuyer sample. Thus, at the beginning of the
sample period, there is no relationship between house expenditures and future income for firsttime homebuyers, but by the end of the sample period the relationship is similar in magnitude to
that of the baseline and poverty samples. This is strong evidence in support of our above
hypothesis that potential disadvantaged families such as first-time homebuyers have benefited
the most from improvements in mortgage markets.
The corresponding breakpoint results are consistent with those above. The third column
of Table 3 tells us that in all specifications of the model, there is evidence of a single structural
change in the coefficient estimate of house value sometime in the early to mid 1980s. While
Bai’s breakpoint test only finds a statistically significant break for future income defined as a 5year average (panel 2), the null hypothesis that the estimated coefficient corresponding to house
value is the same before and after the break is rejected at the 1 percent significance for almost
every specification (5 percent level for income 4 years ahead). This further suggests that the
decreased imperfectness of the mortgage market had a significant effect on first-time
homebuyers.
Younger versus older households. Households that are just starting families and still in
early stages of the life-cycle may not have the same access to credit markets as older households
with well-established borrowing histories. We imagine, therefore, that younger families would be
28

The results are robust to slight perturbations of this loan-to-value rule (i.e. ltv=0.4 or ltv=0.6). However. the
results change when we include in the sample households that purchased their first home either without obtaining a
mortgage or by obtaining a trivial mortgage (i.e. ltv<0.2). We suspect that many such households inherited their
homes or were the beneficiaries of family transfers.Unfortunately, the PSID does not contain enough information to
test this hypothesis.

31

more likely to be credit constrained and commensurately more likely to benefit from
improvements in the market for housing finance. To investigate this hypothesis, we divide our
sample into households under the age of 40 and households over the age of 40 (inclusive), and
estimate our model separately for each sample. Summary statistics for these samples are
displayed in panels 4 and 5 in Table 1. Column (4) in Table 2 shows the parameter estimates
from the basic equation (4.2) for the younger sample. The estimated sensitivity of future income
(average of 2 and 4 years ahead) to house purchase expenditures is 0.098, and it has increased
significantly over time as evidenced by the coefficient, 0.005, associated with the interaction
term between the time-trend and house purchase expenditures. Furthermore, we find evidence of
a single break point in α2 occurring in 1981 (column 4 of the first panel in Table 3). As also
indicated in Table 3, for each of the other definitions of future income, there is a break either in
1980 or 1981. Thus, we find substantial evidence of a decrease in the imperfectness of mortgage
markets for households with heads under the age of 40.
Conversely, we do not find evidence of improved credit markets for the sample of older
households. Column (5) in Table 2 displays the parameter estimates for the over 40 sample. The
estimated sensitivity of future income to house value is 0.186, which is larger than all of the
other samples. However, the interaction term, time*loghvalit is not statistically different from
zero—the sensitivity of future income to house value has not increased over time. This is true
regardless of how future income is defined. (See the estimates in the second row, fifth column, of
the various panels in Table 3). Furthermore, as indicated in the third rows of column (5) of the
various panels, there is no evidence of a breakpoint occurring in any of the specifications for this
subsample.
Taken together, these results make perfect sense within our framework. Younger
households, which are likely to be constrained in credit markets, ceteris paribus, have benefited
from innovations in the market for housing finance. Older households, which are less likely to be
constrained, have not.
High-housing versus low-housing families. As a final check on our model, we divide our
sample according to the ratio of house value to current income at the time of purchase. As
already noted, according to our simple theoretical model, the sensitivity of future income to
housing purchase expenditures should increase more over time for families who originally
purchased relatively small homes, because they are the families who are most likely to have been

32

constrained. On this basis, we would expect the increase in the sensitivity of future income to
housing expenditures to be much more pronounced for households purchasing lower-valued
homes relative to their income at the time of purchase.
There is bound to be some arbitrariness in defining a “high” or “low” value of housing
relative to current income. We simply set the dividing line where the log of the ratio was equal to
1. For the “low” sample, we find strong evidence of a single breakpoint in 1984 for the 2-year
average specification of the model (significant at the 1-percent level) and strong evidence of a
structural break in 1980 for the 5-year average specification. There is weaker evidence of a break
in 1984 for the 4-year ahead specification (significant at the 10-percent level). For the 4-year
ahead specification the breakpoint occurs a year later (although not quite significant at the 10percent level). In contrast, for the “high” sample of households, we find no evidence in any of
our specifications of a breakpoint in the relationship between future income and housing
purchases.29 These findings are consistent with the implications of the simple theoretical model
presented in Section 3 and with Figure 3, the plot of the distribution of house expenditures versus
the distribution of future income from Section 4.3.

5.5 The Role of Labor Market Decisions

Our model posits that people decide on the purchase of their home given their beliefs
regarding future earnings, and we find such a relationship in the data. However, an alternative
interpretation is that causality runs in the other direction—households decide to purchase a house
that is beyond their means, and then work harder in the future to earn enough income to make the
mortgage payments.
There are basically two feasible channels through which a household could increase its
income over a relatively short time horizon. The first and more likely channel is by increasing
labor supply, either by working more hours or by obtaining a second job. To see whether the
correlation between the value of a current house purchase and future income is driven by
increases in labor supply, we estimate a regression of total annual hours worked on the value of
the house purchase, current hours worked, income, and our usual set of demographic variables,
29

We also estimate equation (4.2) for only the families with high ratios of housing to current income; we find that the
estimated coefficient of the interaction term between time and house value is not significantly different from zero for
any of the model specifications, further reinforcing the findings from the breakpoint analysis. These results are
available upon request from the authors.

33

two years (as well as four) after a house purchase. If the increased labor supply scenario were
operative, we would expect to see a statistically significant, positive coefficient estimate
associated with house value. However, the estimated coefficient is not statistically different from
zero in any of our specifications.
A second channel through which a household might affect its income in the short run is
occupational change. The PSID contains information about the occupation of both the head of
the household and the spouse.30 We use this information to construct a dichotomous variable that
takes a value of 1 if either the head of the household or the spouse switched occupations during
the two (four) years after a house purchase, and 0 otherwise. We then estimate a probit model for
occupational switches, in which we include the value of the house purchase, current labor
income, a set of occupation indicator variables, and a set of demographic variables. If households
are buying homes that they cannot afford and then switching jobs in an effort to increase income,
we would expect that higher expenditures on housing would increase the probability of switching
occupations. However, we find that the value of the house purchase has no statistically
discernible effect on the probability of switching careers within two years of a purchase. Exactly
the same result is obtained when we look at a 4-year time horizon.31

6. Alternative specifications

In this section, we assess the robustness of our results to alternative econometric
specifications. We begin by looking at a model that is more in the spirit of the traditional setup in
the housing demand literature. Next we analyze some measurement issues. Finally, we consider a
series of issues related to the consequences of omitting certain variables from our model.

6.1 Housing demand specification

Consider a conventional housing demand model, in which the value of house purchase is
regressed on future income, inter alia. As we showed in Section 3, our model predicts that the

30

The coding of occupation in the PSID presents some technical issues. In the early years (up to 1980), occupation
was coded at the 1-digit or 2-digit Census level, while in the later years it was coded at the 3-digit level. To construct
an occupational code that is consistent for the entire span of the data, we used the 1968‒1980 Retrospective
Occupation-Industry Files, a PSID supplement that provides 3-digit occupation codes for household heads and
spouses pre-1980. We then constructed our own 1-digit code for the entire 32-year sample (12 different
classifications).
31
These results are available upon request to the authors.

34

coefficient on future income should increase in response to the relaxation of borrowing
constraints in the mortgage market. As we discussed in Section 4.1, we believe that such a model
is more susceptible to measurement error than our preferred specification. Nevertheless, as a
check on the robustness of our results, we estimate the equation,
lnHit = γ0 + γ1lnYit + γ2 lnYit+f + γ3 t* lnYit+f + βXit + Dt + eit.

(6.1)

In results not reported here for brevity, we find that, consistent with the predictions of our
theoretical model, the estimates of γ2 and γ3 are positive and statistically significant. In addition,
we estimate a variant of the model allowing for a discrete change in the relationship in 1985,
lnHit = γ0 + γ1lnYit + γ2 lnYit+f + γ3’(d8501* lnYit+f) + βXit + Dt + eit.

(6.2)

Consistent with our previous results, the estimate of γ3’ is positive and statistically significant,
suggesting the presence of a break point in the mid-1980s in the sensitivity of house purchase
values to future income. The estimates of equations (6.1) and (6.2) are available upon request.

6.2 Measurement Issues

House values in the PSID are self-reported. Measurement error associated with selfreported asset values is a common problem in the empirical literature (Miniaci and Weber 2002),
and could lead to inconsistent parameter estimates. To address this problem, we take advantage
of the fact that the PSID provides information about whether the value of the house was edited or
imputed. When we estimate our models including only those values that were not edited in any
way, we find no substantive changes in our results.
Another measurement issue relates to income. In particular, should capital income be
included as well as labor income? We believe the answer is yes, as forward-looking households
likely consider all sources of income when contemplating a house purchase. However, because
capital and business income might be more difficult to forecast than labor income, it is useful to
confirm that our results are not sensitive to the way that income is defined. Therefore, we reestimate all of the forecasting equations using only household labor income.32 We find no
substantive differences from the previous results.33
32

Another issue is whether income should be measured in real or nominal terms. We have used real income, because
it is more consistent with the basic permanent income hypothesis. However, to make sure that our results are not
sensitive to this distinction or our choice of deflator, we re-estimated the model using nominal magnitudes for house
value and income, and we found that the results were essentially unchanged.
33
The coefficient on current income increases and the cubic term in age is no longer significant, but the estimated
coefficient on house value is not noticeably different.

35

6.3 Forward looking behavior

We noted above that our main interest is the coefficient on the interaction term between
the value of house purchase and time, and that it is unlikely that omitted variables are
substantially biasing this coefficient. That said, the coefficient on the value of house purchase,
α2, is of independent interest because a positive sign is consistent with the hypothesis of forward
looking behavior. It is therefore useful to consider whether omitted variables might be biasing
our estimates of α2.
Financial wealth is a possible candidate for an omitted variable. Our forecasting equation
follows the conventional tack of not including wealth on the right-hand-side. However, to the
extent that wealth is correlated with future income as well as house value, then omitting it could
lead to inconsistent estimates of α2. Unfortunately, only a limited amount of wealth data is
available in the PSID. The PSID provides supplementary information regarding household
wealth for just 4 years – 1984, 1989, 1994, and 1999. Using these years, we re-estimate the
income forecasting equation with wealth as an explanatory variable. For this sample, which has
1,647 observations, the estimated coefficient on house value is 0.212 with wealth included, while
it is 0.204 without wealth. The difference is not statistically significant, leading us to conclude
that, on the basis of the available data, the omission of wealth is not biasing our estimates of α2.
Another possible omitted variables problem arises from the fact that there might be
regional differences in the demand for housing. Perhaps, for example, families in high incomegrowth regions tend to prefer more expensive houses. The PSID allows us to address this issue
straightforwardly. The data include information about the household’s state of residence, and we
re-estimate our basic models with state and regional effects. We find that their inclusion has no
substantive effect on our results.

7. Investigating the Contribution of the GSEs

We now use our econometric model to assess the impact of the securitization activities
and portfolio decisions of the housing GSEs, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. To begin, we define
GSElevt to be the proportion of the stock of all home mortgages that were securitized by Fannie
and Freddie in year t, and GSEacqt to be the corresponding flow variable. Figure 1 shows the
evolution of each of these ratios over time. With our measures of GSE activity in hand, the

36

question is how to use them to estimate the extent to which the loosening of borrowing
constraints documented above can be attributed to the securitization activity of the GSEs. A
straightforward approach is to interact one or another measure of their activity in period t, GSE*t,
with house value in our empirical regression model:
lnYit+f = α0 + α1lnYit + α2 ln Hit + α3”GSE*t lnHit + βXit + Dt + eit.

(7.1)

A positive value of α3” implies that more extensive GSE activity is associated with Hit's being a
better predictor of future income, which in turn implies an improved ability for households to
purchase homes that are in line with their future income prospects. In short, a positive value of
α3” is consistent with the notion that GSE activity has helped to make the housing finance
market less imperfect.
An important question is the time period over which the model should be estimated. As
emphasized above, the 1970s and early 1980s were a period of tremendous flux in U.S. financial
markets. The technological and regulatory environments changed dramatically. We have no way
to parameterize these changes, and hence, no way to discern the independent effect of the GSEs’
securitization activities. In mechanical terms, if we were to estimate equation (7.1) with
observations going back into the 1970s, the coefficient on the GSE variables would be biased
upward because it would be picking up not only the impact of securitization, but also the impact
of the omitted changes. In order to deal with this problem, we begin the sample in 1983. By then,
most of the deregulatory changes had been enacted, so we can feel fairly confident that the
coefficients on the GSE variables are in fact reflecting the impact of their securitization
activities, and not other changes in the financial environment. In any case, prior to 1983, GSE
securitization activity was almost negligible. Before 1982, outstanding mortgages securitized by
the GSEs were never more than 2 percent of all home mortgages outstanding. In 1982 this
number increased to 5 percent, while after 1990 the proportion of all home mortgages
outstanding securitized by the GSEs never fell below 25 percent and was often close to 30
percent (see Figure 1).
Table 4 shows the estimate of α3” in equation (7.1), and the associated p-value, for each
of our samples, with future income defined as both the average over two and four years as well
as the 5-year average.34 (As in Table 3, the coefficients of the other variables are omitted for the

34

Results for the 2- and 4- year ahead definitions are virtually identical and are available upon request.

37

sake of brevity and available upon request.) Each column exhibits results using data from the
indicated sample (baseline, poverty, first-time home buyers, age less than 40, and age greater
than or equal to 40). Panel 1 includes GSElevt in the regression, while panel 2 includes GSEacqt.
The results are quite clear for the baseline sample (column (1)): Whether we measure GSE
securitization activity in terms of stocks or flows, and whether we are trying to estimate future
income as an average over two and four years or as the five-year average, we cannot reject the
hypothesis that the coefficient on the interaction term between the log of house value and GSE
securitization activity is zero. Thus, we find no evidence that the securitization activities of
Fannie and Freddie played any role in making the housing finance market less imperfect.
The GSEs and marginal borrowers. One of the missions of the GSEs is to facilitate the
financing of housing for low and middle-income families. Indeed, in 1992 Congress passed
legislation requiring the Department of Housing and Urban Development to establish
quantitative goals for Fannie and Freddie with respect to their purchases of mortgages from
families in these income groups (Ambrose and Thibodeau 2004). At least since that time, the
extent to which the GSEs actually help low-income families has been a subject of fierce political
debate, with the GSEs claiming that they have helped marginal borrowers the most and their
critics arguing the opposite. Taking the GSEs’ claims at face value, perhaps even if they have not
improved the system of housing finance for the population as a whole, they have improved
things for marginal borrowers. In terms of our model, if the GSEs’ claims were correct, we
would expect to see significant and positive GSE interaction terms in the models estimated with
the poverty, the first-time homebuyer, and the under 40 samples.
Columns (2), (3) and (4) display the estimates of α3” when we estimate equation (7.1)
using the poverty, first-time homebuyer, and younger household samples, respectively. The point
estimates are statistically insignificant for all three samples in each of the specifications. The
results are similar for our sample of older households (column 5). Hence, we cannot reject the
hypothesis that GSE securitization activity played no role in reducing the capital market
imperfections facing low-income families, first-time homebuyers, and younger households.
The retained portfolio. In addition to securitizing mortgages, the GSEs issue debt to
purchase mortgages and mortgage-based securities. This so-called “retained portfolio” has
increased enormously over time. From 1990 to 2003, it increased from 5.2 percent to 22.2
percent of total home mortgages outstanding, as displayed in the top panel of Figure 1 (dotted

38

line). The retained portfolio has emerged as an extremely contentious issue. Critics of the GSEs,
including former Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan, have argued that the
hedging activities associated with the retained portfolio are a dangerous source of systematic risk
to the U.S. financial system.35 From this perspective, the retained portfolio does nothing to help
homeowners; it is merely a way for the GSEs to turn themselves into very profitable but risky
hedge funds. In contrast, the GSEs argue that their demand for mortgage-backed securities is an
important source of liquidity in the housing market and therefore leads to substantial benefits to
homeowners.
Our model provides a natural framework for assessing the impact of the retained portfolio
on the financial environment for homeowners. To begin, we construct both stock and flow
measures of the retained portfolio, normalized by the total stock of home mortgages outstanding
and the total number of new originations of home mortgages, respectively.36 Following the tack
described above for estimating the effect of GSE securitization activity, we interact both of these
variables with house value and include the interaction terms in our regression models. We then
estimate the models using the post-1983 portion of our sample. The results for the flow measure
of the retained portfolio are shown in panel 3 of Table 4.37 They provide no evidence that the
retained portfolio has made the housing finance market less imperfect for households. More
precisely, whether we measure the GSE retained portfolio in terms of stocks or flows, and
whether our left–hand-side variable is future income measured as a 5-year average, or the
average of two and four years ahead, one cannot reject the hypothesis that the coefficient on the
interaction term between the log of house value and the GSE retained portfolio is zero.

7. Conclusions

Taken together, our results suggest the following conclusions: First, the housing finance
market has become substantially less imperfect over time. Second, for the population as a whole,
there appears to have been a discrete improvement in the housing finance markets in the early to
mid 1980s. We conjecture that this was due to a combination of innovative mortgage products,
deregulation, and the development of a secondary market in mortgages. Third, one cannot reject
35

See Kopecki (2006). For further discussion of the systemic risk issue, see Jaffee (2003).
The series used for constructing these measures were obtained from the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise
Oversight, 2005 Report to Congress, Appendix Tables 5 and 15.
37
The results for the stock measure are very similar and are omitted for brevity. These results are available upon
request.
36

39

the hypothesis that the GSEs and their activities in the secondary market have failed to improve
the housing finance environment facing low-income and first-time homebuyers.
More broadly, we have argued that a life-cycle approach to thinking about questions
regarding housing finance is both theoretically attractive and empirically tractable. This approach
takes advantage of the life-cycle prediction that current behavior can predict future income in the
presence of well-functioning credit markets. It might be fruitfully applied in other contexts.
Possible issues include measuring the “affordability” of housing, assessing the extent of
mortgage market discrimination, and other topics as well.

40

References

Ambrose, B., and T. Thibodeau. 2004. “Have the GSE Affordable Housing Goals Increased the
Supply of Mortgage Credit?” Regional Science and Urban Economics 34: 263–273.
Artle R., and P. Varaiya. 1978. “Life Cycle Consumption and Homeownership.” Journal of
Economic Theory 18: 38–58.
Bai, J. 1999. “Likelihood Ratio Tests for Multiple Structural Changes” Journal of Econometrics
91: 299–323.
Bartlett, W. 1989. Mortgage-Backed Securities. New York: New York Institute of Finance.
Brueckner, J. 1986. “The Downpayment Constraint and Housing Tenure Choice.” Regional
Science and Urban Economics 16: 519–525.
Bubnys, E., S. Khaksari, and M. Tarimcilar. 1993. “Intermarket Efficiency: An Application of
Interbattery APT to Mortgage-Backed Securities.” Journal of Real Estate Finance and
Economics 7: 99–115.
Campbell, J., and J. Cocco. 2003. “Household Risk Management and Optimal Mortgage
Choice.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118: 1449-1494.
Card D., and J. Dinardo. 2002. “Skill Biased Technological Change and Rising Wage
Inequality: Some Problems and Puzzles.” Journal of Labor Economics 20: 733-783.
Chomsisengphet, S., and A. Pennington-Cross. 2006. “The Evolution of the Subprime Mortgage
Market.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 88(1): 31–56.
Cocheo, S. 2003. “25 years later Merrill’s CMA Is Still Making Waves.” ABA Banking Journal.
August.
Devaney, M., and K. Pickerill. 1990. “The Integration of Mortgage and Capital Markets.”
Appraisal Journal 58: 109–113.
Devaney, M., K. Pickerill, and F. Krause. 1992. “Cointegration and Causal Relations in
Mortgage and Capital Markets.” Journal of Financial Services Research 5: 341–353.
Dynan, Karen E., Douglas Wl Elmendorf, and Daniel E. Sichel, “Can Financial Innovation Help
to Explain the Reduced Volatility of Economic Activity?” Working Paper, Federal Reserve
Board, November 2005.
Dynan, Karen E., Douglas Wl Elmendorf, and Daniel E. Sichel, “Financial Innovation and the
Great Moderation: What Do Household Data Say? Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Conference: “Financial Innovations and the Real Economy” November 2006.

Elliehausen, G., and T. Durkin. 1989. “Theory and Evidence of the Impact of Equal Credit
Opportunity: An Agnostic Review of the Literature.” Journal of Financial Services Research
2: 89–114.
Engelhardt, G. 1996 “Consumption, Down Payments, and Liquidity Constraints.” Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking 28: 255–271.
England, C. 1992. “Lessons from the Savings and Loan Debacle: The Case for Further Financial
Deregulation.” Regulation: The Cato Review of Business & Government 15(3).
Friedman, M. 1957. A Theory of the Consumption Function. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Goebel, P., and C. Ma. 1993. “The Integration of Mortgage Markets and Capital Markets.” Real
Estate Economics 21: 511–538.
Gilbert, R., 1986. “Requiem for Regulation Q: What it Did and Why it Passed Away.” Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 68(2) 22–37.
Goodfriend, M., and R.G. King, 2005. “The Incredible Volcker Disinflation.” Journal of
Monetary Economics 52: 981–1015.
Guttentag, J. 1984. “Recent Changes in the Primary Home Mortgage Market.” Housing Finance
Review 3: 221–254.
Harrigan, S. 1981. “Wachovia Has Other Bankers Taking Notice.” Wall Street Journal. April 27.
Hendershott, P., and R. Van Order. 1989. “Integration of Mortgage and Capital Markets and the
Accumulation of Residential Capital.” Regional Science and Urban Economics 19: 189–210.
Himmelburg, C., Mayer, C., and T. Sinai. 2005. “Assessing High House Prices: Bubbles,
Fundamentals and Misperceptions.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 19: 67 92.
Jaffee, D. 2003. “The Interest Rate Risk of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.” Journal of Financial
Services Research 24: 5–29.
Kettel, R., 2006. “Golden West Financial at Credit Suisse First Boston Financial Services
Conference – Final.” February 8.
Kopecki, D. 2006. “Greenspan Seeks to Recast Debate on Fannie and Freddie Portfolios.” Wall
Street Journal. January 20.
Ladd, H. 1982. “Equal Credit Opportunity: Women and Mortgage Credit.” American Economic
Review 72(2): 166–170.

Lewis, M. 1989. Liar’s Poker: Rising Through the Wreckage on Wall Street New York: Penguin
Putnam.
Linneman P., and S. Wachter. 1989. “The Impacts of Borrowing Constraints on
Homeownership.” Real Estate Economics 17: 389–402.
Loutskina, E., and P. Strahan. 2006. “Securitization and the Declining Impact of Bank Finance
on Loan Supply: Evidence From Mortgage Acceptance Rates.” NBER Working Paper
W11983.
Macauley, I. 1980. “Banks Offer New Choices In Mortgages.” New York Times. May 25.
Mason, D. 2004. From Buildings and Loans To Bail-Outs: A History of the American Savings
and Loan Industry, 1831–1995. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mayo, S. 1981. “Theory and Estimation in the Economics of Housing Demand.” Journal of
Urban Economics 10: 95–116.
McConnell, Margaret and Gabriel Perez Quiros, 2002. “Output Fluctuations in the United States:
What Has Changed Since the Early 1980s?” American Economic Review, 90 (5): 1464-76.
Miniaci, Raffaele and Guglielmo Weber, “Econometric Issues in the Estimation of Household
Portfolio Models,” in Guiso, Luigi, Michael Haliassos, and Tullio Jappelli, Household
Portfolios, The MIT Press: Cambridge, 2002.
Modigliani, F., and D. Lessard. 1975. “New Mortgage Designs for Stable Housing in an
Inflationary Environment” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series.
Morris, F. 1975. “Solving the Long-Range Problems of Housing and Mortgage Finance” in
Modigliani and Lessard (1975).
Munnell, A., Tootell, G., Browne, L., and J. McEneaney. 1996. “Mortgage Lending in Boston:
Interpreting HMDA Data.” American Economic Review 86(1): 25–53.
Passmore W., R. Sparks, and J. Ingpen. 2002. “GSEs, Mortgage Rates, and the Long-Run Effects
of Mortgage Securitization.” Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 25: 215–242.
Phalon, R. 1977. “A Mortgage Plan To Help the Young.” New York Times. May 26.
Polinsky, A., and D. Ellwood. 1979. “An Empirical Reconciliation of Micro and Grouped
Estimates of the Demand for Housing.” Review of Economics and Statistics 61: 199–205.
Ranieri, L. 1996. “The Origins of Securitization, Sources of Its Growth, and Its Future
Potential.” In A Primer on Securitization, eds. Leon Kendall and Michael Fishman, 31–44.
Cambridge: MIT Press.

Rudolph, P., and J. Griffin. 1997. “Integration of the Mortgage Market into the National Capital
Markets: 1963–1993.” Journal of Housing Economics 6: 164–183.
Rudolph, P., L. Zumpano, and M. Karson. 1982. “Mortgage Markets and Interregional
Differences in Mortgage Terms.” Real Estate Economics 10: 94–110.
Shaman, D. 1979. “Mortgage Seekers Find Few Doors Open.” New York Times. September 30.
Stahl, D., 1996. “A COFI break.” Mortgage Banking. November 1.
Stock, J., and M. Watson. 2003. “Has the Business Cycle Changed? Evidence and Explanations.”
Prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City symposium “Monetary Policy and
Uncertainty.”
Straka, J.W. 2000. “A Shift in the Mortgage Landscape: The 1990s Move to Automated Credit
Evaluations.” Journal of Housing Research 11: 207–232.

Appendix A
Some PSID issues

The PSID tracks members of its first-wave (1968) families, including all those leaving to
establish separate family units. Children born to a member of a first-wave family are classified as
sample members and are in many cases tracked as separate family units when they set up their
own households. Ex-spouses and other adult sample members who move out of PSID family
units are also tracked to their new family units. Thus, new PSID families originate from two
sources: Children from original PSID families who grow up and establish separate households,
and marriage partners who divorce and go their separate ways. This dynamic structure allows
two ways to define and identify a household across time. One possibility, which is consistent
with the PSID's definition, is to identify a household simply by its head (usually the husband).
Such a definition would not factor in a change of spouse. For example, if the husband and wife
divorced, and the husband later remarried, the new family created by the new marriage would be
identified as the original household. The second possibility, which we adopt, is to identify a
household as a unique husband/wife pair. With respect to the above example, if the husband and
wife of the original household divorced, then the household would cease to exist in the sample,
and a new household would form with the new marriage. We choose to define a household this
way because we feel that it is more consistent with our analysis of housing choice and income
behavior.
Another important issue is the reliability of the PSID data on homeownership and
housing finance. We performed a comparison of homeownership and housing finance data in the
PSID with information from other sources, in order to be sure that we are working with a
nationally representative sample. Specifically, we compared our annual homeownership rates
from the PSID to those produced by the federal government’s Office of Federal Housing
Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO). During the last three decades, there is never more than a 2percentage-point difference between OFHEO’s annual rates and those from our PSID data. We
also compared PSID mortgage data to corresponding data from Chicago Title’s Annual Survey
of Recent Home Buyers. The PSID has mortgage information for most of our sample period,
including the original value of the mortgage and the annual mortgage payment. Average loan-tovalue ratios and payment-to-income ratios for first-time homebuyers displayed very similar
patterns over time in each data set.

Appendix B
This appendix presents a more formal version of the model discussed in Section 3.
We show that in the context of a simple, two-period model, the relaxation of a debtto-income constraint (DTI), increases the sensitivity of future income to housing
expenditures. Our derivation is comprised of two pieces. First, we show that in a
world with two possible types of houses (big and small), household wealth determines
choice of dwelling, ceteris paribus. If household wealth exceeds some threshold level,
w ∗ , then the household buys a big house; if wealth falls short of the threshold, it buys
a small house. Further, we show that w ∗ is weakly decreasing in δ, the maximum allowable ratio of debt to current income. Second we consider a model with households
that differ only in the level of their future income, either low (y1L ) or high (y1H ), and
show that an increase in the maximum allowable debt-to-income ratio, by changing
w ∗ and thus the mix of buyers of houses of different types, increases the sensitivity
of future income growth to current house purchase.
B.1: Derivation of the wealth threshold
We consider a deterministic, two-period world in which a representative household
faces the following problem. Given current income, y0 , future income, y1 , and current wealth, the household must choose between one of two houses (H B > H S ) and
consumption today and in the future. Borrowing to finance a house purchase is represented by θ and the amount of the mortgage is constrained to be less than or equal
to a constant fraction of current income, δ, the maximum DTI ratio. We also assume
a constant interest rate, r, log-utility in which consumption of non-durables and consumption of housing are additively separable, and for simplicity, no discounting over
time on the part of households. The household’s problem is to maximize
log(cα0 H 1−α ) + log(cα1 H 1−α )
subject to:
c0 = y0 + w − H + θ,
c1 = y1 − (1 + r)θ,
δy0 − θ ≥ 0
We separate the decision into two parts. First, the household chooses an optimal consumption profile conditional on a particular house. Letting V (H; δ, w, y0, y1 , r) measure the indirect utility conditional on house choice H, the household then chooses

the house that maximizes V .
We establish two facts about this problem. First, we show that holding all else equal,
there exists a critical or threshold value, w ∗, such that if w falls short of w ∗ , the
household chooses to buy a small house, and if w exceeds w ∗ , the household chooses
to buy a large house. Second, the critical value, w ∗, is weakly decreasing in δ, the
maximum allowable debt-to-income ratio. Taken together, these facts imply that in
households that differ only by wealth, an increase in δ raises the fraction of that
population that opts for the large house.
To begin, let:
∆V (δ, w) = V (δ, H B , w) − V (δ, H S , w),
where for notational simplicity we suppress the additional arguments of V . Our first
goal is to show that when w ≥ w ∗, ∆V (δ, w) > 0 and when w ≤ w ∗ , ∆V (δ, w) < 0.
We proceed by setting up a Lagrangian for the conditional problem:
L = log(cα0 H 1−α ) + log(cα1 H 1−α )+
λ0 · (y0 + w − H + θ − c0 ) + λ1 · (y1 − (1 + r)θ − c1 ) + λDT I (δy0 − θ)
plus the usual complementary-slackness conditions. By the envelope theorem,
∂V
∂w

= λ0 =

1
c0

> 0.

If the household is unconstrained, then λDT I is zero, and the associated initial consumption is
y0 + y1 /(1 + r) + w − H
(1)
c0,λDT I =0 =
2
If it is constrained then δDT I is positive, and initial consumption is
c0,λDT I >0 = (1 + δ)y0 + w − H

(2)

> 0, we need to know the relationship
In order to determine the sign of the term ∂∆V
∂w
between consumption if the family buys a small house, cS0 , and consumption if the
family buys a big house, cB
0 . To think about this, it is useful to consider the various
possibilities with respect to the borrowing constraints that the family faces. If the
household is constrained whether it buys the big house or the small house, then equation (1) shows that cS0 > cB
0 . If the household is unconstrained whether it buys the
big house or the small house, then equation (2) shows that cS0 > cB
0 . In either case,
purchase of a house comes at the expense of current consumption. Another regime

is for the borrower to be constrained in buying the small house and unconstrained in
buying the big house, but this is impossible. This leaves only the case in which the
household is unconstrained in buying the small house, but constrained in buying the
big house – the case which we next explore.
We know that for a given house, unconstrained initial consumption is always larger
than constrained initial consumption. That is:
B
cB
0,λDT I =0 > c0,λDT I >0

and
cS0,λDT I =0 > cS0,λDT I >0 .
Furthermore, by equation (1),
cS0,λDT I >0 > cB
0,λDT I >0 ,
implying that
cS0,λDT I =0 > cS0,λDT I >0 > cB
0,λDT I >0 .
Thus, ∂△V
= c1B − c1S > 0. That is, as wealth increases, so does the gain in utility
∂w
0
0
associated with buying a big house.
Now, ∆V (δ, w ∗ ) = 0 implicitly defines a function w ∗ (δ). Our goal is to show that
w ∗′ (δ) < 0. Differentiating both sides of ∆V (δ, w ∗ ) = 0 with respect to δ yields
∂∆V ∗′
∂∆V
w (δ) +
=0
∂w
∂δ

(3)

implying that
∂∆V

∂δ
.
w ∗′ (δ) = − ∂∆V
∂w

We have already shown that the denominator is positive. To finish the proof, we
simply need to sign the numerator. Using the envelope theorem again,


∂∆V
S
= λB
DT I − λDT I y0 .
∂δ

If neither constraint is binding, then w ∗′ (δ) = 0 because both of the λ’s are zero. If the
S
constraint binds only for the big house, then w ∗′ (δ) exceeds zero because λB
DT I > λDT I .
If the constraint binds for both houses, then we use the first-order condition of the
optimization problem, which says that

λDT I



= λ0 − λ1 (1 + r) =



1
c0

−

1+r
c1



.

Thus,
∂∆V
∂δ

=



1
cB
0

−

1+r
cB
1

−

1
cS
0

+

1+r
cS
1


y0 > 0,

where the last inequality follows from the fact that when the DTI constraint binds,
S
B
S
the budget constraint implies that cB
1 = c1 and c0 < c0 . Hence, we have shown that
w ∗ is weakly decreasing in δ, the maximum allowable debt-to-income ratio. Algebraically, w ∗′ (δ) ≤ 0.
B.2: Effect of relaxing the DTI constraint on different types of households
We now assume two types of households that differ only in their future income, y1i ,
where i is either “high” (H) or “low” (L). We assume that there is a continuum of
households with measure 1 of each type, indexed by their wealth w. We assume
that the wealth distribution is bounded above by w and below by w, and that it
has a cumulative distribution function that is strictly increasing. For each type of
household, we can compute a wealth threshold function, wi∗ (δ). For simplicity, we
make the following three assumptions on the wealth distribution.
w < wL∗ (∞),

(4)

∗
w > wH
(∞),

(5)

∗
w > wH
(0) > w.

(6)

Conditions (4) and (5) imply complete separation of types when there are no borrowing constraints. When unconstrained, the richest low type of household buys a small
house and the poorest high type of household buys a big house. However, condition
(6) guarantees that the constraints matter: If we eliminate borrowing altogether, the
richest high types still buy a big house, but the poorest opt for a small house.
In Section 3, we made two claims, which we prove in turn. First, we argued that “the
borrowing constraints attenuate the observed relationship between income growth
and the size of current home purchases.” To see why, start with in a situation with no
constraints. In that case, all high types buy big houses and all low types buy small
houses. Thus,

Y (HB , ∞) = y1H
and
Y (HS , ∞) = y1L,
where Y (Hj , δ) is the average future income of buyers of house, j = B, S, when
the debt-to-income constraint equals δ. Now we introduce a finite debt-to-income
constraint. By continuity and condition (6), there exists δ sufficiently small, call it
δ̂ such that at least some high types buy a small house, meaning that the pool of
small-house buyers is now a mix of high and low types, rather than a monoculture of
high types, so
Y (HS , δ̂) > Y (HS , ∞).
But, the income of the big-house buyers does not change, as condition (4) assures us
that only high types ever buy the big house, so
Y (HB , δ̂) = Y (HB , ∞),
implying that the income gap between big-house buyers and small-house buyers
shrinks when we introduce a binding constraint.
Our second claim was that relaxing an existing debt-to-income constraint increased
the gap between average income growth of big-house buyers and small-house buyers.
To see why, suppose we have an economy with debt-to-income constraint level δ̂, as
above. If we raise δ, the number of high types that buy the small house falls, since
∗′
wH
(δ) < 0, and the number of low types stays the same, lowering the average income
of small-house buyers. The cross-sectional relationship between house size and income growth increases. Because the average future income of big-house buyers again
remains the same, it follows that the gap shrinks when we lower δ.
B.2: Discussion of a more general model
The 2-type model derived above, provides a specific example of how relaxing borrowing constraints will increase the estimated coefficient in a regression of future income
on current housing expenditures. The model is intuitively appealing because of its
simplicity. However, one may be inclined to ask whether generalizing the model to
include more types of individuals and houses will change the substantive conclusions?

In this section, we will provide a very general expression that links changes in borrowing constraints to movements in regression coefficients. In the context of a more
general model, this expression provides us with a necessary condition for obtaining an
increasing regression coefficient in response to the relaxation of borrowing constraints.
We assume that β̂ is the ordinary least-squares estimate from a regression of future
income, y f , on the value of house purchases h. We are interested in the direction
of impact on β̂ from the relaxation of borrowing constraints, which corresponds to
increasing δ in our model. Thus, we must evaluate the quantity, ∂∂δβ̂ . Since
β̂ =

f)
cov(h,y
ˆ
var(h)
ˆ

=

1
T

P (h −h̄)∗y
P (h −h̄)
i

i

1
T

i

it is easy to derive the following expression:
P
∂ β̂
1
i
= var(h)
{ T1 i (yif − y¯f ) ∗ ∂h
−
∂δ
ˆ
∂δ
which can be rewritten as,1

i

2β̂
T

f
i

2

P

i (hi

− h̄) ∗

∂ β̂
1
∂h
∂h
=
{cov(y
ˆ f,
) − 2β̂ cov(h,
ˆ
)}.
∂δ
var(h)
ˆ
∂δ
∂δ

∂hi
},
∂δ

(7)

According to equation (7), the relaxation of borrowing constraints will result in an
increase in β̂ if
cov(y
ˆ f,

∂h
∂h
) > 2β̂ cov(h,
ˆ
).
∂δ
∂δ

(8)

Thus, condition (8) tells us that in order to obtain an increase in β̂, we must place
restrictions on the manner in which we shift the distribution of future income types
among houses, as well as the manner in which we change the housing distribution itself in response to lower borrowing constraints. It is easy to see that our simple 2-type
model above satisfies these conditions. The left-hand side term is positive, since a
portion of high-income growth households move from small houses into big houses in
response to lower borrowing constraints, while none of the low-income growth households switch. Thus, the covariance between future income and house movements is
positive. Meanwhile, the right-hand side term is negative in the model. Households
initially living in big houses are not affected by changes in borrowing constraints,
since by assumption they are all unconstrained, high-future income types. However,
a portion of the high-future income households initially constrained and living in
small houses become unconstrained and move into big houses, in response to lower
1

Note, that all terms involving partial derivatives of future income drop out, since we are assuming
that changes in borrowing constraints do not have a direct effect on income.

constraints. This implies that the covariance between housing expenditures and house
movements is negative.
Economic theory suggests that the left-hand side of condition (8) should be positive.
The permanent income model of consumption tells us that ceteris paribus, households
with high, expected future income growth will smooth consumption to a much greater
extent than households with low expected income growth. Thus, in the presence of
constraints on borrowing, households expecting high income growth are more likely
to find themselves borrowing constrained than households expecting lower income
growth. This implies that households who are expecting higher income growth will
be more affected by the relaxation of constraints.
Theory also suggests that the right-hand side of condition (8) should be negative. If housing consumption is a positive function of permanent income, then ceteris
paribus, families with higher wealth will prefer to live in more expensive houses. Since
households with higher levels of wealth are less likely to be borrowing constrained,
then we would expect that on average, households living in bigger houses are less
likely to change homes in response to a change in constraints.

Figure 1: GSE Activity Over Time
Stock Measures

% of total mortgages outstanding

30
Guarantees outstanding→

25
20
15
10
5

տ Retained Portfolio

0
1970

1974

1978

1982

1986

1990

1994

1998

2002

Flow Measures
60
Purchases by GSEs ց

% of new originations

50
40
30
20
∆Retained Portfolio ց
10
0
1970

1974

1978

1982

1986

1990

1994

1998

2002

Sources: Historical Statistics of the United States and OFHEO.

Figure 2: Borrowing Constraints, Income Growth and Housing Expenditure
Constraints make
some YHf types
buy HS

Y (HB ) = YHf

C

YHf

move to
bigger houses

A

Y (HS , 1) = 25 YHf + 35 YLf

B

Y (HS , 2) = 14 YHf + 34 YLf
YLf

HS

HB

Figure 3: The effect of relaxing constraints in a regression of housing on future income.

C

HB

B

H(YHf , 2) = 13 HS + 23 HB

A

H(YHf , 1) = 23 HS + 13 HB

YHf move to
bigger houses

Constraints make
some YHf types
buy HS

H(YL) = HS

YLf

YHf

Figure 4: The effect of relaxing borrowing constraints on the housing-future income relationship in a more
general setting. The key condition for borrowing constraints to raise the sensitivity of house spending to
future income is that the smaller the house purchased and the higher the income growth, the more likely
it is that a household faces binding constraints. See Section 3 for details.

Yf

Smaller
House/Income

Higher Income
Growth

More
constrained

Less
constrained

Less
constrained

H
Figure 5: Housing Expenditure and Future Income.
0.3
Income Growth over 2 years (Yt+2 /Yt )



•
0.2


0.1


0

•



Pre-1985 ց •

-0.1

•

•

•

•



•


տPost-1985

-0.2


-1

-0.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

Log Ratio of House Value to Current Income (Log(H/Y ))
Notes: For each octile of the distribution of the ratio of housing expenditure to
income, this figure shows the corresponding average income growth.

Table 1: Summary Statistics.

Size of household
Age of head
Real Quantities (2000 Dollars)
Total family income
Labor income
House value
Size of mortgage

(1) Baseline Sample
(obs = 5,277)
Mean
St. dev. Median
3.0
1.4
3.0
38
14
34
55,842
46,439
107,247
78,490

Percentages of household heads who are...
Male
White
Black
Other race
Educ < High School
Educ = High School
High School < Educ < College
Educ = College
Educ > College
First-Time Buyers

Sizeo of Household
Age of Head
Real Quantities (2000 Dollars)
Total Family Income
Labor Income
House Value
Size Of Mortgage

43,284
35,383
91,021
60,274

47,296
41,524
88,132
66,498

91.0%
95.3%
4.2%
0.5%
6.5%
24.7%
37.0%
21.0%
10.9%
21.1%

(2) SEO Poverty Sample
(obs = 2,574)
Mean St. dev. Median
3.7
1.9
3.0
36
12
33
40,319
34,084
70,284
58,541

27,487
25,726
59,249
44,384

34,347
30,316
56,477
49,600

(3) First-Time Buyers
(obs = 1,112)
Mean St. dev. Median
2.8
1.2
3.0
27
4
27
46,899
43,482
82,903
67,099

80.6%
38.7%
60.1%
1.1%
12.7%
36.7%
36.9%
8.7%
5.0%
25.5%
(4) Age < 40 Sample
(obs = 3,453)
Mean
St. dev. Median
3.2
1.3
3.0
30
5
30

53,350
48,539
103,100
78,095

Percentages of household heads who are...
Male
White
Black
Other Race
Educ < High School
Educ = High School
High School < Educ < College
Educ = College
Educ > College
First-Time Buyers

34,395
31,411
85,765
58,093
95.3%
95.5%
4.0%
0.5%
3.4%
24.1%
38.0%
23.8%
10.6%
31.8%

46,232
42,804
85,537
67,167

23,764
21,866
56,323
44,357
94.2%
93.8%
5.4%
0.8%
3.6%
25.8%
36.4%
24.0%
10.2%
100.0%

(5) Age ≥ 40 Sample
(obs = 1,704)
Mean
St. dev. Median
2.7
1.5
2.0
55
11
52
59,628
41,053
113,721
78,793

55,774
41,556
99,570
65,207

48,892
34,866
90,813
63,754

82.2%
94.7%
4.8%
0.6%
13.0%
26.6%
34.2%
15.1%
11.2%
0.7%

Notes: The baseline sample includes all home buyers in the PSID over the years 1969-2001 excluding those in
the SEO Poverty Sample. First-time buyers includes households that bought a house using a mortgage who had
never bought a house before. Section 5 provides further details.

42,918
40,718
74,390
61,192

Table 2: Estimates of the Basic Model.
Left-Hand-Side Variable = Average of income 2 and 4 years into the future
(1)
Baseline

(2)
Poverty

(4)
Age < 40

0.32
(5.35)

(3)
First-Time
Buyers
0.554
(12.93)

log(Total Family Income)

0.358
(5.92)

log(House Value)

(5)
(6)
Age ≥ 40 Baseline

0.408
(4.89)

0.308
(3.80)

0.358
(5.92)

0.131
(5.53)

0.155
(4.59)

0.036
(1.05)

0.098
(3.54)

0.186
(4.63)

Age

0.047
(3.58)

0.018
(1.08)

0.143
(0.98)

0.2
(1.39)

High School

0.085
(2.83)

0.065
(1.95)

-0.008
(-0.13)

Some College

0.156
(4.56)

0.187
(4.82)

College

0.258
(6.45)

> College

(9)
Age < 40

0.32
(5.35)

(8)
First-Time
Buyers
0.553
(13.24)

0.161
(8.03)

0.141
(4.90)

0.078
(3.39)

0.126
(5.38)

0.138
(1.81)

0.047
(3.64)

0.019
(1.13)

0.162
(1.15)

0.194
(1.37)

0.065
(1.69)

0.078
(1.77)

0.084
(2.83)

0.066
(1.97)

-0.013
(-0.21)

0.064
(1.67)

0.034
(0.51)

0.11
(2.69)

0.196
(3.87)

0.155
(4.57)

0.188
(4.85)

0.030
(0.46)

0.107
(2.68)

0.307
(6.13)

0.194
(3.11)

0.215
(4.59)

0.315
(4.85)

0.258
(6.47)

0.308
(6.15)

0.190
(3.07)

0.211
(4.57)

0.33
(7.49)

0.384
(7.41)

0.219
(3.12)

0.302
(5.93)

0.343
(4.96)

0.329
(7.53)

0.384
(7.46)

0.218
(3.13)

0.298
(5.96)

Black

-0.042
(-1.60)

-0.076
(-3.44)

-0.017
(-0.38)

-0.04
(-1.28)

-0.026
(-0.55)

-0.042
(-1.62)

-0.076
(-3.43)

-0.021
(-0.48)

-0.04
(-1.29)

Other Race

-0.155
(-3.40)

0.084
(1.13)

-0.241
(-3.02)

-0.123
(-1.92)

-0.254
(-4.67)

-0.157
(-3.46)

0.084
(1.16)

-0.240
(-3.09)

-0.124
(-1.98)

Female

-0.337
(7-.71)

-0.379
(-8.69)

-0.245
(-3.37)

-0.334
(-5.63)

-0.341
(-5.99)

-0.337
(-7.71)

-0.38
(-8.70)

-0.247
(-3.41)

-0.337
(-5.66)

Size

0.02
(3.21)

0.021
(3.23)

0.020
(1.08)

0.011
(1.15)

0.033
(3.64)

0.02
(3.16)

0.021
(3.29)

0.020
(1.07)

0.01
(1.08)

Time× log(House Value)

0.004
(3.21)

0.003
(1.84)

0.006
(2.87)

0.005
(2.88)

0.002
(0.98)

Dummy(Year≥ 1978)×
log(House Value)

(7)
Poverty

0.089
(3.46)

Dummy(Year≥ 1981)×
log(House Value)

0.076
(3.24)
0.064
(3.23)

Dummy(Year≥ 1985)×
log(House Value)
Observations

0.408
(4.89)

5,277

2,574

1,112

3,453

1,824

5,277

0.124
(2.51)
2,574

1,112

Notes: Left hand side variable is average of income 2 years and 4 years into the future. Subsamples are described
in Section 5 and, briefly, in the notes to Table 1. Columns (1)-(5) provide estimates of equation (4.5) in the text for
various subsamples. Columns (6)-(9) provide estimates of equation (5.1) in the text. (There is no second column
for the Age ≥ 40 sample because we identified no breakpoints for this sample.) All regressions are estimated using
data from 1969 to 2001 and include a constant, a set of year effects, and a cubic in age. Figures in parentheses
are t-statistics based on the use of robust standard errors.

3,453

Table 3: Selected Coefficients from Alternative Specifications
(1) Left-hand side variable = avg. of 2 and 4 years ahead
(1)
Baseline

(2)
Poverty

log(House Value)
0.131∗∗∗ 0.155∗∗∗
Time× log(House Value)
0.004∗∗∗
0.003∗
∗∗∗
Breakpoint
1985
1978∗
log(House Value)
0.161∗∗∗ 0.141∗∗∗
Dummy(Year≥ Breakpoint)×
(v)
0.064∗∗∗ 0.089∗∗∗
log(House Value)
Observations
5,277
2,574
(2) Left-hand side variable = avg. of 5 years ahead
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

(3)
First-Time
Buyers
0.036
0.006∗∗∗
1985
0.078∗∗∗

(4)
(5)
Age < 40 Age ≥ 40
0.098∗∗∗
0.005∗∗∗
1981∗∗
0.126∗∗∗

0.186∗∗∗
0.002
none
-

0.124∗∗∗

0.076∗∗∗

-

1,112

3,453

1,824

log(House Value)
0.090∗∗∗
Time× log(House Value)
0.005∗∗∗
Breakpoint
1982∗∗∗
log(House Value)
0.127∗∗∗
Dummy(Year≥ Breakpoint)×
(v)
0.061∗∗∗
log(House Value)
Observations
4,349
(3) Left-hand side variable = 2 years ahead

0.114∗∗∗
0.007∗∗∗
1977∗∗
0.134∗∗∗

0.006
0.008∗∗∗
1981∗∗
0.067∗∗∗

0.051∗∗∗
0.006∗∗∗
1981∗∗∗
0.097∗∗∗

0.164∗∗∗
0.001
none
-

0.101∗∗∗

0.087∗∗∗

0.075∗∗∗

-

2,158

930

2,902

1,447

log(House Value)
0.116∗∗∗
Time× log(House Value)
0.004∗∗∗
Breakpoint
1985∗∗∗
log(House Value)
0.146∗∗∗
Dummy(Year≥ Breakpoint)×
(v)
0.073∗∗∗
log(House Value)
Observations
6,717
(4) Left-hand side variable = 4 years ahead

0.119∗∗∗
0.005∗∗∗
1980∗∗
0.134∗∗∗

0.068∗
0.004∗
1980
0.068∗∗∗

0.055
0.006∗∗∗
1980∗∗∗
0.079∗∗∗

0.204∗∗∗
0.001
none
-

0.099∗∗∗

0.097∗∗∗

0.109∗∗∗

-

3,366

1,424

4,335

2,382

0.101∗∗∗
0.005∗∗∗
1984∗∗
0.147∗∗∗

0.142∗∗∗
0.003
1981∗∗∗
0.103∗∗∗

0.039
0.007∗∗∗
1981
0.073

0.074∗∗
0.006∗∗∗
1980
0.107∗∗∗

0.146∗∗∗
0.005∗∗
none
-

0.089∗∗∗

0.118∗∗∗

0.124∗∗

0.091∗∗∗

-

5,359

2,638

1,127

3,507

1,852

(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

log(House Value)
Time× log(House Value)
Breakpoint
log(House Value)
Dummy(Year≥ Breakpoint)×
(v)
log(House Value)
Observations

Notes: Subsamples are defined in Section 5, and, briefly, in the notes to Table 1. Rows (i) and (ii)
report results from basic specifications including time trends, corresponding to columns (1) through
(5) of Table 2. Row (iii)-(v) exhibit the results of our breakpoint analysis, corresponding to columns
(6) through (9) of Table 2. Row (iii) shows the estimated breakpoint. One, two and three asterisks
imply that we can reject the hypothesis of no breakpoints at the 10, 5, and 1 percent significance
levels respectively. Row (iv) shows the coefficient on the log of house value prior to the breakpoint
and row (v) shows the coefficient on the interaction between log of house value and a dichotomous
variable which equals one for years starting with the breakpoint. For the coefficient estimates in
rows (i), (ii), (iv) and (v), one, two and three asterisks imply that we can reject the hypothesis that
the coefficient equals zero at the 10, 5, and 1 percent significance levels, respectively.

Table 4: The Impact of GSE Activity
(1)
Baseline

(2)
Poverty

(3)
First-Time
Buyers
(1) GSE secondary market activity (stocks)
(a) yf = avg. of 2 and 4 years ahead
α3′′
0.22
-0.39
0.07
p-value
0.23
0.13
0.88
observations
2,596
1,225
551

(4)
Age < 40

(5)
Age ≥ 40

0.06
0.78
1,652

0.42
0.19
944

0.01
0.94
1,194

-0.08
0.82
610

(2) GSE secondary market activity (flows)
(a) yf = avg. of 2 and 4 years ahead
α3′′
0.21
-0.27
0.32
p-value
0.12
0.20
0.16
observations
2,596
1,225
551

0.11
0.43
1,652

0.35
0.20
944

(b) yf = avg. of 5 years ahead
α3′′
0.08
-0.13
p-value
0.59
0.65
observations
1,804
902

-0.11
0.43
1,194

0.17
0.58
610

(3) GSE retained portfolio activity (flows)
(a) yf = avg. of 2 and 4 years ahead
α3′′
0.00
-1.05
-2.92
p-value
1.00
0.28
0.02
Observations
2,596
1,225
551

-0.65
0.38
1,652

1.41
0.13
944

(b) yf = avg. of 5 years ahead
α3′′
-0.88
0.26
p-value
0.55
0.91
Observations
1,804
902

-1.54
0.32
1,194

3.79
0.19
610

(b) yf = avg. of 5 years ahead
α3′′
0.12
-0.05
p-value
0.51
0.88
observations
1,804
902

0.55
0.11
405

0.27
0.32
405

-5.19
0.03
405

Notes: For each specification, this table reports the estimate of α3′′ of equation (6.1), which is
the coefficient on the interaction of the relevant measure of GSE activity and the log of housing
expenditure. The estimates are from models that also include all the covariates in Table 2, which
are not reported here.

