                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      STRATEGIC RESPONSES TO PARALLEL TRADE

                                          Margaret K. Kyle

                                        Working Paper 12968
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12968


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2007




I thank Amy Finkelstein, Kevin Schulman, Fiona Scott Morton, and participants seminar participants
at the NBER Productivity Lunch, NBER Summer Institute, Lehigh, University of Toulouse, HEC
Lausanne, London Business School, London School of Economics, Imperial College London, New
York University, and Duke for useful discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Margaret K. Kyle. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Strategic Responses to Parallel Trade
Margaret K. Kyle
NBER Working Paper No. 12968
March 2007
JEL No. D21,L1

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper examines how pharmaceutical firms have responded to changes in intellectual property
rights and trade barriers that legalized "parallel imports" within the European Union. The threat of
arbitrage by parallel traders reduces the ability of firms to price discriminate across countries. Due
to regulations on price and antitrust law on rationing supply, pharmaceutical firms may rely on non-price
responses. Such responses include differentiation of products across countries and selective "culling"
of product lines to reduce arbitrage opportunities, as well as raising arbitrageurs' costs through choice
of packaging. Using a dataset of drug prices and sales from 1993-2004 covering 30 countries, I find
evidence that the behavior of pharmaceutical firms in the EU with respect to their product portfolios
is consistent with attempts to reduce parallel trade. This may at least partially explain why parallel
trade has not yet resulted in significant price convergence across EU countries. Accounting for non-price
strategic responses may therefore be important in assessing the welfare effects of parallel imports.

Margaret K. Kyle
London Business School
Sussex Place
Regent's Park
London NW1 4SA
United Kingdom
and NBER
mkyle@london.edu
I. Introduction


           Firms often rely on trade barriers or intellectual property rights to charge different
prices in different countries in response to local market conditions. This paper examines
how European integration, which involved changes in both trade regulations and
intellectual property rights, has affected the product market strategies of pharmaceutical
firms.      In particular, it illustrates the importance of non-price responses, such as
adjustments in product offerings or characteristics, to maintain price differences across
borders.


           Cross-national differences in pharmaceutical prices are the topic of much
discussion in the press and in policy circles. Representative Henry Waxman (D-CA), a
vocal critic of the pharmaceutical industry, maintains that: “A grandmother on the
Westside has to pay more than twice as much for her drugs as a grandmother in France,
in Canada, in Germany, in Italy, and in the United Kingdom. And for some drugs, seniors
in Los Angeles are paying over three times more than seniors in other countries. This
unconscionable gouging is unacceptable and has to end." 1 Quite a few studies have
documented these differences (Stuart et al. (2000), Danzon and Chao (2002), Danzon and
Furukawa (2005)) and provided some explanations for their underlying causes, such as
differences in patient demand, national income, and the use of price controls by
governments.         Historically, these price differences have persisted because of laws
preventing arbitrage of drugs across borders. These laws include regulations on the right
to sell a drug in a country as well as rights granted to patent-holders to prevent the sale of
a product by other firms without authorization.


           While arbitrage of drugs, or “parallel trade,” remains illegal in most countries, it
is now permitted within the European Union. This is part of the move to a single market
for pharmaceuticals in the EU; other changes include harmonization of regulations for the
approval of new drugs, the adoption of the Euro, and the application of Articles 28-30
governing the free movement of goods within the EU. The EU has established a policy

1
    http://www.democrats.reform.house.gov/investigations.asp?Issue=Price+Discrimination


                                                    2
of “community exhaustion” of most forms of intellectual property2, which means that
once a firm has put the drug on the market in any EU country, it may not prevent the sale
of that drug within the EU by any other firm by claiming a violation of patent rights or
trademarks, under most circumstances. The combination of these changes has reduced
the ability of firms in all industries to price discriminate across EU countries, but has
been of particular concern to pharmaceutical firms, which face price controls in many EU
countries.


         The issue of parallel imports is at the intersection of competition law, intellectual
property (IP) law, and trade law, and therefore is an important policy issue for
governments and international organizations. There have been proposals in the United
States to permit parallel imports from Canada (and other countries) in the last several
years; re-importation of drugs was an important campaign issue in 2004 for Senator John
Kerry and the subject of a Congressional Budget Office study. 3 In addition, non-
governmental organizations such as Doctors Without Borders/Medicins Sans Frontieres
have lobbied extensively for a policy of “international exhaustion” of patent rights, which
would remove the current barrier of IP rights to parallel trade in most countries.4 Both
the law and the strategies firms use in response to parallel imports are relevant not only to
the pharmaceutical industry, but to all IP-intensive firms that are active in multiple
countries, some of which contend with illegal pirating that is not well-policed in addition
to legal parallel trade.5


         This paper examines the extent of parallel imports of pharmaceuticals within the
EU, and describes the strategic responses by firms to dampen the resulting profit losses. I

2
  In the case of patent rights, community exhaustion is not the result of specific legislation, but rather the
interpretation of laws on the free movement of goods by the European Court of Justice.
3
  Congress passed a law allowing parallel imports from Canada under President Clinton, but the
Department of Health and Human Services and the Food and Drug Administration declined to enforce it,
citing safety concerns.
4
  Under the TRIPS agreement, each country can choose a policy of national (domestic) exhaustion (which
would allow patentholders to prevent unauthorized imports) or international exhaustion of patent rights.
Hong Kong and Argentina apply international exhaustion; most (all?) others use national. In contrast, most
countries have adopted international exhaustion of trademarks.
5
  These industries include movies, video games, luxury goods, and others. The sources of the pirated
copies are countries like China, India, Brazil, and Russia. See “US Moves to Stop Piracy of Intellectual
Property,” New York Times, Sept. 22, 2005.


                                                      3
find that parallel imports have not yet led to a large reduction in aggregate price
dispersion across EU countries, consistent with other recent empirical studies of drug
prices (Kanavos et al. (2004), Danzon and Chao (2002)). While the number of products
experiencing parallel imports has been increasing, it is still a small fraction of the total
number of pharmaceutical products. I find evidence that efforts by pharmaceutical firms
to adjust to the threat of parallel imports may have moderated the impact. The setting
examined in this paper is useful for understanding how firms adapt to a change in the
legal environment that affects the ability to price discriminate. This research highlights
the importance of considering all strategic options available to firms and the interaction
of multiple policies when assessing the impact of parallel trade, or a change in trade and
intellectual property laws more generally.


       The paper proceeds as follows. Section II reviews the literature on parallel trade
and describes the pharmaceutical market in the European Union. Section III presents a
simple model of entry by parallel traders and describes what strategic options might be
expected from pharmaceutical firms. Section IV describes the data, and Section V
estimates the entry model and presents evidence of strategic responses. Section VI
discusses and concludes.


Section II. Overview of the pharmaceutical industry in the EU and relevant literature


       The move to a European Common Market has directly affected the
pharmaceutical industry in several ways. One major change is the process of obtaining
approval to market a drug in the EU. Historically, a firm wishing to sell a new drug had
to submit a separate application for marketing approval in each European country, and
was to different regulatory standards in each. In an effort to form a single market for
pharmaceuticals, the EU established two procedures for drug approval in 1995. The first
of these, the Mutual Recognition Procedure, allows a firm to apply for marketing
approval in one “reference member state” (RMS). Following approval in the RMS, the
firm may launch the drug in other EU countries without additional applications unless
another country raises a formal objection over concerns about safety and efficacy. The



                                             4
other procedure, which is required for biological products but optional for most others,
involves an application to the newly created European Medicines Evaluation Agency
(EMEA) for an EU-wide marketing approval. These processes have reduced the fixed
cost of obtaining regulatory approval in multiple EU countries.


        However, selling a drug in most EU countries involves more than approval
through either procedure. In general, prices are not determined by market conditions: all
but a few countries use explicit price controls on pharmaceuticals, necessitating a
sometimes lengthy negotiation with health agencies responsible for providing health
coverage to the local population. Many countries also specify that the launch price be set
at the minimum or average of the price in a basket of other countries. Once a drug is
marketed in several countries at different prices, therefore, any convergence towards a
uniform price tends toward the minimum. For this reason, many firms attempt to launch
at a uniform price, but this can lead to lengthy launch delays in countries where
governments prefer to set a lower price (Danzon and Epstein (2005)). Despite the
reduction in the fixed cost of additional entry conditional on launch in one EU country,
there are large differences in the set of drugs available across these countries, which are
at least partly attributable to price regulation (Danzon et al. (2005), Kyle (2005), Lanjouw
(2005)).


        Besides changes in the approval process, pharmaceutical firms have experienced
an important change in the protection afforded by patents they hold in the EU. Court
decisions by the European Court of Justice during the last 25-30 years have established a
policy of “community exhaustion” of patent rights and other forms of intellectual
property, such as trademarks and copyrights. Once a patent holder has sold a product
within the EU, subsequent buyers may trade it freely within the EU and without
interference by the patent holder.6 Note the patent holder may still prevent the sale of
products first marketed outside the EU; it remains illegal to import drugs from Africa, for


6
  A “derogation” period was imposed for countries with relatively weak patent rights prior to joining the
EU. These include Spain and Portugal before 1995, and the eight EU ascension members of 2004 (the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, the Slovak Republic, and Slovenia). During
the derogation period, these countries could not serve as sources of parallel imports.


                                                    5
example, without the permission of the patent holder. But the combination of large price
differences within the EU, some of which exist because of price controls, and the
inability of pharmaceutical firms to use intellectual property rights to prevent resale of
their products has given rise to parallel imports.


       There are some important restrictions on parallel imports. A parallel importer
must obtain a license to import a product of identical chemical composition, dosage form,
and strength from a country with a lower price. A single 10 milligram (mg) tablet of a
chemical is not, by this definition, a perfect substitute for two 5 milligram tablets, nor is a
10 mg tablet identical to a 10 mg capsule. If the product has packaging in a different
language, has a different brand name, or has a different pack size, the parallel trader may
incur re-packaging costs. The cost of a license is approximately €1500 in most countries
or €3480 for products approved through the EMEA. For additional detail, please see the
EMEA’s “Post-Authorisation Guidance on Parallel Distribution” and Arfwedson (2004).


       In addition to securing a license and finding adequate supply, a parallel importer
must find pharmacists willing to purchase their imports. This may seem simple enough;
the parallel importer can offer the product at a lower price than that of the original
product in the destination country.       However, there are a host of country-specific
regulations on pharmacists, in addition to pharmaceuticals. For example, a number of
countries, including Denmark, Sweden, and Germany, fix the profit margins of
pharmacists. This reduces the incentive of pharmacists to seek out the lowest cost supply,
and hence their demand for parallel imports. Germany has imposed a quota on the
volume of parallel imports a pharmacist must dispense (now 7%), but since his margins
are fixed, the pharmacist has no strong motivation to find parallel imports that are any
cheaper than the original product.       The Netherlands and the United Kingdom use
“clawback” mechanisms: any savings from the use of parallel imports are shared between
the pharmacist and the government health authority, so pharmacists do have some
incentive to find a low-cost supply.       Patients in all EU countries have government
insurance coverage for most prescriptions, and are rather insensitive to price as a result.




                                              6
       In principle, the legalization of parallel imports, as well as the elimination of
exchange rate fluctuations resulting from the Euro’s adoption, should reduce price
dispersion across EU countries.     However, empirical evidence of the effect of EU
integration on price dispersion is mixed. Goldberg and Verboven (2005) find that prices
for automobiles have become more uniform within the EU following the adoption of the
Euro and other attempts to integrate the European markets, although there remain
persistent differences. Ganslandt and Maskus (2004) show that parallel imports have
resulted in a reduction of the prices of original products for the top 50 drugs in Sweden.
However, another study (Kanavos et al. (2004)) finds parallel imports have had little
effect on prices in the EU for the 20 top-selling drugs. By and large, parallel imports of
these drugs were not sold at much of a discount to original products. The authors point
out that parallel imports do not generate significant savings either to patients or to
national health systems in most cases.


       Most papers on parallel trade assume that the only strategic instruments firms
have at their disposal are price, rationing of supply, and exit from a market. The focus of
these papers is the welfare impact of a move from international price discrimination to a
uniform world (or regional) price, following Varian (1985). Malueg and Schwartz (1994)
show that parallel trade reduces global welfare if there are large differences in demand
across countries, because firms will choose not to serve low-price countries. A limitation
of applying the Malueg and Schwartz model to the pharmaceutical industry is that it does
not explicitly consider how an inability to price discriminate affects incentives to invest
in research and development (R&D).        More recent research analyzes the additional
welfare consequences for R&D, including Danzon (1998), Rey (2003), and Szymanski
and Valletti (2005, 2006).     These papers point out that parallel trade can reduce
investment in quality or R&D as a result of reducing profits to patent-holders, so that
even in cases where parallel trade benefits many consumers in the short run, welfare




                                            7
tends to be lower in the long run. Most theoretical work does not explore the use of
second degree price discrimination.7


        Price controls significantly constrain the ability of firms to increase prices, so it is
not usually possible to set a uniform price at the average between the high and low price
markets.8 Another important factor limiting the application of standard economic models
of price discrimination is EU competition law. Practices that interfere with parallel trade
or that can be shown to be an abuse of dominant position, such as rationing supply to a
low price market in an attempt to restrict exports, are legally problematic. Several drug
firms have made attempts to control supply; these were evaluated in Bundesverband der
Arzneimittel-Importeure and Commission of the European Communities v. Bayer AG
(C-2/01 P and C-3/01 P). In October of 2005, the European Association of Euro-
Pharmaceutical Companies asked the European Union antitrust authorities to investigate
Pfizer for using contracts in Spain that reward wholesalers for keeping products within
the Spanish market.9


        Pharmaceutical firms are therefore limited in their ability to use price and, to
some extent, rationing as strategic variables in response to parallel trade: in general, they
cannot raise prices in the lower-price markets (though they should encounter little
resistance to lowering prices in higher-price markets), and they may not explicitly ration
supply.10 Withdrawing all versions of a drug from a low price market may be politically
costly, and more importantly, could be interpreted by a government as a failure to “work”
a patent and result in compulsory licensing – which may then also serve as parallel
imports into other countries. Due to community exhaustion of intellectual property rights,
firms may not rely on intellectual property claims to prevent arbitrage across borders.

7
  Anderson and Ginsburgh (1999) consider the possibility that firms introduce versions of their products in
a foreign country in order to price discriminate across consumers with different arbitrage costs, and find
that under some circumstances, world welfare is increasing in the cost of arbitrage.
8
  These constraints include laws restricting the rate of price increases or requiring government approval to
increase price. While pharmaceutical firms could seek a price increase in countries with price controls,
they find it difficult to persuade governments facing their own EU-imposed limits on budget deficits to
increase expenditures.
9
  “European Pharma Lobby Group Complains To EU About Pfizer,” Dow Jones Newswire, Oct. 17, 2005.
10
   The inflexibility of prices in Europe is an important difference with the US market. Scott Morton (1997a,
1997b) studies how pharmaceutical firms adjusted prices in response to changes in Medicaid laws.


                                                    8
Decisions made about the timing of entry and initial price are crucial, given the
constraints on ex post changes. A number of papers examine how price controls have
affected the entry decision (Danzon et al. 2005, Kyle 2005, Lanjouw 2005), and a recent
paper by Danzon and Epstein (2005) looks at both launch delays and pricing decisions in
relation to price regulations in the EU. All these papers use a molecule or new chemical
entity as the unit of analysis.


        This research focuses on the threat of parallel trade in particular (separate from
price controls), and considers additional strategic choices firms make: that of product
characteristics.   It follows a number of recent empirical papers exploring non-price
strategic responses to competition. Mazzeo (2002) demonstrates that motels choose
quality to soften competition. Dafny (2005a, 2005b) shows that hospitals, which also
face constraints on price responses, find other means to respond to regulatory or
competitive changes. This can be in their choice of how to classify a procedure (Dafny
(2005a)), or in their investment in quality as a product characteristic (Dafny (2005b)).
Duggan and Scott Morton (2006) find that in addition to raising prices for some buyers,
pharmaceutical firms in the US introduce more new versions of their products at higher
prices in response to Medicaid procurement policies.         In industries like consumer
electronics or DVD distribution, firms exploit differences in product characteristics such
as standards across countries for geographic market segmentation.          Software firms
change the characteristics of their products sold in low-price countries to make them less
attractive to buyers in high-price countries, by removing certain features, for example. In
the case of pharmaceuticals, product characteristics such as brand name, dosage form,
and strength for a particular molecule may serve a similar purpose. In general, these
decisions are of second-order concern relative to the decision to launch a drug. However,
they can be quite important in the context of parallel trade, and, in particular, for
understanding why parallel trade has had relatively little impact on price convergence so
far.


        This research uses data on a wider variety of products than the Ganslandt and
Maskus (2004) and Kanavos (2004) papers, so it is possible to study additional factors



                                            9
that might affect arbitrage. The detailed information on product characteristics – in
particular, those characteristics chosen by drug firms after development costs are largely
sunk – allows me to look for non-price responses to parallel trade. The data also covers
15 non-EU countries, enabling me to isolate strategic changes specific to parallel trade in
the EU separately from general changes in product portfolios.


III. Conditions for parallel trade and strategic responses


         I begin by considering the decision by a potential arbitrageur to begin parallel
importing a particular product, conditional on having entered the business of parallel
importing in general. A first requirement is that a match in chemical composition, dosage
form, and strength exist between a lower price country and a high price country.11 The
owner of the original product, henceforth the originator, has some control over the
number of matches between high and low price countries. One strategic response to the
threat of parallel trade is to market the same chemical with different dosage forms and
strengths in low price countries than in high price countries. For example, a drug might
be sold as 30 mg pills in one country, and 25 mg capsules in another. The originator does
face some constraints on its ability to introduce variations: in addition to incurring higher
production costs, it must receive regulatory approval for each version. The cost of
obtaining approval on a new version is significantly less than for obtaining approval for a
new chemical entity, but additional clinical trials to justify a particular method of
administration or strength may be necessary.


         Assuming a product match exists, the entry condition for a parallel importer is:


E (Π ) = E (p H − p L − c T )q − L > 0


11
   The stringency of this requirement is unclear. The European Court of Justice ruled in Kohlpharma
GmBH vs. Bundesrepublik Deutschland (Case C-112/02) that the products must be “substantially
identical,” and that there be no safety concerns related to the differences. Future litigation on this point is
likely. In addition, the court ruled in Rhone-Poulenc Rorer (Case C-94/98) that when originators replace
versions that face parallel import competition with new presentations, parallel importers may continue to
sell the “old” version. However, differences in appearance might affect the willingness of buyers to
substitute towards the parallel import.


                                                       10
where pH is the price of the product in the higher-price country, pL is the price of the
matching product in the lower-price country, cT is the cost of transporting a product
between the countries, q is the number of units the parallel importer supplies in the
higher-price market, and L is the license fee. That is, a parallel importer will enter a
product market if it expects to cover its fixed costs (L) with a high enough margin (pH –
pL – cT) on sufficient quantity (q).


          The originator can influence the entry decision of a parallel importer through
changes in some of these variables.                As discussed above, originators are generally
prevented from raising pL due to price controls, but they do have the option of lowering
pH to narrow the price difference, and therefore the attractiveness of entry to a parallel
trader.    They can increase the transportation costs for a parallel importer by using
different brand names in different countries and a variety of different package sizes; this
requires the parallel trader to repackage the product for import. Finally, they may reduce
the per-package volume of sales for a drug by splitting the total volume over many
different versions. Since the parallel importer must obtain a license for each of these
versions in the high price country, this has the effect of increasing its relative fixed costs.
Rationing – or restricting supply to low price countries – is another strategic response that
limits q. It is probably the easiest strategy for originators to implement, at least in the
short run, but it is also of questionable legality.12 Due to the limitations of my dataset, it
is difficult for me to identify when rationing occurs with much certainty.                             As an
alternative, I look for evidence of supply interruptions to certain countries that are likely
sources of parallel trade.


          Since at least the 1970s, pharmaceutical firms and others have challenged parallel
imports under trademark law. While trademarks are usually internationally exhausted,
trademark owners object to any changes made to packaging that might interfere with the


12
   Firms may be sued for violating Articles 81 and 82 of the Treaty of Rome, which relate to competition
law. The courts must determine whether rationing is an abuse of a dominant position and restricts parallel
trade in practice (intent to restrict is not enough), or there is an agreement between the firm and wholesalers
to restrict competition.


                                                      11
trademark, usually arguing that such changes interfere with a buyer’s ability to identify
the manufacturer. The European Court of Justice has established the circumstances under
which repackaging is permissible in a series of decisions;13 most of these decisions did
not result in as many restrictions on parallel trade as trademark owners would have liked.
While I do not consider non-market strategies such as litigation in response to parallel
trade, the uncertainty surrounding the legality of parallel imports probably limited their
prevalence through at least the mid-1990s.


        To illustrate how these various strategies work in practice, Table 1 contains
package information and prices for Adalat (nifedipine, which is marketed as Procardia in
the US), a calcium channel blocker that treats high blood pressure, in Finland. Bayer is
the originator of Adalat, and has introduced 24 different versions (varying in form and
strength) in EU countries. Paranova is the parallel importer of Adalat in Finland. Several
points stand out. First, the price of Paranova’s imports was generally less than US$ .03
below the Bayer price, or less than a 5% discount. Second, Bayer only faced parallel
importing in three versions in Finland. Third, Bayer slightly reduced the prices of those
versions that did face parallel import competition. Finally, Bayer discontinued two
versions of Adalat that had matching products in Greece, and introduced a new version
that did not have a match in Greece. In this particular case, Bayer seems to have
responded to parallel imports by reducing the number of matches between Finland and
countries with lower prices and reducing the volume of versions with competing parallel
imports by introducing another version, in addition to responding with a price change.14


        In a more complicated model, I would account for other important strategic
considerations. For example, cutting price not only reduces the likelihood of entry by a

13
   These include Hoffman-La Roche vs. Centrafarm (C-102/77); Bristol-Myers Squibb vs. Paranova (C-
427/93); Boehringer Ingelheim vs. Paranova (C-429/93); Bayer vs. Paranova (C-436/93); Pharmacia &
Upjohn vs. Paranova (C-379/97); Boehringer Ingelheim vs. Dowelhurst (C-143/00); Merck, Sharp and
Dohm vs. Paranova (C-443/99); and Aventis Pharma vs. Kohlpharma (C-433/00).
14
   Adalat was the subject of a long-running legal battle in the EU. In 1996, Bayer was fined for rationing
supply between 1989 and 1993 to wholesalers in France and Spain, who were re-selling for parallel import
into the UK. The claim was that Bayer had formed a cartel with its wholesalers, a violation of EU
competition law. In January 2004, the European Court of Justice determined that Bayer had acted
unilaterally and had not violated any competition law since it did not have a dominant position in the
market.


                                                    12
parallel importer, but also may steal market share from substitute chemicals if physicians
are sensitive to price differences. Within a country, originators probably employ some
second degree price discrimination across packages, and I do not account for this. An
interesting extension for future work may be to apply recent innovations in structural
estimation of firms’ product offerings, such as the model proposed by Draganska,
Mazzeo and Seim (2005). I do not focus here on any strategic interaction between
parallel traders. I assume that they are essentially undifferentiated and have low sunk
costs (low exit costs).15 Pre-launch strategies, such as delaying launch into low price
markets, are assumed to be independent of the post-launch decisions I consider here.
Finally, I do not model the choice(s) each firm makes, out of a menu of strategic options,
although it is quite likely that not all firms respond to parallel trade in the same way and
an individual firm may use multiple strategic responses.


IV. Data


        The data used in this research is a subset of the IMS Midas database, which is the
most comprehensive source of information on drug prices and sales across countries. My
dataset covers a total of 30 countries for all drugs assigned to 36 therapeutic classes
(measured at the 4-digit Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical, or ATC, level) in five
broader categories for 1993Q1-2004Q3.                These are listed in Table 2.           The dataset
contains information at the package (i.e. chemical(s), dosage form, strength, and pack
size) level on the quantity sold within each country, as well as the ex-manufacturer,
wholesale, and retail price per “standard unit,” typically a pill, capsule, vial, etc.
measured in US dollars at the current exchange rate in each quarter. Summary statistics
are provided in Table 3.           There are 1791 different chemicals (or unique chemical
combinations) in these classes; 414 of them were introduced after 1990. This sample
clearly includes many products that are not “new chemical entities,” but which appear to
be herbal medicines marketed in only one or two countries, or products which are merely
new combinations of existing chemicals. As a robustness check, I have run all the

15
  In reality, parallel importers may be a heterogeneous bunch. The largest of them have sophisticated re-
packaging factories, and certainly some (like Paranova) have been very aggressive in testing EU
intellectual property and competition law as they related to parallel trade.


                                                    13
following analyses on the subset of chemicals that have been marketed in the US, and
therefore meet FDA standards for safety and efficacy, and obtained similar results.


         IMS identifies some products in the Midas data as parallel imports, though the
source country is unknown. In the dataset provided to me, the only countries with a
significant fraction of products flagged by IMS as parallel imports are Germany and the
UK. Since other sources have named the Netherlands and Scandinavian countries as
important destination markets, this suggests that IMS labels only a subset of parallel
imports. 16     I therefore use additional criteria to identify parallel imports.                        If a
manufacturer or corporation sold any product labeled a parallel import by IMS, I treat all
its other products as parallel imports too. To improve on this further, I tried to determine
whether each corporation in the dataset is a parallel importer by looking at company
websites, the membership lists of parallel import trade associations in the EU, and lists of
approved parallel imports available from regulators in the UK and Denmark.                                The
reclassification of products using this information led to a much more reasonable picture
(consistent with other studies) on the penetration of parallel imports into Germany, the
UK, the Netherlands, Denmark, Finland, and Sweden.17


         Figure 1 shows the share in terms of standard units of parallel imports within the
set of drugs in my dataset, by country over time.                      The country with the highest
penetration of parallel imports for this subset of drugs is Sweden, although the
penetration has declined since 2002. Denmark, the Netherlands, Finland, Germany, and
the UK are the other main destination markets for parallel imports. Figure 2 shows the
average share gained by parallel imports at the product level, conditional on parallel trade
taking place, and Figure 3 displays the average relative price of parallel import products
to originator products. On average, an originator does not lose more than 10% of its sales
to parallel imported versions. This could reflect difficulty in finding supplies of parallel

16
   I am forced to assume, for lack of a better data source, that IMS mislabels whether products are parallel
imports but does include all product sales.
17
   Classification is not straightforward for all firms. For example, an entity called Delta Pharmaceuticals is
a parallel importer of some products into the UK. A firm by the same name markets 2 drugs in Portugal,
which are flagged as parallel imports using my rule. Delta does not market the same drugs in the UK, so
these are probably two different firms. Fortunately, these classification issues affect few observations.


                                                     14
imports, consumer tastes, or – based on the relative prices given in Figure 3 – rather small
(if any) price discounts for parallel imported products. Note, though, that Figure 3 could
reflect price matching by originators to (initially) cheaper parallel imports. I explore this
point further in Section 5.


       Parallel trade takes place only if price differences exist across markets. In a
related paper, Kyle et al. (2006) show that price dispersion for pharmaceuticals is both
large and persistent throughout the time period I examine here. Roughly half of all price
differentials at the drug level across the EU exceeded 50% (i.e., a given drug was 1.5
times as expensive in the priciest market than in the cheapest). As well, the distribution
of price differentials did not fall dramatically after parallel trade became possible, and in
fact fell less than across non-EU countries. At the aggregate level, therefore, parallel
imports have had only a small effect, if any, on price dispersion. In contrast, Goldberg
and Verboven (2005) find that EU integration has reduced price dispersion in
automobiles, an industry which, like pharmaceuticals, historically had large price
differences across countries.


V. Results


       To begin, I estimate the simple model of parallel trade entry presented in Section
IV. The purpose of this analysis is mainly to establish that parallel importers respond to
factors over which originators have some control, so that the strategic responses I suggest
can be expected to have some effect on the behavior of parallel importers. Ideally, I
would estimate entry into each source-destination product pair, since a parallel importer
must specify the country from which it will obtain supply. However, I am unable to
identify the source country of parallel imports in my data; I observe only the destination
market. I therefore estimate entry by parallel importers into product j in country i using a
logit, and use proxies for the terms in the profit function related to price differences,
availability of supply for parallel imports, demand for parallel imports, and transportation
costs. Table 4 provides these variable definitions and parameter estimates. I include
country, time period, and therapeutic class fixed effects to control for differences in the



                                             15
costs or benefits to entry related to regulation of pharmacists, storage requirements, and
other factors.


        Results are consistent with expectations. The probability of entry by parallel
importers is increasing in the average price difference between country i and other EU
member states, the volume of sales in country i, and the availability of lower cost
supplies elsewhere. Parallel imports are less likely when the product has many different
brand names in the EU, since a parallel trader would have to incur additional repackaging
costs to sell them in country i. The parameter estimates are largely robust to changes in
the sample of drugs (results not shown here).                    Having demonstrated that parallel
importers respond to factors over which originators have at least partial control, I now
turn to evidence of strategic responses by originators to reduce entry by parallel traders.


1. Have originators reduced price differentials?


        Since price controls restrict the ability of pharmaceutical firms to increase price, I
focus here on whether firms decrease price in order to deter, or in response to, entry by
parallel traders. To make entry by parallel traders less attractive, the originator can
reduce the average price differential between a high price country and those with lower
prices. Originators should be more likely to reduce prices of those versions for which
parallel trade is most likely, i.e., those with matches in several other countries. They may
also choose to reduce price on products facing parallel imports, in order to make
substitution towards parallel imports less attractive to pharmacists or patients.


        Products in non-EU countries face no threat of parallel imports, and products in
the EU face entry by parallel traders only if there are other EU countries with a matching
version at a lower price. Similarly, a given product does not experience entry by parallel
traders in all countries. To look for strategic price responses, I estimate the regression
equation:


Ln(Originator price ijt ) = β 0 + β1Threat ijt + β 2 Entry ijt + β 3 Competition ijt + ϕ ij + κ t + ε ijt



                                                     16
where i indexes country, j indexes a drug version (chemical/form/strength), t indexes
quarters, ϕ is a country-drug version fixed effect and κ is a time period fixed effect.18


        I measure potential entry as the number of typical “source” countries for parallel
trade (in which an identical version is available. I choose this set based on the following
evidence. First, the average price index for pharmaceuticals for each of these countries
was below the EU average, with France and Portugal having the lowest price indices
(Urch Publishing, 2001), in 1998. Second, Ganslandt and Maskus (2004), who have data
on the source of parallel imports into Sweden, identify Spain, Italy and Greece as
accounting for 74% of the total there. I experimented with other measures of potential
competition. The obvious candidate is the number of countries with an identical version
at a lower price, or at a price below some threshold. I found either a positive coefficient
or a statistically insignificant one in most specifications. One explanation for this is that
parallel traders must invest in some infrastructure in each country from which they export,
and they have largely sunk this cost for the five countries I treat as “typical sources.”
While prices for products may vary widely and be significantly lower in other EU
countries, parallel traders do not incur these fixed costs for only a few products.


        Competition takes two forms. I include the number of competing drugs in the
same therapeutic class launched in country i. to control for any price changes that are the
result of entry by competing chemicals, rather than entry by parallel imports. I also
include the number of other non-parallel trading firms that sell the same drug in country I
to control for price changes that result from competition from either generic versions, or
branded versions marketed by other firms, separate from parallel imports.




18
  Price is measured in constant US dollars for this analysis. This introduces some noise through exchange
rate fluctuations and makes statistical significance less likely.


                                                   17
       Table 5 contains the results of the price response regressions, which are estimated
using data from EU countries only (as only these observations would have any variation
in actual or potential entry by parallel traders). The results show a statistically significant
price reduction following entry by parallel imports: for all specifications, prices in the
periods following entry by parallel traders fall by roughly 3%. The response to potential
entry is even smaller. The coefficient on the number of potential source countries (those
with an identical version, and which are typically cited as the sources of parallel trade)
corresponds to about a 1% price reduction, and is not estimated very precisely. I also
examine whether prices respond differently to potential parallel trade across countries by
interacting country dummies and the number of potential source countries (all
interactions are included, but only a subset are reported in the last column of Table 5).
While prices in the Netherlands do appear to be constrained by the threat of parallel trade,
in that prices are about 5% lower than for drug versions in other countries facing a similar
threat of parallel trade, this is not a widespread pattern. In fact, prices in the UK appear
to be higher.


       These parameter estimates imply that firms respond to entry by parallel importers
by lowering prices about 3%, to potential entry by about 1%, and the response varies
across countries. In this setting, the threat of competition from parallel imports does not
appear to result in large or widespread pre-emptive price cuts. Parallel trade does have a
small impact on price once an importer enters the market, but since only 7% of products
in the EU with at least one matching product actually experience entry by parallel traders,
this has had a small effect in the aggregate so far. These results are consistent with
Ganslandt and Maskus (2004). Though they find that parallel import competition reduces
prices by 12-19% for their sample of drugs in Sweden, firms in their study also did not
react much to potential competition from parallel traders.


2. Have originators reduced the number of matching products in both high and low
   price countries?




                                              18
        To test whether pharmaceutical firms have adjusted their product offerings to
reduce the potential for parallel trade, I examine the overlap of products between pairs of
countries over time. Each country-period is an observation, with a vector of dummy
variables indicating whether a product is available. I calculate the Jaccard similarity
measure of any two country-period pairs, Sijt, as the number of products available in both
countries i and j in the period t divided by the number of products available in only one of
the two countries.19 The higher this number, the more similar the product mix in the two
countries. I estimate the following regression equation for both the similarity in drugs
between markets and also for the similarity in versions of drugs (dosage form and
strength combinations):


Sijt = α 0 + α1Timetrend + α 2 Market similarity + α 3 Relationship ijt + ε


where market similarity is calculated as the correlation between a set of variables from
OECD Health Data on demographics and pharmaceutical demand, and the relationship
between countries i and j is defined as whether both are EU members and whether they
are likely source or destination markets for parallel imports. Source countries are defined
as above (Greece, Italy, Spain, Portugal, and France), and destination countries are
Sweden, Denmark, the Netherlands, Finland, Germany, and the UK. As illustrated in
Figure 1, these countries have the highest penetration of parallel imports in my dataset.
When estimating this equation for version similarity, I include drug similarity as a control
variable. Table 6 presents the results of this analysis for drug similarity, and version
similarity results are in Table 7.


        The parameter estimates in Table 6 show that a pair of any two EU countries has
more similar drugs than a pair of non-EU countries or an EU/non-EU pair, though the
interaction between the time trend and the dummy for a pair of EU countries indicates the
similarity of EU markets has increased less than the similarity of other markets over time.
This may be somewhat surprising, since changes to the approval process in the EU

19
 I experimented with other similarity measures, such as the simple matching coefficient and the Bray and
Curtis coefficient, and found the same results.


                                                   19
should have reduced the cost of gaining regulatory approval in multiple EU countries.
However, it is consistent with Danzon et al. (2005) and Kyle (2005), who show that
pharmaceutical firms are avoiding or delaying launch in EU countries with price controls,
which are likely to be source countries for parallel trade. Pairs that include a source
country and a destination country, like Denmark-Greece, are roughly as close in the
availability of drugs as a random pair of other countries, despite both being in the
“common market.” For the subset of US-launched drugs, pairs of source countries
appear more similar. However, this reflects a common lack of US-launched drugs rather
than common availability, and this result is not robust to the method of calculating
similarity (results of alternative similarity measures are available on request).


       Pairs of EU countries have more overlap of versions as well, and the version
mixes are becoming more similar over time across EU countries, based on the results in
Table 7. However, the similarity in the EU is mostly driven by pairs of “destination”
countries (such as UK-Germany or UK-Finland). Pairs that include a source country and
a destination country, like Denmark-Greece, are less similar than a random pair of other
countries, despite both being in the “common market.” Though the coefficients on
source-destination pairs are not significantly different from zero, note that they are
significantly different from the coefficients on destination pairs. This finding holds for a
variety of similarity measures (not included). As well, pairs of source markets have less
similarity of versions available than any other combination. This is consistent with
originators taking steps to limit the number of source countries.          Interestingly, the
interaction of drug similarity and the time trend is negative within the sample of EU
countries (Models 3 and 4). This suggests that even as they launch drugs in more
countries, firms have increased differentiation of versions available across countries.


       Overall, these results are consistent with an adjustment of product offerings to
reduce the potential for parallel trade. Similarity of both drugs and versions of drugs is
lower between pairs of source countries and destination countries than between other
pairs of EU countries. In addition, similarity is greatest between pairs of destination
countries, while pairs of source countries have less overlap of versions than any other EU



                                             20
pairing. This may indicate a strategy of producing versions for sale in all high price
(destination) markets, and at the same time producing different versions in each of the
likely low price (source) markets to limit both the number of arbitrage opportunities and
the availability of supply sources.


        As a second test for how product offerings change in response to parallel imports,
I look for evidence of product line “culling,” or selective exit of drug versions. That is,
are firms more likely to discontinue versions of a drug that are threatened by parallel
imports or that may serve as a source of parallel imports into a higher price market? I
estimate a conditional fixed-effects logit for exit,


Exit ijt = β 0 + β1Source i + β 2 Destination i + β 4 Threat_Export ijt + β 5 Threat_Import ijt +
        β 6 Source i × Threat_Import ijt + β 7 Destination i × Threat_Export ijt + β 8 Controls ijt +
        λ j + κ t + ε ijt

where i indexes country, j indexes a drug version (chemical/form/strength), t indexes
quarters, λ is drug version fixed effect and κ is a time period fixed effect. Exit takes the
value of 1 if the drug version is available in country i in period t but not sold in any
period after that. I measure threat of import as the number of markets with the identical
product at a lower price that can serve as legal sources of parallel imports. Threat of
export is similarly defined as the number of markets with a higher price than the drug
version. Control variables include the measures of competition defined earlier (number
of competing molecules in the same therapeutic class, number of other firms making the
same drug, and number of other versions of the same drug) as well as the number of
standard units of version j sold in the previous quarter.


        Results from conditional fixed effects logits of exit are contained in Table 8 for
both the entire sample of countries as well as the subset of EU countries. Most of the
control variables have similar coefficients (in sign and order of magnitude) in both
samples. I find that overall, if a version is discontinued, the exit is less likely to occur in
EU countries than in the non-EU subset. However, products are more likely to be
withdrawn from destination markets than from mid-priced EU or source countries. The


                                                 21
probability of withdrawal is increasing in the number of source countries with an
identical match as well as the number of destination countries with an identical match,
i.e., both the threat of competition from imports (number of source countries) and the
threat of serving as exports (number of destination countries) increase the likelihood that
a version is pulled from the market. The interactions of the source and destination market
dummies with these threat measures are both positive, though estimated with less
precision, for the EU subsample, implying that exit is particularly likely to occur from
source countries when there are many potential destination markets, and from destination
countries when there are many sources.


        These results provide limited evidence of product line “culling” in response to
parallel trade. Conditional on withdrawing a version at any time or in any country in my
sample, firms appear to choose those that are likely to be targets or sources of parallel
imports.


3. Have originators reduced supply to low price countries?


        An originator may attempt to ration the supply of product to low price countries
that parallel traders are likely to use as sources. While rationing is difficult for me to
identify well, I can look for evidence of selective supply interruptions. That is, are firms
more likely to interrupt the supply of versions of a drug that are that may serve as a
source of parallel imports into a higher price market? I estimate a conditional fixed-
effects logit for “temporary” exit,


Temporary Exit ijt = β 0 + β 1Source i + β 2 Destination i + β 4 Threat_Export ijt + β 5 Threat_Import ijt +
                    β 6 Source i × Threat_Import ijt + β 7 Destination i × Threat_Export ijt + β 8 Controls ijt +
                    λ j + κ t + ε ijt


where i indexes country, j indexes a drug version (chemical/form/strength), t indexes
quarters, λ is drug version fixed effect and κ is a time period fixed effect. Temporary
exit takes the value of 1 if the drug version is available (units shipped are greater than



                                                  22
zero) in country i in period t-1, not available in period t, but available again in some
future period. Explanatory variables are defined as in Section V.2. Here, however, I
expect only the coefficients on the source country dummy and threat of export variables
(and their interactions) to be important, as there is no need to reduce supply to high price
markets.


       Results from regressions of temporary exit are contained in Table 9 and seem
consistent with expectations. The coefficient on the dummy for source countries is
positive and significant, but the coefficient for destination countries is closer to zero in
magnitude and not estimated precisely. While the number of destination markets itself is
not statistically significant, its interaction with the source country dummy is positive and
significant. The corresponding interaction between the destination market dummy and
the number of source countries is close to zero.


       Supply interruptions occur more frequently in likely source countries, and are
more likely to happen when the version in question has a match in many destination
markets.   Unlike permanent withdrawal, which affected both source and destination
markets depending on the vulnerability to parallel trade, temporary exit is generally
confined to source markets.       This is not surprising, given the explicit efforts of
pharmaceutical firms to ration supply to these countries.


4. Have originators taken steps to increase transportation costs?


       I examine the overlap of brand names between pairs of countries over time to test
whether firms use different brand names in across countries. Such differences require
parallel traders to repackage products for import, and so increase their transportation
costs. The approach taken is analogous to that of version overlap. Each country-period
is an observation, with a vector of dummy variables indicating whether a given brand
name is used in the country. I calculate the Jaccard similarity measure of any two
country-period pairs, Sijt, as the number of brand names available in both countries i and j




                                            23
in the period t divided by the number of brand names available in only one of the two
countries. I estimate the following regression equation:


Sijt = α 0 + α1Timetrend + α 2 Market similarity + α 3 Relationship ijt + ε


       Results are presented in Table 10. Interestingly, pairs of EU countries have lower
similarity than pairs of other countries. As expected, source-destination pairs have even
lower overlap of brand names. Over time, the overlap between source and destination
pairs is increasing, but at a slower rate than the similarity between pairs of destination
countries is increasing.      While version similarity was greatest between destination
countries and lowest between pairs of source countries, the opposite is true in the case of
brand name similarity.       This pattern is still consistent with increasing the cost of
repackaging for parallel importers, however. The lack of similarity between source and
destination markets means that parallel importers must relabel many of the products they
ship to destination markets. In addition, while there may be substantial overlap in the
versions of drugs available in destination countries, a parallel importer would be required
to repackage a product for sale in each of them if they have different brand names. Thus,
this use of brand names denies parallel importers significant economies of scale.


VI. Discussion and Conclusion


       Policymakers in the EU actively support the development of parallel trade as an
important step towards a common market in pharmaceuticals. Some governments also
hoped and expected that competition from parallel imports would lower drug costs in
countries with relatively high prices. The European Court of Justice has, in a series of
decisions, generally sided against originators in lawsuits related to parallel trade. Despite
all this, parallel trade has yet to reduce price dispersion across EU member states very
significantly. In short, firms have moved from using third-degree price discrimination to
a form of second-degree, through increasing product differentiation.




                                               24
       In part, parallel trade may be limited as a result of policies set by national
governments. Regulations on the profits of pharmacists inhibit incentives for pharmacists
to seek low-priced drugs, so that many see little financial reason to stock parallel imports
in lieu of original products. Patients and doctors in most countries are also rather
insensitive to price, and probably see no benefit to using parallel imported versions of
products. And although much has been done to facilitate parallel trade, parallel importers
still face many regulations on their activities, including substantial documentation
requirements due to concerns about drug safety.


       However, non-price responses by pharmaceutical firms may also be playing a role.
Firms do cut prices in response to actual entry, but this affects a small number of
products, and the price reduction itself is not large. In addition to rationing supply – a
strategy that has faced a number of legal challenges – firms appear to adjust their product
offerings in each country to minimize the potential for parallel trade. “Versioning” and
“culling” limit the number of arbitrage opportunities. Such a strategy is, of course, costly
to originators: it means additional regulatory fees and higher production costs. An
important question is whether these costs add any consumer benefit.


       This paper illustrates one way firms adapt to changes in intellectual property and
trade law. While the pharmaceutical industry differs from most others in the extent to
which it is regulated, non-price responses are important for other IP-intensive sectors as
well, including consumer electronics, college textbooks, and software.            Non-price
responses such as these have received little attention in the debate over the welfare effects
of parallel trade. Firms should have higher profits than under perfect arbitrage, which
may offset the negative effects of parallel trade on long-run incentives to invest in
research. However, these strategies also offset the expected consumer gains from parallel
trade. Understanding their impact may be important in evaluating whether to legalize
parallel trade in other countries, and how to adjust other policies or regulations to a goal
of price reductions.




                                             25
References

Arfwedson, J. (2004), “Re-importation (Parallel Trade) in Pharmaceuticals,” Institute for
Policy Innovation Policy Report 192.

Anderson, S. and V. Ginsburgh (1999), “International Pricing with Costly Arbitrage,”
Review of International Economics 7(1), 126-139.

Committee on Government Reform Special Investigations Division (2002), “Prescription
Drugs Are More Expensive in Rep. Waxman’s Congressional District in California than
in Canada, Europe, and Japan.”

Dafny, L. (2005a), “How Do Hospitals Respond to Price Changes?” American Economic
Review, 95(5), 1525-1547.

Dafny, L. (2005b), “Games Hospitals Play: Entry Deterrence in Hospital Procedure
Markets,” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 14(3): 513-542.

Danzon, P. and A. Epstein (2005), “Launch and Pricing Strategies of Pharmaceuticals in
Interdependent Markets," University of Pennsylvania working paper.

Danzon, P. and M. Furukawa (2003), “Prices and Availability of Pharmaceuticals:
Evidence From Nine Countries,” Health Affairs Web Exclusive. October 2003.

Danzon, P., R. Wang and L. Wang (2005), “The Impact of Price Regulation on the
Launch Delay of New Drugs,” Health Economics, 14(3).

Danzon, P. and L. Chao (2000), "Cross-National Price Differences for Pharmaceuticals:
How Large and Why?" Journal of Health Economics. 19:159-195.

Danzon, P. (1998), “The Economics of Parallel Trade,” PharmacoEconomics 13(3):293-
304.

Draganska, M., M. Mazzeo and K. Seim (2005), “Modeling Joint Pricing and Product
Assortment Decisions,” working paper, Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern
University.

Duggan, M. and F. Scott Morton (2006), “The Distortionary Effects of Government
Procurement: Evidence from Medicaid Prescription Drug Purchasing,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, Vol. 121, No. 1: 1-30.

Ganslandt, M. and K. Maskus (2004), “The Price Impact of Parallel Imports in
Pharmaceuticals: Evidence from the European Union,” Journal of Health Economics
23(5), 1035-1057.




                                           26
Goldberg, P. and F. Verboven (2005), “Market Integration and Convergence to the Law
of One Price: Evidence from the European Car Market,” Journal of International
Economics, 65(1), 45-73.

Goolsbee, A. and C. Syverson (2006), “How do Incumbents Respond to the Threat of
Entry? Evidence from the Major Airlines,” working paper, University of Chicago
Graduate School of Business.

Kanavos, P., J. Costa-i-Font, S. Merkur, and M. Gemmill (2004), “The Economic Impact
of Pharmaceutical Parallel Trade in European Union Member States: A Stakeholder
Analysis,” LSE Health and Social Care Special Research Paper.

Kyle, M. (2007), “Pharmaceutical Price Controls and Entry Strategies,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 89(1), 88-99.

Kyle, M., J. Allsbrook and K. Schulman (2006), “Does Reimportation Reduce Price
Differences for Prescription Drugs? Lessons from the European Union,” Duke University
working paper.

Lanjouw, J. (2005), “Price controls, patents, and the availability of drugs,” NBER
working paper.

Malueg, D. and M. Schwartz (1994), “Parallel imports, demand dispersion, and
international price discrimination,” Journal of International Economics, 37(3-4), 167-195.

Mazzeo, M. (2002), "Product Choice and Oligopoly Market Structure," RAND Journal of
Economics, 33(2), p. 221-242.

Medicins Sans Frontiers (2001), “Recommendations to the European Commission for
discussions at the June 2001 TRIPS Council on Health and Access to Medicines,”
http://www.accessmed-
msf.org/prod/publications.asp?scntid=3182001446419&contenttype=PARA&

Rey, P. (2003), “The Impact of Parallel Imports on Prescription Medicines,” University
of Toulouse working paper.

Scott Morton, F. (1997a), “The Strategic Response by Pharmaceutical Firms to the
Medicaid Most-Favored-Customer Rules.” RAND Journal of Economics 28:2, 269-290.

Scott Morton, F. (1997b), “The Interaction Between a MFC Clause and Price Dispersion:
An Empirical Examination of the Medicaid Rebate Rules of 1990,” Journal of Economics
and Management Strategy, 6(1),151-174.

Stuart, B., N. Brandt, N. Briesacher, C. Fahlman, D. Mullons, F. Palumbo, J. Pizarro, and
L. Stuart (2000), “Issues in Prescription Drug Coverage, Pricing, Utilization and




                                           27
Spending: What We Know and Need to Know,” United States Department of Health and
Human Services Office of Health Policy Report.

Szymanski, S. and T. Valletti (2005), “Parallel trade, price discrimination, investment
and price caps,” Economic Policy, 20, 705-749.

Szymanski, S. and T. Valletti (2006), “Parallel Trade, International Exhaustion and
Intellectual Property Rights: A Welfare Analysis,” Journal of Industrial Economics,
54(4), 499-526.

Urch Publishing (2001), The Guide to European Pharmaceutical Pricing and
Reimbursement Systems, London, United Kingdom.

Varian, H. (1985), “Price Discrimination and Social Welfare,” American Economic
Review 75:870-875.




                                            28
     Table 1: Example of parallel trade in Finland: Adalat

   Year-Quarter      98-1   98-2   98-3   98-4   99-1   99-2   99-3   99-4   00-1   00-2   00-3   00-4   01-1   01-2   01-3   01-4   02-1   02-2   02-3   02-4
PARANOVA
 BBN RT.MEMB CT
TAB
     0060MG                                                                                                                          0.54   0.57   0.61   0.62
     0030MG                                                                         0.43   0.41   0.39   0.42   0.40   0.41   0.41   0.40   0.42   0.45   0.45
  BBC FILM-C TAB
RET
     0020MG          0.29   0.29   0.30   0.31   0.30   0.28   0.27   0.27   0.26   0.25   0.24   0.23   0.24   0.23   0.24   0.24   0.23   0.24   0.26   0.26
BAYER
  BBN RT.MEMB CT
TAB
     0060MG          0.67   0.68   0.69   0.73   0.70   0.66   0.65   0.65   0.63   0.59   0.57   0.55   0.59   0.56   0.57   0.57   0.56   0.59   0.63   0.64
     0030MG          0.50   0.50   0.51   0.55   0.52   0.49   0.48   0.48   0.47   0.44   0.43   0.41   0.44   0.41   0.42   0.42   0.42   0.44   0.47   0.47
     0020MG                                                    0.37   0.36   0.35   0.33   0.32   0.31   0.33   0.31   0.31   0.32   0.31   0.32   0.35   0.35
  BBC FILM-C TAB
RET
     0020MG          0.29   0.30   0.30   0.32   0.30   0.29   0.29   0.28   0.27   0.26   0.25   0.24   0.26   0.24   0.25   0.25   0.24   0.26   0.27   0.28
     0010MG          0.17   0.17   0.17   0.18   0.17   0.16   0.16   0.16   0.15   0.15   0.14   0.14   0.15   0.14   0.14   0.14   0.14   0.14   0.16   0.16
 ACA CAPSULES
     0005MG          0.09   0.09   0.10   0.10   0.10   0.09   0.09   0.09   0.09
     0010MG          0.16   0.17   0.17   0.18   0.17   0.16   0.16   0.16   0.16

     Numbers in cells are the price per standard unit (pill) in US dollars. Yellow (italicized) cells are parallel imports of Adalat. Purple
     (bolded) cells are the original versions of Adalat facing parallel imports.




                                                                             29
Table 2A: Therapeutic classes

Broad Classification      ATC-4   Definition
Alimentary Tract and      A4A1    Antiemetics and antinauseants -- serotonin
Metabolism                A4A9    Antiemetics and antinauseants -- other
Blood and Blood           B1C1    Cyclo-oxygenase inhibitor platelet aggregation inhibitors
Forming Organs            B1C2    ADP (adenosine diphosphate) receptor antagonist platelet
                                  aggregation inhibitors
                          B1C3    GP IIb/IIIa (glycoprotein) antagonist platelet aggregation
                                  inhibitors
                          B1C4    Platelet cAMP enhancing platelet aggregation inhibitors
                          B1C5    Platelet aggregation inhibitors, combinations
                          B1C9    Other platelet aggregation inhibitors
                          B1D0    Fibrinolytics
Cardiovascular system     C3A1    Potassium-sparing agents plain
                          C3A2    Loop diuretics plain
                          C3A3    Thiazides and analogues plain
                          C3A4    Potassium-sparing agents with loop diuretic combinations
                          C3A5    Potassium-sparing agents with thiazides and/or analogue
                                  combinations
                          C3A6    Other diuretics
                          C7A0    Beta-blocking agents, plain
                          C7B1    Combinations with anti-hypertensives and/or diuretics
                          C7B2    Combinations with other drugs of group C
                          C7B3    Combinations with all other drugs except those of group
                                  C
                          C8A0    Calcium antagonists, plain
                          C9A0    Ace inhibitors, plain
                          C9B1    ACE inhibitor combinations with antihypertensives (C2)
                                  and/or diuretics (C3)
                          C9B3    ACE inhibitor/beta-blocker combinations
                          C9C0    Angiotension-II antagonists, plain
                          C9D0    Angiotension-II antagonists, combinations
General anti-infectives   J1D2    Injectable cephalosporins
(systemic)
Antineoplastic and        L1A0    Alkylating agents
immunomodulating          L1B0    Antimetabolites
agents                    L1C0    Vinca alkaloids
                          L1D0    Antineoplastic antibiotics
                          L1X1    Adjuvant preparations for cancer therapy
                          L1X2    Platinum compounds
                          L1X3    Antineoplastic monoclonal antibodies
                          L1X9    All other antineoplastics
                          L3A1    Colony-stimulating factors
                          L3A9    All other immunostimulating agents excluding
                                  interferons




                                            30
Table 2B: Countries in dataset

Argentina                   Finland                    Netherlands
Australia                   France                     Poland
Austria                     Germany                    Portugal
Belgium                     Greece                     South Africa
Brazil                      Ireland                    Spain
Canada                      Italy                      Sweden
China                       Japan                      Switzerland
Colombia                    Korea                      Turkey
Czech Republic              Luxembourg                 United Kingdom
Denmark                     Mexico                     United States




Table 3: Summary statistics for Midas data

Number of countries                                                   30
Number of quarters                                                    47
Number of unique dosage forms                                        120
Number of unique drugs (chemical combinations)                      1031
Number of unique versions (drug-form-strength)                      9013
Number of unique country-versions (drug-form-strength)             21075
                                N         Mean         SD        Min         Max
Standard units shipped in     957962        11.24        62.02   0.00001     3223.09
quarter (1000s)
Ex-manufacturer revenues,     957962 559487.28 4622218.48        1.00000   726407713
US$
Ex-manufacturer price         957962        21.94       118.83   0.00001    13700.29
(wholesale purchase price)
per standard unit, US$
Trade price (pharmacy         957962        24.12       129.00   0.00001    14852.14
purchase price) per
standard unit, US$
Public price (price to        957962        32.23       175.72   0.00001    31783.57
consumer) per standard
unit, US$




                                         31
Table 4: Results from entry regression

Y = 1 if parallel imports occur for version j in country i                   Coef.
at time t                                                                   (StdErr)            dY/dX
Average log price difference between originator price in                      0.028             0.001
country and other EU countries
                                                                             (0.019)
Log of standard units sold by originator in market                            0.291**           0.008
                                                                             (0.006)
Log of standard units sold in EU at a lower price                             0.043**           0.001
                                                                             (0.007)
Number of EU markets in which product is available                           -0.036**          -0.001
                                                                             (0.006)
Number of EU markets with a lower price                                       0.123**           0.003
                                                                             (0.005)
Number of EU markets with parallel trade in this                              0.228**           0.006
product
                                                                             (0.009)
Number of EU markets with different brand name                               -0.015**           0.000
                                                                             (0.002)
Number of "source" countries with identical version                           0.073**           0.002
                                                                             (0.011)
Intercept                                                                    -5.565**           0.027
                                                                             (0.202)
Number of Observations
                                                                                     167086
Log Likelihood
                                                                                   -34918.318
Pseudo-Rsq
                                                                                      0.3263

* = significant at the 5% level, ** = significant at the 1% level. All specifications include country,
therapeutic class, and period fixed effects. Marginal effects are computed at the mean of all variables.




                                                     32
Table 5: Results from price response regression

Dependent variable = ln(Originator                          Coef.            Coef.
price)                                                     (StdErr)         (StdErr)
Intercept                                                   0.613**         0.618**
                                                           (0.029)         (0.029)
Post entry by parallel traders                             -0.031**        -0.028**
                                                           (0.006)         (0.006)
Post entry by parallel traders in other                     0.003           0.003
versions of the same drug                                  (0.003)         (0.003)
Number of competing drugs in class                          0.004           0.004
                                                           (0.002)         (0.002)
Number of firms selling the same drug                      -0.019**        -0.019**
                                                           (0.003)         (0.003)
Total number of countries with                             -0.010**        -0.010**
identical version                                          (0.002)         (0.002)
Number of source countries with                            -0.013          -0.018
identical version                                          (0.008)         (0.012)
Germany * # sources                                                        -0.024
                                                                           (0.013)
Denmark * # sources                                                        -0.032
                                                                           (0.021)
Netherlands * # sources                                                    -0.057*
                                                                           (0.024)
Sweden * # sources                                                          0.013
                                                                           (0.011)
Finland * # sources                                                         0.032*
                                                                           (0.016)
UK * # sources                                                              0.067**
                                                                           (0.016)
Within Rsq                                                    0.387          0.390
Number of observations                                     251216           251216
Fixed effects included                                     Period, product*country

* = significant at the 5% level, ** = significant at the 1% level. All country*number of source countries
interactions are included in the regression, but the coefficients are reported only for likely “destination”
countries (and are generally insignificant for the others).




                                                      33
Table 6: Results from drug similarity regression

                                            Model 1            Model 2             Model 3             Model 4
 Y = Jaccard similarity of drugs              Coef.              Coef.               Coef.               Coef.
                                            (StdErr)           (StdErr)            (StdErr)            (StdErr)
 Time trend                                 0.01226**          0.01052**           0.01275**           0.00888**
                                           (0.00026)          (0.00028)           (0.00031)           (0.00031)
 Pair of EU countries                       0.07590**          0.04124**           0.10117**           0.04121**
                                           (0.00573)          (0.00483)           (0.00695)           (0.00533)
 Time trend * Pair of EU                    -.00604**          -.00353**           -.01007**           -.00520**
 countries
                                           (0.00077)          (0.00069)           (0.00093)           (0.00076)
 Pair of source-destination                 -.05711**          -.05721**           -.00261             -.00268
 countries
                                           (0.01517)          (0.01240)           (0.01838)           (0.01371)
 Pair of destination countries              -.00707            -.00647             -.00333             -.00332
                                           (0.01790)          (0.01468)           (0.02170)           (0.01622)
 Pair of source countries                   0.00579            0.00583             0.07577**           0.07372**
                                           (0.01573)          (0.01280)           (0.01907)           (0.01414)
 Time trend * Pair of source-               -.00002            -.00013             -.00276             -.00308
 destination countries
                                           (0.00203)          (0.00177)           (0.00246)           (0.00195)
 Time trend * Pair of                       -.00332            -.00347             -.00630*            -.00636**
 destination countries
                                           (0.00237)          (0.00207)           (0.00288)           (0.00229)
 Time trend * Pair of source                0.00240            0.00217             0.00295             0.00277
 countries
                                           (0.00216)          (0.00187)           (0.00262)           (0.00207)
 Similarity of OECD variables                                  0.00681**                               0.01685**
 (Correlation)
                                                              (0.00128)                               (0.00141)
 Intercept                                  0.34610**          0.37303**           0.49653**           0.54184**
                                           (0.00186)          (0.00205)           (0.00225)           (0.00227)
 R-square                                   0.116              0.120               0.092               0.089
 Mean of Y                                  0.429              0.443               0.584               0.607
 Sample                                     All drugs          All drugs           US drugs            US drugs
 Number of Observations                      20439              13215               20439               13215

   * = significant at the 5% level, ** = significant at the 1% level. Source countries are Greece, Spain,
   Portugal, Italy, and France. Destination countries are the UK, Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden,
   Denmark, and Finland.




                                                   34
    Table 7: Results from drug version similarity regression

                                        Model 1               Model 2            Model 3              Model 4
  Y = Jaccard similarity in
         versions                         Coef.                Coef.               Coef.                Coef.
                                        (StdErr)              (StdErr)           (StdErr)             (StdErr)
Time trend                             -0.00222**           -0.00019             0.00585**            0.00630**
                                       (0.00025)            (0.00041)           (0.00087)            (0.00095)
Pair of EU countries                    0.00273              0.00732**
                                       (0.00155)            (0.00179)
Time trend * Pair of EU                 0.00226**            0.00176**
countries                              (0.00021)            (0.00025)
Similarity of drugs available           0.36379**            0.39443**           0.38640**            0.39238**
(Jaccard)                              (0.00351)            (0.00616)           (0.01275)            (0.01312)
Time trend * Similarity of              0.00335**            0.00025            -0.00845**           -0.00961**
drugs available (Jaccard)              (0.00055)            (0.00090)           (0.00181)            (0.00198)
Similarity of OECD                                           0.00391**                               -0.00418**
variables (Correlation)                                     (0.00047)                                (0.00093)
Pair of source-destination             -0.00683             -0.00543            -0.00550             -0.00502
countries                              (0.00408)            (0.00457)           (0.00444)            (0.00463)
Pair of destination countries           0.03101**            0.03047**           0.03109**            0.03191**
                                       (0.00422)            (0.00470)           (0.00454)            (0.00471)
Pair of source countries               -0.01584**           -0.01812**          -0.01482**           -0.01584**
                                       (0.00480)            (0.00540)           (0.00517)            (0.00541)
Time trend * Pair of source-           -0.00033             -0.00051            -0.00101             -0.00102
destination countries                  (0.00055)            (0.00065)           (0.00060)            (0.00066)
Time trend * Pair of                    0.00041              0.00035             0.00064              0.00064
destination countries                  (0.00058)            (0.00069)           (0.00062)            (0.00069)
Time trend * Pair of source             0.00087              0.00137             0.00040              0.00062
countries                              (0.00064)            (0.00076)           (0.00069)            (0.00076)
Intercept                              -0.00454**           -0.02577**          -0.01381*            -0.01366*
                                       (0.00146)            (0.00261)           (0.00592)            (0.00610)
R-square                                0.706                0.560               0.542                0.546
Mean of Y                               0.1506               0.1556              0.177                0.175
Sample                               All countries,       All countries,      EU countries,        EU countries,
                                     all drugs            all drugs           all drugs            all drugs
Number of Observations               20439                13215               3401                 3167

    * = significant at the 5% level, ** = significant at the 1% level. Source countries are Greece, Spain,
    Portugal, Italy, and France. Destination countries are the UK, Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden,
    Denmark, and Finland.



                                                    35
Table 8: Results from conditional logit regressions of exit

                                                              All countries              EU countries
 Y = 1 if version discontinued                                    Coef.                     Coef.
                                                                (StdErr)                   (StdErr)
 Source country                                                  0.396*                      0.375
                                                                (0.167)                     (0.236)
 Destination country                                             1.895**                     2.350**
                                                                (0.120)                     (0.171)
 Number of source countries with identical                       0.659**                     1.037**
 version                                                        (0.096)                     (0.144)
 Number of destination countries with                            0.923**                     1.624**
 identical version                                              (0.069)                     (0.108)
 Source country*Number of destination                            0.095                       0.224**
 countries                                                      (0.051)                     (0.065)
 Destination country*Number of source                           -0.030                       0.108
 countries                                                      (0.048)                     (0.069)
 Number of competing drugs in class                             -0.020*                     -0.091**
                                                                (0.009)                     (0.018)
 Number of other non-parallel trade firms                        0.022*                      0.056**
 selling the same drug                                          (0.009)                     (0.018)
 Total number of countries with identical                        0.624**                     0.411**
 version                                                        (0.060)                     (0.071)
 Total number of unique versions worldwide                      -0.007*                     -0.018**
                                                                (0.003)                     (0.005)
 Number of unique versions in country                           -0.024*                     -0.100**
                                                                (0.009)                     (0.024)
 Units shipped in the prior quarter                             -0.511**                    -0.518**
                                                                (0.010)                     (0.017)
 EU country                                                     -0.535**
                                                                (0.084)
 Fixed effects                                               Version, period           Version, period
 Number of observations                                           243716                     92061
 Log Likelihood                                                   -9600.1                   -4095.9

* = significant at the 5% level, ** = significant at the 1% level. Source countries are Greece, Spain,
Portugal, Italy, and France. Destination countries are the UK, Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden,
Denmark, and Finland.




                                                     36
Table 9: Results from conditional logit regressions of temporary exit

                                                              All countries              EU countries
 Y = 1 if temporary exit occurs (units
 shipped=0 at t, but positive in future)                          Coef.                     Coef.
                                                                (StdErr)                   (StdErr)
 Source country                                                  0.747**                     1.263**
                                                                (0.083)                     (0.124)
 Destination country                                            -0.082                       0.172
                                                                (0.078)                     (0.113)
 Number of source countries with identical                       0.152**                     0.252**
 version                                                        (0.045)                     (0.070)
 Number of destination countries with                           -0.039                      -0.008
 identical version                                              (0.039)                     (0.062)
 Source country*Number of destination                            0.071**                     0.077*
 countries                                                      (0.023)                     (0.033)
 Destination country*Number of source                           -0.052                       0.001
 countries                                                      (0.036)                     (0.048)
                                                                -0.009                      -0.017
 Number of competing drugs in class                             (0.006)                     (0.011)
 Number of other non-parallel trade firms                       -0.177**                    -0.385**
 selling the same drug                                          (0.010)                     (0.024)
 Total number of countries with identical                       -0.033*                     -0.057*
 version                                                        (0.016)                     (0.024)
                                                                -0.002                      -0.002
 Total number of unique versions worldwide                      (0.001)                     (0.002)
                                                                 0.000                       0.043**
 Number of unique versions in country                           (0.006)                     (0.015)
                                                                -0.605**                    -0.670**
 Units shipped in the prior quarter                             (0.006)                     (0.011)
                                                                -0.429**
 EU country                                                     (0.045)
 Fixed effects                                               Version, period           Version, period
 Number of observations                                           261360                     94770
 Log Likelihood                                                   -22560                    -8929.5

* = significant at the 5% level, ** = significant at the 1% level. Source countries are Greece, Spain,
Portugal, Italy, and France. Destination countries are the UK, Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden,
Denmark, and Finland.




                                                     37
 Table 10: Results from brand name similarity regression

                                        Model 1               Model 2            Model 3              Model 4
  Y = Jaccard similarity in
        brand names                       Coef.                Coef.               Coef.                Coef.
                                        (StdErr)              (StdErr)           (StdErr)             (StdErr)
Time trend                             -0.00027             -0.00220**          -0.01160**           -0.01238**
                                       (0.00027)            (0.00035)           (0.00102)            (0.00108)
Pair of EU countries                    0.04195**            0.05597**
                                       (0.00270)            (0.00298)
Time trend * Pair of EU                -0.00601**           -0.00833**
countries                              (0.00036)            (0.00043)
Similarity of drugs available           0.45889**            0.39380**           0.51626**            0.55307**
(Jaccard)                              (0.00591)            (0.00777)           (0.01541)            (0.01694)
Time trend * Similarity of              0.00860**            0.02032**           0.01184**            0.00747**
drugs available (Jaccard)              (0.00081)            (0.00110)           (0.00238)            (0.00262)
Similarity of OECD                                          -0.00290**                               -0.01586**
variables (Correlation)                                     (0.00082)                                (0.00175)
Pair of source-destination             -0.04089**           -0.04479**          -0.04005**           -0.03987**
countries                              (0.00704)            (0.00751)           (0.00826)            (0.00856)
Pair of destination countries          -0.03893**           -0.04382**          -0.03670**           -0.03489**
                                       (0.00727)            (0.00771)           (0.00853)            (0.00880)
Pair of source countries                0.01233              0.01437             0.00993              0.01475
                                       (0.00831)            (0.00888)           (0.00973)            (0.01011)
Time trend * Pair of source-            0.00235*             0.00312**           0.00250*             0.00287*
destination countries                  (0.00094)            (0.00107)           (0.00111)            (0.00122)
Time trend * Pair of                    0.00430**            0.00497**           0.00376**            0.00412**
destination countries                  (0.00100)            (0.00113)           (0.00117)            (0.00129)
Time trend * Pair of source            -0.00081             -0.00105            -0.00007             -0.00103
countries                              (0.00110)            (0.00125)           (0.00129)            (0.00143)
Intercept                              -0.00027              0.00438**           0.05174**            0.06365**
                                       (0.00116)            (0.00159)           (0.00435)            (0.00472)
R-square                                0.816447             0.814760            0.762802             0.768434
Mean of Y                               0.129605             0.123012            0.156134             0.149289
Sample                               All countries,       All countries,      EU countries,        EU countries,
                                     all drugs            all drugs           all drugs            all drugs
Number of Observations                    19082                12153                3402                 3168

    * = significant at the 5% level, ** = significant at the 1% level. Source countries are Greece, Spain,
    Portugal, Italy, and France. Destination countries are the UK, Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden,
    Denmark, and Finland.



                                                    38
PI_MKT_SHARE
        0.14


        0.13


        0.12


        0.11


        0.10


        0.09


        0.08


        0.07


        0.06


        0.05


        0.04


        0.03


        0.02


        0.01


        0.00
             1992QI   1994QI    1996QI   1998QI   2000QI   2002QI   2004QI   2006QI
                                             PERIOD
   COUNTRY            AUSTRIA                 BELGIUM               DENMARK
                      FINLAND                 FRANCE                GERMANY
                      IRELAND                 ITALY                 NETHERLANDS
                      SWEDEN                  UK
PI_SHARE
    0.08




    0.07




    0.06




    0.05




    0.04




    0.03




    0.02




    0.01




    0.00
      1992QI   1994QI   1996QI   1998QI   2000QI   2002QI   2004QI   2006QI
                                     PERIOD
   COUNTRY         AUSTRIA              BELGIUM              DENMARK
                   FINLAND              FRANCE               GERMANY
                   IRELAND              ITALY                NETHERLANDS
                   SWEDEN               UK
REL_PRICE
      1.7



      1.6



      1.5



      1.4



      1.3



      1.2



      1.1



      1.0



      0.9



      0.8



      0.7



      0.6



      0.5
       1992QI   1994QI   1996QI   1998QI   2000QI   2002QI   2004QI   2006QI
                                      PERIOD
   COUNTRY         AUSTRIA              BELGIUM              DENMARK
                   FINLAND              FRANCE               GERMANY
                   IRELAND              ITALY                NETHERLANDS
                   SWEDEN               UK
