NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SCHOOLS AND LOCATION:
TIEBOUT, ALONSO, AND GOVERNMENT POLICY
Eric A. Hanushek
Kuzey Yilmaz
Working Paper 12960
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12960

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2007

We benefitted from comments and suggestions by Dennis Epple, Ed Glaeser, Ken Judd, Charles Leung,
Lance Lochner, Michael Wolkoff and participants at several conferences. This research was funded
by a grants from the Packard Humanities Institute. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Eric A. Hanushek and Kuzey Yilmaz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Schools and Location: Tiebout, Alonso, and Government Policy
Eric A. Hanushek and Kuzey Yilmaz
NBER Working Paper No. 12960
March 2007
JEL No. H4,I2,R1,R51
ABSTRACT
An important element in considering school finance policies is that households are not passive. Instead
they respond to policies with a combination of modified residential choice and political choice of
tax levels. The highly stylized decision models of most existing analyses, however, lead to conerns
about the policy evaluations. In our general equilibrium model of residential location and community
choice, households base optimizing decisions on commuting costs, school quality, and land rents.
With both centralized and decentralized employment, the resulting equilibrium has heterogeneous
communities in terms of income and tastes for schools. This model is used to analyze a series of conventional
policy experiments, including school district consolidation, district power utilization, and different
equalization devices. The important conclusion is that welfare falls for all families with the restrictions
in choice that are implied by these approaches.
Eric A. Hanushek
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
hanushek@stanford.edu
Kuzey Yilmaz
Koc University
Rumneli Feneri Yolu, Sariyer
80910 Istanbul, TURKEY
kuyilmaz@ku.edu.tr

1 Introduction
A unique feature of the U.S. education system is the high degree of both funding and control
granted to local governments. As a result, school choice is inextricably tied to residential location
decisions. This organization has been lauded for its responsiveness to individual demands and for
the potential of increased school accountability. On the other hand, it also introduces potential
inequities by tying funding decisions to local ability to pay. These con icting views have made
debates about school nancing a regular item on both legislative and judicial agendas.
The complexities of analyzing the interaction of location and schooling are well known.
When local citizens control taxing and spending decisions and when the quality of schools depends
on the peer group, school quality is an endogenous outcome that depends on aggregate individual
choices. With local funding of schools through a property tax, housing prices and the tax base also
become endogenous and potentially strongly in uenced by any governmental policies that a ect
funding formula. Finally, residential location, while potentially responsive to school quality, is also
strongly in uenced by job location and journey to work.
With a few exceptions, analyses of school nance policies have generally ignored one or
more of these features of household choices of schools and homes. As a result, analysis of policy
alternatives for school nance and operations is likely to be biased.
This paper integrates the essential features of schools and location. In a general equilibrium
framework, heterogeneous families (in terms of income and tastes) seek out an optimal residential
location based on commuting costs and on school quality. They also vote on local taxes, yielding
variations in school spending that, along with peer in uences, produce variations in school quality.
The general equilibrium aspects are especially important, because housing prices vary with demand
and with governmental policy.
This model is used to analyze the impacts of alternative school nance policies. First,
consolidation of school districts, paralleling the trends of the past century, are considered from
the perspectives of school outcomes and of individual welfare. Second, spending equalization and
district power equalization { common legislative and judicial choices of the past three decades
{ are put into the general equilibrium framework where families react to the altered locational
1

advantages.

2 Existing Literature
Urban location and local public nance have been built on two arti cially separated streams
of literature, namely urban residential location models and Tiebout models of community choice.
In urban location theory, a households' residential location is determined by the trade-o between
accessibility and space. The pioneer of this approach was Alonso (1964) with his simple but
instructive model of the land market, which was later followed by a great deal of theoretical and
empirical work by Muth (1969), Mills (1972), and others. (See the reviews in Straszheim (1987)
and Fujita (1989)). These models are mainly concerned with how to model residential choice where
the driving force is commuting costs. By ignoring local public goods and services, they do not
address many policy questions, but they do provide baseline predictions about locational choices.
The typical model predicts that higher income people live in suburban areas, although Glaeser,
Kahn, and Rappaport (2000) suggest that the observed behavior has more strati cation than can
be supported by the models.
In Tiebout models of community choice, on the other hand, households care (only) about
local public goods and vote with their feet to shop for the community which best satis es their
preferences. This literature has evolved from the central insight of Tiebout (1956) and builds
upon the analytical framework developed in Ellickson (1971). The most in uential studies from
this approach have been conducted by Epple, Filimon, and Romer (1984, 1993), who have also
introduced politics into the model. (See also the additions by Epple and Romano (1998, 2003) and
the review by Ross and Yinger (1999)). This literature concludes that households should stratify
into communities by their income and tastes and predicts that the same type households would live
in the same community. This is an important shortcoming of these models, given empirically that
communities tend to be quite heterogeneous in terms of income (see, for example, Pack and Pack
(1977,1978)).
Some prior work has addressed the problem of homogeneous communities in Tiebout models.
Epple and Platt (1998) introduce households that di er both by income and by tastes and show
2

that there is income heterogeneity within communities because of these preference di erences. In
their model, they concentrate on residential location decisions where di erent communities provide
di ering amounts of local redistribution of income. Their results lead to an interpretation of
the resulting communities as a central city (with redistribution) and suburban locations (without
redistribution), but location (or accessibility) per se is not important.1
The urban location model and the Tiebout model have each attempted to abstract from
reality in order to concentrate on a speci c feature of interest. However, the general con icts with
the gross empirical data are severe, suggesting that the models may not provide reliable indications
of the comparative statics and of how policy interacts with location. An innovative paper by de
Bartolome and Ross (2003) suggests that combining the two modeling perspectives may provide
a more realistic portrait of urban location. Their monocentric city model that includes scal
motivation of jurisdictions and majority voting can produce income mixing in a central city and
suburban ring. Nechyba (2000, 2003), taking a di erent route, develops a general equilibrium
model that is calibrated on pre-existing heterogeneity of income and housing. A complete review
of alternative modeling approaches is provided by Epple and Nechyba (2004) and Nechyba (2006).
This paper builds on these various strands. The objective is construction of a model with
sucient richness to capture the basic reality of urban spatial structure.2 We begin by developing
a general equilibrium model of household location, school demand, and voting on taxes. We begin
with a common monocentric city model except that it has two competing school districts. We then
expand this to a model of with multiple workplace centers. These models, which produce income
and taste mixing within communities, provide the benchmark for subsequent policy experiments.
Speci cally, we investigate the popular education nance reforms of school district consolidation,
district power equalization, and expenditure equalization and assess the impact of these reform
attempts in the context of household choice behavior.
1
With a single single community characteristic (the amount of local redistribution), the distribution of tastes yields
an equilibrium with communities that have a mixture of income. The same type of individual (denominated by income
and taste) will only be found in a single community. As described below, when there are multiple motivations for
living in a community, the same type of household can be found in di erent communities in equilibrium.
2
This analysis concentrates on the long run equilibrium for the residential location of households. As such it
ignores any of the short run dynamics or of the interactions with the macroeconomy; cf Leung (2004).

3

3 Formal Model of Household Decisionmaking
The outline of our structure is easy to describe. Urban location and public good preferences
are integrated with a calibrated general equilibrium model of community choice. Households that
di er in both income and tastes commute to their workplaces, facing both pecuniary and time costs
in commuting. Education is nanced through property taxes determined by majority voting. The
production function for education combines peer group e ects with spending. Both location and
school quality a ect housing prices, and thus enter in uence taxes and mobility.
After showing that mixing of di erent household types is found within a city with centralized employment, we relax the common monocentric city assumption of urban location models.
Speci cally, we develop a closed city model with decentralized employment locations: a CBD and
two subcenters, and three school districts providing a local public good (education).
The primary innovations in our analysis are the introduction of more realistic decision problems for households and the subsequent tracing of the implications of this for policy. Speci cally,
individuals are motivated in their locational decisions by both schools and commuting costs, and
individuals di er in both tastes for schooling and in income.3 They also consider housing quality, here proxied by lot size. Introducing these simple factors into the decision problem provides
added realism that permits calibrating the model to the urban structures that we observe. It also
forms the basis for a series of policy simulations that mirror a variety of proposals for changing the
nancing of schools.

3.1 Centralized Employment
The simplest version of a locational model that illustrates the interaction of commuting and
political preferences is a monocentric metropolitan area that is divided into jurisdictions. We
develop a basic structure here that generalizes easily to multiple employment centers and added
school districts.
Our metropolitan area lies on a featureless xy plane. All employment is found in the Central
Business District (CBD) located at the origin. Moreover, the area is divided into two jurisdictions,
3
This work extends our previous work on models of monocentric employment location. The added choices here
permit more realistic evaluations of policy alternatives. See Hanushek and Yilmaz (forthcoming).

4

each operating its own schools. The y-axis, passing through the CBD, forms the boundary between
the two jurisdictions. We will refer to the jurisdictions as the East School District and West School
District throughout. Each jurisdiction o ers a local public good (education) nanced through taxes
on residential property.
The labor market has two types of workers, skilled (S) and unskilled (U), who produce
a composite commodity. The equilibrium wages in the CBD are determined exogenously. Skilled
workers make ws dollars per hour while unskilled workers make wu (< ws) dollars per hour.
One member of each household works and makes all the economic decisions in the house.
Each household has a pupil attending school.
Households place di erent values on the quality of education a jurisdiction provides. Some
value education more (high valuation types, H), some less (low valuation types, L). Therefore, we
have four di erent types of households in the city i 2 fSL; SH; UL; UH g.
Consider a type i household seeking a residence at a location that is r miles from the CBD
in jurisdiction j. The time endowment for the household is 24 hours. The city has a dense radial
transportation system. Households commute between workplaces and residences. Commuting has
both pecuniary and time costs. Formally, commuting requires a=2 dollars per mile and b=2 hours per
mile. Labor is the sole source of income. Thus, the household's full income, net of transportation
costs, is Yi (r) = 24wi ? (a + bwi )r.
The preferences for households are represented by a Cobb-Douglas utility function given
by U ( i ; i ; q; s; z; l) = qj i si z l , where

i

+ i + +  = 1, qj is the quality of education in

community j2 fw; eg, s > 0 is the lot size, z > 0 is the numeraire composite commodity, and

l 2 [0; 24] is leisure.

i

2 f H;

Lg

is the taste parameter for education and, i 2 fH ; L g

is the taste parameter for lot size. The normalization of the parameters to sum to one is done
to di erentiate high valuation and low valuation households with the same income. To see this,
consider two households, one low one high valuation, with the same income. In this formulation, a
high valuation type enjoys education (lot size) more (less) than a low valuation type (i.e.
and H < L ).
The budget constraint of the household is given by
5

H

>

L

z(r) + (1 + j )R(r)s(r) + wil(r) = Yi(r) = 24wi ? (a + bwi )r
where j is the property tax rate, Rj (r) is the equilibrium rent per unit of land at distance r
that is paid to a landlord for his land in community j. Notice that this formulation suggests that
households sell all available time to employers and buy back some leisure at the prevailing market
wage rate.
In a standard way, we can de ne the bid-rent function of the household, which shows the
household's willingness to pay given a xed utility level as:
(r; ui ; qj ; j ) =maxs;z;l

n

Yi (r)?z ?wi l jU ( ;  ; q; s; z; l) = u
i i
i
(1+j )s

o

Following Solow (1973), the bid rent function and the bid max lot size function, s(), can
be derived analytically by using the indirect utility function:
=i

i +



=i
(r; ui ; qj ; j ) = (1+ki )w=i qj i =i Yi (r) i u?1
i
j i
s(r; ui ; qj ; j ) = (i + +i)(1+j ) (r;uYii(;qr)j ;j )
1

+

We can now examine some properties of bid-rent and bid-max lot size functions. Clearly,
the bid-rent function is di erentiable, and decreasing in both utility level u and distance r (i.e.
@ (r;:)
@r

@ (ui ;:)
@ui

< 0). Moreover, since i+i + > 1, the bid-rent function is convex in r. As
for the bid-max lot size function, it is di erentiable, and increasing in both u and r.
< 0 and

The relative steepness of bid-rent functions by distance determines the spatial ordering of
equilibrium household locations in a jurisdiction. Following Alonso (1964), we assume a competitive
land market in which households bid for land and absentee land owners o er the land to the highest
bidder. For any given location, the landlord receives ve implicit o ers corresponding to the four
di erent types of households and agricultural use, which has a xed bid of ra .
Consider two di erent types of households with bid-rent functions

1 (r; u1 ; :) and

2 (r; u2 ; :). Because the bid-rent functions are di erentiable and convex in r, there is a unique

intersection point for any pairs of bid-rent function, and it suces to look at the slopes at the
intersection point to determine which bid-rent function is the steepest. Let r stand for the intersection point (i.e.

1 (r ; u1 ; :) =

2 (r ; u2 ; :) for some (r ; u1 ; u2 )). Given that Household

6

1 and Household 2 are the only bidders and Household 1 has a steeper bid-rent function (i.e.

@ 1 (r ; u1 ; :)=@r > @ 2 (r; u2 ; :)=@r), the bid-rent function of Household 1, 1 (r; u1 ; :); dominates
the bid-rent function of Household 2, 2 (r; u2 ; :); as we move towards the CBD. In other words,
the households are strati ed by distance. The equilibrium location of Household 1 is closer to the
CBD than that of Household 2 if and only if the following condition holds in our speci c case:
@
@

1
2

(r ;u1 ;:)=@r = (1 + +)2 Y2 (r ) (a+bw1 )
(r ;u2 ;:)=@r (2 + +)1 Y1 (r ) (a+bw2 )

>1

To understand the implications, consider two households with the same wages, bidding
for a location at distance r (i.e. w1 = w2 , implying Y1 (r) = Y2 (r)). Suppose Household 1 is a
high valuation type ( =

H)

and Household 2 is a low valuation type ( =

L ).

Since 1 < 2 ,

@ 1 (r ; u1 ; :)=@r > @ 2 (r ; u2 ; :)=@r. In other words, high valuation type Household 1 has a
steeper bid-rent curve and locates closer to the CBD. Next, consider two households with the
same tastes and assume Household 1 is the higher income one (i.e. 1 = 2 , w1 > w2 ). Whether

@ 1 (r ; u1 ; :)=@r > @ 2 (r; u2 ; :)=@r is indeterminate. There are two opposing factors. First, higher
wages imply higher incomes and, since rich households want bigger houses, they want to move away
from the CBD. However, because the cost of commuting is more for higher wage-earners, they want
to move closer to the CBD in order to commute less.
We can identify the equilibrium location of households and equilibrium market rents in
each jurisdiction, once we know the equilibrium wages in the CBD along with households' utilities.
Market rent Rj (r) in community j is the upper envelope of the equilibrium bid-rent curves i (r; ui ; :)
for all household types i 2 fSL; SH; UL; UH g and the agricultural rent line. Needless to say, in
equilibrium, if type i households are present in both jurisdictions, they should get the same utility
wherever they are so that nobody has an incentive to switch his community of residence. Since
bid-rent functions for all types are convex and decreasing in r, market rent curves, Rj (r) j 2 fw; eg,
are necessarily decreasing up to a distance.
Our real interest is to examine the interaction of school quality and location. For most
interesting analyses, we must turn to a full general equilibrium model, but there are two general
outcomes that follow directly from the basic structure (and are proved in the Appendix). First,
7

if one jurisdiction, say the East, has better schools than the other, than more high valuation types
will live in the East. Second, this structure will also result in an equilibrium that has income
mixing in the two jurisdictions.4
From a household's point of view, each jurisdiction is characterized by the quality of education and property tax rate pair (qj ; j ) it provides. Education in community j 2 fw; eg is nanced
through property taxes on residential land. Each jurisdiction's local government spends all tax
revenue on education. Then, the government budget constraint in community j is

Ej = j R j = j


R rfj
0

Rj (r)L(r)dr
Nj

where Nj is the population, Ej is the expenditure per pupil, and R j is the tax base per pupil
in community j.
Characterizing the relationship between the quality of education and the expenditure on
schools has proved dicult (Hanushek 2003). Here, we emphasize the interaction of peers and
spending in determining quality. Speci cally, we characterize quality as being determined by:

qj = j (NLj ; NHj ) Ej
where NLj and NHj are the number of low educational valuation and high educational valuation
households in community j, respectively. The peer group e ect function, j (), which has a natural
interpretation of determining the eciency of spending, is given by
j

j (NLj ; NHj ) = c1 + c2 exp(?c3 NNLj )
H

where c1 ; c2 ; > c3 > 0 are constants: Notice that the eciency of schools in jurisdiction j, j ,
is increasing in high valuation households and decreasing in low valuation households. The value
of peer group e ect is between c1 and 0. Two arguments can be made to justify this kind of peer
group e ect. The rst argument is based on the classical peer-group e ect: the more my neighbor
With a somewhat di erent structure, de Bartolome and Ross (2003) prove that a similar income mixing possibility
exists in the monocentric employment model. While it may appear that it arises here because we introduce di erences
in tastes along with income, we will show below in our calibrated model that income mixing also occurs even when
tastes and income are perfectly correlated.
4

8

knows, the more I can learn from him. The second argument is that high valuation households
are more involved in how schools operate such as taking a part in the schooling process as board
members or simply continuously watching over school decisions. This involvement is presumed to
lead to a more ecient use of resources.
The property taxes are determined by majority voting in each jurisdiction. Following Epple
et al. (1983, 1984, 1993), we assume that voters are myopic5 in the sense that they do not consider
that their decision about (qj ; j ) will in uence land prices, populations, eciency of the schooling
system, etc. Their vote will re ect their tax preferences (j ) that come from maximizing indirect
utility as in:
ki
i + + subject to q =  ()E
i
maxj V () = R(r)i (1+
j
j
j
j )i wi qj Yi (r )

Ej = j Rj

Solving this problem yields the preferred tax rate for type i household, ~i = i ?i i .6 The
preferred tax rate is a direct function of the household's valuation type. Since there are only two
valuation types for households, there are two possible preferred tax rates in the economy, and high
valuation types have a higher preferred tax rate (~SH > ~SL and ~UH > ~UL). Also, the more they
value housing and spend on it (higher ), the lower the property tax rate they prefer.
The timing of events would be as follows: At the beginning of each period, households make
community/residential choice decisions with the expectation that the last period's education and
property tax packages would prevail in the current period. Once they move in, they are stuck.
They vote for the property tax rate in their community of residence. The public good and tax
rate package might be di erent from what they expected, but they have chosen the community for
that period. At the beginning of the next period, they update their expectations and events start
over again. In analyzing this model, we impose a requirement that all local government budget
are balanced. Equilibrium occurs when, regardless of their location or communities, same type
households attain the same utility level (i.e. a type i household gets ui everywhere).
For a model of voters with perceptions of capitalization and capital gains, see Yinger (1982, 1985).
The approach to solving the problem comes from the duality approach (Solow 1973). The calculations exploit
the fact that with this form of utility function the optimized budget shares of lot size s, composite good z, and leisure
l are given by i +i + , i + + , and i + + , respectively. The constant in the maximization comes from the utility
i

function parameters: i = (i + +i )(i + +)
5
6

k

:

9

Parameter Value Parameter Value
H
L

a
wu

H
L

b
ws

0.019
0.016
0.187
$1.10
$10.70

0.048
0.051
0.747
0.1 hrs
$18.30

Table 1: Calibration Parameters for Centralized Employment Model

3.1.1 Calibration
The empirical implementation involves a calibration to an urban economy around 1997. The key
parameters are given in the table:
These parameter relate the equilibrium choices of households to relevant aggregate statistics.

+ , and H + + percent of his net income Y (r)
on land, composite commodity, and leisure, respectively.7 U.S. average weekly hours of persons
working full time are about 40 hours8 , and the average annual earnings of 18 year or over high

Recall that the household spends

H
H + + , H +

school and college graduate workers are $22; 154 and $38; 112, respectively in 1997. These gures
suggest the hourly wages in the CBD for unskilled and skilled workers should be calibrated as

wu  $10:70=hour and ws  $18:30=hour, respectively. The share of leisure (nonwork time) in the
40ws  0:762: The data on average annual expenditures of
household's budget is H + + = 1 ? 247
ws
some selected MSAs suggest that a household spends about 20 percent of his income on shelter.
Therefore, we set the budget share of composite commodity and land as H + + = (1?0:762)0:8 
0:1904 and H +H + = (1 ? 0:762)  0:2  0:0476, respectively. Recall that the preferred tax rate for
a type i household is given by ~i = i ?i i and we had two possible preferred tax rates, one for high
valuation and another for low valuation type households. The one for high (low) valuation type is
set to be about 1.7 percent (1.1 percent) annually. These relationships yield enough equations to
calibrate

H ; L ;  H ; L ;

; :

Since the most common practise of commuting in the U.S. is to drive a car, pecuniary commuting
cost per round trip mile is based on the cost of owning and operating an automobile. In 1997,
pecuniary cost per mile was 53.08 cents, suggesting a pecuniary commuting cost of a = $1:1 per
7
8

For the calculations we begin with the skilled, high valuation type (SH).
The statistical facts, unless otherwise indicated, come from the Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1998.

10

Types

Unskilled High
Unskilled Low
Skilled High
Skilled Low

West East
2.4
28.8
6.3
11.1
48.6

14.7
17.1
14.2
42.9
21.6
27.9
1.0
12.1
51.4 Total

Table 2: Equilibrium percentage distribution of households across jurisdictions
round trip mile. Assuming the commuting speed is 20 miles per hour within the city, the time cost
of commuting per round trip mile is set to be b = 0:1 hours per mile.
In equilibrium, the endogenous urban fringe distance is set to be about 12 miles in both jurisdictions. The population of the city is set to be 1,469,748 households, which implies approximately
a population density of 4,680 households per square mile9. Approximately, 40 percent of the total population is assumed to be skilled worker households. Moreover, about 30 percent of skilled
households are assumed to be low valuation types. As for the unskilled households, 70 percent are
low valuation types. The agricultural rent bid ra is set to be $8; 897 per acre per year. The pairs of
(qj ; j ) j 2 fw; eg which are consistent with the population distribution summarized in the Table
2 are found.10
We use discrete distances and evaluate integrals numerically. We know that, if we had only one
jurisdiction in the model (i.e. both jurisdictions provide the same quality of education and have
the same tax rates), we could theoretically show the existence and uniqueness of equilibrium by
using the boundary rent curves approach.11 Since we have two jurisdictions, it is dicult to show
the uniqueness analytically.

3.1.2 Spatial Structure with Centralized Employment
The equilibrium for the basic model is summarized by Tables 2 and 3 along with Figure 1.12
The median population per square mile of cities with 200,000 or more population was 3,546 in 1992. Source:
County and City Data Book, 1994.
10
The parameters of the education production function are set to be 1 = 0 2 = 1 02 and 3 = 0 001. These
parameters, as discussed below, depend on the complete structure of the metropolitan area and the varying jurisdiction.
11
See Fujita (1986) for the formal procedure.
12
Ex ante both jurisdictions are identical. Depending on the initial point, west is sometimes the ecient district.
9

c

11

:; c

:

;

c

:

Figure 1: Monthly Gross Market Rent (per acre)
Rent

9000

8000

Skilled Low
Skilled High

7000

Unskilled Low
Unskilled High

6000

5000

4000

3000

2000

1000

0
-13

-11

-9

-7

-5

-3

-1

1

Location

3

5

7

9

11

13

Variable

Tax rate
Expenditure per pupil per year
Quality of Education
Average monthly gross rent per acre

West East

1.09%
$1,735
4.84
$2,148

1.66%
$2,305
6.44
$2,462

Table 3: Equilibrium characteristics of jurisdictions.
The East School District is more ecient than the West School District by virtue of its
concentration of more involved parents. It o ers a better education along with a higher price
tag (i.e. higher property taxes). Also, the East School District has a higher expenditure per
pupil.13 Since the East School District o ers a higher quality of education more eciently, a higher
percentage of high valuation types from both skilled and unskilled worker households chooses to
reside there. The East School District contains 51.4 percent of the household population. Unskilled
worker households make up 30 percent of the city population in both jurisdictions. However, the
East School district contains more skilled worker households, which would make us expect that the
eciency is higher in the East School District. Indeed, that is the case.
Market rents and the spatial location of households in equilibrium are shown in Figure 1.
(Because of the radial symmetry around the CBD, we present a cross-sectional view of the area in
equilibrium). The East School District is located on the positive x-axis, and the CBD is located
at the origin. Skilled worker households choose to locate away from the CBD. The inner rings
around the CBD are occupied by unskilled worker households. With the current set of parameters,
skilled worker households have a higher income and want to have bigger houses. They move away
from the CBD where such houses are more abundant and cheaper. The commuting cost factors are
dominated by the income e ect. The low valuation type households have a higher income elasticity
of lot size (L > H ) and enjoy bigger houses by moving away from the CBD. Thus, the spatial
equilibrium pattern of households (ordered from the CBD to fringe) is given as Unskilled High
Valuation Households (UH), Unskilled Low Valuation Households (UL), Skilled High Valuation
Households (SH), Skilled Low Valuation Households (SL).
13
In 1999, the average expenditure per pupil was $6,146 of which 43.2% comes from local funds. We calibrate to
the local spending. Source: U.S. Department of Education, 1999.

12

We see market rents go down as we move away from the CBD. As expected, locations
closer to the CBD have higher accessibility and we see capitalization of accessibility advantages/disadvantages. More importantly, we see a jump in the market rent as well as higher average
gross market rent as we cross to the East School District from the West School District due to the
capitalization of quality of education di erence.
A key element of the equilibrium is the heterogeneity of both income and tastes in both
communities. Necessarily, with four types of individuals, there must be mixing. But this solution
shows that neither income groups nor tastes groups form homogeneous communities. Moreover, if
we make income and tastes perfectly correlated (as is implicit in most theoretical investigation of
locational choice), we still nd heterogeneity of income across communities (not shown). The key
is that the varied components of the decision making lead to trade-o s in terms of accessibility and
school quality.

3.2 Decentralized Employment
The monocentric employment model, while particularly convenient in developing closed form
solutions, does not match reality.14 Our concern here is deeper than that. The previous section
showed that, even in the simplest model, commuting costs interacted with governmental service
preferences. As the employment and jurisdictional option expand, these interactions may become
even more important. The prior development can be expanded in a very straightforward manner
(although the computational problems become considerably larger). Because the basic structure of
the model we employ is identical to the prior setup, we simply identify the key di erences.
We again begin with a at featureless plane that has exogenously determined jurisdictions.
As shown in Map 1, the area has two suburban workplaces, namely West Suburban Center and
East Suburban Center, as well as a Central Business District (CBD). Firms are located at points,
take up no space, and have no taxable property. Each jurisdiction also contains a school districts
(named after its employment center).
| Map 1 about here << Map1.doc >>|
14
See, for example, the discussion of patterns of American cities in Glaeser and Kahn (2001, 2004). The incorporation of decentralized employment into urban modeling is explored in depth in White (1976, 1999).

13

Map 1: City Map
y (North)
CBD

CBD

West School District

x (East)
WEST WORKPLACE

EAST WORKPLACE

East School District

At each workplace, there are both high wage (paid to skilled workers) or low wage (paid
to unskilled workers) jobs (wsc > wuc ). Both skilled and unskilled wages across suburban centers s

2 fw; eg are not necessarily the same depending on their relative locations to the CBD, and denoted
by wss and wus , respectively. Needless to say, wss > wus . Also, they are less than their counterparts
in CBD (i.e., wsc > wss and wuc > wus ), because of the wage gradient induced by the lesser need
to commute and the bigger and cheaper houses around these places. (For calibration, wages are
exogenously set).
The worker commutes to a given workplace, but a household could have a residence di ering
from his/her workplace. For instance, a household commuting to his/her workplace at the CBD,
could reside in West School District due to a better education, tax advantages, or less commuting
distance. The city is closed in the sense that there is a set population of each of four types of
households in the metropolitan area described previously; i.e., types SL; SH; UL; UH . The city
has a dense radial transportation system, and the worker of every household commutes daily from
his residence to his workplace, and, as before, there is both a time and distance component to the
commuting cost.15
Since we have four types of households, three workplaces and three school districts, there
are 4  3  3 = 36 di erent household types. As before, we solve for the household equilibrium,
where each household has no desire to move to a di erent school district.

3.2.1 Parameterization of the Decentralized Employment Model
The central parameter values for the functional forms used in the model follow those displayed
in Table 4. The wage rates across areas are, however, expanded as shown in the table below.
The population of the city is set to be 3,000,000 households. Approximately, 40 percent
of the total population is assumed to be skilled worker households. Moreover, 30 percent of skilled
households are assumed to be low valuation types. As for the unskilled households, 70 percent are
low valuation types. We do also specify the distribution worker populations across workplaces. A
high fraction of jobs are located at the CBD (46.7%). The East Suburban Center (32.4%) o ers
Distance, denotedpby d, is the Euclidean norm for any two points. On xy plane, the distance between (
and ( 2 2 ) is 21 = ( 1 ? 2 )2 + ( 1 ? 2 )2 .
15

x 1 ; y1

x ;y

d

x

x

y

y

14

)

Parameter Value Parameter Value
wsc
wsw
wse
c1
c3

Variable

wuc
wuw
wue
c2

$18.3
$17.6
$17.9
5.819
0.461

$10.7
$10.3
$10.5
3.975

Table 4: Calibration Parameters

Quality of Education
Tax rate
Expenditure per pupil per year
Eciency
Average monthly gross rent per acre

CBD West East

40.1
1.3%
$1,968
7.43
$3,815

59.9
1.66%
$2,273
9.63
$4,054

29.9
1.3%
$1,876
5.82
$3,399

Table 5: The characteristics of communities in equilibrium.
more jobs than West Suburban Center (20.7%). See Table 6 for the exact decomposition of the
population. Parameters of the education production function are set to be c1 = 5:819; c2 = 3:975;

c3 = 0:461; so that (qj ; j ) preferences of households in di erent jurisdictions are consistent with
(qj ; j ) pairs that induce the underlying population distribution.16
We divide the metropolitan area into ne grids (i.e. apply discrete distances), and nd
residential location pattern over those grids. The metropolitan area is large in the sense that
the grids at boundaries are left undeveloped. Therefore, we have a inelastic supply of residential
property in any direction in the metropolitan area.17

3.2.2 Basic Results with Decentralized Employment
The simulation results for the benchmark model are given in Tables 5 and 6 in addition
to Figures 2 and 3. The West School District is the best in terms of the education it provides,
while the East is the worst. West (East) School District attracts mostly high (low) valuation type
households. These high valuation households put more pressure on schools and make schools more
productive and ecient. The majority voting outcome of tax rates in West (East) School district
are the preferred tax rates of high (low) valuation type households. To be precise, tax rates for
With these parameter values for peers, a school district of all residents with low (high) valuation has a productivity
of 5.819 (9.794), a 68 percent di erent in productivity for the higher peer group.
17
With three communities, we cannot show uniqueness of the equilibrium theoretically. The equilibrium can be
solved numerically for a wide range of starting values. For our experiments, we consistently nd a unique equilibrium,
independent of the starting point.
16

15

15

10

150
100
300

5

250

50
250
100

0

150
200
300
250

−5

250 250

200

150

−10

50

100

−15

−15

−10

−5

0

5

10

15

Figure 2: ISO-RENT CURVES: Iso-rent curves have been shown. Notice the large drop/jump in
iso-rent levels as we cross the district border as well as rings around the CBD extending to West
and East School Districts. This is due to eciency/quality of education di erence between districts.
The rent is per acre per DAY to have a descent picture.
West and East/CBD School Districts are 1.66 percent and 1.3 percent, respectively. The higher
quality of education is capitalized into housing prices. Average rents attain their peak value in the
West School District and their lowest value in the East. Moreover, the West School District with
the highest property taxes and land prices spends more on education than the other communities
in the metropolitan area.
Figure 2 shows iso-rent curves for the metropolitan area. As sites gets close to employment
centers, we observe a monotone increase in rents. We see three local maxima around workplaces.
This is due to accessibility, which includes both pecuniary and time costs associated with getting to
and from work. More importantly, we see capitalization of higher quality of education. The rents
are higher in the West School District that provides the best education than East School District
that provides the worst education. In this respect, it is quite surprising that West School District
providing a much better education than CBD seems to have almost the same rents. The reason
for this observation is that wages are higher at the CBD, and the households of workers with a
job at the CBD can a ord to pay more to outbid other bidders. It is also interesting to observe
the big jumps/drops as we cross the school district borders because of the capitalization of better
education. Moreover, the rings around CBD extends to both West and East School districts (i.e.
the presence of in-commuters). The rents at locations the same distance to the CBD are highest
16

Type/ Workplace Residence
CBD West East All
Skilled Low:CBD
Skilled High:CBD
Unskilled Low:CBD
Unskilled High:CBD
Skilled Low:West
Skilled High:West
Unskilled Low:West
Unskilled High:West
Skilled Low:East
Skilled High:East
Unskilled Low:East
Unskilled High:East

3.6
10.4
19.6
1.5

6.3
3.2
6.3
2.6
11.1
4.4
0.6
2.1
36.6

35.1

1.2
0.3
0.5

1.0
7.3
0.2
17.8
28.3

4.8
17
46.6
20.1
4.7
6.3 21
3.6
11.1
7.3
4.6 32.4
18.4
2.1
100

Table 6: Equilibrium percentage distribution of households across communities.
in the West School District and lowest in the East. Once again, we observe the capitalization of
better education. We also see the rings around the East employment center extending to the West
School District, showing the presence of households with a job at East employment center residing
at West School District to enjoy a better education.
In equilibrium, all poor households with steeper bid-rent curves locates closer to the workplaces than rich households with atter bid-rent curves, while high valuation households locate
closer to workplaces than low valuation households. That is, households of each type form a concentric ring, or zone, around the workplaces, and zones for all household types are ranked by the
distance from the workplaces in the order of steepness of their bid rent functions. No agricultural
land should be left inside the urban fringe. At the locations in between workplaces, we see the
inference of concentric rings around workplaces.
Table 6 reports the distribution of households across communities in equilibrium. As opposed to the traditional Tiebout models, all communities are heterogenous, and we do not observe
perfect strati cation by income or tastes or distance. Although the CBD is the biggest employer
and o ers 46.6 percent of all jobs available, a much smaller fraction, 35.1 percent resides in CBD. A
disproportionate share of high valuation households (6.3% + 3.2% = 9.5%) resides in West School
district that provides the best education, and commutes to his workplace at the CBD. Also, there
17

15
0.25
10

0.05

5

0.05
0

0.1
0.2

0.2

0.25

0.05

−5

0.05

−10

0.05

0.15

−15

−15

−10

−5

0

5

10

15

Figure 3: ISO-LOT SIZE CURVES: Iso-lot size curves have been shown. The pattern is quite
similar to that of iso-rent curves.
are some households (2 percent) with a job at CBD and residence at East School district. We
do not see any out-commuters (i.e. residents of CBD getting to and from their workplace at any
suburban employment center). Also, note the presence of some households with a workplace at
East (West) and residence at West (East), either to commute less or to provide a better education
to their pupils.
Iso-lot size curves are drawn in Figure 3. The pattern is quite similar to iso-rent curves,
and similar arguments can be made. The lot sizes increase monotonically with distance, and has
local peaks at workplaces. This is pretty consistent with empirical evidence in the U.S. The rich
reside in big houses away from workplaces. Once again, we clearly see two e ects: Holding distance
constant to workplaces, houses around West School District are smaller than houses around the
East and CBD School Districts. This is due to higher rents resulting from the capitalization of
better education. Also, observe the rings around CBD extending to West and East School Districts.
In the west, households with a job at CBD accept having a smaller house and/or commute more to
provide their children with a better education. As for residential densities, the pattern is analogous
to rents.

18

4 School Finance Policy Experiments
The decentralized employment model provides a benchmark for considering alternative policies.
Perhaps the most interesting are policies revolving around the nancing of schools. The recent
history of school nance, dating from roughly 1970, involves the interaction of courts and legislatures
to move the funding of schools away from local property taxes to some alternative revenue plan (see
Murray, Evans, and Schwab (1999) and Hoxby (2001)). For the most part, the discussions behind
the changing nance patterns have concentrated on the outcomes displayed before. Some districts
(West in our model) have a higher property tax base and spend more on their schools than others,
particularly in these discussions more than the CBD. What is less often discussed is the fact that
West also chooses a higher tax rate and that the disparity in spending only roughly translates into
quality di erences in student outcomes. What is never discussed is that, if the method of funding
the schools is altered, the choices of households will also shift, leading to a di erent pattern of
locational and schooling outcomes.
This section analyzes a series of alternative school nance policies, representing variants
of policies that have been discussed or implemented in the recent period of school funding. We
start with school district consolidation and then consider alternative expenditure and tax rate
equalization plans along with district power equalization.

4.1 School District Consolidation
As emphasized throughout this paper, one aspect of having a variety of school districts, as
suggested by Tiebout (1956), is that households can choose schools that meet their preferences.
On the other hand, the history of U.S. schooling in the 20th century was one of consolidation of
districts. At the beginning of World War II, there were over 115,000 school districts. This gure
fell to less than 15,000 today. While the pace of school district consolidation has slowed, the
remarkable decline occurred even as the overall student population increased considerably.
School district consolidation remains relevant for policy today. In the face of various school
nance equity law suits, a potential policy is full state funding { which is essentially equivalent to
school district consolidation.
19

Variable

Quality of Education
Tax rate
Expenditure per pupil per year
Eciency
Average monthly gross rent per acre

CBD West East

51.1
1.3%
$1,936
9.63
$4,046

31
1.3%
$1,936
5.84
$3,439

34.7
1.3%
$1,936
6.55
$3,516

Table 7: The characteristics of communities after school district consolidation.
Although the causes of consolidation (Brasington 1999) and the potential cost savings
from school district consolidation (Duncombe and Yinger, 2002) are well documented, the potential
welfare and eciency consequences of consolidation have been largely ignored. Calabrese, Cassidy,
and Epple (2002) analyze consolidation within the context of a political model and suggest that
voters as a group are unlikely to support further consolidation, although they suggest the welfare
aspects of consolidation are ambiguous.
This section explores the consequences of school district consolidation. The CBD, West,
and East School Districts are consolidated under the name, Greater City School District. The
metropolitan area moves from benchmark to new equilibrium, which is described by Tables 7 and
8 and Figure 4.
Consolidation has a common spending and tax policy across all of the districts, but it does
not imply that outcomes are the same. One striking feature of the new equilibrium is that, although
all jurisdictions spend the same amount of money on education, they end up with providing di erent
qualities of education. The CBD School district o ers the best education, while the West School
District is the worst. The driving force is the impact of peers on schooling outcomes, which in turn
are capitalized into rents. The property taxes prevailing at equilibrium are, not surprisingly, the
preferred tax rate of low valuation households. We also see the capitalization of better education
into rents (see Figure 4). The rents around the CBD, which provides the best education, are much
higher than the rents around the West School District, which provides the poorest education.
Table 8 shows the population distribution in the metropolitan area after school district
consolidation. The number of CBD residents increases, since CBD now also o ers the best education in addition to having jobs with higher wages than any other workplace in the metropolitan
area. We do not see any signi cant change in worker/resident population in the East. The major
20

15

10
250

150
5

350

300

200

100

50

0
150

200
250
200 250

−5

−10

−15

−15

−10

−5

0

5

10

15

Figure 4: ISO-RENT CURVES: Iso-rent curves after School district consolidation have been shown.
worker/resident movement to CBD comes from West. Once again, we do not have perfect strati cation by incomes or tastes, but most high valuation households reside in the community with best
schools, the CBD.
In terms of welfare, the constrained choices of consolidation makes every household worse
o .18 Both Skilled and Unskilled High Valuation Households are the most severely hit groups,
where the policy is the equivalent of a two percent consumption loss. But even the unskilled, low
valuation households are hurt, because rents are driven up from the minimums previously available.
(See the summary in Table 12).

4.2 District Power Equalization
The wealth neutrality approach, developed by Coons, Clune and Sugarman (1970), has been
a perennial candidate for school nance reform. A portion of the funding in many states is based
on a version of this.19 It explicitly does not call for equal spending among districts, only that all
districts are able to realize the same revenues from the same tax e ort. As is well known, however,
the implications for spending patterns depend centrally on the behavior of households in setting
taxes and choosing locations (see, for example, Feldstein (1975)).
This section analyzes the consequences of moving to a metropolitan (state) government,
Our previous analysis based on the classic monocentric employment model (Hanushek and Yilmaz forthcoming)
also found the consolidation led to generalized welfare losses.
19
The central idea is a variable matching grant that equalizes the yield across varying tax bases from a property
tax . It is variously called guaranteed tax base, district power equalization, or wealth neutrality.
18

21

Type/workplace

Residence
CBD West East All

Skilled Low:CBD
2.2%
Skilled High:CBD
19.2% 1.2%
Unskilled Low:CBD 3.3% 4.2%
Unskilled High:CBD 17.9%
Skilled Low:West
2.8%
Skilled High:West
0.4%
Unskilled Low:West
12.5%
Unskilled High:West
Skilled Low:East
1.8%
Skilled High:East
0.6%
Unskilled Low:East
3.1%
Unskilled High:East
40.4% 28.8%

0.7%
1.2%
0.3%

1%

2.9%
21.6%
7.8%
17.9%
2.8%
0.4%
13.5%

4.6%
5.4%
17.6%

6.4%
6%
20.7%

30.8%

50.2%

16.7%

33.1%
100%

Table 8: The percentage distribution of households across communities after school district consolidation.

Variable

Quality of Education
Tax rate
Expenditure per pupil per year
Eciency
Average monthly gross rent per acre

CBD West East

32.8
1.30%
$1,864
6.42
$3,714

63.2
1.66%
$2,375
9.72
$4,140

30
1.30%
$1,864
5.87
$3,425

Table 9: The characteristics of communities after district power equalization.
rather than school districts, that raises tax revenues and redistributes them to school districts
proportionally to the property tax rate that prevails in each school district. Since the capitalization
of education and accessibility again yields an incomplete strati cation by incomes or tastes along
the lines elaborated in the previous section, we mostly concentrate on the welfare analysis (after
brie y describing the new equilibrium).
As shown in Table 9, the West School District now provides a somewhat better education,
compared to the benchmark, while there is a signi cant fall in quality in the CBD schools. The
West School District is the most ecient school district, since it is home mostly to high valuation
households. We also see the e ect of access and wages on rents. Rents in the East remain below
those in the CBD, even though the tax rates and school quality are essentially the same.
The impact of District Power Equalization on households are shown in Table 12. This
table displays the change in rent needed to hold household utility constant after the introduction
22

Variable

Quality of Education
Tax rate
Expenditure per pupil per year
Eciency
Average monthly gross rent per acre

CBD West East

53.9
1.33%
$2,039
9.65
$4,088

32.6
1.52%
$2,039
5.84
$3,563

35.8
1.43%
$2,039
6.4
$3,582

Table 10: The characteristics of communities after expenditure equalization.

Variable

Quality of Education
Tax rate
Expenditure per pupil per year
Eciency
Average monthly gross rent per acre

CBD West East

57.8
1.48%
$2,190
9.64
$4,210

31.9
1.48%
$2,000
5.82
$3,517

38.1
1.48%
$2,089
6.65
$3,632

Table 11: The characteristics of communities after tax equalization.
of the policy. (Table 13 provides an estimate of the consumption change required for constant
utility). Again, all households seem to be worse o . The most severely hit group is Skilled High
valuation households (who have to share part of the capitalized rents from high school quality with
other groups). However, the welfare loss for each household is smaller than that of School District
Consolidation.
As Feldstein (1975) previously indicated, this program does not sever the relationship between a community's expenditure per pupil and its wealth (here measured by rents). Communities
with the same property tax rates, as in our simulation, might end up with di erent quality of
schools, and tax rates also vary by wealth.

4.3 Expenditure and Tax Equalization Policies
Much of the history of school nance reform in the latter half of the 20th century had as a
central concern reducing educational spending disparities. Readily apparent and large di erences
in spending on education from district to district became one major target of court action and
legislative change. District consolidation takes this to an extreme by insuring that taxes and
spending are equalized everywhere, while district power equalization allows for di erences based
on tastes but equalizes revenue from chosen tax rates.20
20
Note that all of our simulations begin with the current national average of state and local funding. The policy
options presume that roughly half of spending comes from the state, and this will lead to equalization compared to
an entirely local taxing and spending system.

23

This section looks at two "more radical" approaches, albeit ones that match some of the
rhetoric around school nancing policy. The rst explores the consequences of equalizing expenditure per pupil across school districts by simply administratively setting spending to the average of
expenditures per pupil across school districts at benchmark. (Expenditures are set at the average
expenditure in the baseline model). The second, following some of the discussions that emphasize
di erential tax rates, administratively sets the tax rates. In both cases, we permit household locational choices to operate such that capitalization and preferences yield di erent school quality. In
the rst case, tax rates are allowed to di er across communities, while in the second case spending
di ers across communities.
We again assume the economy starts at the old benchmark and moves to new equilibrium.
Expenditure equalization is described in Table 10. While tax equalization is described in Table
11.
With expenditure equalization, the CBD o ers the best education, while having the highest
rents. Most high valuation types reside in the CBD School District, and the CBD district has the
highest eciency. While the CBD has the lowest property tax rate, it also has the most expensive
housing. The West district ends up having the highest tax rate, the lowest quality of schools, and,
consistently, the lowest rental values.
Under tax rate equalization, the ranking of the cities in terms of educational quality remains the
same, but the dispersion is widened over that in the expenditure equalization case. In both cases,
however, the dispersion is narrower than observed in the baseline. With expenditure equalization,
the variation in school quality is the least of all of the policies except consolidation. Nonetheless,
Table 12 indicates that again all households are worse o in welfare terms with the policies.

4.4 Summary of Welfare Changes
Tables 12 and 13 summarize the welfare change of households resulting from the previous
policy alternative. As noted above, we calculate welfare changes in two complementary ways. In
Table 12, we present the percentage change in rents that would be needed to provide the same
utility in the move from the benchmark (unconstrained) equilibrium to the various policy options.
24

Type

Skilled High
Skilled Low
Unskilled High
Unskilled Low

Consolidation Expenditure Equal. Tax Equal. Power Equal.
-2.01
-1.80
-2.25
-1.65

-1.40
-1.49
-1.49
-1.19

-0.35
-0.58
-0.22
-0.37

-1.72
-1.29
-1.42
-1.53

Table 12: Winners and losers as a result of governmental involvement, measured by rent change
needed to equate welfare with baseline. (Minus sign means loss while a plus is a proxy for gain).

Type

Skilled High
Skilled Low
Unskilled High
Unskilled Low

Consolidation Expenditure Equal. Tax Equal. Power Equal.
-0.52
-0.48
-0.58
-0.44

-0.36
-0.40
-0.38
-0.32

-0.09
-0.15
-0.06
-0.10

-0.44
-0.34
-0.36
-0.41

Table 13: Winners and losers as a result of governmental involvement in terms of consumption
equivalents. (Minus sign means loss while a plus is a proxy for gain).
Table 13 we provide a measure of the consumption change that is equivalent to the utility change
with the introduction of the policy.
Although we have ideal conditions for governmental involvement -the presence of peer
group e ects and the redistributive motives for the government to reduce spending disparitiesthe welfare implications of the policies that are shown in Table 12 and Table 13 are somewhat
surprising. Due to distortions that could only be captured by a general equilibrium framework,
crippling the Tiebout system by divorcing local property wealth (i.e. the price mechanism) from
school spending results in welfare losses for all households. The worst policy, in terms of welfare
loss, is school district consolidation, but district power equalization does surprisingly bad. Tax
equalization has the least e ect on welfare of the various policies, but there is little obvious reason
for choosing this { given the households have the ability to move according to di erences in taxes
and housing prices.

5 Conclusions
This paper provides a uni ed treatment of two arti cially separated streams of literature,
namely urban location theory and Tiebout models of community choice. It also takes the model
beyond the limits of a monocentric city model by introducing decentralized employment locations
and produces a locational outcome that is more consistent with empirical observation. As opposed
25

to the prediction of Tiebout models, the strati cation of households by income into communities,
all communities are heterogenous, and contain all household types. The model also predicts the
capitalization of better education and of accessibility.
We use the model to assess the impact of several types of reforms in the pursuit of equity in
school nance on the quality of education and individual welfare. A signi cant nding of our paper
is that households seem to be uniformly worse o as a result of governmental involvement. In the
baseline, communities establish di erent levels of education and property taxes, and households
"vote with their feet " to choose the optimal bundle. The property tax essentially becomes a fee
for education and location. When government policy divorces intervenes, households are not made
better o .
Moreover, with school district consolidation and expenditure equalization programs, districts have the same expenditure per pupil, yet end up providing di erent levels of education.
Improving the scal capacity of schools may be a necessary requirement to improve outcomes, but
clearly it is not sucient to achieve equity of educational opportunity. Operating on just the
spending margin does not make the situation better, even when one has speci c distributional
objectives.

26

References
Alonso, William. 1964. Location and land use. Cambrdige, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Brasington, David M. 1999. "Joint provision of public goods: the consolidation of school
districts." Journal of Public Economics 73, no. 3 (September):373-393.
Calabrese, Stephen, Glenn Cassidy, and Dennis Epple. 2002. "Local government fiscal
structure and metropolitan consolidation." In Brookings-Wharton papers on urban
affairs, 2002, edited by William G. Gale and Janet Rothenberg Pack. Washington:
Brookings.
de Bartolome, Charles A. M., and Stephen L. Ross. 2003. "Equilibria with local
governments and commuting: Income sorting vs income mixing." Journal of
Urban Economics 54, no.:1-20.
Duncombe, William, and John Yinger. 2005. "Does School District Consolidation Cut
Costs?" Center for Policy Research, Maxwell School, Syracuse University
November.
Ellickson, Bryan. 1971. "Jurisdictional fragmentation and residential choice." American
Economic Review 61, no. 2 (May):334-339.
Epple, Dennis, Radu Filimon, and Thomas Romer. 1984. "Equilibrium among local
jurisdictions: toward an integrated treatment of voting and residential choice."
Journal of Public Economics 24, no. 3 (August):281-308.
Epple, Dennis, Radu Filimon, and Thomas Romer. 1993. "Existence of Voting and
Housing Equilibrium in a System of Communities with Property Taxes." Regional
Science and Urban Economics 23, no.:585-610.
Epple, Dennis, and Thomas Nechyba. 2004. "Fiscal decentralization." In Handbook of
Regional and Urban Economics, edited by J. Vernon Henderson and JacquesFrançois Thisse. Amsterdam: Elsevier:2423-2480.
Epple, Dennis, and Glenn J. Platt. 1998. "Equilibrium and Local Redistribution in an
Urban Economy when Households Differ in both Preferences and Incomes."
Journal of Urban Economics 43, no. 1 (January):23-51.
Epple, Dennis, and Richard E. Romano. 1998. "Competition between private and public
schools, vouchers, and peer-group effects." American Economic Review 88, no. 1
(March):33-62.

Epple, Dennis, and Richard E. Romano. 2003. "Neighborhood schools, choice and the
distribution of educational benefits." In The Economics of School Choice, edited
by Caroline M. Hoxby. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Epple, Dennis, Richard E. Romano, and Holger Sieg. 2003. "Peer Effects, Financial Aid,
and Selection of Students into Colleges." Journal of Applied Econometrics 18, no.
5 (September/October):501-525.
Feldstein, Martin S. 1975. "Wealth neutrality and local choice in public education."
American Economic Review 65, no. 1 (March):75-89.
Fernandez, Raquel, and Richard Rogerson. 1996. "Income distribution, communities, and
the quality of public education." Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, no. 1
(February):135-164.
Fujita, Masahisa. 1989. Urban Economic Theory: Land Use and City Size. New York,
NY: Cambridge University Press.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Matthew E. Kahn. 2001. "Decentralized employment and the
transformation of the American city." In Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban
Affairs, 2001, edited by William G. Gale and Janet Rothenberg Pack. Washington,
DC: Brookings:1-47.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Matthew E. Kahn. 2004. "Sprawl and urban growth." In
Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, edited by J. Vernon Henderson and
Jacques-François Thisse. Amsterdam: Elsevier:2481-2527.
Glaeser, Edward L., Matthew E. Kahn, and Jordan Rappaport. 2000. "Why do the poor
live in cities?" 7636, National Bureau of Economic Research, April.
Hamilton, Bruce W. 1975. "Zoning and property taxation in a system of local
governments." Urban Studies 12, no.:205-11.
Hanushek, Eric A. 2003. "The failure of input-based schooling policies." Economic
Journal 113, no. 485 (February):F64-F98.
Hanushek, Eric A., and Kuzey Yilmaz. forthcoming. "The complementarity of Tiebout
and Alonso." Journal of Housing Economics, no.
Hotchkiss, David, and Michelle J. White. 1993. "A simulation model of decentralized
metropolitan area." Journal of Urban Economics 34, no.:159-185.
Hoxby, Caroline Minter. 2001. "All school finance equalizations are not created equal."
Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, no. 4 (November):1189-1231.

Leung, Charles Ka Yui. 2004. "Macroeconomics and housing: A review of the literature."
Journal of Housing Economics 13, no. 4 (December):249-267.
McMillen, Daniel P., and Stefani C. Smith. 2003. "The number of subcenters in large
urban areas." Journal of Urban Economics 53, no. 3 (May):321-338.
Mills, Edwin S. 1967. "An aggregate model of resource allocation in a metropolitan
area." American Economic Review 57, no.:197-210.
Mills, Edwin S. 1972. Studies in the Structure of the Urban Economy. Washington, D.C.:
Resources for the Future, Inc.
Mills, Edwin S., and Bruce W. Hamilton. 1989. Urban Economics. Fourth Edition ed.
Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman and Company.
Murray, Sheila E., William N. Evans, and Robert M. Schwab. 1998. "Education-finance
reform and the distribution of education resources." American Economic Review
88, no. 4 (September):789-812.
Muth, Richard F. 1969. Cities and Housing: The Spatial Pattern of Urban Residential
Land Use. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Nechyba, Thomas J. 2003. "Public school finance and urban school policy: General
versus partial equilibrium analysis." In Brookings-Wharton papers on Urban
Affairs, 2003, edited by William G. Gale and Janet Rothenberg Pack. Washington:
Brookings:139-170.
Nechyba, Thomas J. 2006. "Income and peer sorting in public and private schools." In
Handbook of the Economics of Education, edited by Eric A. Hanushek and Finis
Welch. Amsterdam: North Holland:1327-1368.
Pack, Howard, and Janet Rothenberg Pack. 1977. "Metropolitan fragmentation and
suburban homogeneity." Urban Studies 14, no.:191-201.
Pack, Howard, and Janet Rothenberg Pack. 1978. "Metropolitan fragmentation and local
public expenditures." National Tax Journal 31, no.:349-362.
Ross, Stephen L., and John Yinger. 1999. "Sorting and voting: A review of the literature
on urban public finance." In Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, edited
by Paul Cheshire and Edwin S. Mills. Amsterdam: North Holland:2001-2060.
Ross, Stephen, and John Yinger. 1995. "Comparative static analysis of open urban
models with a full labor market and suburban employment." Regional Science
and Urban Economics 25, no.:575-605.

Solow, Robert M. 1973. "On equilibrium models of urban locations." In Essays in
modern economics, edited by J.M. Parkin. London: Longman:2-16.
Straszheim, Mahlon. 1987. "The theory of urban residential location." In Handbook of
Regional and Urban Economics, edited by Edwin S. Mills. Amsterdam: NorthHolland:717-757.
Sullivan, Arthur M. 1986. "A general equilibrium model with agglomerative economies
and decentralized employment." Journal of Urban Economics 20, no.:55-75.
Tiebout, Charles M. 1956. "A pure theory of local expenditures." Journal of Political
Economy 64, no. 5 (October):416-424.
U.S. Department of Education. 2004. Digest of Education Statistics, 2003. Washington,
DC: National Center for Education Statistics.
White, Michelle J. 1976. "Firm suburbanization and urban subcenters." Journal of Urban
Economics 3, no.:323-343.
White, Michelle J. 1999. "Urban areas with decentralized employment: Theory and
empirical work." In Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, edited by Paul
Cheshire and Edwin S. Mills. Amsterdam: North Holland:1375-1412.
Yinger, John. 1982. "Capitalization and the theory of local public finance." Journal of
Political Economy 90, no. 5 (October):917-43.
Yinger, John. 1985. "Inefficiency and the median voter: Property taxes, capitalization,
heterogeneity, and the theory of second best." In Perspectives on local public
finance and public policy, edited by John M. Quigley. Greenwich, CT: JAI
Press:3-30.

6 Appendix
In the monocentric area model, two general propositions follow directly from our basic model (see
also Hanushek and Yilmaz forthcoming).

Proposition 1. Suppose that school quality is higher in the East (i.e., qe  qw ), and all four
di erent types of households are bidding for land. Then, the size of the ring allocated to High (Low)
valuation households is larger (smaller) in the East.
Proof: Consider a Skilled High Valuation household in East School District. The bid-rent func-

tion for Skilled High Valuation household,
UL (r; uUL ; :)

uation household,
e
UL (rULSH ; uUL ; :).

SH (r; uSH ; :)

dominates that for Unskilled Low Val-

e , where re
if r  rULSH
ULSH is such that

e
SH (rULSH ; uSH ; :)

=

Notice that

i (:; qw ; w ) =

(1+e ) qwi =i (:; q ;  ) 8i 2 fSL; SH; UL; UH g
(1+w ) qe i =i i e e

e
And note that at rULSH
in the West School District,
e
;uSH ;qw ;w )
SH (rULSH
e
;uUL ;qw ;w )
UL (rULSH

= qqwe

H =H ? L =L

 1 if

H =H

? L =L > 0

e
w . Similarly,
Since bid-rent functions are convex and di erentiable, it follows that rULSH
 rULSH
w
e
w  re . The proof is the same for all other
one could show that rSHUH
= rSHUH
and rSHSL
SHSL

types, 8i 2 fSL; SH; UL; UH g.
Now, let us introduce the fth alternative, the agricultural use of land. Theoretically, it is not
clear what exactly happens. But still, we can come up with the following proposition.

Proposition 2. Suppose qe  qw and the landlord holds an auction with 5 alternative bids. Then,
it cannot be case that we got perfect strati cation by income. At least, one community should be
heterogenous in income, as opposed to the traditional Tiebout Models.
Proof: Without the loss of generality, assume that the steepness of bid-rent functions from the

lowest to the highest would be as Skilled Low, Skilled High, Unskilled Low, and Unskilled High
valuation households. If it is the case that the attest bid-rent function household, Skilled Low
valuation type, happens to live in the West School District, then by Proposition 1, it must be also
27

the case that Unskilled Low valuation household is present in the West School District. If some
Skilled Low valuation types were to live in the East School District, again by Proposition 1, Skilled
and Unskilled High valuation households should be present in the East School District.

28

