NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DEMAND FOR LABOR IN
THE LONG 1JN

Daniel

S. Harnermesh

Working Paper No. 1297

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, Mfi 02138
March 1981t

Professor of Economics, Michigan State University-, and research
associate, National Bureau of Economic Research. To be published
in 0. Ashenfelter and R. Layard, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics,
North—Holland Press. Orley Ashenfelter, George Borjas, George
Johnson, Richard Layard, Andrew Oswald and John Pencavel provided
helpful comments. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of

Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1297
jarch. 1984

The Demand for Labor in the Long Run

ABSTRACT

The theory of the demand for labor is presented alonQ with a catalog and
critique of methods that are used to estimate the parameters that describe

empirical labor—demand and substitution possibilities. A critical survey is
presented of studies of own—price demand elasticities for labor as a whole and
for workers categorized by demographic group, of substitution parameters among

workers of different types, and of workers for capital. The main findings
are: 1) The long—run constant—output demand elasticity for labor that is
treated as homogeneous is between .15 and .5; 2) Own—price demand elasticities
are higher for workers that have less general human capital embodied and them;
3)

Skilled

labor and physical capital are p—complements; and 4 More

tentatively, youths and wornenare q—substitutes in production. The
implications and importance for policy of these and other results are

discussed. Suggestions for improving the literature and narrowing the range
of knowledge of the underlying parameters, especially by concentrating more on
disaggregated and even microeconornic data, are presented.

Daniel S. Harnerrnesh

Department of Economics
Michigan State University
East Lansing, Michigan 48824

(517) 355—7349

I. Introduction
The demand for labor in the long run

should

be important to labor

economists for a variety of reasons. So long as the supply of labor to an
occupation, industry or area is not perfectly elastic in the long run, the
nature of demand for labor in that subsector interacts with the shape of the

supply function to determine the level of wages. As in the market for a
commodity, so too in the market for labor the demand is an integral
determinant of the price of what is exchanged.
In many cases economIsts are Interested In the demand for labor for Its
own

sake

rather than for its effects on wage determination. In some

Instances, e.g., In unionized employment or where the supply of labor to a
subsector is perfectly elastic, the wage can be viewed as unaffected by labor

demand. In such cases knowledge of wage elasticities of labor demand allow
one to infer the effects of exogenous changes in wage rates on the amount of

labor employers seek to use. The impact of changes in the price of one type
of labor on its employment and on the employment of other types of labor
(cross—price effects) can be discovered using estimates of labor—demand

relations alone. Alternatively, one can in many instances assume that the
employment of workers of a particular type is fixed (and determined solely by

the completely inelastic supply of such workers to the market). In those
cases the demand for their labor determines the wage rate they are paid.

Knowledge of the shape of the labor—demand function enables one to infer how
exogenous changes in supply (due perhaps to changes in the demographic mix of
the labor force or to shifts in suppliers' preferences for entering different
occupations) affect the wage rate of workers in the group whose supply has
shifted and in other groups too (cross—quantity effects).

1

2

Economists interested in policy questions should be concerned with

issues of labor demand. The effects of any policy that changes factor prices

faced by employers will depend on the structure of labor demand. Thus to
predict the impact of wage subsidies, payroll tax changes, investment tax
credits, etc., one must have satisfactory estimates of underlying

parameters. Similarly, the impact on wages of policies such as skills
training or population control that change the demographic or human—capital
mix of the labor force can be assessed only if one knows the underlying

trtietur of substitution relations among rouos of workers.
Bearing in mind throughout that the purpose of studying the demand for
labor is to understand how exogenous changes will affect the employment and/or

wage rates of a group or groups of workers, we begin this essay by examining

the theory of labor demand. The theoretical discussion is divided into two
parts: Demand for labor in the two—factor case, and demand in the multi—
factor case. In each part we first derive the results generally, then proceed
to specific functional forms. In Sections IV and V we point out the issues
involved in estimating labor—demand relations for one type of homogenous

labor, and then summarize the state of knowledge in this area. Sections VI
and VII perform the same tasks for the demand for labor of several types.
The focus throughout is on the relations between exogenous wage changes
and the determination of employment, and between exogenous changes in
inelastically supplied labor and the structure of relative wages. We ignore
the possibility that firms may not maximize profits or minimize costs, and

assume throughout that employers are perfect competitors in both product and

labor markets. While this latter assumption may be incorrect, the analysis
applies mutatis mutandis to employers who have some product—market power.
Most important, we focus only on the long—run, or static theory of labor

3

demand, and thus only on the long—run effects of exogenous changes in wage

rates or labor supply. The dynamics of labor demand, particularly the role of
adjustment costs and the distinction between the amount of labor used and its
intensity of use (employment versus hours per period), are Ignored (and left

to Nickell's essay in this volume). Most lags in the adjustment of labor
demand to its long—run equilibrium do not appear to be very long (Hamerinesh,

1980); the slow adjustment of relative wages to exogenous shocks appears due

mostly to lags in suppliers' decisions about training and mobility. That
beIng the case, the theory of labor demand in the long run, and the estImates
of parameters describing that demand, are useful in answering questions of
interest to policy—makers and others who are interested In the near—term
effects of various changes In the labor market.

El. Two Factors——The Theory
While the theoretical results on labor demand can be generalized to N
factor inputs, many useful insights Into the theory can be gained by examining
the demand for homogeneous labor when there is only one cooperating factor,

usually assumed to be capital services. Since much of the terminology of
labor demand applies in the two—factor case, concentrating on it also has some

pedagogical advantages. Also, many of the specific forms for the production
and cost functions from which labor—demand functions are derived were

initially developed for the two—factor case and make a good deal more economic

sense applied to only two factors than generalized to several. The
presentation here and in Section III goes through some derivations, but our

aim is to provide a theoretical outline to link to empirical work. More
complexity can be found in Varian (1978); still more is available In the
essays in Fuss—McFadden (1978).

4

Assume that production exhibits constant returns to scale, as described
by F, such that:
(1)

Y =

F(L,K),

FD > 0, Fji < 0, F > 0

where Y is output, and K and L are homogenous capital and labor inputs

respectively. A firm that maximizes profits subject to a limit on costs will
set the marginal value product of each factor equal to its price:
(2a)

FL — Xw=0;

(2b)

FK — Xr=O,

where w and r are the exogenous prices of labor and capital services
respectively, X is a Lagrangean multiplier showing the extra profit generated
by relaxing the cost constraint, and we assume the price of output is unity.
The firm will also operate under the cost constraint:
(2c)

C°—wL—rKO

The ratio of (2a) to (2b) is the familiar statement that the marginal rate of
technical substitution equals the factor—price ratio for a profit—maximizing
firm.

Allen (1938, p.341) defines the elasticity of substitution between the
services of capital and labor as the effect of a change in relative factor
prices on relative inputs of the two factors, holding output constant.
(Alternatively, it is the effect of a change in the marginal rate of technical

substitution on the ratio of factor inputs, defined as an elasticity.) In
this two—factor linear homogeneous case it is (see Allen (1938) pp. 342—343):

(3)

a —

din K/L —

din(w/r)

din

din

K

— FLFK
YFLK
(FL/FK)

5

The own—wage elasticity of labor demand at a constant output and
constant r is [Allen (1938) PP. 372—373]:

1LK = [1—s]ci > 0

(4a)

where s = wL/Y, the share of labor in total revenue. Intuitively, the
constant—output elasticity of labor demand is smaller for a given technology (ci)

when labor's share is greater because there is relatively less capital

toward which to substitute when the wage rises. The cross—elasticity of
demand (for capital services) is:
1LK = [1—s}c > 0

(4b)

[What is the intuition on the inclusion of 1 — s in (4b)?].

Both (4a) and (4b) reflect only substitution along an isoquant. When
the wage rateincreases, the cost of producing a given output rises; and the
price of the product will rise, reducing the quantity of output sold. The
scale effect depends on the (absolute value) of the elasticity of product

demand, , and on the share of labor in total costs (which determines the
percentage increase in price). Thus to (4a) and (4b) the scale effects must
be added, so that:

LL = — [1—sJi

(4a')

—

s

and

(4b')

= [l—sJ

[ci—i]

The results here and in (4a) and (4b) are the most important in the theory of

labor demand. They will be proved below using the cost—function approach.
Both (4a) and (4a') are useful, depending on the assumptions one wishes

to make about the problem under study. Certainly in an individual firm or
particular industry, which can expand or contract as the wage it must pay

changes, scale effects on employment demand are relevant. For an entire
economy, in which output may be assumed constant at full employment, (4a) and

6

(4b) are

the correct measures of the long—run effect of changes in the wage

rate on factor demand.

All of these measures assume that both factors are supplied elastically

to the firm. If they are not, the increase in employment implicit in (4a')
when the wage decreases cannot be complete: The labor that is demanded may
not be available; and the additional capital services whose presence raises

the marginal product of labor (FLK > 0) also may not be. In such cases the
demand elasticities are reduced (see Hicks (1964, Appendix)). Though such
cases may be important, we ignore them in this essay (though we do deal with
the polar case in which the wage depends upon the level of exogenous
employment).

An alternative approach makes

use

of cost minimization subject to an

output constraint. Total cost is the sum of products of the profit—maximizing
input demands and the factor prices. It can be written as:
C =

(5)

C(wr,Y), C > 0, Cj > 0, i,j = w,r,

since the profit—maximizing input demands were themselves functions of input

prices, the level of output, and technology. By Shephard's lemma (see Varian
(1978, p. 32)) the firm's demand for labor and capital at a fixed output Y can
be recovered from the cost function (5) as:

L* =

(6a)

C

and
(6b)

K*Cr

Intuitively, the cost—minimizing firm uses inputs in a ratio equal to their

marginal effects on costs. The forms (6) are particularly useful for
estimation purposes, as they specify the inputs directly as functions of the
factor prices and output.

7

Using equations (6) and the result that C(w,r,Y) =

YC(w,r,l)

if Y is

linear homogeneous, the elasticity of substitution can be derived (see Sato—
Koizumi, 1973) as:

ccyr

(7)

yr

Note that the elasticity of substitution derived from a cost function looks

strikingly similar to that derived from a production function. Obviously they
are equal, suggesting that the form one chooses to measure i should be
dictated by convenience.

The factor—demand elasticities can be computed as:
1LL = —[1—mjci

(8a)

and
1LK = [1—m]i,

(8b)

where m is the share of labor in total costs. Since by assumption factors are
paid their marginal products, and the production and cost functions are linear
homogeneous, m=s, and (8a) and (8b) are equivalent to (4a) and (4b).
We are now in a position to prove (4a') easily following Dixit (1976,

p. 79). If we continue to assume constant returns to scale, we can reasonably
treat the firm as an industry and write industry factor demand as:
(6a')

L = YC

and
(6b')

K =

YC.

Under competition firms equate price, p, to marginal and average cost:
p = C.

8

Noting that if markets clear, so that output equals industry demand D(p), we
obtain:

YC + D'(p) C2
w
ww

ôLIôw

Because C is linear homogeneous, C

ww

=

w Cwr

.

Substituting

for CWW'

then from (7) for Cwr and then for C and Cr from (6a') and (6b'):
ÔL/ôw =

2J +

Y

D'(p)L2

wC

To put this into the form of an elasticity, multiply both sides by pw/pL, and
remember that p = C:

1TT —

—rK
cs

£JAJ

+

pD'(p) wL —
S

— — —[l—sjci —

by the definition of factor shares under linear homogeneity.
The production or cost functions can also be used to define some

concepts that are extremely useful when examining markets in which real factor
prices are flexible and endogenous, but factor supplies are fixed (and,

because of the flexibility of input prices, are fully employed). The converse
of asking, as we have, what happens to the single firm's choice of inputs in
response to an exogenous shift in a factor price is to ask what happens to

factor prices in response to an exogenous change in factor supply. Define the
elasticity of coniplementarity as the percentage responsiveness of relative

factor prices to a one—percent change in factor inputs:
(9)

ô.tn w/r

C InK/L

This is just the inverse of the definition of .

9

Thus:
1

CC
wr

=•=CCwr

(10)

YFLK
FF
LK

In the two—factor case in which the production technology is linear
homogeneous, one can find the elasticities of substitution and of
complementarity equally simply from production and cost functions; and, having
found one of them, the other is immediately available.
Given constant marginal costs, the elasticities of factor price (of the

i

wage rate and the price of capital services) are defined as:

(11\
'''

''ww

= — ri—mi
L

and

rw =

(lib)

[1—m]c

Equation (ha) states that the percentage decrease in the wage rate necessary
to accommodate an increase in labor supply with no change in the marginal cost
of the product is smaller when the share of labor in total costs is larger
(because labor's contribution to costs —— a decrease —— must be fully offset
by a rise in capital's contribution in order to meet the condition that
marginal cost be held constant).
Consider now some examples of specific production and cost functions.

A. Cobb—Douglas technology
The production function is:
Y =

(12)

where a is a parameter; marginal products are:
oY

Y

(13a) stat,
and
(13b)

Y
oY =
[1—a]

Since the ratio of (13a) to (13b) is

if the firm is maximizing profits,

taking logarithms and differentiating with respect to £n

yields cy = 1

10

Equations (4a) and (4b) Imply:

LL = — [1—a]
=

1 -

a

Minimizing total costs subject to (12), one can derive (Varian (1978,

p. 15)) the demand functions for L and K, and thus the cost function. The
latter reduces to:
(14)

C(w,r,Y) =

Zwarl

a

y

where Z Is a constant. Using Shephard's lemma, one can again derive:
(15)-

w

LIK=--—.
i—a

Taking logs, the calculation that c =

1

follows immediately. It is also clear

from (15) that c = 1.

B. Constant elasticity of substitution technology
The linear homogeneous production function is:
1

(16)

Y = [aLa + (1—a)Kj

where a and p are parameters. Marginal products are.!-":

(17a)

Y1.-p

oY =

and
(17b)

oY =

Y1—p
(1—cz)()

Setting the ratio of (17a) to (17b) equal to the factor—price ratio, taking

logarithms, differentiating with respect to In

,

and making

) 0 , yields:

L
(18)

—ô In K =
o

= l/[l—pJ

r

The CES is sufficiently general that any value of p < 1 is admissable, and the
relationship (18) can be used to estimate ci.

11

mong special cases are:

1) The Cobb—Douglas function (p =

should be clear from (18)); 2) The linear function (p =

1),

0,

as

in which L and K

are perfect substitutes. (Go back to (3), and note that if p = 1, so that (16)
is linear and FLK =

0,

a =

.)

3) The Leontief function (p = — w), in

which output is the minimum function Y =

mm

{L, K} , and the inputs are not

substitutable at all.-! The constant—output factor—demand elasticities in
each case follow immediately from the definitions and the recognition
that

a is labor's share of revenue if the factors are paid their marginal

products.
The CES cost function can be derived (Ferguson (1969, p. 167)) as:
1

a 1—a

a 1—a 1-c

C=Y[aw +[1—a] r
where, as before, a = l/[l—p]

) 0 •

]

The demand for labor is:

L.aawaY

(19)

Taking the ratio of (19) to the demand for K, the elasticity of substitution
can again be shown to be a.

In both of these examples it is very straightforward to derive c first,

then derive a as its inverse. It is worth noting for later examples and for
the multifactor case that c is more easily derived from equations (17) and the
factor—price ratio (since w/r, the outcome, appears alone), than from (19) and

the demand for capital. a is more readily derived from the cost function,
since the ratio L/K appears alone. Obviously in the two—factor case the
simple relation (10) allows one to obtain c or a from the other; but the ease
of obtaining c or a initially differs depending on which function one starts
with,

a

difference that is magnified in the multifactor case.

12

Two other specific functional forms, the generalized Leontief form of
Diewert (1971) and the translog form (Christensen et al (1973)), are second—

order approximations to arbitrary cost or production functions. Each has the
advantage over the CES function in the two—factor case that ci (or c) is not

restricted to be constant, but instead depends on the values of the factor

inputs or prices. In each case we examine here only the cost function.

C. Generalized Leontief
(20)

C =

Y{a11w

+ 2 a12 w5r5 + a22r}

where the ai are parameters. Applying Shephard's lemma to (20) for each
input, and taking the ratios:

w —1/2
a11 + a12 C—)

L
(21)

wl/2
a22 + a12 (j)

As is easily seen from (21), in general

three parameters and the ratio

(—

ôin

(K)/&Qn (a)) depends on all

Under restrictive assumptions (20)

.

reduces to some of the examples we have already discussed. If a12 =

0,

it

becomes a Leontief function (since the ratio L/K is fixed). If a11 = a22, it
becomes a Cobb—Douglas type function.

D. Translog
(22)

in C =

in Y

+ a0 + a1 in w + .5b1[ w}2 + b2 in w in r + .5b3[in r]2

+

[1—a1]

in r

where the a1 and bi are parameters. Applying Shephard's lemma to each input,
and taking the ratios:

'

'23'
"

Again

a
Lr
1
K
—

+binw+b
mr
1
2

w [1—a1] + b2 in w + b3 in r

depends on all parameters and both factor prices. Under specific

circumstances (bi = 0 for all 1), the cost function reduces to a Cobb—Douglas
technology.

13

Both the generalized Leontief and translog functions may be useful for

empirical work (see below), even when written out as in (20) and (22). Each
has the virtue of allowing flexibility and containing some simpler forms as

special cases. That suggests that they should supplant the Cobb—Douglas and
CES functions even for empirical work involving just two inputs.
Throughout this Section we have assumed the production and cost

functions are linear homogeneous. This also implies they are homothetic:
Factor demand is such that the ratio of factor inputs is independent of scale

at each factor—price ratio. This assumption may not always make sense. For
example, large firms may be better able to function with a more capital—
Intensive process at given w and r than are small firms.
In the general case nonhoinotheticity means that the production function
cannot be written as:
Y =

G(F[L,K]),

where G is monotonic and F Is linear homogeneous. Alternatively, the cost
function cannot be expressed as (Varlan (1978, p. 49)): C(w,r,Y) =

C1(Y) C2(w,r) ; i.e., output is not separable from factor prices. Some
special cases are useful for estimation; and a nonhomothetic CES—type function
(Sato (1977)) and translog form (Berndt—Khaled (1979)) have been used.

III. Several Factors — The Theory
Mathematically the theory of demand for several factors of production

Is just a generalization of the theory of demand for two factors presented in

the last section. Empirically, though, the generalization requires the
researcher to examine a related aspect of factor demand that is not present

when the set of inputs is classified into only two distinct aggregates. The
issue is illustrated when one considers a three—factor world, for example,
three types of labor, L1, L2 and L3 .

One could assume that production is

14

characterized by:
(24)

Y = F(G(L1, L2), L3)

where F and G are two—factor production functions of the kind we discussed

above. The difficulty with (24) is that the aggregation of L1 and L2 by the
function G is a completely arbitrary description of technology. Far better to
devise some method that allows this particular aggregation to be a subcase

whose validity can be tested. This problem, one of separability of some
factors from other(s), provides the major reason why labor economists must be

interested in multi—factor labor demand. As an example, it means that one
should not, as has been done by, for example, Dougherty (1972), combine pairs
of labor subaggregates by hierarchies of two—factor CES functions.

Intuitively this is because changes in the amount of one type of labor in a
particular subaggregate could affect the ease of substitution between two

groups of labor that are arbitrarily included In another subaggregate. If so,
one will draw incorrect inferences about the ease of substitution between the
latter two factors (and about the cross—price demand elasticities).
Consider a firm (industry, labor market, economy) using N factors of
production, X1,
(25)

Y =

...,

f(X1,

XN.

...,

Let the production function be:

XN),

> 0, f1 < 0

Then the associated cost function, based on the demands for X1, ..., XN, is:
(26)

C =

g(w1,

> 0,

..., WN, Y),

where the wj are the input prices. As in the two—factor case:
(27)

f1 — Xw = 0

,

I

=

1,

..., N;

15

and, using the cost function:
(28)

Xg1=O,

i=1, ...,N,

where X and i.t are Lagrangian multipliers.

The technological parameters can be defined using either the
equilibrium conditions based on the production function ((25) and (27)) or

those based on the cost function ((26) and (28)). Allen (1938) used f to
define the partial elasticity of substitution, the percentage effect of a

change in wj/w on

holding output and other input prices constant, as:

1;

=

(29)

xixj

where:
0 f

.

I

F=

. . .

. fn

f
•

ii

the bordered Hessian determinant of the equilibrium conditions (25) and (27),

and F1 is the cofactor of fj in F.
The definition in (29) is quite messy. An alternative definition based
on the cost function is:

C

(30)

.=
ij g1g

(Note the similarity to the definition of a in (7) in the two—factor case.

Note also that the definition in (30) requires knowledge only of a few
derivatives of (26), unlike that of (29), which requires a compete description
of the production function.)

16

If one differentiates the system (25) and (27) totally, the
comparative—static equations are:

rdvx
(31)

[F]

dX1

:

=

axN

Holding
(32)

Y and all other wk constant:

ÔX./bw. = ____

Multiplying

(33)

the numerator and denominator of (32) by WJX1XJY:

ônX/ô2.nw.
I
j iJ

f .X.

Y

1.]

3

13

where the last equality results from the assumptions that factors are paid
their marginal products and f is linear homogeneous.3" The

factor demand

elasticities, can, of course, be calculated more readily using the definition
of

ij

based on (26).

Since ii < 0 (and thus ii < 0), and since E1. = 0 (by the zero—
3

degree homogeneity of factor demands in all factor prices), it must be the
case that at least one

> 0,

But (and what makes the multifactor

case interesting) some of the r1. may be negative for j*i.
The partial elasticity of complementarity between two factors is
defined using the production function as:

(34)

c. = ____

17

(Here the definition is just a generalization of (10).) The cj show the
percentage effect on w1/w of a change in the input ratio X1/Xj, holding
marginal cost and other input quantities constant.

The cii can also be defined from the cost function (from the system of
equations (26) and (28)) in a way exactly analogous to the definition
from the production function:

C.
(35)

c1

=

where JGj is the determinant of the bordered Hessian matrix that results from
totally differentiating (26) and (28), and Cj is the cofactor of g1 in that
matrix (see Sato—Koizumi (1973, P. 48)). Note that unlike the two—factor
case, in which c = 1/dy

c1 l/CIU

The result of totally differentiating (26) and (28) under the
assumption that G is linear homogeneous is:

dY/Y1

(36)

[GJ

dw11

Solving in (26) for

(37)

ôw1/ôX =

Multiply

both numerator and denominator in (37) by Cw1wX to get:

(38)

ôlnw /lnX. =
I

j

lj• = s.c..
3]..]

18

the partial elasticity of factor price I with respect to a change in the

quantity X.
Since

ii

= s c

iii

< 0 , and

E s.c.. =

313

0,

c. .

> 0 for at least some

:ij

factors. It is quite possible, though, that there are factors for which
< 0 for some j # I, i.e., for which an exogenous increase In the quantity
of input j reduces the price of input i at a constant marginal cost.

The partial elasticities of demand and of factor prices can be used to

classify pairs of factor inputs. Using the
q—complements J.f

c .
iJ

= s.c..

inputs i and j are said to be

> 0- ci—substitutes if c. . < 0.

3 13

(Note that it

13

is possible for all input pairs (i,j) to be q—complements.) Using the
inputs i and j are said to be p—complements if i.. =
> 0.

if

s.c..

< 0, p—substitutes

(Note that it is possible for all input pairs (i,j) to be p—

1ij

substitutes.) If there are only two inputs, they must be q—complements and p—
subs titutes .

The use of these definitions should be clear, but some examples may
demonstrate it better. If skilled and unskilled labor are p—substitutes, one
may infer that a rise in the price of skilled labor, perhaps resulting from an
increase in the ceiling on payroll taxes, will increase the mix of unskilled

workers in production. These two factors may also be q—complements.

If so,

an increase in the number of skilled workers (perhaps resulting from increased
awareness of the nonpecuniary benefits of acquiring a college education) will
raise the wage of unskilled workers by Increasing their relative scarcity.
The concepts developed in this section can be illustrated by a number
of the specific functional forms that have been used in the literature to
estimate production/cost relations describing several inputs.

A. Multifactor Cobb—Douglas and CES functions

19

These are just logical extensions of the two—factor cases. The N—
factor Cobb—Douglas cost function can be written:

C =

(39)

ri wi',

ai = 1

i

=

Each

1

(just apply (30) to (39)), making this function quite

uninteresting in applications where one wishes to discover the extent of p—

substitutability or examine how substitution between X and X is affected by
=

the amount of Xk used. That

1

can be readily derived from a

generalization of the argument in (13)—(15).
The N—factor CES production function is:
1

Y = [E

(40)

p]P

=1

,

As with the N—factor Cobb—Douglas function, the technological parameters are
not interesting:

c1

=

1—p

for all

The degree of substitution within each pair of factors is restricted to be
Identical.

A slightly more interesting case is that of the two—level CES function

N N

containing M groups of inputs, each of which contains Ni individual inputs:
1

N.

1

(41)

p1
Y.{[ a)C}

p1

N

+...+[E

1

where the

M

N N

akxk

}

,Ei=i,
i

NM_i

and u are parameters to be estimated. Equation (41) is the same

as (40), except that groups of factors aggregated by CES subfunctions are

themselves aggregated by a CES function with parameter u •

For factors

within the same subaggregate:

cl.=i—pk, k=1,...,M.
For factors in different subgroups, c.. = 1 —

u.

While (41) is less

20

restrictive than (40), it still imposes the assumption that the ease of
substitution is the same between all pairs of factors not in the same

subgroup; and it also imposes separability——substitution within a subgroup is
unaffected by the amount of inputs from other subgroups.

B. Generalized Leontief
The cost function, an expanded version of (20), is:
(42)

C = Y EE a. .w5w5, a.. =
lJi 3
13

a..
3].

The technological parameters can be estimated from:
(43)

X =
A.

a + > a [w./w]5, i =
j.j.

.IJ

J

1,

...,

N.

The partial elasticities of substitution are:

ij

—
(5..—
13

2[X.X.
13
13 s.s.1'

and
a. -X.

(5.. = 2ii 1
X.s.
11

ii

from this functional form, one need only know those

To derive the
ij

parameters that involve factors i and j.5 A production function analogous to
(42) can be used to derive the c1 easily (and the a.1. with great effort!).

C. Translog
In general the translog cost function is:
(44)

in C = mY + a + Ea.lnw. + .5 E E b. •lnwlnw
1
0
1
.
.1
3
1

13.13

with
(45)

E ai = 1; b . = b..
1

iJ

31

; E b. .
. 1]
1

=0

for all j.

The first and third equalities in (45) result from the assumption that C is

21

linear homogeneous in the w1 (proportionate increases in the w1 raise costs

proportionately). By Shephard's lemma:
lnC

I

s

=
= 1,...,N
=
,
X1w/C
ôlnw1
where both sides of the factor demand equation have been multiplied by w1/C,
(46)

and we have assumed factors receive their marginal products.
The reason for writing (46) as it is rather than as a set of factor—
demand functions is that, while the latter are nonlinear In the parameters,
(46) is linear:

N
=

(47)

a

+

b1.lnw.
,
-,
-J

I

=

1,...,N.

The partial elasticities of substitution are:
=

[b1. + s1sj/s1s. ,
2

I

j

2

a11 = [b11 ÷ s1—s}/s1
The

a1 can also be calculated from a translog production

specification, but to do so requires using (29), and thus the determinant of

what could be a large matrix. The production form is useful, though, to
derive partial elasticities of complementarity.

These functional forms and the associated production functions are all

summarized in Table 1 for the multifactor case. (Though the Cobb—Douglas and
CES should not be used when there are more than two factors, I present them

here to allow their use in the two—factor case.) The relative merits of and
problems with the alternative cost and production tableaux are discussed in
the next sections.

TA8LE 1
SUMMARY OF FUNCTIONAL FORMS

Estimating

Forms and
Demand Elasticities

Theoretical Forms

1. Cobb—Douglas

a. Cost
C —

b.

Yfl10I

a —

1 11 CRS

.tn C/Y

— 1 if CES

mY —

Production
Y

Ii X11; E

2.

a.

Cost

1aw

L

Production

a — 1 If CRS

J

jnX1;

-. -

a + tnw1 + amY;

—

in

5j0.

Ti11

Little use

b

'•b

—

E

CES

1

C — Y5

b.

Ea mw1

—

1 If CRS

Generalized Leontief

3.

a. Cost
C

— YEEa1 Wj5WJ5 .

X1

—

a11 + t a1[w/w115.

1

1

N;

—

a

—

5

2IX1X.s1sY
(a11 —

11 —

2X1

b. Production

Y —

w1 — b11

EEb1X5X5,

+ Eb1(X X1r5, I —

cii

II

I

N

.5
2 [W1W1S1SJ

- V1

—

2w1

4. Translog

a. Coat

in dY —

a + Es1

+

b11 —

b1

+

ssJ/s

+

s

Tlii

—

b.

I—1

a1 + b11mnw;

•5EEb1

(b11

N

—

Production.
joY —

a0

+

Ea1inX1 + .5EEB11mnX1iflX
—

I

s — a1 +

E 1inx1;

Ij

Cjj
—

I—

1

+
+

— 51/B

N

22

IV.

Homogeneous Labor——Estimation and Empirical Issues
In this section we deal with the problems involved in estimating the

demand for homogeneous labor. We examine how one estimates the demand
parameters under the assumption that all units of labor are identical. The
parameters of interest, the labor—demand elasticity and the cross—price and
substitution elasticities, have been produced both in the two— and the
rnultifactor cases. We discuss both issues of how the estimating equations are
to be specified, and how they are to be estimated and the results
interpreted.

A. Specification
The first approach to estimation rel ies on the production or cost

function 'directly." In the case of the Cobb—Douglas function this method

produces the distribution parameters. (If, for example, data on factor prices
are unavailable, these parameter estimates are necessary to compute the

factor—demand elasticities. if data on shares can be computed, there is no
reason to estimate such a function.) Estimating a CES function directly is,
as inspection of (16) shows, not easy, so the direct approach does not apply

here. The general ized Leontief and translog approximations can be estimated

directly (either in their cost or production function forms). Though little
work has rel ied upon this approach, it is quite feasible in the two—factor

case. In the multifactor case the problem of multicoll inearity (N+1 terms
involving each factor of production are included in the translog

approximation, N in the generalized Leontief approximation) becomes severe
(but see Hansen

al (1975)). With more than one other factor included,

direct estimation should not be done unless one arbitrarily imposes a
mul tifactor Cobb—Douglas technology.

23

The second approach uses labor—demand conditions, either from the
marginal productivity condition (2a) or the Shephard condition (6a). In the
simplest case, a CES function, this means estimating an equation like:

(48) ln L =

a0

+

Yln

WL + a11n Y,

where the a. are parameters, with a11 if the production function is
characterized by constant returns to scale.6 (Indeed, estimating (48) without
constraining a1 to equal one is the standard way of testing for constant

returns to scale while estimating the labor—demand equation.) In the
generalized Leontief and translog cases the amount of labor demanded is a
noni inear function of the factor prices, which makes these approaches

inconvenit.
In the multifactor case the labor—demand approach involves the estimation
of an equation like:

(49) in L = Eb.ln w. 4 a In Y, Eb. = 0,
1
I

where one can test for constant returns to scale (a11). Clearly, (49) should
be viewed as part of a complete system of factor—demand equations; if data on
all factor quantities are available, a complete system should be estimated.
If not, though, (49) will provide all the necessary estimates, for:

£ln L/ln w. =

(s./s

]ln X./51n w

L

The multifactor labor—demand approach provides a useful way of testing whether
the condition that the demand for labor be homogeneous of degree zero in

factor prices holds, and whether it is homogeneous of degree one in output. A
similar approach can be used to examine a wage equation specified as a linear
function of the logarithms of all factor quantities.

24

Yet a third approach may be cafled the relative factor demand method. In
the two—factor CES case this just invoives estimation of <18), with in L/}< as

a dependent variable, from which the demand elasticities can be calculated,
Some research has used this method, but none has used <21) or <23) directly.
The relative factor—demand method should not be used in the rnultifactor

case, for it involves the estimation of all pairs of equations like (18), in
the CES case, or like (21) and (23:1 in the more general cases. UJhile there is

nothing inherently wrong with this approach, it prevents the imposition of the
restrictions that factor demand be homogeneous of degree zero in all factor

prices. Since that restriction is a postulate of the theory, the
specification that prevents the researcher from imposing or at least testing
it does not seem desirable.

The fourth approach is to estimate the demand for labor as a part of a
system of equations based upon one of the approximations, like the general ized

Leontief or translog forms, that we discussed in Section III. Even in the

two—factor case a single equation like (47) for iL could be used, with the
only parameters to be estimated being the constant term and the slope on
ln{WL/Wj) (since the homogeneity restrictions make an equation for the other
factor redundant and the coefficients on ln WL and in w. equal and of opposite

sign). In the case of several factors homogeneous labor becomes one of the
factors in a system of N—i equations. These are the share equations for the
translog approximation, or equations (43) for the generalized Leontief
approximation.

Throughout the discussion in this section we have dealt only with methods

of estimating the constant—output labor—demand elasticity. As we indicated in
Section II, in the short run, or for individual firms, sectors or industries,
a change in the price of labor will induce a change in output (especially if a

25

small industry is the unit of observation). The effect of the output change
can be measured indirectly or directly. The indirect approach simply takes
some extraneous estimate of the demand elasticity •for the product of the

industry, and uses (4a') to derive a labor--demand elasticity that includes the

scale effect. A direct approach would estimate equations 1 ike (48) or (49)
but with output (Y) deleted.

B. Measurement and Interpretation Issues

There are many data considerations in estimating elasticities involving
labor demand; we concentrate here only on problems concerning the measurement
of L and w . The simpler issue is the choice of a measure of the quantity L

In the literature the alternatives have mostly been total employment and total

hours. Clearly, if workers are homogeneous, working the same hours per time
period, the choice is irrelevant. If they are heterogeneous along the single
dimension of hours worked per time period, using number of workers to
represent the quantity of labor will lead to biases if hours per worker are

correlated with factor prices or output. In studies using cross—section data,
in which there may be substantial heterogeneity among plants, firms or
industries in hours per worker, this consideration suggests that total hours

be used instead of employment. In time—series data (on which most of the
estimates of demand elasticities for homogeneous labor are based:) the choice

is probably not important, since there is relatively little variation in hours
per worker over time. However, if one is also interested in the dynamics o-f
labor demand, the choice is crucial, for there are significant differences in
the rates at which employment and hours adjust to exogenous shocks (see

Nickell in this volume).

The choice of a measure of the price of labor is more difficult. Most of
the published data from developed countries are on average hourly earnings or

26

average wage rates. A few countries publish data on compensation (employers'
payments for fringes and wages per hour on the payroll). While most of the
studies of the demand for homogeneous labor use one of the first two measures,

none of these three is satisfactory. There are two problems: 1) Variations in
the measured price of labor may be the spurious result of shifts in the
distribution of employment or hours among subaggregates with different labor
costs, or of changes in the amount of hours worked at premium pay; and 2) Data
on the cost of adding one worker (or one hour of labor services> to the
payroll for one hour of actual work are not available.'

The first problem can be solved in studies of labor demand in the United
States using the adjusted earnings series covering most of the postwar period

for the private nonfarm economy. The second problem is soluble (except for
labor costs resulting from inputs into training) for studies of the United
States labor market beginning in 1977 by the Employment Cost Index that the

Bureau of Labor Statistics has produced. Clearly, future work using aggregate
data should rely upon that index. That the distinction is important is shown
in Harnerrnesh (1983), in which a measure of labor cost per hour worked is

developed and shown to lead to substantially higher own—price demand
elasticities than do average hourly earnings or average compensation
measures.

The second measurement issue is what variables if any should be treated

as exogenous. Ideally the production or cost function, or labor—demand
equation, will be embedded in an identified model including a labor supply

relation. In such a case methods for estimating a system of equations are
appropriate, and the problem is obviated: Both the price and quantity of labor

may be treated as endogenous. If a complete system cannot be specified, one
may have sufficient variables that are not in the equation based on the cost
or production function and that can be used to produce an instrument for the

27

endogenous right—hand side variable. However, given the difficulty of
specifying a labor supply relation in the aggregate data on which most studies
of

labor demand are based, it seems unlikely that a good set of variables can

be found.

The choice usually boils down to whether price or quantity can be viewed
as exogenous in the problem under study. In studies based an small
units——plants, firms, or perhaps even geographical areas——one might well argue

that supply curves to those units are nearly horizontal in the long run. If
so, the wage rate may be treated as exogenous; and estimates of cost
functions, labor—demand equations, or share equations based on factor prices
are appropriate <for they include the wage instead of the quantity of labor as

an independent variable). In studies using aggregate data this assumption has
not been considered valid since Maithusian notions of labor supply were

abandoned. If, as many observors believe, the supply of labor to the economy
is quite inelastic even in the long run, demand parameters are best estimated
using specifications that treat the quantity of labor as exogenous; production
functions and variants of second—order approximations that include factor
quantities as regressors should be used.
Since in reality it is unlikely that the supply of labor to the units
being studied is completely elastic or inelastic, any choice other than
estimating production parameters within a complete system including supply is

unsatisfactory. However, since supply relations have not been estimated
satisfactorily except in certain sets of cross—section and panel data, one is
left to make the appropriate choice based on one's beliefs about the likely
elasticity of supply to the units, the availability and quality of data, and

whether factor—demand elasticities or elasticities of factor prices are of
i r t e rest.

28

V. Homogeneous Labor-—Results and Problems

A. Results with Output Constant and Wages Exogenous

Remembering that the chief parameter of interest in analyzing the demand
for homogeneous labor is the constant—output own—price elasticity of demand,
let us consider a number of studies that have produced estimates of this
parameter.7

I have divided the studies into two main types depending on the

specification of the equations estimated: Labor—demand studies and production

or cost—function studies. All of the latter use either a CES production

function or a translog cost function. In the translog cost functions labor is
specified as one of several factors of production (with energy, the focus of
interest in these studies, included as one of the other factors).

In Table 2 I list the classification of the available studies of the

constant—output long—run demand elasticity for labor. The estimates are of
the absolute value of the own—price elasticity of demand for homogeneous
labor. (The studies listed in Part l.A are based on relationships like (48:);
since the values of
the estimates of

are unavailable for the particular samples, I present

The estimates in the studies based on a

marginal productivity condition imply a measure of the responsiveness of
demand that is quite consistent with constant—output demand elasticities
holding other factor prices constant of between .2 and .4 (assuming the share
of labor is 2/3, and noticing that the range of most of the estimates is .67 —

1.09).

Only Black—Kelejian 1970: and Drazen .e...t .aJ. (1984) aron those studies

using this approach produce estimates that imply a constant—output demand
elasticity holding other factor prices constant that is well below this
range. The latter may be an outl ier because of the difficulties with the wage
data for some of the countries; why the estimates in the former are so low is

TABLE 2

STUDIES OF THE AGGREGATE ELOYNT-WAGE ELASTICITY
Author and Source

Data and Industry Coverage

LL

I. Labor Demand Studies
A, Marginal productivity condition on labor (estimates of lL' [1—sI)
Black—Kelelian [1970]

Private nonfarm, quarterly, 1948—65

.36

Dhrymes [1969]

Private hours, qtrly., 1948—60
Manuf. hours, qtriy., 10 OECD countries,
mostly 1961—1980
Private nonfarm, qtrly., based on labor
cost, 1955—1978
Private hours, monthly, 1961—71
Production hours, annual, 1930—65
Private production hours, annual 1930—73

.75

Drazen et al [1984]
Hainermesh [1983]

Liu—Hwa [1974]
Lucas—Rapping [1970]
Rosen—Quandt [19781

a
.21
.47
.67

1.09
.98

B. Labor demand with price of capital
Chow—Moore [1972]
Clark—Freeman [1980]

Nadiri [1968]

Nickell [1981]
Tinsley [1971]

Private hours, qtrly., 1948:IV—1967
Manuf. qtrly., 1950—76:
Employment
Hours
Manuf. qtrly., 1947—64:
Employment
Hours
Mariuf. qtrly., 1958—74,United Kingdom
(materials prices)
Private nonfarm, qtrly., 1954—65:
Emnlovment
Hours

.33
.51
.15
.19
.19

b
.04
•

06

C. Interrelated factor demand
Coen—Hickman [1970]
Nadiri—Rosen [1974]

Schott [1978]

Private hours, annual 1924—40, 1949—65
Manuf. employment, qtrly., 1948—65:
Production
Nonproducticn
British indust , annual, 1948—1970:

Employment
Hours

.18

—. 11
.14
.82
.25

2

II. Production and Cost Function Studies
A. CES production. functions
Brown—deCani [1963]
David—van de
Kiundert [1965]
McKinnon [1963]

Private nonfarm hours, annual, 1933—58

.47

Private hours, annual, 1899—1960
2—digit SIC manuf., annual, 1947—58

.32

B. Translog cost functions
Berndt—Ithaled [1979]

Magnus [1979]
Morrison—Berndt [1981]
Pindyck [1979]

Manuf., annual, 1947—71; capital, labor,
energy and materials:
Homogeneous, neutral techn0 change
Nonhomothetic, nonneutral techn. change
Enterprise sector, annual, 1950—76, Netherlands;
capital, labor and energy
Manuf., annual, 1952—71; capital, labor
energy and materials
10 OECD countries, annual, 1963—73;
capital, labor and energy

aSimple average of country estimates.

bEstimates calculated at the sample end—point.

.46
.17

.35

29

unclear.

Studies included under LB. in the table in most cases specify the price

of

capital services in a labor—demand equation that can be viewed as part of a

complete system of demand equations. The estimates have the virtue that the
own—price demand elasticity is simply the coefficient of in WL in the equation

containing in L as the dependent variable. The estimates are substantially
lower than those produced in studies in l.A. that include only the wage rate.

However, when one remembers that the estimates in l.A. are of the elasticity
of substitution, the two sets of estimates are in the same fairly narrow

range. Only the estimates based on interrelated factor demand (Part l.C. in
the table) are below the range implied by the estimates in l.A. and l.B.

Clark—Freeman (1980) have shown that measures of the price of capital services
are much more variable than measures of wages or earnings (presumably

reflecting at least in part errors of measurement). Studies of interrelated
factor demand, by estimating labor and capital demand simultaneously,
inherently base the estimated labor—demand elasticities in part on the

responsiveness of the demand for capital to what is likely to be a poorly
measured price of capital. This view suggests the studies in Part l.C. o-f the
table probably shed little light on the demand parameters of interest.
Among the cost arid production function studies listed under Part II of

Table 2 there is a remarkable degree of similarity in the implied

constant—output labor—demand elasticity. Given the diversity of
specifications, sample periods and units that are studied, the extent of

agreement is astounding. These studies produce estimates that are roughly in
agreement with those listed under LA. and lI.B. Again, whether one takes
information on other factor prices into account or not seems to make little

difference for the estimates of the labor demand elasticity. All that is

30

required is that one interpret one's results carefully, relating the parameter
estimates back to the elasticity one is trying to estimate.
Obviously there is no one correct estimate of the constant—output

elasticity of demand for homogeneous labor in the aggregate. The true value
of the parameter will change over time as the underlying technology changes,

and will differ among economies due to differences in technologies. However,
a reading of the estimates in Table 2 suggests that, in developed economies in
the late twentieth century, the aggregate long—run constant—output
labor—demand elasticity lies roughly in the range .15 — .50

.

While this range

is fairly wide, it does at least put some limits on the claims one might make

for the ability of, for example, wage subsidies to change the relative labor

intensity of production at a fixed rate of output. These limits suggest that
the huge empirical literature summarized here should narrow the debate over

what the likely effects would be of any change imposed on the economy that
affects the demand for labor.
An examination of these empirical studies and a consideration of the
problems of specification indicates that the labor—demand elasticity can be
obtained from a marginal—productivity condition, from a system of
factor—demand equations, from a labor—demand equation that includes other
factor prices, or from a system of equations that produces estimates of the
partial elasticities of. substitution among several factors of production.

Often data on other factor prices will not be so readily available as the wage

rate. The lack of differences we have noted between studies that include
other factor prices and those that do not suggest the effort devoted to
obtaining series on those other prices will not result in major changes in the
estimates of the labor—demand elasticity.

B. Varying Output or Endogenous Wages

31

While our major interest is in the constant—output labor—demand
elasticity, it is may be worth asking a short—run question: What is the
elasticity when output can vary, that is, what is a reasonable value for

l'

in

(4a')? The responses to changes in wage rates under these assumptions are
obviously of special interest to those concerned with short—run macroeconomic

problems. One recent study, Symons—Layard (1983), examined demand functions
for six large OECD economies in which only factor prices, not output, were

included as independent variables. The estimates range from .4 to 2.6, with

four of the six being greater than one. These relatively large estimates
suggest, as one should expect from comparing (4a) and (4a'), that there is
more scope for an imposed rise in real wages to reduce employment when one
assumes output can vary.

The discussion thus far has dealt with the demand for homogeneous labor

in the aggregate. Nearly all the studies summarized treat factor prices,

including the wage rate, as exogenous. Yet, as we noted in Section IV, this
assumption is strictly correct only if the elasticity of labor supply is
infinite, which hardly seems correct in those studies based upon data from

entire economies. <it is unlikely that the private nonfarm sector can elicit
more labor from households without any increase in the market price of time.)

The remarkable similarity of the results discussed in this Section may merely
arise from the authors' use of methods that are similar, but essentially
incorrect, and that fail to provide a proper test of the theory of labor

demand. Studies based on units of observation to which the supply of labor
can be claimed to be truly exogenous thus provide a clearer test of the
predictions of the theory of labor demand.

Estimates of labor—demand elasticities for small industries, for workers
within a narrowly—defined occupation, for workers within small geographical
areas, or even within individual establishments, are less likely to be fraught

32

with problems of simultaneous—equations bias than are the macro time—series
that underlie the studies summarized in Table 2. Unfortunately, relatively
little attention has been paid to this problem; but those studies that have
treated less aggregated data describing the demand homogeneous labor are
summarized in Table 3. The estimates of the constant—output labor—demand
elasticities are quite similar to those summarized in Table 2. This suggests
that the estimated elasticities that seem to confirm the central prediction of
the theory of labor demand are not entirely an artifact produced by using
aggregate data.

One might claim that even these units of observation are not the

establishments or firms upon which the theory is based. it is true that, in
contrast to the myriad studies of labor supply behavior based observations on
households, there is a shocking absence of research on the empirical
rnicroeconomics of labor demand. Thus the most appropriate tests of the

predictions of the theory have yet to be made. For those skeptical even of
the results in Table 3 that are based on data describing occupations or
industries, an additional confirmation of the theory is provided by analyses

of the effects of the minimum wage. An overwhelming body of evidence <see the
summary in Brown .t al 1582:) indicates that imposed, and thus exogenous,
changes in minimum wages induce reductions in the employment of workers in
those groups whose market wages are near the minimum.

VI. Heterogeneous Labor——Estimation and Empirical Issues

Most of the methods for specifying and estimating models involving
several types of labor carry over from the discussion of homogeneous labor in

the previous section. Yet because one is generally interested in many more
parameters than in the case of homogeneous labor, there are several

TABLE 3

INDUSTRY STUDIES OF LABOR DEMAND

Author and Source

Data and Industry Coverage

1LL

Ashenfelter and
Ehrenberg (1975)

State and local government activities,
states, 1958—69

•67a

Field—Crebenstein (1980)

2—digit SIC manuf., annual, 1947—58

Freeman (1975)

U.S., university faculty, 1920—1970

.26

Hoperoft—Synions (1983)

U.K. road haulage, 1953—80, capital
stock held constant

.49

Lovell (1973)

2—digit SIC manuf., states, 1958

McKinnon (1963)

2—digit SIC manuf., annual, 1947—58

Sosin—Fairchild (1984)

770 Latin American firms, 1970—74

Waud (1968)

2—digit SIC manuf., qtrly., 1954—64

aweighted average of estimates, using employment weights.

29a

.20

1 03a

33

considerations that do not arise in that case.

A. Specification

If one assumes that there are only two types of labor, and that they are
separable from

nonlabor inputs, the discussion in the previous section applies

and the ways of estimating substitutability between the two factors should be

apparent. (But see below for some problems that arise in this case.) In most
instances, though, the problem at hand involves estimating the degree of
substitutability among several types of labor (and among them and other

factors). In

that

case, as the discussion in Section III should make clear,

the restrictive Cobb—Douglas and CES forms will not be appropriate to answer
the questions under study except under highly unl ikely circumstances.

Two alternatives are possible, with the choice depending on the
availability of data: 1) A complete system of factor—demand equations,
essentially a series o4 N equations with the L. ,

i=1...N,

as dependent

variables, and the same set of independent variables as in (49); and 2) A
system of equations based on one of the flexible approximations to a
production or cost function, e.g., the generalized Leontief or translog forms,

such as are shown in Table 1. (Whether one specifies these systems with factor
prices or quantities as independent variables is another issue, which we

discus; below.) Each of these approaches requires data on all factor prices
and quantities. Each of the approaches using the flexible forms allows the
ready inference of the partial elasticities of substitution (or of

complementarity) as well as the factor—demand (factor—price) elasticities.
As in the case of homogeneous labor, one would ideally specify factor
demands simultaneously with factor supplies and be able to estimate a model

that obviates the need to consider whether factor prices or quantities are to

34

be considered exogenous. However, if it is difficult to specify such a model
involving homogeneous labor, it seems impossible to do so for a model that

includes several types of workers. Accordingly, one must be able to argue
that suppi ies of each type of labor are either completely inelastic or

completely elastic in response to exogenous changes in demand. 8

No satisfactory choice appears to have been made in the studies that have

estimated substitution among several types of labor. For example, consider a
study that seeks to examine the extent of substitutability among adult women,
adult men, youths and capital.

It seems reasonable to treat the quantity of

adult men in the work force as exogenous, and increasingly also for adult

women, but that assumption hardly makes sense for youths whose labor supply

appears to be quite elastic. (The supply elasticity of capital is also a
problem.) That being the case, the absence of an appropriate set of variables
from which to form instruments for the wage or labor quantities used means one
must accept some misspecificat ion whether one chooses to treat wages or

quantities as exogenous.

As another example, one might argue that the supplies of blue— and
white—collar labor to the economy are highly elastic in the long run; but it
is uni ikely, given the heterogeneity among workers' abil ities, that these

supplies are completely elastic. Even if one believes they are, the long run
over which they are infinitely elastic is probably longer than the quarter or
year that forms the basic unit of observation a-f time—series studies that

focus on this disaggregation of the work force. That being the case, there is
no clear—cut choice dictated by theory alone about whether wages or quantities
should be treated as exogenous in this example either.

The problem is not solved by estimating the cost or production parameters
using aggregated cross—section data. For example, the persistence a-f regional

35

wage differentials unexplained by apparent differences in amenities suggests
that one cannot claim that labor of all types is suppl ied perfectly

elastically to geographical areas. Thus using data on metropolitan areas or
other geographical subunits does not guarantee that factor prices can be

considered exogenous. The same problem arises when data on industries are
used: Insofar as industries use industry—specific skills, the supply of labor

to the industry could well be upward—sloping in the long run. The only
satisfactory solution, one that has not been tried in practice, is to use data
on firms or establishments as the units of observation.
In practice the best guide to the choice between treating wages or
quantities as exogenous is the link between this choice and the researcher's

own priors on the supply elasticities of the factors whose demand is being
examined (and thus how the misspecification that is induced can be

minimized). In the example involving adult females, adult males and youths
the overwhelming shares of output are accounted for by the first two groups,

whose supply of effort is relatively inelastic. That being so, treating
factor quantities as exogenous is probably the better choice. This also means
that one should focus the analysis on the elasticities of comnplementarity and

of factor prices, which are estimated more readily using production rather
than cost functions (see Section III).

B. Measurement and Interpretation Issues

Whether labor subaggregates are separable from capital, or whether some
groups within the labor force are separable in production from others, is of

central importance in empirical work estimating substitution among
heterogeneous workers. Consider first the issue of separabil ity of labor

subaggregates from capital. In many cases the available data provide no way
of obtaining a measure of the price or quantity of capital services. Even if

36

such data are available, they may be measured with much greater error than the

data on wage rates or employment in each labor subgroup. If the errors of
measurpr'rJ are small, one might well argue the Cambridge position that the
notion of trying to aggregate the capital stock in an economy, or even in a

labor market, is senseless. That being the case, one must be sure that labor
is separable from capital when one estimates substitution relations among
labor subgroups in the absence of a measure of capital price or quantity.
Otherwise, the estimates of labor—labor substitution will be biase:
A similar problem arises when one concentrates on substitution among
several subgroups in the labor force and assumes that they are separable from

the rest of labor. (For example, Welch—Cunningham (1978) examine substitution
among three groups of young workers disaggregated by age under the assumption
that the 0

of each for adult workers are identical.) The estimates of the
IJ

<or c ) between the pairs of labor subgroups being studied will
generally be biased. The separability of the labor subgroups from capital
should always be tested rather than imposed if the data permit.

Even if the labor subaggregates are separable from capital (or, if they
are not separable, the biases induced by assuming separability are small), a

problem of interpretation arises. Assume, for example, that the true
production function is:

Y

F(K,6EL1, L2]),

where the function 6 aggregates the two types of labor. Estimates based on:

(50)

L

G(L1,L2),

implicitly measure substitution along an isoquant that holds L ,

but

not

necessarily Y constant. Thus the factor—demand elasticities computed from

37

(50) are not constant—output demand elasticities (see Berndt (1980) for a

ias±icLtie.s; constant—output

discussion of this). They are

labor

demand elasticities will differ from these, for any rise in the price of, say,
L1 ,

will

induce a reduction in L (because the price of aggregate labor has

fallen). If, for example, the L—constant demand elasticity for L1 is
the constant—output demand elasticity will be:

<51)

11

where fl

LL

=

+

LL

is the constant—output elasticity of demand for all labor <see

Berndt—Wood (1979)). In general:

1.1

U

=

U

+ s.11
j

LL

The true (constant—output) demand elasticity is more negative <greater in
absolute value) than the gross elasticity, '*ii; and the true cross—price
demand elasticities are more negative than those based on estimates of
substitution using <so: as the underlying production relation.
Assuming the labor subgroups can be treated as separable from capital,
there is nothing wrong with the estimates of factor—demand (or factor—price

elasticities in the dual case). However, they are not the usual elasticities,
and should be adjusted accordingly. Otherwise, one will underestimate
own—price demand elasticities, and infer that the types of labor are greater
p—substitutes than in fact they are.
Another consideration is the choice of a disaggregation of the work

force. Much of the early empirical work (through the middle 1970s) focussed
on the distinction between production and nonproduction workers. This was
dictated partly by the ready availability of time—series data on this
disaggregation, partly by the belief that this distinction represented a

38

comparison of skilled and unskilled workers. Recent work by labor economists
has recognized that differences in skill (embodied human capital) between

production and nonproduction workers are not very great. lso, most of the
pol icy issues on which studies of labor demand can have a bearing involve

labor subgroups disaggregated according to other criteria. Thus most of the
recent work has disaggregated the work force by aQe, by race or ethnicity, by
sex, or by these criteria in various combinations.
Given one's interest in substitution among particular groups of labor
necessitates the aggregation of workers who differ along other dimensions that

are of less interest to the researcher. Care should be exercised, though,
that the aggregations decided upon make sense, in that substitution toward
other groups is the same for all workers within a subaggregate.9 In practice
this means that, wherever possible given the limitations of the data being
used, one should test for the consistency of aggregating workers into larger

groups. For example, if one is concerned about substitution among males,
females and capita, one should if possible test whether the substitution
between young men and females (or capital) is the same as that far older men.
The problem of deciding which disaggregation to use and the larger
difficulty of deciding what we mean by a 11skill" have led to efforts to

circumvent the decision by defining a set of characteristics of the workers.
In this view (see Ujelch (1949) and Rosen (1983)) each worker embodies a set of
10

characteristics (by analogy to Lancastrian models of the demand for goods).

This approach has the appeal of avoiding the aggregation of what may be very
dissimilar workers into a particular group; instead, it ulets the data tells'

what the appropriate skill categories are, in a manner similar to factor

analysis. One of its difficulties is that it has not as yet been developed
enough that the powerful restrictions of production theory can be imposed on

39

estimates using this approach. Also, for many issues that attract pub] ic

interest the arbitrary disaggregations of workers by age, race, sex, etc. are
of substantial importance.

VII. Heterogeneous Labor——Results and Problems

A summary of the parameters of interest in the studies that have examined
11

heterogeneous labor disaggregated by occupation is shown in Table 4. Perhaps
the most consistent finding is that nonproduction workers (presumably skilled
labor) are less easily substitutable for physical capital than are production

workers (unskilled labor). Indeed, a number of the studies find that
nonproduction workers and physical capital are p—complements. This supports
Rosen's (1968) and Griliches' (1969) initial results on the c.apJ.ial—.skiII

cIiaii hi±b.s..Ls. This finding has major impi icat ions f or the
employment effects of such policies as accelerated depreciation. investment
tax credits and other attempts to stimulate investment in physical capital,
suggesting that they will increase the demand for skilled relative to
unskilled labor.

Although not uniformly observed in all the studies tabulated, in most the
demand elasticity for nOnpraduction workers is lower than that for production

workers. This difference reflects what seems to be a consistent result among
studies examining all the disaggregations of the labor force: The own—price
demand elasticity is lower, the greater is the amount of human capital

embodied in the average worker in the particular class of labor. Thus skill
p.ar. s. ties employers to workers by making labor demand less sensitive to

exogenous changes in wage rates.
One would like to draw some inferences about the ease of substitution of

Functions

(1982)

Manufacturing, 1929—68;
translog, 1968
elasticities
States, Census of Population,
1960; CBS

Nonunion

Union

Manufacturing plants, 1968,
1970, and 1972, detailed
industry dummy variables; CES

Data and Method

Dennis—Smith

Clark—Freeman

Berndt—White

(1978)

(1977)

(1978)

(1972)

A. Cost Functions

Dougherty

Manufacturing, 1947—71;
translog,
1971 elasticities
Manufacturing, 1950—76;
translog,
mean elasticities
2—digit manufacturing
1952—73; translog,
mean elasticitiesa

Remit—Christensen (1974b)

B. Production

Freeman—Medoff

A. Cost Functions

Study

II.

I.

2.10

.91

Capital Included

.19

Capital Excluded

BK

.38

—1.98

1.09

4.1

4.9

.18

WK

STUDIES OF SUBSTITUTION OF PRODUCTION
AND NONPRODUCTION WORKERS

TABLE 4

—.05

.91

3.70

—1.63

8W

—.58

—1.23

—2.87

BB

—.22

—.72

WW

(1977)

by

per manhour.

Estimates

2.86

2.92

1.28

6.0
2.0

—1.88

2.5

—1.94

—.48

.08
.14

.47

iLodustries.

—1.3
1.5

4.76

—2.10

—.52

—.70

5.51

—.34

—.32

—.12
—.43

.49

.52

—.24
.76

—.02
1.02

.53
.90

.46

2.06

—.91

1.50

medians of paraneters for individual

a
Estisates are medians of parameters for individual industries.
b Ranked
value added
are

(1974b)
Manufacturing, 1929—68;
trans log
1968 elasticities
ChiswIck (1978)
States, Census of
Population, 1910 and 1920
manufacturing; CBS
professionals vs. others
Denny—Fuss (1977)
Manufacturing, 1929—68;
translog
1968 elasticities
Hansen et al.b (1975)
3— & 4—digit industries,
Census of Manufactures,
1967, translog;8
highest quartile of plants
lowest quartile of plants

Eerndt—Christensen

B. Production Functions

Manufacturing, 1929—68;
translog,
1968 elasticities
Freeman—Medoff (1982)
Fooled states and 2—digit
manufacturing industries,
1972; translog
Union .94
Nonunion
Grant (1979)
SMSAs, Census of Population,
1970; translog
Professionals & managers
Sales & clericals
Kesselman et al. (1977) Manufacturing, 1962—71;
translog
1971 elasticIties
Woodbury (1978)
Manufacturing, 1929—71;
trans log
1971 elasticties

Denny—Fuss

-2.59

—.19

—.18

—.61

40

white— for blue—collar labor, and about the absolute size of the demand

elasticities for each. Unfortunately, there appears to be very little
agreement among the studies on these issues. Examining the table more
closely, though, one notices that the estimated demand and substitution
elasticities are generally higher in those studies that base them on estimates

of production functions. Since inferring these parameters from production
functions requires inversion of an entire matrix of parameter estimates (see
equation (29)), they will be affected by errors in any of the parameters

estimated. While there is no reason to expect biases, the accumulation of

errors is also to be avoided. For that reason the cost—function estimates are
likely to be more reliable. The estimates shown in Parts l.A and II .A are

better ones to use to draw inferences about the extent of substitution among

these three factors. Using them, the demand elasticities for the broad
categories, white— and blue—collar labor, seem to be roughly the same

magnitude as the estimates of the demand elasticity for homogeneous labor that
we discussed in Section V.
Only a few studies have disaggregated the labor force by educational

attainment. Among them Grant (1979) finds that the own—price demand
elasticity decl ines the more education is embodied in the group of workers.

(This is consistent with the results on the relation of the elasticity to the

skill level that we noted above.) Grant and others, including Welch (1970)
and Johnson (1970), find that college and high—school graduates are

p—substitutes. (These latter two studies, which estimate pairwise CES
relations, are less reliable because they did not allow the level of other
factor inputs to affect the measured extent of substitution within a pair of

inputs. Essentially they estimate relative factor demand for many pairs of

factors.) All the studies estimate the extent of substitution, and the
own—price demand elasticities, to be roughly on the order of those found

41

between white— and blue—collar workers in Table 4.

The disaggregations of labor used in the studies discussed above are
clear—cut. In the more recent research a large variety of disaggregat ions,

mostly involving age and/or race and/or sex, have been used. This diversity
makes it rather difficult to draw many •firm conclusions from the findings

because of the relative lack of replication. In Table 5 1 list the results of
these studies, separating them by whether they estimate substitution

elasticities or elasticities of complementarity. Among the former several
I tJI

pJtI

LIJII'I.II I. 17

III!..1IIy

'_II

.I.UIJIV.

Tk. -+4
tIIQJ
III

elasticities (and, though they are not shown in the table, the substitution

elasticities) are much larger when produced using methods that treat factor

quantities as exogenous. This result parallels what we observed in Table 4;
even though quantities may be exogenous, deriving any substitution elasticity
from estimates based on this assumption requires estimates of all the

production parameters. That requirement may induce large errors when one or
more of the parameters is estimated imprecisely.

The estimates of the factor—demand elasticities vary greatly among the

studies. (Indeed, in Merrilees (1982) some are positive, for reasons that are
not clear; but their sign casts doubt on all of Merrilees' results.) However,
the demand elasticity for adult men is generally lower than that for other

groups of workers. This result is another reflection of the apparently
general inverse relationship between a group's average skill level and the
elasticity of demand for its labor. The final general izat ion from the studies

listed in Part I of Table 5 is that in most of the disaggregations each factor
is a p—substitute for the others.

As we noted in Section VI, the elasticity of supply should guide the

choice about whether to treat wages or quantities as exogenous. In the case
of disaggregating by age and sex, treating quantities as exogenous and

Study

Wages exogenous
Time—series
equations

(1982)

Herrilees

Layard (1982)

(1979)

Johnson—
Blakemore

Time—series

(19)8)

Government of
Australia (1983)
factor—demand
equations

Welch—
Cunningham
CES

Pooled cross—section
time series

Wages exogenous
Cross—section

I. Substitution and Demand Elasticities

Category

B.

Adult

females

Adult males

Canada, entire economy,
1957—7B; factor—demand

are

male wages
< 0

adult

Young males
Young females

Capital Included

< 21
< 18
21+
18+

H
F
M
P

BrItish manufacturing,
1949—69;
translog

M < 21
F < 21

14—15,
16-17, 18—19

Capital Excluded

Average for 14
age—sex groups

A.

Types of Labor

Entire U.S. economy,
1970—77; CES

F 21+

H 21+

17 Australian
industries, 1976—81;

States, Census of
Population, 1970;
Teenage Labor

Data and Method

STUDIES OF SUBSTITUTION AMONG AGE AND SEX GROUPS

TABLE 5

—

.11

.07

Mixed, but all
involving

All are
> 0 except
F < 18 vs. F 18+

1.43

—2.25

All are
>0
— .59

—1.34

All are
> 0

0ij

.56

— .44

—1.25
—.31
—.35
—1.59

—1.80
—4.58

Cross—section

SMSAs, Census
25—44
45+
of

SNSAs, Census of Pop—
ulation 1970; translog
White M25+
White F25+
SMSAs, Census of Pop—
ulation 1970; translog
Foreign born

Grossaian
(1982)

White migrants

Crant—Haraermesh
(1981)

Borjas (1983a)
1970;
generalized

B.

A.

Census of Population,
Females
Leontief
Hispanic migrants
White nonmigrants

Entire U.S. economy,
Borjas (1983b)
microdata 1975; Hispanics
Leontief
generalized

and Factor Prices

Anderson (1977)
Manufacturing,
25—44
1947—72;
45+
translog,
1972 elasticities

Crant (1979)
Population,l970;
translog

Elasticities of Complenentarity
(Quantities exogenous)

Cross—section

II.

Time—series

Quantities exogenous
Cross-section

Hamerisesh
Entire economy, 1955—75;
(1982)
translog,
mean elasticities

Natives
Second eeneration

Blacks 25+

Youths

Black males
those involving
Hispanic nonmigrants
involving Hispanics

Capital Included

Whites

> 0

Blacks

Capital Excluded

> 0

16—24

> 0

14—24

25+

14—24

< 0
— .23

All are

— .13
— .19

All > 0 except
youths vs. F 25+

102a

— .03

females, and some
—11.98

2.90

All > 0 except all

All are
— •64a

All are
—3.45
—3.99

All are
—2.72
—2.48

> 0

— .59
.01

001a

— .20
— .03

— .03
— .43

_266a

—

— •07a

—7.14

—9.68

—

a

Own—quantity

elasticities

Freeman

Time—series
1950—74; translog,
mean elasticities

Entire U.S. economy,

States, U.S.,
1967—74;
translog,
mean elasticities

of complesentarity.

(1979)

Berger (1983)

Pooled cross—section,
time—series

F

91

35—64
91

35—64 vs. F is > 0

Only

.38
.49

•29
— .71

—

—
—

45a

.5i8
— .
—l •48a

—

F
20—34

0

except young
vs. old
college grads

All are <

M

M, 0—15 yrs. school, 0—14 experience
H, 16+ school, 0—14 experience
14, 0—15 school, 154- experience
M, 16+ school, 15+ experience

42

deriving elasticities of cornplernentarity and factor price is the better choice

(in the absence of a well—specified model of the supply of each type of labor)

if data on large geographical units are used. (Clearly, if data on a small
industry or even individual establishments are used, wages should be treated
as exogenous. One's bel ief in the validity of the theory of labor demand
should be strengthened by the results of those three studies——Rosen (1968),

OConnell (1972) and King (1980)——that use these small units and find the
expected negative own—price elasticities for workers in narrowly—defined

occupations.) The studies presented in Part 11 of Table 5 treat quantities as
exogenous and estimate these elasticities for a variety of disaggregations of

the labor force. As such they give a better indication of the substitution
possibilities within the labor farce disaggregated by age, race and sex than
do those listed in

Part

I.

In all the studies the elasticities of factor prices are fairly low.
(Given the small share of output accounted for by most of the inputs, the
elasticities impi ied by Borjas' studies and by Berger (1983) are also quite

low.) They suggest that the labor market can accommodate an exogenous change

in relative labor supply without much change in relative wages2No
general izations about the relative magnitudes of the elasticities are possible

from the studies currently available.
One intriguing result occurs in all four studies (BorJas (1983a),
Grant—Hamermesh (1981), Berger (1983) and Freeman (1979)) that examine the

issue. Adult women are q—substitutes for young workers. Borjas (1983a) also
disaggregates the black male work force by age and finds that most a-f

the

q—substitutabil ity is between women and young black men. This finding
suggests that the remarkably rapid growth in the relative size of the female
labor force that has occurred in many industrialized countries, including the

43

United States, Canada and Sweden, in the past twenty years has contributed to

a decline in the equilibrium relative wage iate for young workers. To the
extent that relative wages cannot adjust because of real wage floors, and thus
permanent unemployment, the assumptions needed to produce estimates of

q—substitutability are incorrect. However, so long as adjustment ..en±uaI1

occurs, these cc. :section estimates can be used to infer that the growth of
the female labor force has also contributed to the high rate of youth
unemployment in these countries during this time.
Among the studies discussed in this Section oniy a few have tested for
the separability of labor from capital (and thus shed light on whether
estimates of the (gross) elasticities of demand or of factor prices obtained

when capital is excluded are biased). Berndt—Christensen (1974a) and
Denny—Fuss (1977) examine this issue using the production—worker,
nonproduction—worker disaggregatian; and Grant—Hamermesh (1981) disaggregate

the labor force by age, race and sex. All three studies conclude that the

separability of labor from capital is not supported by the data, The findings
suggest that the inclusion of the quantity or price of capital services is
necessary to derive unbiased estimates of production and cost parameters even

between subgroups in the labor force. The extent of the biases induced by
assuming separability has not been examined, though Borjas (1983a) indicates
that the a.. involving labor—force subgroups change little when capital is
excluded from a generalized Leontie-f system.13

There has also been very little effort made to examine whether the
particular disaggregations used are correct in assuming that workers included

within a subgroup are equally substitutable for workers in other subgroups.
This absence is due partly to the difficulties of obtaining data on large

numbers of narrowly—defined groups of workers. However, the evidence (see

44

Grant-Harnermesh (1981)) suggesting that it is incorrect to aggregate subgroups

of workers into still larger subgroups should induce greater care in future
research in this area.

VIII. Conclusions

Research into the demand for labor over the past 50 years has focussed on
depicting demand in a decreasingly restrictive way as the outcome of

employers' attempts at cost minimization or profit maximization. The outcome
of this trend to date is a means of characterizing demand for N factors of
production in a way that allows for complete flexibility in the degree of
substitution within any pair of factors; for that flexibil ity to depend on the

firm's output level; and for flexibility in the specification of returns to

scale in production. Not only is the theory completely general: We have today
the means to describe production relations empirically in a completely general
manner.

Perhaps the main advantage of this increased general ity is that it allows

us to test whether some of the simpler specifications of labor demand describe

the data well. Thus the many studies analyzed in Section V suggest that the
Cobb—Douglas function is not a very severe departure from real ity in

describing production relations between homogeneous labor and physical

capital. So too, returns to scale in production functions involving
homogeneous labor do not seem to differ too greatly from one.

The major advance of the last 15 years has been the ability to estimate

substitution within several pairs of inputs. While such estimation is reall>
in its childhood (partly because of the wide range of interesting choices

about how to disaggregate the labor force), some results are already fairly
sol Id. 1) Skill (human capital) and physical capital are p—complements in

production; at a fixed output employers will expand their use of skilled labor

45

when the price of capital services deci ines. 2) The demand for skill is also
less elastic than the demand for raw labor; thus we find that the demand for
more educated or more highly trained workers is less elastic than that -for

other

workers. 3) No matter what the disaggregation, labor is not separable

in production from physical capital. This finding impi ies that estimates of
substitution among groups within the labor force should be based on models

that include either the price or quantity of capital services. 4 Finally,
though it is less solid a result than the other three, there is an
accumulation of evidence that adult women are q—substitutes for young
workers.

The theory and estimation techniques we have outlined provide many ways
to estimate the degree of factor substitution and the responsiveness of factor
demand <prices) to changes in factor prices <quantities). Though the
appropriate specification depends upon one's beliefs about the behavior of the

agents in the particular labor market, several guidelines for the analysis

arise from this discussion. Where at all possible, the specification should
allow the researcher sufficient flexibil it>' to test whether simpler

specifications are applicable. Where the data are available, physical capital
should be included as a factor of production in the analysis along with the
various types of labor.
Despite the substantial advances that have been made in analyzing the

demand for labor, a remarkable amount is still unknown. We still understand
very little about the absolute magnitudes of elasticities of demand, or

elasticities of factor prices, for various labor—force groups. So too, the
ease of substitution among groups is only now beginning to be analyzed.
More important than these lacunae in our understanding of labor demand,
though, are problems induced by the failure to account for the interaction of
substitution parameters with parameters describing the supply of labor—force

46

groups. Those relatively few studies that have estimated demand relations
using highly disaggregated data corroborated the basic predictions of the

theory of labor demand. However, there has been far too little work that has
accounted for the possibil it>' of simultaneity between wages and quantities of

labor. Since we have seen how important the specification of labor supply is
to deriving estimates of production parameters, the joint estimation of
substitution parameters and labor supply should be an area that will lead to

substantial advances in understanding the demand for labor. Alternatively,
more research is needed that estimates demand relations using data on
individual firms or establishments as units of observation.

47

REFERENCES

Allen, R.G.D. Mathematical Analysis for

Economists.

London: Macmillan,

1938.

Anderson, J. "Labor Force Age Structure Changes and Relative Wages."
Unpublished paper, Harvard University, 1977.

Arrow, K., Chenery, H., Minhas, B. and Solow, R. Capital—Labor Substitution
and Economic Efficiency." Review of Economics and Statistics 43
(1961): 225—250.
Ashenfelter, 0. and R. Ehrenberg. "The Demand for Labor in the Public
Sector." In Labor in the Public and Nonproft Sectors. Ed. D.
Hamermesh. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1975.
Berger, M. "Changes in Labor Force Composition and Male Earnings: A
Production Approach." Journal of Human Resources 18 (1983): 177—196.

Berndt, E. "Modelling the Simultaneous Demand for Factors of Production. In
The Economics of the Labor Market. Eds. Z. Hornstein et al. London:
HMSO, 1980.
and Christensen, L. "Testing for the Existence of a Consistent
Aggregate Index of Labor Inputs." American Economic Review 64 (1974):
391—404, a.

__________ and __________.

"The Specification of Technology in U.S.

Manufacturing. Unpublished paper, University of Wisconsin, 1974, b.
Berndt, E. and Khaled, M. "Parametric Productivity Measurement and Choice
Among Flexible Functional Forms." Journal of Political Economy 87
(1979): 1220—1245.

__________ and White, C. "Income Redistribution and Employment Effects of
Rising Energy Prices." Unpublished paper, University of British
Columbia, 1978.
and Wood, D. "Engineering and Econometric Interpretations of
Energy—Capital Complementarity." American Economic Review 69 (1979):
342—354.
Black, S. and Kelejian, H. "A Macro Model of the U.S. Labor Market."
Econometica 38 (1970): 712—41.

Borjas, G. "The Demographic Determinants of the Demand for Black Labor,"
Unpublished Paper, University of California——Santa Barbara, 1983, a.

"The Substitutability of Black, Hispanic and White Labor."
Economic Inquiry 21 (1983): 93—106, b.

__________

Brown, C., Gilroy, G., and Kohen, A. "The Effect of the Minimum Wage on
Employment and Unemployment," Journal of Economic Literature 20
(1982):487—528.

48

"A Measure of Technological Employment." Review of
Brown, M. and de Cani, J.
Economics and Statistics 45 (1963): 386—94.
"The Growth of Professional Occupations in U.S. Manufacturing,
Chiswick, C.
1900—73," In Research in Human Capital and Development. Ed. I.

Sirageldin. Greenwich, Conn.: JAI Press, 1978.
Chow, C. and Moore, G. "An Econometric Model of Business Cycles." In
Econometric Models of Cyclical Behavior, Vol. II. Ed. B. Hickman. New
York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1972.
Christensen, L., Jorgenson, D., and Lau, L. "Transcendental Logarithmic
Production Frontiers," Review of Economics and Statistics 55 (1973):
28—45.

Clark, K. and Freeman, R. "How Elastic Is the Demand for Labor?" Review of
Economics and Statistics 62 (1980): 509—520.

"Time—Series Models of the Elasticity of Demand for Labor in
___________
Manufacturing." Unpublished paper, Harvard University, 1977.
Coen, R. and Hickman, B. "Constrained Joint Estimation of Factor Demand and
Production Functions." Review of Economics and Statistics 52 (1970):
287—300.
David, P. and van de Klundert, T. "Biased Efficiency Growth and Capital—Labor
Substitution in the United States, 1899—1960." American Economic
Review 55 (1965): 357—94.
Dennis, F. and Smith, V.K. "A Neoclassical Analysis of the Demand for Real
Cash Balances by Firms." Journal of Political Economy 86 (1978): 793—
814.

Denny, M. and Fuss, M. "The Use of Approximation Analysis to Test for
Separability and the Existence of Consistent Aggregates." American
Economic Review 67 (1977): 404—18.

Dhrymes, P. "A Model of Short—Run Labor Adjustment." In The Brookings
Model: Some Further Results. Ed. James Duesenberry and others.
Chicago: Rand McNally, 1969.
Diewert, E. "An Application of the Shephard Duality Theorem: A Generalized
Leontelf Production Function." Journal of Political Economy 79
(1971): 481—507.

Dixit, A. Optimization in Economic Theory. Oxford, England: Oxford, 1976.
Dougherty, C.R.S. "Estimates of Labor Aggregation Functions." Journal of
Political Economy 80 (1972): 1101—1119.
Drazen, A., Hamermesh, D. and Obst, N. "The Variable Employment Elasticity
Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence." Research in Labor Economics 6
(1984), forthcomIng.

49

Ferguson, C. The Neoclassical Theory of Production and Distribution.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge, 1969.
Field, B. and Grebenstein, C. "Capital—Energy Substitution in U.S.
Manufacturing." Review of Economics and Statistics 62 (1980): 207—212.

Freeman, R. "Demand for Labor in a Nonprofit Market: University Faculty."
In Labor in the Public and Nop ofit Sectors. Ed. D. Hamermesh.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1975.
"The Effect of Demographic Factors on Age—Earnings Profiles."
Journal of Human Resources 14 (Summer 1979): 289—318.

__________ and Medoff, J. "Substitution Between Production Labor and Other
Inputs in Unionized and Nonunionized Manufacturing." Review of
Economics and Statistics 64 (1982): 220—233.

Fuss, M. and McFadden, D. Production Economics: A Dual Approach to Theory
and Applications. Amsterdam: North—Holland, 1978.
Government of Australia, Bureau of Labor Market Research. Youth Wages,
Employment and the Labour Force. Canberra: Australia Government
Publishing Service, 1983.

Grant, J. "Labor Substitution in U.S. Manufacturing." Ph.D. dissertation,
Michigan State University, 1979.

__________ and Hamermesh, D. "Labor—Market Competition Among Youths, White
Women and Others." Review of Economics and Statistics 63 (1981):
354—360.

Griliches, Z. "Capital—Skill Complementarity." Review of Economics and
Statistics 51 (1969): 465—68.
Grossman, J.B. "The Substitutability of Natives and Immigrants in
Production." Review of Economics and Statistics 64 (1982): 596—603.
Hamermesh, D. "Econometric Studies of Labor Demand and Their Application to
Policy Analysis." Journal of Human Resources 11 (1976): 507—525.
•
"Factor Market Dynamics and the Incidence of Taxes and
Subsidies." Quarterly Journal of Economics 95 (1980): 751—764.

•
"Minimum Wages and the Demand for Labor." Economic Inquiry 20
(1982): 365—380.

• "New Measures of Labor Cost: Implications for Demand
Elasticities and Nominal Wage Growth." In The Measurement of Labor
Cost. Ed. J. Triplett. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983.
and Grant, J. "Econometric Studies of Labor—Labor Substitution and
Their Implications for Policy." Journal of Human Resources 14
(1979): 518—542.

50

Hanson, R., Klotz, B. and Madoo, R. "The Structure of Demand for Low—Wage
Labor in U.S. Manufacturing, 1967." Unpublished paper, Urban
Institute, 1975.

Hicks, J.R. The Theory of Wages. London: Macmillan, 1964.
Hopcroft, M.P. and Symons, J. "The Demand for Labour Schedule in the Road
Haulage Industry." Discussion Paper No. 169, Centre for Labour
Economics, London School of Economics, 1983.
"The Demand for Labor by Educational Category." Southern
Johnson, G.
Economic Journal 37 (1970): 190—204.
and Blakemore, A. "The Potential Impact of Employment Policy on
the Unemployment Rate Consistent with Non—Accelerating Inflation."
American Economic Review 69 (1979): 119—23.
Kesselman, J., Williamson, S. and Berndt, E. "Tax Credits for Employment
Rather Than Investment," American Economic Review 67 (1977): 339—49.
King, W. "A Multiple Output Translog Cost—Function Estimation of Academic
Labor Services." Unpublished Ph.D., Michigan State University, 1980.
Layard, R. "Youth Unemployment in Britain and the United Strates Compared."
In The Youth Labor Market Problem: Its Nature, Causes and
Consequences. Eds. R. Freeman and D. Wise. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1982.
Liu, T.C. and Hwa, E.C. "A Monthly Econometric Model of the U.S. Economy."
International Economic Review 15 (1974): 328—65.
Lovell, C.A.K., "CES and VES Production Functions in a Cross—Section Context,"
Journal of Political Economy 81 (1973):705—720.
"Real Wages, Employment and Inflation." In
M1croeconornicFodati9 of Employment and Inflation Theory. Ed.
Edmund Phelps. New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1970.

Lucas, R.E. and Rapping, L.

Magnus, J. "Substitution Between Energy and Non—Energy Inputs in the
Netherlands, 1950—1976." International Economic Review 20 (1979):
465—484.
"Wages, Capital Costs and Employment in Manufacturing."
McKinnon, R.
Econometrica 30 (1963): 501—21.

Merrilees, W. "Labor Market Segmentation in Canada: An Econometric
Approach." Canadian Journal of Economics 15 (1982): 458—473.
Morrison, C. and Berndt, E. "Short—run Labor Productivity in a Dynamic
Model." Journal of Econometrics 16 (1981): 339—365.

Nadiri, N. "The Effect of Relative Prices and Capacity on the Demand for
Labor in the U.S. Manufacturing Sector." Review of Economic Studies 35
(1968): 273—88.

51

___________ and Rosen, S. A Disequilibrium Model of Production. New York:
National Bureau of Economic Research, 1974.

Nickell, S. "An Investigation of the Determinants of Manufacturing Employment
in the United Kingdom." Discussion Paper No. 105, Centre for Labour
Economics, London School of Economics, 1981.
O'Connel, J. "The Labor Market for Engineers: An Alternative Methodology,"
Journal of Human Resources, 7 (1972):71—86.

Pindyck, R. "Interfuel Substitution and the Industrial Demand for Energy: An
International Comparison." Review of Economics and Statistics 61
(1979):

169—179.

Rosen, H. and Quandt, R. "Estimation of a Disequilibrium Aggregate Labor
Market." Review of Economics and Statistics 60 (1978): 371—379.
Rosen, S.
"A Note on Aggregation of Skills and Labor Quality." Journal of
Human Resources 18 (1983): 425—431.

"Short—Run Employment Variation on Class—I Railroads in the U.S.,
1947—1963," Econometrica 36 (1968):511—529.

________

Sato, R. "Homothetic and Nonhomothetic CES Production Functions." American
Economic Review 67 (1977): 559—569.
___________ and Koizumi, T. "On the Elasticities of Substitution and

Complementarity." Oxford Economic Papers 25 (1973): 44—56.
Schott, K. "The Relation Between Industrial Research and Development and
Factor Demands.' Economic Journal 88 (1978): 85—106.
Sosin, K. and
Fairchild, L. "Nonhomotheticity and Technological Bias in
Production." Review of Economics and Statistics 66 (1984): 44—50.

Stapleton, D. and Young, D. The Effects of Demographic Change on the
Distribution of Wages, 1967—1990." Unpublished Paper, Dartmouth
College, 1983.
Symons, J. and Layard, R. "Neo—classical Demand for Labour Functions for Six
Major Economies." Discussion Paper No. 166, Centre for Labour
Economics, London School of Economics, 1983.

Waud, R. "Man—Hour Behavior in U.S. Manufacturing: A Neoclassical
Interpretation." Journal of Political Economy 76 (1968):407—27.
Tinsley, P.

"A Variable Adjustment Model of Labor Demand." International
Economic Review 12 (1971): 482—510.

Varian, H. Nicroeconomic Analysis. New York: Norton, 1978.

52

Waud, R. "Man—Hour Behavior in U.S. Manufacturing: A Neoclassical
Interpretation." Journal of Political Economy 76 (1968): 511—529.
Welch, F. "Linear Synthesis of Skill Distribution." Journal of Human
Resources 4 (1969): 311—327.
"Education in Production." Journal of Political Economy 78
(1970): 764—71.
and Cunningham, J. "Effects of Minimum Wages on the Level and Age
Composition of Youth Employment." Review of Economics and Statistics
60 (1978): 140—145.
Woodbury, S. "Is the Elasticity of Demand for Labor Subject to Cyclical
Fluctuation?" Unpublished paper, University of Wisconsin, 1978.

FOOTNOTES

1The little trick to derive (17a) and (17b) is to remember that, after having
done the grubby arithmetic, the numerator is just Y raised to the power i—p.
2The arithmetic that demonstrates this is in Varian [1978, p. 18].
in the two—factor case,

3One might wonder how, if 1L =

2. Remembering that
LL = 5LLL in the multi—factor case when we assume N =
—
=
and KL is just
Since
O 11LL =

SLLL + SK =

alternative notation for

SK
,

the two representations are identical.

good mnemonic for these distinctions is that the q and p refer to the
exogenous quantities and prices whose variation is assumed to produce changes
In endogenous input prices and quantities respectively.
5To derive a.., perform the required differentiation and remember that

g1=X.

53

6One should note that the slope parameter on in WL in (48) is not the usual

constant—output labor—demand elasticity, and that the latter needs to be
calculated from the estimate using (4a). it is also worth noting that (48) is
a trans-formation of the equation used by rrow LI al (1962) to estimate the
elasticity of substitution in the CES function they had proposed: Under
constant returns to scale (48) can be written as;
In '(IL

aOwL,

the -form originally used to estimate .
7The issues from 1975—1982 of a large number of Journals
were searched. For years before 1975 the references are taken
from Harnermesh (1976). While we make no claim that our survey
is exhaustive, it should give a fair representation of work on
this subject.
8Remernber that this is an
economic issue, not a problem of inferring the partial
elasticities of substitution or complementarity. in the translog
case, for exarnple,those can always be inferred, either easily or
by inverting a matrix involving all the coefficients estimated.

9lndeed, one should be able
to demonstrate that workers can be aggregated
linearly, not merely that those within a subgroup are separable
from those in other subgroups.

10

Stapleton and Young '1983) have attempted to apply
this view to the United States for 1967—1977. The results
support many of the findings summarized in the next section,
though they are not uniformly consistent with the theory of
product ion.

1tThe issues from 1979—1982 of a large number of
journals were searched. For years before 1979 the references are
taken from Harnerrnesh—Grant (1979).

12This finding implies nothing about how uicidx
an economy can adjust
to such a change. Even though the required change in relative
wages may be slight, adjustment costs may be sufficiently large
to lead to long periods of disequil ibriurn in the markets for some
o-f the groups of labor.
13

By tself, though, this shows very 1 ttle,
since small changes in the estimated parameters in a
translog or general ized Leontief system often lead to large
changes in the estimates of the underlying production or cost
parameters, as the discussion in Section III indicates.

