                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




USING BEHAVIORAL ECONOMIC FIELD EXPERIMENTS AT A LARGE MOTOR CARRIER:
     THE CONTEXT AND DESIGN OF THE TRUCKERS AND TURNOVER PROJECT

                                           Stephen V. Burks
                                           Jeffrey Carpenter
                                             Lorenz Goette
                                            Kristen Monaco
                                            Aldo Rustichini
                                              Kay Porter

                                         Working Paper 12976
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12976


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2007

 Conference: The Conference on the Analysis of Firms and Employees (CAFE) was held September
 29-30, 2006 in Nuremberg, Germany. We gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided to
 the Conference by the Institute for Employment Research (IAB), the Data Access Center (FDZ-BA/IAB),
 The Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (German Research Foundation), their Research Network "Flexibility
 in Heterogeneous Labour Markets", the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, and the National Science Foundation.

 Research:The authors gratefully acknowledge generous financial support for the Project from the John
 D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation's Research Network on the Nature and Origin of Preferences,
 the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Trucking Industry Program at the Georgia Institute of Technology
 (one of the industry studies programs initiated by the Sloan Foundation), the University of Minnesota,
 Morris, and cooperating motor carrier. We also thank the managers and employees of the cooperating
 firm, without whose involvement and active support the project would have been impossible. The
 designers of the field experiments used in the project thank Catherine Eckel and Kate Johnson for
 sharing protocol and design details from a field experimental project in Mexico, and for offering helpful
 advice on our design issues. The views expressed herein are those of the authors, and not of the Federal
 Reserve System, nor the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, nor the other employers of any of the authors,
 nor of the project sponsors. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
 reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2007 by Stephen V. Burks, Jeffrey Carpenter, Lorenz Goette, Kristen Monaco, Aldo Rustichini,
 and Kay Porter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
 without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Using Behavioral Economic Field Experiments at a Large Motor Carrier: The Context and
Design of the Truckers and Turnover Project
Stephen V. Burks, Jeffrey Carpenter, Lorenz Goette, Kristen Monaco, Aldo Rustichini, and
Kay Porter
NBER Working Paper No. 12976
March 2007
JEL No. C82,C93,J63,L92

                                               ABSTRACT

The Truckers and Turnover Project is a statistical case study of a single firm and its employees which
matches proprietary personnel and operational data to new data collected by the researchers to create
a two-year panel study of a large subset of new hires. The project's most distinctive innovation is
the data collection process which combines traditional survey instruments with behavioral economics
experiments. The survey data include information on demographics, risk and loss aversion, time preference,
planning, non-verbal IQ, and the MPQ personality profile. The data collected by behavioral economics
experiments include risk and loss aversion, time preferences (discount rates), backward induction,
patience, and the preference for cooperation in a social dilemma setting. Subjects will be followed
over two years of their work lives. Among the major design goals are to discover the extent to which
the survey and experimental measures are correlated, and whether and how much predictive power,
with respect to key on-the-job outcome variables, is added by the behavioral measures. The panel
study of new hires is being carried out against the backdrop of a second research component, the development
of a more conventional in-depth statistical case study of the cooperating firm and its employees. This
is a high-turnover service industry setting, and the focus is on the use of survival analysis to model
the flow of new employees into and out of employment, and on the correct estimation of the tenure-productivity
curve for new hires, accounting for the selection effects of the high turnover.

Stephen V. Burks                                      Kristen Monaco
Division of Social Science                            Department of Economics
University of Minnesota, Morris                       1250 Bellflower Blvd.
600 East 4th Street                                   Long Beach, CA 90840
Morris, MN 56267                                      kmonaco@csulb.edu
svburks@morris.umn.edu
                                                      Aldo Rustichini
Jeffrey Carpenter                                     Department of Economics
Department of Economics                               University of Minnesota
Middlebury College                                    Minneapolis, MN 55455
Middlebury, VT 05753                                  arust@econ.umn.edu
jcarpent@middlebury.edu
                                                      Kay Porter
Lorenz Goette                                         Cooperating Motor Carrier
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston                        c/o Stephen V. Burks
600 Atlantic Ave                                      Division of Social Science
Boston, MA 02210                                      University of Minnesota, Morris
lorenz.goette@bos.frb.org                             600 East 4th Street
                                                      Morris, MN 56267
                                                      c/o svburks@morris.umn.edu
1. Introduction
         The Truckers and Turnover Project is a statistical case study of a single large
trucking firm and its driver employees. The cooperating firm operates in the largest
segment of the for-hire trucking industry segment in the United States, the “full
truckload”, or TL segment, in which approximately 800,000 people are employed,
according to the 2002 Economic Census. The TL segment has a high-turnover labor
market for its main employee group, tractor-trailer drivers, and the project is designed to
address a number of academic and business questions that arise in this setting.
         One major part of the project matches proprietary personnel and operational data
to new data collected by the researchers, to create a two-year panel study of a large subset
of new hires. The most distinctive innovation of this project component is the data
collection process, which combines traditional survey instruments with behavioral
economics experiments. The survey data include information on demographics, risk and
loss aversion, time preference, planning, non-verbal IQ, and the MPQ personality profile.
The data collected by behavioral economics experiments include risk and loss aversion,
time preferences (discount rates), backward induction, patience, and the preference for
cooperation in a social dilemma setting. Subjects will be followed over two years of their
work lives. Among the major design goals are to discover the extent to which the survey
and experimental measures are correlated, and whether and how much predictive power,
with respect to key on-the-job outcome variables, is added by the behavioral measures.
         The panel study of new hires is being carried out against the backdrop of a second
research component, the development of a more conventional in-depth statistical case
study of the cooperating firm and its employees. This component involves constructing
large historical data sets from fragmented legacy IT sources, and using them to create
multivariate models of turnover and productivity. Two main emphases are on the use of
survival analysis to model the flow of new employees into and out of employment, and
on the correct estimation of the tenure-productivity curve for new hires, accounting for
the selection effects of the high turnover.
         The project is designed to last three and a half years, with the first half-year for
set up, and then a year for the initial intensive data collection in the panel study of new
hires, in parallel with the construction of the data sets for the statistical case study, and
the initial generation of modeling from these data. Then there will be two years of lower-
intensity work while follow-up data is collected from the participant in the panel study of
new hires.
         The balance of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 sets the context by
describing the U.S. trucking industry, and the role of the TL segment within it. Section 3
discusses the nature of the labor market for TL drivers, and why it has had a high
turnover equilibrium for about twenty-five years. Section 4 discusses the nature of the
research relationship with the cooperating firm, and how it was constructed. Section 5
discusses the statistical analysis of historical operational and human resource data from
the firm. It has two main subparts, Section 5.1, which exhibits preliminary findings on
turnover, and Section 5.2, which does the same for productivity. Section 6 describes the
design of the panel study of new hires. It has four main subparts. Section 6.1 describes
the context of the Project’s use of behavioral economic field experiments. Section 6.2
covers the process by which new students are trained as tractor-trailer drivers, and
Section 6.3 discusses the schedule for the data collection effort at the training school.



                                      Page 2 of 50
Section 6.4 lists and describes the five data collection activities (three experiments and
two survey-type instruments) that take place during the first two-hour session of each
data collection event, while Section 6.5 does the same for the six activities (three
experiments and three survey-type instruments) during the second two-hour section of
each data collection event. Section 7 reflects on the implications of the Project for the
relevant research communities and public policy.

2. The U.S. Trucking Industry
    2.1. Segments within the Industry
        To a casual observer one truck looks much like another, but in fact, the operations
that provide trucking services in the U.S. are meaningfully differentiated from each other
on several dimensions. At the broadest level, trucking operations are broken into private
carriage versus for-hire carriage, based on a legal relationship: whether the carrier also
owns the freight (private carriage), or is hauling it for another party (for-hire carriage).1
In recent years for-hire carriers (one of which is the focus of the present study), have
typically operated about one-third of the heavy trucks2 in the overall U.S. fleet, but about
three-fifths of the total miles run by such vehicles (Burks et al. 2004a).
        For-hire trucking is itself further broken into a number of distinct segments,
separated along three cross-cutting dimensions. Within each segment inter-firm
competition is significant, but across segments it may be muted, or in some cases even
absent. The 2002 quinquennial Economic Census, because of its use of the relatively
new North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS), which is based on
production process characteristics, gives a good overview of the structure of the for-hire
trucking industry at this level of segmentation. For-hire truck transportation as a whole,
NAICS category 484, generated $165.56 billion in revenue in 2002, or about 1.56% of
that year’s GDP.3
        The first broad scale distinction within for-hire trucking is between firms that use
general purpose equipment (i.e. standard enclosed van trailers) to handle general
commodities, and those that use specialized equipment to handle special commodities
(examples of the latter would be refrigerated vans, flatbeds, tank trailers, and various
other types of specialized equipment). According to the Economic Census, in 2002
general freight operations generated $111.60 billion annual revenue (67.3% of the total)
and specialized freight had $54.01 billion annual revenue (32.3% of the total). A second
cross-cutting broad scale distinction is between firms that make long distance inter-city
hauls, and those that specialize in operations in and around a particular metropolitan area.
In 2002 the Economic Census reports $120.21 billion in annual revenue for long distance
trucking (72.6% of the total), and $45.35 billion for local hauls (27.4%).


1
  Private carriers are firms primarily in non-trucking lines of business who provide trucking services
internally as support functions to their primary business operations. Examples might be deliveries of food
by a retail grocery chain to its stores in trucks it also owns, or pickups of parts for assembly at an auto plant
by the auto manufacturer's freight vehicles.
2
  Heavy freight vehicles are defined here as having a gross vehicle weight (GVW) of more than 26,000 lbs.,
the level at which weight alone is sufficient to require the driver to hold a commercial driver's license
(CDL).
3
  Calculation by the authors; total GDP is from the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic
Analysis; URL: http://bea.gov/ .


                                              Page 3 of 50
        A third cross-cutting broad scale distinction is based on the size of the typical
shipment hauled, and this dimension on which firms differ is of particular relevance to
the present study. It is easiest to understand this distinction by considering full-truckload
service in contrast to the other two, less-than-truckload (LTL), and parcel service. At one
end of the spectrum are firms like the one providing data for the current study. The
archetypal full truckload (TL) carrier sends a driver with a tractor-trailer to a shipper’s
dock to fill up the trailer with a load, typically weighing from 10,000 to 48,000 pounds.4
The driver takes the loaded trailer wherever in the U.S. the shipment is destined, and
unloads at the consignee’s dock. The driver is then dispatched empty, possibly after
waiting for a while, to the next location where a full load is available for pick up. TL
carriers may use specialized equipment for special commodities, but if they haul general
commodities they use general purpose equipment to maximize the chance of backhauls.
        By contrast, both parcel and LTL firms aggregate large numbers of individual
shipments collected at local terminals by local drivers into full trailer loads, and move
them between terminal systems on fixed routes. Parcel carriers handle very small
shipments (each piece typically being no larger than 150 lbs., with the average nearer to
50 lbs.), and LTL carriers aggregate medium-sized shipments (widely varying, but with
average size around 1,000 lbs.). The Economic Census does not group parcel service
firms with the for-hire trucking industry, but with air freight carriers. However, it does
capture LTL and TL firms within trucking. In 2002 the TL segment dominated the
general freight portion of (non-parcel) for-hire trucking, with 67.9% of the total
employment, and 83.8% of the total revenue. If the segments of specialized freight that
are primarily TL by shipment size are added to the mix5, then TL’s share of the total
employment of 1.137 million jumps to 72.8%, and its share of the total revenue of
$124.50 billion rises to 77.1%.

    2.2. Differences in the Type of Competition within Segments
        The differences across the segments in the operational routines needed affect the
form and intensity of competition within each segment. Specifically, in the parcel and
LTL segments, the need for a fixed network of freight re-handling terminals creates an
entry barrier.6 While competition among parcel and LTL carriers is frequently strong, it
generally takes place among incumbents. This is evidenced by the numbers of firms in
the long distance parcel and LTL segments. In parcel there are really only four firms
with full national coverage (UPS, FedEx, DHL, and the USPS).7 There are more LTL
firms, but the number is still small. The 2002 Economic Census identifies 89 long

4
  The variation is because some less dense freight exhausts a trailer's volume at low weight levels, while
more dense freight hits the weight limit before the volume limit.
5
  Essentially, this means adding all specialized freight except household goods moving.
6
  A brand new LTL carrier that wants to serve more than a single metropolitan area must create and operate
a network that is of minimum size necessary to attract sufficient traffic from shippers with differing
destination demands, relative to the total shipment flow densities in the geographic area it wishes to serve.
But such networks exhibit strong economies of density (a combination of both scale and scope
economies)—at low volumes the average costs are high, but they fall rapidly as volume increases. The
expenses of running such a network until a large enough market share is obtained to make the new network
cost competitive with those of incumbent carriers are non-recoverable (or “sunk”) if the firm exits. And the
existence of a sunk cost of entry is the classic definition of an entry barrier.
7
  Local parcel service is easier to enter, and there are many firms of small geographic scope.


                                            Page 4 of 50
distance general freight LTL firms with five or more establishments, which is the
minimum number of terminals needed to give significant geographic scope; there are
only 57 firms with ten or more.
         But in TL there are essentially no entry barriers. Since TL carriers do not
normally re-handle freight once it is loaded, they do not typically require terminals, nor
regular route patterns, for cost-competitive operations. So a one-truck carrier can cover
the entire nation, and in doing so is competitive, on a load-by-load basis, with most of the
services offered by one of the TL-segment’s giants. When more complex service
coordination is the key factor in market penetration, small firms can subcontract to third
party logistics providers. 8 And in fact, there is a continual flow into, and out of, the TL
segment, mostly by firms operating at small to medium scales. In TL, the 2002
Economic Census identified 25,831 long distance general freight firms.9 The market
concentration levels in these two segments also show the differing nature of competition.
In LTL, the 2002 Economic Census puts the revenue share of the top 4 long distance
general freight LTL firms at 36.3%, while it calculates the share of the top 4 long
distance general freight TL firms to be only 14.7%.
         The implication of these facts is that most of TL service is what business analysts
call a “commodity business”, and what economists call “perfectly competitive”. As a
result, the firms “at the margin”, whose choices set prices for the whole market, in TL are
often not the big players, exploiting economics of scale, but may instead be the small
firms in the competitive fringe of the industry segment. Their pricing is in turn driven
significantly by the wages drivers in such firms are willing to accept. Small firms
generally face more modest wage expectations from their employees than do large ones,
and they also have the benefit of more personal relationships between owners, managers,
and drivers. And owner-operators, who make up a significant subset of the small firms,
can always choose to pay themselves less in order to get started in the business. Large
firms can choose to pay a modest premium above the level set by such firms, because
they may have cost efficiencies in other areas, and they may be able to maintain a small
price premium due to offering customers a number of different services in an integrated
fashion, but if they raise their wages too high they will make their costs uncompetitive.
This industry structure sets the context for the derived demand for truck drivers in TL
freight, and the consequent nature of the labor market for TL drivers.


3. The Labor Market for TL Drivers
    3.1. Segmented Labor Markets Emerge
        The American Trucking Associations’ (ATA) quarterly turnover report typically
shows the average turnover rate at large truckload (TL) motor carriers to be in excess of
100% per year (ATA Economic & Statistics Group 2005). Driver turnover among these
carriers is an economically significant phenomenon—truckload carriers make up the
largest segment of for-hire motor carriage by employment, with approximately six

8
  Since a TL carrier can subcontract actual movements in a spot market to owner-operators, it is possible
for a firm to enter TL for-hire carriage initially with zero trucks.
9
  Unlike the case of LTL, since TL firms don’t have freight terminal networks, single establishment firms
can be of national geographic scope, but in fact 997 of these had more than one establishment, which is still
more firms than in the LTL segment.


                                            Page 5 of 50
hundred thousand drivers working at any given time (U.S. Census Bureau 2004)10. This
segment of the universe of for-hire trucking firms emerged into its present form after the
economic deregulation of 1980, which transformed the structure of the trucking industry.
Before deregulation the nature of the entry barriers created by government policies
resulted in lots of TL output by firms using the LTL-type organization of production,
with a fixed network of freight handling terminals (Belzer 1995; Burks 1999). But in the
post-deregulation period carriers specialized quite strongly in one or another specific
shipment size, from the smallest (parcel), through middle-sized shipments (less-than-
truckload, or LTL), to the largest ones (truckload, or TL) (Corsi and Stowers 1991;
Belzer 1995; Burks et al. 2004b).
         As the truckload industry segment emerged, so did a parallel segmentation of the
labor market for truck drivers (Belzer 1995; Burks 1999)11. Drivers wanting to enter
employment at parcel and less-than-truckload carriers generally found job queues12,
while the labor market for truckload driving jobs began exhibiting high rates of turnover.
In fact, the labor market in the truckload segment has essentially been in a high-turnover
equilibrium since soon after the end of the recessions of 1981-82.13

    3.2. The TL Driver's Job
        To understand this situation, we start with a short description of the human capital
investment needed to become a driver, and then discuss the working conditions
encountered by the typical driver. Driving a tractor-trailer requires training for, and
passing, the state-administered written and driving tests for a commercial drivers’ license
(CDL). Typically a high-school equivalent level of literacy is required, and training
begins with at least two weeks mixed between classroom work and in-truck practice.
This is usually followed by between a few days and a few weeks of initial driving
experience, which is often obtained with an experienced driver riding in the cab as a
coach, while the trainee is still driving on a “learner’s permit”, before he or she has taken
the final test for the CDL. While the CDL test is administered separately by each state,
as of 1991 they do so under Federal standards for what must be included. It is comprised
of both written and driving portions, and the minimum legal age at which it may be taken
is 21. Trucking firms generally considered a driver to be satisfactorily experienced after
a year of work, so the level of human capital required places the job somewhere between
unskilled and skilled, and it is best labeled as “semi-skilled”.
        Once a driver is licensed, the key problem in retention is generally perceived to be
the working conditions faced by a tractor-trailer operator in the archetypal long-haul,
randomly dispatched, 48-state service provided by most TL firms. In addition to the
stresses of handling a big rig among swarms of cars, many drivers have very long weekly
work hours on an irregular schedule. In one published survey of long haul drivers, 21.9%

10
   The calculation is this: in the 2002 Economic Census TL firms have 72.8% of the total employment of
1.137 million workers in (non-parcel) trucking, and the usual rule of thumb is that about 75% of the labor
force employed by a TL firm is made up of drivers, the balance being made up of sales, customer service,
administrative, and managerial employees.
11
   In fact, the argument of the second cited work is that the labor market segmentation was itself a
significant driver of the parallel industry segmentation.
12
   This was especially at unionized carriers, but was also to some degree at non-union ones.
13
   It is an indication of the institutionalization of the high-turnover secondary labor market equilibrium in
TL trucking that the ATA has published its turnover report continuously since 1996.


                                             Page 6 of 50
reported working 70 plus hours each week, and two out of three drivers reported working
60 plus hour weeks (Stephenson and Fox 1996). Other surveys report similar findings
(Belman and Monaco 2001). A survey of long haul drivers in the Midwest found the
median driver worked 65 hours, with 25% reporting 80 or more hours. In a 24-hour
period, the median hours worked was 11, median hours driving 8.5, and median hours in
non-driving work 2 (Belman et al. 2005). These hours contrast to those in two industries
in which there are occupations with similar human capital requirements, manufacturing
and construction, which had average work weeks of 40.8 and 38.3 hours in 2004,
respectively (Bureau of Labor Statistics 2002).
         A related issue is that long-haul drivers are often away from home for multiple
weeks at a time, with little predictability about the date of return. In the same survey
previously mentioned, only 20.7% of TL drivers reported that they were home almost
every day, while 28.7% of drivers in the same study reported being home less often than
once every two weeks (Stephenson and Fox 1996). In the survey of drivers from the
Midwest, the median long haul driver had last been home four days prior to the interview,
though one-quarter had been away from home ten days or longer (Belman et al., 2005). A
less tangible issue is that both drivers and firms like to think of CDL holders as
professionals, in command of a big rig and responsible for its safe operation. But
trucking is a service business, and a primary job function of the driver is to make shippers
and receivers happy. The implications vary by customer shipping or receiving location,
but this can place drivers somewhat lower than they might expect on the supply chain
status hierarchy.
         Of course, not every driver in TL operations faces the same conditions. The
foregoing description applies to those “running the system”, or being randomly
dispatched across the 48 U.S. states. Some TL operations are dedicated to the service of
particular large customers, and drivers in these operations have a more restricted set of
pickup and delivery locations, more regular schedules on average, and generally enjoy
more time at home, as well. And some TL operations move freight between cities via
trailer-on-flat-car (TOFC) or container–on–flat-car (COFC) intermodal methods. Drivers
in these operations usually have regional or local runs to and from intermodal facilities,
and are often home nightly, or nearly so.
         Given these facts, a labor economist would expect to observe a “compensating
differential” built in to the wages of TL drivers that have the worst conditions. In other
words, other things equal, TL firms should offer long-haul randomly dispatched drivers a
higher earnings level than stay-at-home jobs requiring similar human capital, to
compensate for their poorer working conditions. But dissatisfaction over wage
compensation levels is frequently cited as a leading reason for TL driver turnover (Cox
2004).

    3.3. Buying "Effective Labor"
        Perhaps a better way to think of the firm’s decision problem, that captures the
nature of the driver labor market and the TL driver’s job, is to consider the nature of
“effective labor” in this context. For a TL firm this is the application of labor services to
move trucks to and from geographically specific customer locations on the particular time
schedule desired by the firm. There are three main factors that go into the cost of
effective labor in this setting. One is the cost of recruiting and training new drivers to



                                      Page 7 of 50
replace those who leave, to account for the lower productivity of inexperienced drivers,
and also to account for any growth in business. A second is the cost of paying
compensating differentials to drivers with the worst conditions, to slow driver exits. The
third is the operational cost of making driver working conditions better. Frequently the
most efficient allocation of equipment, in response to stochastic customer demands, calls
for irregular schedules and little time at the driver’s home terminal. When this is the
case, making schedules more regular and increasing the driver’s time at home is costly.
         The key point is that these three cost factors can, to a significant degree, be traded
off against each other, with higher expenditure in one area lowering the expenditure in
another. The firm’s goal can then be construed in the standard manner: it is to find the
cost-minimizing mix of these factors. Historically, the best thinking among many
competing TL firms appears to be that spending more on recruiting and training is a
cheaper way to get the needed units of effective labor than paying more to raise
compensating wage differentials or improve schedules.14
         A stable equilibrium characterized by high turnover rates defines what labor
economists call a "secondary labor market" (Cain 1976; Dickens and Lang 1993).15 The
persistence of the secondary labor market for drivers in TL trucking since sometime in
the early nineteen-eighties has occasioned much discussion in the trucking industry trade
press over the years, as well as a number of academic studies (examples include (Casey
1987; Griffin et al. 1992; Stephenson and Fox 1996; Griffin and Kalnbach 2002; Beadle
2004)). Through the American Trucking Associations the industry has commissioned
significant analytic efforts to understand the management issues raised by a high turnover
business model, and the long term demographic trends affecting the viability of the model
(Gallup Organization 1997; ATA Economic & Statistics Group 2005). The major
findings suggest that firms are aware of the trade-offs among the components of effective
labor, and that within this framework firms adjust to changes in the conditions of the
demand for, and supply of, effective labor. It appears that as a result, the labor market as
a whole also adjusts, perhaps with some lags, to such changes.
         A major study done by consultants at Global Insight for the ATA links the supply
of truck drivers to the supply of labor for semi-skilled jobs in construction, since this type
of work often represents the next best opportunity for likely truckers. The labor demands
in these two industries are driven by significantly different macroeconomic factors.
During the 1990’s, when the derived demand for drivers was high, there was a modest
premium—truckers’ earnings were an average of 6-7% above a position demanding
similar levels of human capital in construction. The downturn of the economy in 2000-
01 created slack in the trucking labor market, but the arrival of low interest rates kept the
derived demand in construction relatively stronger. As a result, for a few years the
average long haul driver could expect to make less than if employed in the construction
industry. By 2004 the gap had narrowed, with long haul drivers 1.5% below that of
construction workers (Global Insight Inc. 2005). These facts suggest that wage levels do

14
   There is actually another cost factor in “effective labor” that is non-negligible, the costs of accidents,
which inexperienced drivers have at a higher rate than do experienced ones. We do not address that cost in
this project.
15
   Correspondingly, the ATA typically reports turnover rates at LTL firms to be in the 10% to 20%, which
makes them roughly equivalent in turnover to non-trucking jobs requiring similar amounts of human
capital.


                                            Page 8 of 50
adjust over time to changes in the balance of labor supply and labor demand, but the
persistence of the high turnover numbers shows that the levels of compensating
differential being offered are not sufficient to lower turnover to the levels typical in other
blue collar jobs.16
        It is well documented that the flows into and out of industry (as well as related
movements of dissatisfied drivers between firms) represent a substantial cost to firms. A
study by the Upper Great Plains Transportation Institute found in 1998 that replacing one
dry van TL driver conservatively costs $8,234 and the industry wide cost total was
estimated at nearly $2.8 billion in 1998 dollars (Rodriguez et al. 2000). The study
authors suggested that this estimate is conservative, but it gives an idea of the magnitude
of the turnover costs that TL firms must balance against the alternative costs of raising
wages and/or adjusting operational and dispatching decisions, in order to lower turnover.
        One might well ask whether firms have fully explored the possibilities for trade-
offs among the three factors behind the cost of effective TL labor. Most firms are
operating with high turnover costs, and relatively lower costs for compensating
differentials and operational adjustments that improve driver lifestyles. Is it possible that
some large discrete shift along the frontier could move a firm out of a “local cost
minimum” in this region, to a different local minimum that might be lower in total costs?
        In fact, J.B. Hunt, then the second largest firm in the industry, engaged in a highly
publicized experiment with switching from a business model with high turnover and
modest wage costs to one with higher wage costs but lower turnover in 1996. It took the
portion of its workforce facing the worst conditions (long and irregular dispatches) and
raised wages by 35%, while at the same time closing down its driver training schools
(Cullen 1996; Isidore 1997). The net result was a cut in both turnover and accident rates
by approximately one-half (Belzer et al. 2002). However, the long run net financial
benefits were not as clear (Waxler 1997), most of the other large firms in the industry,
including the one providing data for the present study, continue to train many of their
new drivers from scratch, and nearly all TL firms use the high-turnover-modest-pay-
premium model.
        The long run dynamics of driver labor supply and demand are made more
complex by the growth of the long-haul TL industry. Between 2004 and 2014 Global
Insight projects it will grow at a rate of 2.2% which translates into an additional 320,000
heavy-duty long-haul new jobs. This statistic does not include the number of drivers
needed to replace those who will retire during this time; the industry will need to find an
estimated 219,000 additional drivers to replace the 1 in 5 drivers who are 55 years old or
older and are approaching retirement. Concurrently with an increase in demand for
drivers, the growth rate of overall U.S. labor force will slow from 1.4% to .5% between
2005 and 2014 (Global Insight Inc. 2005). Another challenging trend for the industry is
that to date Hispanics, who comprise the fastest growing segment in the workforce,
represent a lower percentage of drivers than they do of the overall labor supply. It is
possible that the conjunction of these factors means that a secular trend towards higher
prices for trucking labor has begun. This in turn could shift the nature of the tradeoffs that
firms face among the components of effective TL labor, and—along with fuel price

16
   The Global Insight study used government data that does not distinguish TL from LTL among drivers for
firms in long distance trucking, but TL drivers make up the predominant share of the categories they
analyze.


                                          Page 9 of 50
trends and the limitations on the growth of labor productivity in trucking (Boyer and
Burks 2007)—it could also dampen the long run growth prospects of the industry
(Reiskin 2006).

4. Working with the Cooperating Firm
        The cooperating trucking firm is a large company of national geographic scope,
with divisions that operate in several of the segments of TL trucking, including long-haul
random dispatch service, dedicated carriage for large customers, and intermodal services.
By revenue and employment it is among the top one hundred firms in TL. The firm
began as a family-owned enterprise in the regulatory era, although it has grown through
multiple acquisitions, as well as internal expansions, and the original family has not been
centrally involved in top management for some time.
        Under family control the management culture was stable and effective, but was
also, by design, relatively inward looking. It was based on long-term employment
relationships with managerial and administrative ranks filled with “trucking people”,
whose careers tended to be built within this single firm. A significant portion of the
management started as front-line driver supervisors, or in some cases as drivers, and then
worked their way up. Managers at the firm tended to learn their skills on the job, and did
not see much need to look elsewhere, except to service vendors who could provide
expertise relevant to particular practical business problems, such as targeted marketing
surveys.
        During the period between deregulation and the end of the twentieth century the
firm made many major and critical strategic moves, some of which were quite daring. But
the decisions leading to these moves were primarily based on the vision and judgment
calls of the trucking people in top managerial positions. There was little thought of broad
strategic planning in the formal sense. Early in the new millennium a new CEO, who had
significant formal training in management-related areas, directed the first exercise in
formal strategic planning in the firm’s history, following a process recipe provided by a
major consultancy. This exercise began to increase the interest within the firm in
planning as a useful activity, and also increased interest in establishing the analytic
foundations for planning work.
        UMM faculty began to work with the firm starting in the fall of 2002, initially on
a single pilot project in the form of faculty-guided analysis by an advanced undergraduate
student. The project was successful, and laid the foundation for an expanding series of
faculty-guided research projects over the next two years on a variety of topics. These
projects operated on a gift-exchange basis: the faculty and students contributed their time
as teaching and learning functions, and the firm paid out-of-pocket expenses and
provided access (under appropriate confidentiality restrictions) to proprietary business
data. The core of the process involved selecting topics of both business and academic
interest, and for which advanced undergraduates could provide analyses of business use,
as well as generating course-level academic output. By the third year of such projects,
about twenty students supervised by six different faculty members had done small
projects on several continuing topics, from the analysis of exit interviews, to some initial
turnover and productivity analyses, to work on the recruitment and retention of Hispanic
employees.




                                     Page 10 of 50
        Within the firm the linchpin of the process was a senior executive who had joined
the firm from the outside, and who had significant prior experience working fruitfully
with academics. He was promoted to responsibility for a number of the aspects of human
resources and driver training, and moved into his new role just as the firm as a whole was
opening up internally to the importance of strategic analysis. From this initial contact
UMM came to work with several other executives, at similar or higher levels of authority
and responsibility, on specific projects.
        On the UMM side the linchpin was an industry studies connection: the initial
supervising faculty member (Burks) worked with the Sloan-funded Trucking Industry
Program as a doctoral student, and as a post-doctoral fellow.17 This added academic
depth and polish to trucking industry institutional knowledge he had originally begun
acquiring in his youth, when he worked as a tractor-trailer driver during the era of
deregulation, between two bouts in graduate school. Burks’ background, along with a
passion for all things trucking-related, gave him credibility with executives, and allowed
him to guide the UMM side of the relationship so that that useful business deliverables
always accompanied the academic results of interest to faculty and students.
        On the basis of the relationship constructed through the student projects, Burks
and a second UMM researcher, biostatistician Jon Anderson, developed a small project
contractually sponsored by the firm for the summer of 2004. This project began
exploring the historical data retained by the firm for strategic purposes, including the
analysis of the determinants of driver productivity and turnover. The larger scale design
of the Truckers and Turnover Project was developed from the starting point provided by
the results of this project. Burks, who devoted a sabbatical year to the project, is the
principal organizer, and he has been joined in creating and developing the substantive
content of the project by the co-authors of the present paper, as well as by a number of
other colleagues, who are based in several other institutions. 18

5. Research Component One: Statistical Case Study of Historical Data
        Research Component One is a statistical case study of some of the historical
personnel and operations data of the cooperating trucking firm. There are three
interrelated parts to this component. The first is building the data sets needed for
analysis, the second is analyzing turnover, and the third is analyzing driver productivity.
The goal of the first part is to take the many different data and report outputs produced by
the fragmented legacy IT resources at the firm, and construct from them data sets that
permit useful strategic and tactical analyses. Because the firm’s IT investments began in
the early mainframe era, and those investments were focused primarily on solving
succeeding generations of practical business problems, the data storage and reporting
functions at the firm do not lend themselves easily to strategic use. Data set assembly,
documentation, and validation are consuming, and will continue to consume, a very large
part of the project’s resources.
        The goal of the second part is to use survival analysis to map the differences in
turnover by driver group, to use hazard functions to explore the different time paths of
exits by driver group, and to use Cox proportional hazard multivariate regression to

17
   Burks was a doctoral student at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst; TIP was then located at the
University of Michigan, and is now hosted by Georgia Tech.
18
   A complete list of co-investigators appears in Appendix A.


                                           Page 11 of 50
analyze the interaction between the various factors that can affect exits. The goal of the
third part is to use panel data multivariate regression models to map the tenure-
productivity curve of new drivers as they gain experience, using a fixed effects variant to
make a first-order adjustment for the impact of selection on the tenure-productivity
relationship. Once the panel data model is sufficiently robust, the estimated fixed effects
will then be further dissected statistically.
        A key (proprietary) business deliverable from this part of the project will be the
assembly of the results of the turnover and productivity models to create an “expected net
value of human capital” model for the investment in recruiting and training various types
of drivers, who are utilized in various types of operational settings at the firm. Central
academic results are expected to be generated from both the turnover and productivity
models. Additionally, the analysis of Research Component Two, the panel study of new
hires, will be integrated with the results of the analyses from the statistical case study.
We next briefly describe the challenges and sketch a few pilot findings from the turnover
and productivity analyses.

     5.1. Initial Work on Turnover
         The proprietary human resource data set used for initial turnover analysis was
constructed from three distinct initial data files, which share the feature that each record
provides information on one driver during one calendar week. The constituent files
covered different calendar periods, so we utilize the calendar window during which all
three overlap, September 1, 2001, through March 31, 2005. The first file, Weekly Hires,
consists of some of the data elements recorded about a driver during the week he or she is
hired. Drivers who are rehired during the calendar window have more than one line in
this file. The second file, Weekly Separations, contains information recorded about a
driver during the week that he or she separates from the firm. Drivers who are rehired
and who, as a result, also separate more than once during our calendar window, have
more than one line in this file. The third file, Weekly Employment, consists of one
observation in each week for each driver employed during that week. Combining all
three data sets gives a complete picture, week by week, of flows in, flows out, and who is
currently working, for the firm.
         However, there are some important limitations in these data, and a resulting major
problem with analyzing them. The Weekly Hire and Weekly Separations data files
contain a number of useful variables, including several key breakout variables, such as
the driver’s division (e.g. dedicated, intermodal, system) and what kind of prior training
or experience the driver had when they joined the firm. 19 Unfortunately, the Weekly
Employment data file is missing these key variables. This means that at the present
initial stage of the analysis we don’t have this information on the drivers who do not
experience either a hire or a separation event during our calendar window. And our
information is incomplete for drivers who experience only a hire or only a separation
event. In particular, the division to which the driver is assigned is known prospectively at
the time of the hire event. But it changes later for many drivers, and we only have the
updated information in the separation event record for that subset that does depart.


19
  Not included, on the other hand, are items such as age, gender, level of formal education, or ethnic
category.


                                           Page 12 of 50
         To partially compensate for these problems, we take the following steps.
Breakout variables that are of interest in the present study are carried forward to all
observations on a given driver, from that driver’s hiring observation. This gives us
reasonably accurate information on the previous trucking industry training or experience
of each driver (since this is not information that changes with tenure). It also tells us
which division of the firm’s operations a new driver is expected to be assigned to at the
time of hire. Because the data on the type of work assignment is so noisy after this
process, and because we would only be able to update it for those who exit, we do not
pursue specific findings about the impact of the type of work on retention in the present
analysis.20
         A further implication of the data limitations is that we restrict ourselves in this
initial work to the subset of drivers for which we observe a hiring event during our
calendar window, because we do not have either hire or separation observations for long-
time incumbent employees, and so are missing their key breakout variable values. Given
an industry context in which there are large inflows all the time however, this subgroup is
of significant independent interest, irrespective of what might be found if a more
inclusive group could be analyzed. Also, because we are not confident that we can
correctly identify all the characteristics of second or later spells of employment, we here
only examine the first spell of employment during our calendar window, for those drivers
who have more than one observed hiring event.21 These restrictions still leave us with a
lot of data: we analyze a set of more than one half million observations covering more
than 5,000 distinct individual drivers, observed during the period from September 1,
2001, through March 31, 2005.22
         Our procedure will be to first examine the survival curve for the entire set of
drivers we consider here, along with the associated hazard function, which exhibits the
time path of exit risk that gives rise to the survival curve. Then we will separate out the
survival curves for discrete subgroups of interest, and test for differences between them,
and we will also examine the hazard functions for each subgroup for useful insights. It
should be noted that our analysis does not distinguish between the possible different
reasons for separation. In particular, of the separation events that we observe, 76.4% are
voluntary quits, while 23.6% are discharges for cause, but our survival curves and hazard
functions include both.23


20
   We experimented with the following procedure. We flowed the values from the separation observation
backward, to all prior observations of that particular driver, for the variable recording division to which the
driver is assigned--for those drivers who have an observed separation only. (This overwrote the forward-
flowed divisional assignment data from the time of hire for those separated drivers for whom we observe
the hire event.) This gives us improved information on those who separated, but at the cost that noise is
differentially left in the observations on those who do not separate. The results were not credible, so we
abandoned this part of the analysis until further information can be added to the data set.
21
   This does not prevent us from examining rehires, as a significant number of the first spells we observe
are of rehired drivers.
22
   The precise number of drivers and observations is suppressed for confidentiality reasons.
23
   The primary statistical methodology is survival analysis. Standard descriptive and analytical methods are
problematic when the key dependent variable (here, the length of job tenure) is a time period, since ongoing
spells observed at any given point in time are censored: they continue for an unknown further period.
Instead, a conditional probability approach is needed, to correctly take into account the statistical
information contained in censored observations (Kiefer 1988; Cleves et al. 2004)


                                            Page 13 of 50
        5.1.1. Descriptive Results for All First-Hire-Event Employment Spells
        We begin by examining the survival pattern for the first observed employment
spell of all drivers having a hire-event during our calendar window. Figure 1 displays the
central results. The vertical axis indicates the percentage of the population initially
entering employment that remains after each amount of time on the job, shown on the
horizontal axis in weeks from the start of employment.
        Some key qualitative facts emerge from this picture. First, turnover rates do look
extremely high. At 10.1 weeks 25% of the population is gone, 50% have left by 29.1
weeks (the median survival time), and 75% have departed by 75 weeks. Second, there is
a leveling off of departures in the second six months on the job, followed by an


                             Kaplan-Meier Survival Estimate
      1.00




                              (% remaining at each week)
      0.75
      0.50
     0.25
     0.00




             0          20             40             60             80            100
                                            Weeks of Tenure


  Figure 1: Survival Curve for this Set of Drivers
acceleration at the end of the first year. This is consistent with the fact that most of the
trainees observed here who undergo the firm’s full training program sign a contract to
pay back about half the cost of training (several thousand dollars) if they do not complete
a year of service after training. Plus, the job options within trucking are more plentiful
for drivers with a year of experience. The surprise, in fact, is that so many new drivers
leave before the first year is up. Clearly, these departures cause both the firm and the
drivers to incur real costs.




                                     Page 14 of 50
                         Smoothed Hazard Estimate: Rate of Departure,
                          Conditional on Survival to Beginning of Week
        .03
        .025
        .02
        .015
        .01
        .005




               0           20               40               60                80              100
                                                 Weeks of Tenure



     Figure 2: Hazard Function for this Set of Drivers
        Further insights may be obtained by examining the hazard function for this group
of drivers. The vertical axis indicates the probability of leaving during any particular
week shown on the horizontal axis, given that the driver made it to the beginning of the
week.24 Here the differences in risk of departure are shown more clearly. Exit risk is
highest at about 6 to 8 weeks, which is approximately when new trainees first pull a load
by themselves, without the assistance of an instructor-driver in the cab. Once drivers
make it past this stage, exit risk declines sharply, until the one-year mark is reached,
when separation risk spikes to almost the same level as at the beginning. Drivers who
make it to the end of two years are essentially self-selected to have a high likelihood of
turning out to be longer-term employees.

        5.1.2. Descriptive Results by Level of Previous Experience or Training
        Drivers who are hired by the cooperating firm arrive with different levels of prior
training and prior experience. In Figures 3 and 4, and Table 1, the differing performance
of these subgroups with respect to retention gives rise to separate survival curves and
hazard functions. The best retention is exhibited by the small group (4% of the total) of

24
  Or, to be slightly more careful, the vertical axis shows a “departure rate”, because it is the conditional
probability just described, divided by the number of analysis-time units contained in each unit on the
horizontal axis. In our case the denominator is one, so the rate is also a simple conditional probability.
Formally, the hazard function is defined to be the ratio of the density of employment duration to the
employment duration survival function, or h( x ) = f ( x ) S ( x ) .



                                             Page 15 of 50
rehires. This can be observed from the fact that their survival curve is well above the
curves of the other subgroups, and is quantified in Table 1. We can see in the table that
rehires have the longest time period of any group at which 75% still remain (almost 4
months), and at which 50% still remain (over 5 years). Rehires also have a retention
period for 25% of the starting population that is so long that it cannot be meaningfully
calculated in our data. This is not surprising—rehires are the self-selected subset of
drivers who are not only experienced drivers, but who have worked at least once already
at the cooperating firm. Having explored other opportunities, they now choose to return
to this firm as their best current option.
         The hazard function for these drivers is distinctive, as well. It shows a modest
spike in exit probability early, with falling exit risk thereafter, and also a very distinct
periodicity during the first year, which likely reflects the incentive effects of the firm’s
quarterly bonus system. Rehires are eligible for the firm’s quarterly bonus immediately
                          Kaplan-Meier Survival Estimate
  1.00




                           (% remaining at each week)
                               by Type of Student
  0.75
  0.50
  0.25
  0.00




         0          20              40               60            80             100
                                         Weeks of Tenure
                                  Experienced               LtdExper
                                  NewStudent                PriorTrng
                                  Rehire




Figure 3: Survival Curves by Type of Student

upon starting work, and also have experience with the incentive provided by the
particular bonus system offered by the firm. The periodicity in the rehire hazard function
suggests drivers in this group who may consider leaving during the first year are likely to
wait until they have completed a quarter and have qualified for the bonus, before
separating. Also noteworthy, and sensible, is that there is no “first-year-effect” spike in
the rehire hazard rate—this effect in the aggregate hazard function is entirely due to the
behavior of other subgroups.



                                     Page 16 of 50
         Next consider experienced drivers. These are students who have significant levels
of over-the-road tractor-trailer experience with other employers, before coming to the
cooperating firm. Like rehires, they only have to take a refresher training course that
takes a few days, instead of the multiple-week basic training course all other drivers new
to the firm are required to pass. Their retention performance is not as good as that of the
rehires, but it is still well above that of the lowest groups, with 75th, 50th, and 25th
percentile retention periods of 10.4, 29.4, and 98.3 weeks, respectively. Their hazard
function shows the usual pattern of an early peak, with later declines, and appears to have
a muted version of the periodicity seen in rehires. This would make sense, as
experienced drivers are eligible for the bonus system immediately, but don’t have as
much experience with its incentives as rehires.
         The next item to note is akin to Sherlock Holmes’ famous observation about the
mysterious behavior of the dog in the night. The dog didn’t bark when it should have,
and correspondingly one would expect new students with no prior background of any
kind in trucking to have different (and in particular, poorer) retention performance than


                 Smoothed Hazard Estimate: Rate of Departure,
       .05




                  Conditional on Survival to Beginning of Week,
                               by Type of Student
       .04
       .03
       .02
       .01
       0




             0          20              40               60              80              100
                                             Weeks of Tenure
                                      Exper                       LtdExper
                                      NewStudent                  PriorTrng
                                      Rehire




     Figure 4: Hazard Functions by Type of Student
experienced drivers.25 But in these data both new students who are learning the industry
from scratch, and experienced drivers who are new to the cooperating firm, have closely
similar retention behavior for nearly the first entire year of employment. New students

25
  The mysterious behavior (in “The Silver Blaze”) was that the dog did not bark when someone removed a
valuable race horse from the barn, which was a clue to the thief’s identity.


                                         Page 17 of 50
actually do slightly better than experienced drivers, near the end of the first year. At that
point their hazard function spikes very sharply, and their performance drops below that of
experienced drivers. This is likely associated with the facts that their training contracts
are completed and they then have enough experience to easily switch trucking firms if
they desire. Since new students are by far the largest group (73%) of drivers for whom
we observe a hire event, their behavior is very important in determining that of the entire
aggregate driver population. Thus the size of their initial aggregate spike in exit risk, as
well as that after a year of service, both strongly shape the aggregate survival curve and
hazard function.
         As it turns out, a Chi-square statistical test of the significance of the difference in
overall survival performance between new drivers and those with experience at firms
other than the one providing the data shows that experienced drivers do better overall, at
the 5% significance level (p = .018). But, as Table 1 shows, the effect is all driven by the
one-year exits of new drivers, and the magnitude of the effect is much smaller than the
difference between either of these groups and rehires.26 For instance, 50% of the rehire
group is estimated to still be at work for the cooperating firm 5.48 years after the hire
event we observe, while for drivers with experience at other firms it is only 6.8 months,
and for new students it is essentially the same, at 6.9 months.27 At longer durations of
                                                                          employment we see a
              Table 1: Weeks Of Job Tenure by Type of Student
                                                                          modest difference:
    Drivers for              Estimated Job Tenure in Weeks
  whom a “hire                                                            25% of the drivers
     event” is      Percent      75% of        50% of         25% of      with experience at
    observed;           of       Drivers       Drivers        Drivers     other firms still
    N > 5,000        Drivers   Remaining Remaining Remaining              remain at 22.6
   All Drivers       100%         10.1          27.4            72.1      months, while it is
      Rehire           4%         16.6          284.7        n/a (long)   only 16.9 months for
  Experienced          8%         10.4          29.4            98.3      the same proportion
 New Students         73%         11.1          30.1            73.1      of new drivers.
 Ltd Experience        3%          8.1          21.1            53.1              Last, consider
  Prior Training      14%          6.7          18.1            49.1      the retention
performance of the two final groups: drivers with some prior experience, and those with
some prior training. Both these groups are identified by the driver recruiting staff at the
cooperating firm as having some background in trucking, but not enough to qualify the
student to take only the short training course for fully experienced drivers. To extend the
previous allusion, here is a dog barking loudly—these two groups do quite badly, by
comparison to students wholly new to trucking. The job tenure lengths for the retention
of the 75th, 50th, and 25th percentiles of students with limited driving experience is 1.87,
4.94, and 12.25 months, respectively. This tells us that only 25% make it to the
completion of their one-year-service-after-training employment contract; the other 75%
are incurring a multi-thousand dollar debt in order to leave early. 28 Students with only

26
   The pairwise differences between rehires and new drivers, and between rehires and experienced drivers,
are both significant—the Chi-square p-values for Type 1 error are zero to four decimal places.
27
   The base time unit for the statistical analysis is weeks, so months are everywhere calculated as weeks
divided by 4.33.
28
   Except for those who are hired by a rival firm that is willing to pay off their indebtedness—something
which is known to occur in this labor market.


                                          Page 18 of 50
some prior training, but no prior experience, do even worse, with retention periods for the
75th, 50th, and 25th percentiles of only 1.58, 4.18, and 11.33 months, respectively. So less
than one quarter of these students complete their training contracts. (The difference
between these two groups is significant by the Chi-square test, at the 5% level (p-value of
.045.29))
         Why should these students be at the bottom of the performance ranking, when
normally prior training or experience would be expected to improve retention? A
reasonable hypothesis is that it has to do with the distinctive characteristics of a high-
turnover, secondary, labor market. In this type of market there is always demand for
drivers at some job or other. So someone with prior experience of any kind, as well as
the graduates of any of the many commercial driver training schools, can get some job, as
long as they have a CDL. It may not be a very desirable job, but it is possible to
accumulate experience if one is willing to put up with some of the poorer working
conditions available in an industry segment known for having poor conditions on
average. In this context, coming to the cooperating firm, and being willing to assume the
debt contract that accompanies the full training program, is a bad signal. There may be
many specific reasons outside a prospective driver’s control that lead to such a decision.
For example, the student could have experienced some kind of family event that stopped
their prior training before the CDL exam, or caused them to quit a prior job quickly. But
on average, students with some prior training or some prior experience are likely either to
be job switchers who just couldn’t do better for the time being, but who will be looking to
leave as soon as possible, or to be job candidates who were unsuccessful at someone
else’s training course, or were otherwise judged inadequate by other firms. Either of
these reasons means the student is more likely to depart.


    5.2. Pilot Work on Productivity
         The pilot work on productivity utilized a different set of data files from the
cooperating firm than did the turnover work described above. We began with two data
files, one containing basic information (especially, hire date, and separation date, if any)
on all the drivers who had separated during the period of one year (for example, in some
of the pilot work we used 2003), and the second, extracted at the end of the that year,
containing similar information on all currently employed drivers. Then two separate
additional files containing demographic information, and racial and ethnic identity from
voluntary EEOC employee disclosure forms30, were added.
         Merging these using the internal employee number (“driver number”) as an
identifier immediately caused problems. It turned out that driver numbers are not unique,
but are recycled on a regular basis, so we had to delete some duplicate cases that really
represented different drivers.31 “Hire date”, a key variable for survival analysis also
turned out to be problematic. As one might expect in a high-turnover setting, a small but
29
   The pairwise differences between either of these groups and any of those with better retention
performance is highly significant—the Chi-square p-values for Type 1 error are zero to four decimal
places.
30
   “EEOC” is the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
31
   For the pilot work we did not want the responsibility of making use of social security numbers, although
a secure method for making use of the relevant identification information has been developed for later
work.


                                           Page 19 of 50
significant number of drivers become re-employed, some having as many as four or five
successive employment spells. The problem was that drivers gone for less time than
some threshold (six months at one point, but varied over time) kept their original hire
date, while those gone longer were assigned a new one. The latter fact made it
impossible to distinguish rehires from new drivers with recycled driver numbers.
         To do a productivity analysis the key addition to the records already described
was information from the firm’s payroll records, which provide a week-by-week
compilation of the items added to (or deducted from) each employee’s pay, with each
such transaction constituting a line of data. The taxes and fringe benefit co-pays were in
a separate data source to which we did not have access, but even so the initial files had as
many as 44 transactions per driver per pay period, with more than one million lines of
data per file. We proceeded to document the different variables that contained coded
information about the driver’s work assignment and pay structure, consulting subject-
matter experts at the firm regularly. Each variable could take on multiple values, the
meanings of which to some degree changed over time as operational needs changed. In
addition we began to document all the meanings of the values of the key variable
specifying what type of transaction each line of the payroll file contained. There were
several hundred distinct values of this variable, including values denoting several
different types of mileage pay, dozens of types of lump sum pay for specific tasks,
dozens of types of pay advances and pay deductions, and so on.
         After documentation, we next “rolled up” the payroll file. We sorted the file by
driver and pay-week, and then accumulated all the transaction-level information we were
interested in having on a weekly basis into new variables, so that the last transaction in
each driver-pay-week record contained cumulative information for the week. The kinds
of information in the resulting records included such key items as the total (paid) miles
and the amount paid for them, the total number of dispatches. Also included was
information on various kinds of ancillary activities when they generated a pay
transaction, such as paid customer stops, pay supplements for very short runs, paid
maintenance delays, and so on. The payroll data thus provides a very rich set of
information about what each driver does during each week.
         However, the payroll file records what drivers are actually paid for, which is in
general a subset what they actually do. So, for instance, the first pickup stop and first
delivery stop on each loaded dispatch are not separately compensated. Extra pickup or
delivery stops are paid when they occur on long-distance random-dispatch loads, but only
some of the time when they are on a scheduled run dedicated to a particular customer,
that is engineered to have multiple stops. Most drivers are primarily compensated by the
mile, and these drivers are paid miles for all their dispatches, which normally includes
loaded miles, plus miles pulling an empty trailer, repositioning for a new load, and also
any bobtail miles (i.e. without a trailer). However, drivers generally run more miles than
those for which they are paid. Paid miles are based on a least-distance routing algorithm
which is historically standard in the industry, but which undercounts the actual miles by
several percent (recent guesstimates by managers at our firm for the average undercount
range from 4% to 6%).32 Despite these limitations, the payroll data provide a very useful
starting point for the productivity analysis. 33

32
   This is in part because the standard algorithms are to and from standard reference points, and given the
circuity of the road network, this undercounts actual miles on average. It is also because drivers are


                                            Page 20 of 50
        5.2.1. Descriptive Productivity Results for Inexperienced Long-haul
             Random Dispatch Drivers
        We began our pilot work with a subset of drivers for the years 2002 and 2003.
The subset is those drivers who were inexperienced at hire (i.e. who had to take the full
training course offered by the firm), who were assigned to drove solo (as opposed to in a
team) on long-haul random dispatch runs, and who were in their 5th week to 156th week
of




        Figure 5: Variance! Miles per Week by Week of Driver Tenure.
                                                                                                         tenure
                 34
with the firm. This gave us more than 100,000 pay-week observations on
more than 2,000 drivers. Examining the key dependent variable, miles per week, we
observed very high variance (see Figure 5). In particular, there were negative values and
also very high positive values. The former turned out to be due to mistaken pay being
charged back against a driver’s earnings, and the latter to a small number of drivers from

responsible for selecting a practical route for a large loaded tractor-trailer, which is often more circuitous
than the least-distance version. In addition, drivers may choose to deviate for other reasons (for example,
to run on a turnpike where the salt trucks will be out at night in the Pennsylvania mountains in winter, as
opposed to a non-toll highway on which such services or more uncertain), as long as they don’t exceed
certain percentage standards for excess miles, and meet delivery schedules.
33
   For later work it is expected supplemental information will be added from a separate operational events
data set also maintained by the firm. It is not the place to start because it has its own limitations, and also
because it is about an order of magnitude larger than the payroll data set.
34
   Drivers begin receiving mileage pay when they first pull a load on their own, without a trainer in the
truck with them, and the earliest this occurs is about the 5 the week.


                                             Page 21 of 50
the firm’s early days who were permitted to accumulate vacation earnings over several
years and were being paid upon retirement. We decided to trim the extremes, and had to
choose whether to leave in zero-miles weeks or use only positive-miles ones, and what
upper bound to use.
        The actual maximum number of miles that a solo driver could legally run during
this period, given state speed limits and Federal Hours of Service Regulations for
operators of commercial vehicles was about 4,000 per week. But during at least part of
this




          Figure 6: Average Miles per Week, by Week of Tenure, with and
          without Zero-miles W eeks.

period, until the practice was ended, some drivers at the firm were paid for their runs only
after they submitted completed paperwork for each dispatch. This meant that if they held
their paperwork they could have one (or even two) weeks in a row with zero paid miles,
and then a week with very high miles. We decided to trim only the negative values,
leaving zero-miles weeks in, and also trimmed values over 6,500, after looking at the
distribution of the upper tail.
        Further examination showed that almost 20% of our observations were of zero
miles pay weeks. So we first trimmed out all the pay-week observations that were
associated with any payroll transaction that could exogenously cause the driver to either
miss work, or be paid on a non-mileage basis. This included pay weeks with disability
pay, vacation or holiday pay, salary (sometimes paid to driver-trainers), lump-sum



                                     Page 22 of 50
training pay, and the like. Then we discovered that the payroll system was generating
dummy paychecks for drivers who had separated from the firm, for several weeks after
separation when the driver left owing money, e.g. for things like cash pay advances or
purchases at a store at a company terminal. When all of these cases were trimmed out,
we reduced the number of weeks with zero miles substantially, but 6% of our
observations remained with zero miles per week.
         Figure 6 exhibits a simple descriptive version of the tenure-productivity curve for
this subset of drivers. Even after all the trimming, the remaining weeks with zero miles
affect the mean values quite significantly. Without zero-miles weeks, the initial increase
to full productivity is achieved at about nine months, whereas with zero-miles weeks it is
nearer to a year. There is a sharp drop in the curve at one year of tenure with zero-miles
included. This is undoubtedly related in some way to the fact that drivers with one year
of experience can more easily switch firms, and also to the fact that most of the drivers in
this subset, all of whom have taken the firm’s training, assume a debt of several thousand
dollars for its cost, which is forgiven at the end of a year of service after training is
completed.35 The balance of the pilot analysis keeps all the zero-miles weeks in the data
set, but a goal of the full statistical case study is to dig deeper into this phenomenon and
develop better evidence on whether they all should be included when analyzing
productivity, or not.

        5.2.2. The Impact of Selection on the Tenure-Productivity Curve
        A major goal of the statistical investigation of productivity is to analyze the true
causal effect of increasing tenure on expected miles per week (the “treatment effect”),
while accounting for any impact the high turnover rate might have (the “selection
effect”). A priori, a reasonable hypothesis would be that drivers with lower productive
capacity would be more likely to leave at any given level of tenure. In order to test this
hypothesis we start by running a “fixed effects” panel data OLS regression model, with
total miles per week as the dependent variable. We use all the independent variables
from the payroll data set that plausibly measure exogenous factors that affect
productivity. These include driver tenure (a linear term and as many higher-order terms
as prove significant), the number of dispatches (linear term plus those higher-order terms
that prove significant). We also include variables such as the number of short-haul pay
supplements, the number of paid maintenance delays, as well as dummy variables for
each week of the calendar year (to capture any time-period effects or time trends), and a
dummy variable for each terminal at which drivers are based (to capture any geographic
effects of the home base). We use robust standard errors. The pilot version of this model
has an adjusted R2 of .66.
        The fixed effects model constrains the coefficients on all the independent
variables to be the same across all drivers, but permits each driver to have his or her own
regression plane intercept, or constant. This constant, or “fixed effect”, which is
estimated by the regression, may be thought of as a measure, specific to the model and
the data, of the degree of “job match” between the driver and his employment at the firm.
In the context of the model, it is the number of miles which the driver “brings to the job
each week” (which can be positive or negative), according to the model estimate.

35
  New drivers also earn their first week of paid vacation at this point, but that cannot be the reason for the
drop in the averages, as those weeks have been removed from the data.


                                            Page 23 of 50
Allowing this specific flexibility in the regression model provides a statistical adjustment
for the relative speed with which drivers of high and low job match turn over, in
predicting the miles each driver will operate per week. So, we take the predicted values
from the model, and compute the average of these values over each week of tenure on the
job. These averages, when graphed, produce a “selection-corrected” tenure-productivity
curve. In Figure 7 we compare this new tenure-productivity curve with the simple
descriptive version of the same curve we exhibited in Figure 6.36
        When the both curves are level and the selection-corrected tenure-productivity
curve is below the old curve, it says that the true effect of tenure on productivity is
smaller than it appears in the simple descriptive case. This implies that drivers with poor
job matches are leaving differentially faster than those with good ones, which is in accord
with our hypothesis. By contrast, when the selection-corrected tenure-productivity curve
is either rising more rapidly than the old curve, or is above it when they are level, it says
that the true effect of tenure on productivity may be larger than it appears in the simple




       Figure 7: The Tenure-productivity Curve with (“AvgMiHatFEStd”)
       and without (“AvgTotMiWkW0”) the Fixed Effects Correction for
       Selection.
descriptive case. This could imply that drivers with good job matches are leaving
differentially faster than those with bad ones. The pilot results shown in Figure 7 clearly
show that our initial hypothesis is true from about the ninth or tenth month on. But
Figure 7 is ambiguous about whether this is also true early in the tenure of new drivers,
when the firm has its highest rates of separations. A major goal of the full statistical case
study is to clarify these pilot results.


36
   Both curves are for the case in which zero-miles weeks that cannot be specifically explained away are
retained in the data set


                                           Page 24 of 50
6. Research Component Two: Panel Study of New Hires
         Research Component Two is a study of 1,069 new driver-trainees who were
among those recruited by the firm to start their education at a specific training school
operated by the firm. The basic design of the panel study is quite straightforward in
conception, although it is quite labor intensive and costly to carry out. A large amount of
data is being collected on each driver trainee, starting with an initial contact while each
was in the first phase of training, and then continuing with follow-up data collections
over two years of the trainee’s work life at the firm, or until the trainee exits the firm,
whichever comes first.
    The follow-up data collections include these elements: (1) a follow-up paper survey
for the driver mailed to his or her home every six months, for two years, as long as they
stay employed by the firm; (2) an exit survey for the driver mailed to the driver’s home
soon after their separation, if it occurs during the first two years; (3) a weekly survey with
two questions sent over the satellite unit to the driver’s truck;37 (4) an initial survey (and
consent form) for the driver’s spouse or significant other, asking about family/work-life
issues, and mailed to the driver’s family soon after the driver entered the study; (5) a
follow-up survey to the driver’s family mailed every six months up to two years; and (6)
an exit survey for the driver’s family mailed upon driver separation, if it occurs during
the first two years. As subjects are informed as they enter the study, a cash gift of $5 is
included in each survey mailing, with the goal of increasing the response rate. Finally,
the driver’s on-the-job performance data will be collected as part of future updating of the
master data files for the turnover and productivity studies of Research Component Two.

    6.1. The Use of Behavioral Economic Experiments
         A central project design goal is to perform a multivariate statistical analysis of the
relationship between all the factors that are being measured, and the success on the job of
the trainees, where employee success is measured first by the length of time they are
retained by the firm, and second, by their productivity on the job.38 While the researchers
(and the firm’s managers) start with a number of hypotheses about what might matter in
predicting each of these outcome variables, this research component is essentially a large-
scale empirical investigation, designed to let the data tell us which factors matter
statistically, and which do not. In this regard, it is particularly exciting that we have the
opportunity to employ both traditional measurement instruments, and a selected set of
behavioral economic experiments.
         There are a wide variety of reasons one might have for doing behavioral
economic experiments in the field. But one cross-cutting categorization is whether the
investigation is primarily about treatment effects, or about differences in individual
characteristics. A treatment effect is exactly what it sounds like: analogously to studying
the aggregate differences in the symptoms of ill patients who randomly received a
specific medical treatment, as compared to those who randomly did not, an economic
treatment effect is the difference in aggregate behavior across two variants of the

37
   The two questions are: “How happy are you with your job right now?” (Likert scale response), and “How
many miles do you expect to run next week?”
38
   The analysis has the potential to be extended to include safety performance, but that is not part of the
present project.


                                           Page 25 of 50
experimental setting.39 An example is the difference in average transaction prices
between traders in a pit market and those in a double-auction market, for the same
commodity and with the same valuations and costs.
         However, simple behavioral economic experiments can also be thought of as
measurement tools for the characteristics, including preferences, of individual subjects, as
argued in Fehr and Camerer (2004). And this is the approach that fits the specifics of the
institutional setting of the Project. We anticipate that the results we accumulate will
provide significant evidence on the relative utility of conventional and experimental
measures of individual characteristics in predicting on-the-job outcomes, and in
complementing or substituting for each other.
         One methodological point should be noted. We plan to look at the relationships
among the various measures we are collecting on each subject, as there is little evidence
in the literature on this topic for many of our measures, let alone evidence using the
subject population from which we are drawing our participants. If this were our only
goal it would be important vary the order in which the different measures are
implemented during the initial data collection, as it is quite possible that order effects
could be important for some of these relationships. Order variations are a standard
feature of many experimental economic designs when individual subjects take part in
more than one experiment.
         However, since the central design goal of our project is to examine the predictive
power of the various measures with respect to individual on-the-job outcomes, a
countervailing methodological need is to present—as nearly as possible—exactly the
same set of stimuli to each subject, so that the relationship to the outcome variables is
always the same. In addition, the complexity of administering the data collection process
at the field site made it essentially impossible to vary the order, once we found a
sequence of data collection events that fit the schedule. For these reasons the sequence of
measurements in the initial data collection was not varied.
         The initial data collection process took place on a Saturday in the middle of the
first two-weeks of the training process for new driver trainees. We next describe the
training process, to provide context for understanding where the initial data collection fits
in the new driver’s work life.

    6.2. The Driver Training Process
        The first two weeks of training for every inexperienced driver takes place at one
of the driver training schools maintained by the firm. It includes a large dose of
classroom work in which students are introduced to the firm and learn essential facts
about the equipment they’ll be operating, the regulations governing commercial vehicle
operators and operations, map reading and course-plotting, and the safety rules and
procedures specific to the firm. It also alternates hands-on training time between truck
simulators and an actual Class 8 tractor-trailer.40 Trainees first drive bobtail (tractor with

39
   Of course, the key feature which makes experimental evidence the scientific gold standard is that random
assignment to treatment and non-treatment groups means that any causal factors not directly controlled for
in an effective experimental design wash out of the results, because they equally affect both groups.
40
   By definition, Class 8 vehicles that can operate on the National Highway System (NHS) have a
maximum gross vehicle weight (GVW) of between 33,000 lbs. and 80,000 lbs. The units utilized by most
truckload carriers, including the cooperating firm, are at the top of this range, and have a maximum GVW


                                           Page 26 of 50
no trailer), and then with an empty and a loaded trailer, on the school’s property. Once
the trainee has qualified for a commercial driver’s license learning permit, and is judged
ready by the instructors, they quickly begin driving on the actual roads and highways
surrounding the school, with a driver-trainer in the right seat of the tractor.
         The simulators have two purposes. One is to speed familiarization with the basic
features and operational characteristics of the Class 8 tractor-trailer. An example is
learning how to correctly shift a ten-speed transmission, which requires frequent double-
clutching, coordinated at first by conscious attention to engine RPM’s in comparison to
road speed, especially for downshifts. Another basic feature drivers are first exposed to
in the simulator is how to maneuver around corners on city streets with a rig that is about
65 feet (just under 20 meters) long, and that includes a trailer that is 53-feet (16.2 meters)
long. A second main function of the simulators is to give drivers practice at responding
to dangerous settings which could never be practiced in real life, such as how to avoid
going off the road in response to a blow-out on a steering axle tire, first on dry pavement,
and then on glare ice on a freeway in the middle of car traffic.
         Trainees who complete the initial two-week training process are officially hired
by the firm on their date of completion, after passing a basic skills qualification test.
Once hired the driver goes back to his or her home base, at one of the firm’s terminal
locations. While the content of the Commercial Driver’s License exam is federally
regulated, the exact rules governing driver training vary from state to state.41 So,
depending on their proficiency level and on the state in which they will be based, trainees
may also take the CDL exam at the training school, or they may do so later, at a location
nearer their home base. Whether they have the CDL yet or are still using a learner’s
permit, all new drivers have a second training phase, during which the trainee works for
between one and three more weeks, actually hauling freight from their home base, but
with a certified driver trainer in the right seat of the tractor. When the trainer judges the
trainee ready (and he or she has acquired a CDL), the new driver is assigned a tractor of
his or her own, and goes to work on their own.
         As is mentioned above in previous sections, it is typical for many of the TL
carriers that train all or most of their new drivers to ask trainees to sign a contract for
their training in the form of the extension of credit to the driver-trainee for a substantial
portion of the cost of the training (several thousand dollars, an amount that is about half
the full average cost per trainee), and this firm is no exception. According to the contract
the firm provides both phases of the training, including access to the classroom,
instructors, and trucks, plus needed classroom supplies. For the first phase of training,
transportation to and from the training school, a hotel room while at training, and lunches
during the training day are also covered. The trainee owes no payments on the credit
extended as long as they stay employed by the firm, and the debt is fully forgiven if the
trainee completes a specific period of service after the point they begin working on their
own (either one year or eighteen months). Trainees who do not complete the period of
service, however, become legally liable for repayment of the amount of credit extended.


of 80,000. lbs. (The NHS is a large subset of all U.S. highways designated by the USDOT, on which
federal size and weight standards prevail.)
41
   The Commercial Drivers License (CDL) comes in three categories, "Class C" through "Class A", and for
freight vehicles are differentiated primarily by the ascending maximum GVW of the trucks the bearer can
operate. The "Class A" CDL is required to operate Class 8 vehicles on public roads.


                                         Page 27 of 50
    6.3.The Initial Data Collection Process
        The initial data collection process was piloted in October through December,
2005, and went to full operation on 22 Saturdays during January through August, 2006.
The school starts a class into the initial two-week training process (described above)
every week on Sunday (thus two classes are in residence at any given time). So trainees
in target classes received a one-page flier advertising the study as part of their orientation
on their first day at school. The flier explained the opportunity coming up the next
weekend to take part in the University of Minnesota study, and that trainees who
volunteered could expect to earn cash by participating. At the beginning of the class day
on the Saturday of data collection, Burks conducted an informed consent process, in
which he introduced himself as a former driver turned university researcher, and
explained the goals and procedures of the study to the potential subjects. The study is
governed by the standards of the Human Subjects Protection Committee of the University
of Minnesota’s Institutional Review Board (IRB), so a formal consent document was
used which spelled out the risks and benefits of taking part in the study.42
        The data collection at the training school was set up as two two-hour-long blocks,
spent doing tasks with the researchers, either on computers or with paper and pencil, with
a short break in between. Training classes range from 35 to 70 students, and the largest
group that could be accommodated at one time for data collection was 32 subjects, so
each class was broken into two groups. The first group worked with the researchers from
early to late morning, and the second group from late morning to mid-afternoon. On data
collection days the class day was structured so that those potential subjects who chose not
to take part did not have extra training available, but instead could spend the extra time in
the break room. The buses that transport students to and from the hotel bring everyone at
one time in the early morning, and take everyone back at one time in the afternoon.
Given the monetary compensation being offered, the relatively low opportunity cost of
taking part, and the credible guarantee of confidentiality from the University, 91% of the
trainees offered the opportunity chose to join the study. Initial data was collected from
1,069 participants, with complete information on 1,036 of these.43
        Except for one instrument (the Educational Testing Service’s test of Quantitative
Literacy, labeled “Numeracy” in our schedule), all the instruments were administered on
a wireless network provided by the cooperating firm of refurbished Dell notebook
computers, with a newer Dell notebook as the master controlling computer. The software
used was z-Tree (Fischbacher 2007), the toolbox for constructing computer-administered
economic experiments and surveys developed at the Institute for Empirical Economics at
the University of Zürich.44 The data collection took place in a temporary computerized

42
   This document included the following key facts: a) the kind of data collection activities involved, both
initially and later, b) that subjects would receive $20 in initial cash “thank you gifts” for taking part, and
have the opportunity to earn substantially more, c) that the money paid to them was coming not from the
firm but from two non-profit foundations, d) that under University rules for protecting research
participants, the new data collected about them would be kept confidential from everyone except academic
investigators approved by the IRB, including specifically that it would never be available to their managers
at the trucking firm, and e) that participation was completely voluntary.
43
   Due to a programming glitch, one item, Hit 15 Points, has valid information for only 893 subjects.
44
   Because we are running a licensed adaptation of a non-verbal IQ instrument that requires the display of a
large number of graphics files, each of which is a scanned image of a page with a pattern-matching task, we


                                            Page 28 of 50
experimental economics laboratory that the research team set up in one of the classrooms
at the training school on the Friday before the data collection dates on Saturdays, and
which was then removed at the end of the Saturday event. The team hand-built a set of
cloth dividers hung from frames adapted from portable garment racks, which were
installed between all the computer stations in order to separate subjects during the data
collection. Because the data collection sessions exceeded the endurance of notebook PC
batteries, extra power outlets were installed in the walls and a set of portable extension
cords were deployed as part of the laboratory set up. The wireless network was part of a
VLAN (virtual local area network) set up by the firm’s IT support personnel under a data
security agreement approved by the University of Minnesota Human Subjects
Committee. The VLAN separated the computers on which the confidential data was
being collected from the rest of the firm’s network, and provided secure data storage until
the initial data collection was complete, and the project moved back to the UMM campus.
         Table 2 shows the time sequence and schedule for the actual data collection event
of February 25, 2006. This class of trainees was relatively large, at 59 students. 51 out
56, or 91%, chose to take part.


                         Table 2: Data Collection Activity Time Allocations 2/25/2006


              Start Budgeted Total                      Informed Consent Process
              Time    Time     Time
              7:13     7:10      x    Start Informed Consent Process
               59       x        X       How many people in the room?
              7:29     7:30    0:16 Finish Informed Consent Process




                                                   Session 1a
              Start Budgeted Total                                 Activity
              Time    Time     Time
              7:30     7:30    0:09 Check-In
              7:39     7:40    0:04 Information
              7:43     7:42    0:19 Activity 1: Prisoner's Dilemma
                                      Computer generated
                                      Pay on beliefs for what percentage of people will send $5
                                      as person 1, how much person 2 sends if person 1 sends
                                      $0, and how much person 2 sends if person 1 sends $5,
                                      $1 each
              8:02     8:09    0:39 Activity 2: MPQ
                                      No payment
              8:41     8:47    0:12 Activity 3: Risk/Loss Aversion
                                      1 Question, #23
                                      Green by drawing out of a bowl
                                      Everyone paid for their selection



ran a beta version of zTree that was extended to handle graphics files. Our special thanks to developer Urs
Fischbacher for providing this new version in time for our project.


                                             Page 29 of 50
8:53    8:58    0:27 Activity 4: Demographics
                       No payment
 X      9:16     X     Activity 5: Big Red Button
                       -Computer generated
 X       X       X     Release Participants
9:09     X       X        First person left at this time
9:20    9:26     X        Last person left at this time




                                    Session 2a
Start Budgeted Total                                Activity
Time    Time    Time
9:37    9:40    0:08 Check-In
9:45    9:45    0:02 Information
9:47    9:47    0:09 Activity 1: Time Preference
                       2 Subjects, #12 and #19
                       1 Question, #18
9:56    9:57    0:47 Activity 2: IQ
                       Start Time of Test 10:02
                       2 Subjects, #8 and #21
                       Pay $1 for each correct answer
                       Pay on "pre" and "post" beliefs, $2 each
10:43   10:30   0:25 Activity 3: Numeracy
                       Start Time of Test 10:44
                       2 Subjects, #8 and #18
                       Pay $2 for each correct answer
                       Pay on "pre" and "post" beliefs, $2 each
11:08   10:55   0:08 Activity 4: Ambiguity
                       1 Question, #7
                       Blue by drawing out of a bowl
                       Everyone paid for their selection
11:16   11:05   0:12 Activity 5: Hit 15 Points
                       Computer generated
11:28   11:28   0:12 Activity 6: Risk, Cooperation, Impatience Questions
                       No payment
 X       X       X     Release Participants
11:35    X       X        First person left at this time
11:40   11:40    X        Last person left at this time


                                    Session 1b
Start Budgeted Total                                Activity
Time    Time    Time
12:15   12:30   0:10 Check-In
12:25   12:40   0:03 Information
12:28   12:42   0:23 Activity 1: Prisoner's Dilemma
                       Computer generated
                       Pay on beliefs for what percentage of people will send $5




                              Page 30 of 50
                       as person 1, how much person 2 sends if person 1 sends
                       $0, and how much person 2 sends if person 1 sends $5,
                       $1 each
12:51   1:09   0:35 Activity 2: MPQ
                       No payment
1:34    1:47   0:13 Activity 3: Risk/Loss Aversion
                       1 Question, #21
                       Blue by drawing out of a bowl
                       Everyone paid for their selection
1:47    1:58   0:32 Activity 4: Demographics
                       No payment
 X      2:16     X     Activity 5: Big Red Button
                       -Computer generated
 X       X       X     Release Participants
2:04     X       X        First person left at this time
2:19    2:26     X        Last person left at this time




                                    Session 2b
Start Budgeted Total                                Activity
Time    Time   Time
2:25    2:40   0:09 Check-In
2:34    2:45   0:02 Information
2:36    2:47   0:11 Activity 1: Time Preference
                       2 Subjects, #17 and #16
                       1 Question, #7
2:47    2:57   0:39 Activity 2: IQ
                       Start Time of Test 2:53
                       2 Subjects, #17 and #22
                       Pay $1 for each correct answer
                       Pay on "pre" and "post" beliefs, $2 each
3:26    3:30   0:28 Activity 3: Numeracy
                       Start Time of Test 3:30
                       2 Subjects, #17 and #16
                       Pay $2 for each correct answer
                       Pay on "pre" and "post" beliefs, $2 each
3:54    3:55   0:11 Activity 4: Ambiguity
                       1 Question, #22
                       Blue by drawing out of a bowl
                       Everyone paid for their selection
4:05    4:05   0:16 Activity 5: Hit 15 Points
                       Computer generated
4:21    4:28   0:16 Activity 6: Risk, Cooperation, Impatience Questions
                       No payment
 X       X       X     Release Participants
4:29     X       X        First person left at this time
4:37    4:40     X        Last person left at this time




                              Page 31 of 50
        While it was theoretically possible for a subject to end up with only the initial $20
“thank you gifts”, we always paid at least a dollar or two more. The actual payouts
depended in part on the use of stochastic devices (plastic bowls filled with colored and/or
numbered poker chips), as described in the account of each data collection activity,
below. The average total earnings for the four hour period of the initial data collection
was $53, with a minimum of $21, and a maximum of $168. By design we wanted most
subjects to be pleased about their initial interaction with the researchers, given the follow-
up contacts with them which are called for by the design.
        The latter fact—that we needed to gain not only the immediate but also the
longer-term cooperation of our subjects—also affected the protocol for subject behavior
during the four and a half hour sequence of data events. With undergraduate students in a
university experimental economics laboratory, and with a protocol that takes significantly
less time than the Project’s, it is not hard to ask subjects to be quiet, to not speak to their
neighbors, to not do other tasks on the computers, and not to read, write, or use cell
phones or PDA’s. In order to provide a neutral setting, this is the behavior requested—
and normally received from—typical student subjects in economic experiments, unless
the treatment being investigated is one involving changing some aspect of this, such as be
allowing specific types of communication. We established expectations of our driver-
trainee participants that were similar to this, but found that to receive willing compliance
we had to allow for participants who finished ahead of others on tasks that took a long
time to get up and leave the lab setting temporarily. We did this explicitly during the
Numeracy instrument, and during the MPQ instrument, when differences in reading
speed made the differences in completion time especially large, we also allowed
participants to read after completion if they were done early.
        We next turn to a brief description of each item in the sequence of data collection
events.

   6.4. Session 1 Data Collection Events
       The first two-hour block of data collection activities consists of three behavioral
economic experiments and two more conventional measures.

        6.4.1. Prisoner’s Dilemma
        Our version of this experiment is a sequential and strategic one. Person 1 (the
first mover) and Person 2 (the second mover) each are allocated $5. Person 1 can send
either $0 or $5 to Person 2, and Person 2 can respond by sending $0, $1, $2, $3, $4, or $5
back. All funds sent are doubled by the researchers. Each subject provides their
complete strategy in the game: they make both an unconditional decision for the first
mover role, and a conditional one for the second mover role (first how to respond to
being sent $0, and second how to respond to being sent $5, doubled to $10.) Subjects are
randomly matched and their role selected by the computer, after their decisions. This is a
variant of the task used in Burks, Carpenter, and Götte (2006).
        Before each decision screen, subjects are also asked how they think other
participants in the room will act in this experiment. The first question is “What percent
of the participants do you think will send their $5 as Person 1?” and pays $1 if the subject
is correct within plus or minus 5%. The second and third questions are “If Person 1 does



                                      Page 32 of 50
not send/does
send, what is the                        Second-Mover Strategies in the Prisoner's Dilemma
average that                        6
participants in this
room will send           5$ 5
back?” and pays           tn
$1 for each                eS 4
question if the             if
                             de 3
subject is within             nr
plus or minus                  ut 2
                                e
$0.25 of the                    R
                                tn
actual average.                  uo 1
        There will                m
be four main data                 A0
items of potential                  1
                                    -
interest from this
experiment: first                     -1      0      1      2        3         4     5     6

mover choices,
                                                    Amount  Returned  if Sent $0
the estimate of
first mover            Figure 8: Second Mover Strategies in the Sequential
behavior of others, Prisoners Dilemma
second mover conditional choices, and the estimate of the second mover choices of
others. We intend to analyze what other factors about the participants predict their
choices in this experiment, as well as use some aspects of their choices as predictors of
other experimental responses, and also of some kinds of on-the-job behavior. A potential
workplace application is in predicting on-the-job cooperation. The TL driver’s job is
relatively individualized. But there are two places in which the data store from Research
Component One may permit the construction of an on-the-job measure of cooperation.
        One of the benefits of the strategic form of this experiment is that the second
mover choices provide a fairly clear typing of the respondents, in terms of who is an
egoist (never sends anything to the first mover), who is a conditional cooperator (sends
back exactly what the first mover sent), and who is an altruist (always sends everything),
with some gradations possible for intermediate dollar responses. As Figure 8 shows,
participant behavior is varied in this experiment, but "pure" versions of these three
strategies predominate among second movers (shown by the large circles, which are sized
proportionally to the number of respondent choices they capture). The three pure
strategies make up 61% of the total responses, and most of the rest are intermediate
responses. Those responses below and to the right of the 45-degree line fall in the
"wingnut" category; these participants may have misunderstood the instructions, a
hypothesis we can test by correlating these responses with some of our measures of
cognitive performance.


      6.4.2. Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire (MPQ)
      The Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire (Patrick et al. 2002), otherwise
known as the MPQ, is the second measurement instrument. This is standard personality



                                     Page 33 of 50
profile, and consists of
11 different scales that
represent primary trait             MPQ Scores: Reference Sample versus Drivers
dimensions: wellbeing,
social potency,                  14
achievement, social
closeness, stress                12
reaction, alienation,
aggression, control,             10
harm avoidance,

                              M ea n S co re
traditionalism, and               8
absorption. The short
version used in the               6
study has 154 multiple
choice questions.                 4
Almost all of the 154
questions have the same           2
four possible answers:
“Always True”, “Mostly            0
                                               W e llbe ing

                                                              S oc ia l P ote nc y

                                                                                     A c hie v e m e nt

                                                                                                          S oc ia l C los e ne s s

                                                                                                                                     S tr e s s R e a c tion

                                                                                                                                                               A lie na tion

                                                                                                                                                                               A ggre s s ion

                                                                                                                                                                                                C ontr ol

                                                                                                                                                                                                            H a r m A v oida nc e

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Tra ditiona lis m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        A bs orption

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       U nlik e ly V ir tue s
True”, “Mostly False”,
and “Always False”.
There is no separate
payment for this survey.
         A principal use
of this scale will be to                                         Trait
generate a set of control
variables in regression                                   MPQ Sample     Drivers
modeling of on-the-job
outcomes. We also            Figure 9: Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire
expect to look at how        Profile of Subjects, with MPQ Reference Population
the traits defined by the
MPQ relate to answers to the other survey instruments, and to behavior in the
experiments. As Figure 9 shows, the trainee drivers are similar overall to the benchmark
population presented in Patrick, et alia (Patrick et al. 2002), which is promising given
that our primary goal is to use the variation across individuals in the components of the
MPQ. Some initial hypotheses, for instance, are that high "achievement" orientation
should be correlated with job success as a TL driver, especially given the incentive pay
method faced by these drivers. One noteworthy point is the apparent difference from the
population in the factor "unlikely virtues". The questions in this factor are set up so that
only someone who is "too good to be true" will have a high score, and the authors of the
instrument intend it as a check on the truthfulness of the subject's responses. This MPQ
factor offers the prospect that we may be able to control for this effect to some degree by
using the unlikely virtues score as a regression control variable.




                                               Page 34 of 50
        6.4.3. Risk/Loss Aversion
                                                       Table 3: Risk/Loss Aversion
        In the risk/loss aversion experiment
                                                Question For Sure Your Color Other Color
there are 24 questions which are divided
                                                    1     Win $2.00 Win $10.00 Win $2.00
into four blocks of six questions each (see         2     Win $3.00 Win $10.00 Win $2.00
table 3). There are two possible choices for        3     Win $4.00 Win $10.00 Win $2.00
each question , an amount of money                  4     Win $5.00 Win $10.00 Win $2.00
received with certainty, and a 50/50 gamble         5     Win $6.00 Win $10.00 Win $2.00
that pays a higher dollar amount if “your           6     Win $7.00 Win $10.00 Win $2.00
color” is chosen and a lower dollar amount          7     Win $0.00 Win $5.00 Lose $1.00
if the “other color” is chosen. To avoid any        8     Win $0.50 Win $5.00 Lose $1.00
hint of experimenter control over the               9     Win $1.00 Win $5.00 Lose $1.00
                                                   10     Win $1.50 Win $5.00 Lose $1.00
outcome, subjects choose which color (blue
                                                   11     Win $2.00 Win $5.00 Lose $1.00
or green) is theirs for the random outcomes        12     Win $2.50 Win $5.00 Lose $1.00
as their last response.                            13     Lose $2.50 Lose $5.00 Win $1.00
        Each of the four blocks of six             14     Lose $2.00 Lose $5.00 Win $1.00
questions follows the same format. In each         15     Lose $1.50 Lose $5.00 Win $1.00
block, the amount for “your color” and the         16     Lose $1.00 Lose $5.00 Win $1.00
“other color” do not change and the amount         17     Lose $0.50 Lose $5.00 Win $1.00
of the “for sure” option increases by $0.50        18     Lose $0.00 Lose $5.00 Win $1.00
per question. The design is intended to            19     Win $1.00 Win $5.00 Win $1.00
                                                   20     Win $1.50 Win $5.00 Win $1.00
identify where the subject crosses over from
                                                   21     Win $2.00 Win $5.00 Win $1.00
the “for sure” option to the “gamble”
                                                   22     Win $2.50 Win $5.00 Win $1.00
option, relative to where a risk-neutral           23     Win $3.00 Win $5.00 Win $1.00
person would do so. After all subjects have        24     Win $3.50 Win $5.00 Win $1.00
made their decisions, one poker chip is
drawn by a participant
which identifies which
                                .1




question (1-24)
everyone will be paid
                                .08




on, and then a second
participant draws a
colored chip to
                                  .06
                            Fraction




determine whether the
winning color, for
                                .04




subjects who chose the
gamble on the selected
                                .02




question, is green or
blue.
        The choice
                                0




blocs overlap the zero               0        5        10           15      20       25
                                                      RiskyChoiceTotal
dollar point in order to
allow inference about
the likelihood that the        Figure 10: The Total Number of Risky Choices
implied utility function



                                        Page 35 of 50
has different slopes in the positive and negative domains. But there is no set of choices
only in the negative domain because the project is relying on the long-term
responsiveness of participants, and pilot work showed that a choice block fully in the
negative domain was perceived as too unfriendly a task
         Figure 10 shows the distribution of the total number of risky choices for our
subject pool, and shows that there is significant variation across participants, which is
desirable for the purpose of using the variations across individuals to predict other
behavior. Risk aversion and/or loss aversion are potentially key explanatory factors in TL
firm turnover, since nearly all of each driver’s pay is based on piece rates (cents per mile
for a fixed number of miles for each dispatch). So paychecks can vary quite substantially
from one week to the next, and thus there is a certain level of short run financial risk that
goes with the job. The question for the study is to what extent this form of experimental
measurement of financial risk is predictive of the impact of pay fluctuations on driver
turnover, as compared to things such as survey responses and credit score.


        6.4.4. Demographics
        This instrument is a compilation of 37 demographic questions. The types of
questions vary, but the areas that are covered include education level, languages, marital
status, previous job experience, family lifestyle, racial or ethnic identity, country of birth,
how many people are in the household, household income, and networking done while at
training. These questions are mostly multiple choice, with a few numerical answer
questions as well. There is no separate payment for completing this demographic
questionnaire.
        Figure 11 shows the distribution of ages of the trainee drivers, as compared to the
distribution among blue collar workers, as computed from the March, 2005 Current
Population Survey. The minimum age to acquire the CDL is 21, so there are no new
trainees that are less than this minimum age. However, in general the trainee pool is
similar in distribution to the entire population of blue collar workers in the U.S., albeit
with a modest shift towards the age range of 21-30.
        Figure 12 shows the distribution of the highest education level completed among
the trainee drivers, with the distribution among blue collar workers in the U.S. as a
comparison. The minimum literacy requirements for the TL driver job are undoubtedly
the reason there are very few trainees with very low educational attainment, compared to
the blue collar workforce in the U.S. It is interesting that the trainee group has a much
higher proportion of individuals with some college, but possibly a lower proportion with
a junior college or technical degree, as compared to the population of blue collar workers.
Given that someone who has acquired some level of useful education in college is over-
qualified for this job, this pattern is consistent with the view that completing a two-year
degree is indeed correlated with job market success, since fewer of these individuals are
in our subject pool. A speculation about the apparently slightly higher proportion of
four-year-degree holders in the trainee group, as compared to the benchmark, is that these
are folks with other options who are attracted (at least initially) by the TL driver lifestyle.




                                      Page 36 of 50
                          Age Distibution with CPS Benchmark

          18
          16
          14
          12
Percent




          10                                                                                               Benchmark
          8                                                                                                Panel data
          6
          4
          2
          0
               9

               4

               9

               4

               9

               4

               9

               4

               0

               4

               9
             -1

             -2

             -2

             -3

             -3

             -4

             -4

             -5

             -6

             -6

             -6
          16

          20

          25

          30

          35

          40

          45

          50

          55

          61

          65
                                                  Age Bracket



Figure 11: Distribution of Participant Age with Benchmark




                                  Highest Education Level Attained
                                       with CPS Benchmark
                 45
                 40
                 35
                 30
Percent




                 25                                                                                         Benchmark
                 20                                                                                         Panel data
                 15
                 10
                  5
                  0

                             ol         ol         ol            ge           e            e           e
                      ch
                         o
                                c ho           cho          ll e         g re egre                g re
                    s          s             s            co           e                        e
                  e         le          gh            e              d          sd         or
                                                                                              d
             r ad       id d         Hi          o m
                                                               le ge lor'                y
           G          M                        S            ol         he              d
                                                       a l c Bac                e s tu
                                                    ic                      a t
                                               c hn                    adu
                                             e                       r
                                           rt                      G
                                   i o ro
                                 n
                             Ju                    Education Level

           Figure 12: Participant Education Levels with Benchmark

                                                           Page 37 of 50
         6.4.5. The Red Button
         This experiment is designed to measure short term impatience. It is the last data
collection event in the first of the two two-hour sessions, and it is followed by 10 to 20
minutes of break time, during which participants can use the restroom, stretch their legs
and get something from the vending machines if they wish. It is directly preceded by the
demographic questionnaire, to which it is linked. This means that, unlike most of the
other instruments, subjects do not have to wait until everyone else completes the prior
activity, but instead each participant can start the red button task as soon as they have
individually completed the demographic questionnaire. This setup is designed to
minimize peer effects in the red button task, since each subject will start the task at a
different time.
          The red button activity takes exactly ten minutes, and the task is to wait quietly
until a timer on the task screen counts down from 600 seconds to zero. As described in
Section 6.3, during each session subjects are requested in general to either work on the
task at hand, or wait
quietly, and not to talk to
                                   .8




their neighbors, and nor
engage in any other
activity, such as pulling
                                   .6




out something to read.
During the red button task
                               Fraction




these rules are strictly
                                 .4




enforced. Participants are
paid $5 if they complete
the task by waiting the
                                   .2




full ten minutes.
However, subjects may
choose to end this
experiment earlier if they
                                   0




                                      -1          0           1            2         3
wish. Each click of a                                      RedButtonClicks
button below the
countdown clock on the           Figure 13: Clicks to Reduce Waiting Time at a Cost
computer screen, which is
labeled “Reduce Waiting Time,” will cut their waiting time--but each click costs them $1.
The first click reduces their waiting time by five minutes; the second click reduces the
waiting time by three minutes, and the third click reduces the waiting time by an
additional two minutes. Once the timer says zero, no matter how long the subject has
waited, the he or she is free to get up and leave the room for break time. As Figure 13
shows, 29% of the participants clicked at least once. This is actually lower than we
aimed for; our initial calibration runs may have led us to set the opportunity cost of the
first click too high.
         Patience is relevant to quit decisions, and being impatient can lead to poor job
performance when a significant part of the job involves being able to wait on customer
docks, and then hurry up when customers are ready. Being patient in traffic is also a
relevant job skill. We expect to investigate the extent to which red button choices will



                                          Page 38 of 50
predict impatience on the job, as measured by quit decisions, controlling for prior
earnings and prior waiting time during the earlier data collection activities.

   6.5. Session 2 Data Collection Events
       The second two-hour block of data collection activities contains three behavioral
economic experiments, and three more conventional measures.

         6.5.1. Time Preferences
         In this experiment there are 28 questions which are divided into four blocks of
seven questions each. There



                                              .15
are two possible choices for
each question, a smaller
amount of money paid
sooner, and a larger amount                   .1
of money paid later. Each of
                                   Fraction



the four blocks of seven
questions follows the same
format. The amount for the
                                              .05




higher payoff at a later date
is always $80 and the amount
for the lower payoff at an
earlier time begins at $75 and
                                              0




                                          0               10                  20         30
decreases by $5 intervals to                                FutureTimeChoices
$45. The point at which a
subject switches from the          Figure 14: Total Future Choices
later payoff to the earlier one
(if they do) provides an implicit point estimate of their discount rate over that time
horizon.
         The time frames are (1) today (Saturday) versus Monday; (2) today versus next
Thursday; (3) Monday versus Monday plus one week, and (4) Monday, versus Monday
plus four weeks. The two matched pairs of time frames are designed to allow subjects
that have different discount rates for choices with and without a front-end delay, i.e. with
and without a “quasi-hyperbolic” discounting pattern. After all subjects have made their
decisions, a participant draws one poker chip to select which of the 28 questions will be
activated, and then two poker chips are chosen the same way which identify two of the
subjects in the session who will be paid for their choices on that question. Payments are,
of course, made on the dates requested, either in person, or with an official bank check
mailed in a University of Minnesota envelope.
         As Figure 14 shows, the two modes of the distribution of future choices are at
zero and all, with a median of 17 future choices out of a possible 28. There is a wide
dispersion in individual responses. We expect to examine the relationship between this
measure and such other measures as non-verbal IQ, risk/loss aversion, and impatience.
And we expect to investigate the extent to which it adds predictive power to our
statistical models of quits.




                                              Page 39 of 50
         6.5.2. Non-Verbal IQ
         The IQ instrument used is a computerized adaptation of the Standard Progressive
Matrices by J.C. Raven (Raven et al. 2000); the authors created the adaptation under
license from The Psychological Corporation.45 Each question is presented as a graphic
image. On top is a large rectangular box containing some kind of a pattern with a piece
missing out of the lower right hand corner. On the bottom are six (or eight) possible
pieces that could be used to complete the image on top. Each section starts with easy
images, and gets progressively more difficult.
         The original instrument consists of five sections, each containing 12 questions.
Our version is not fully comparable to the standard results for the instrument, because we
are actively administering only the last four sections, due to time constraints. The
original is primarily benchmarked in an un-timed format, and we cut our subjects off
after 31 minutes, having given a warning 3 minutes earlier.46 The simplest way to match
our data with the untimed reference benchmarks is to note that everyone in our subject
pool finished the fourth section before the announcement of a time limit. So we simply
multiply our subjects' scores on sections 2, 3, and 4 by 5/3 to scale them up to the same
range as the score for
untimed subjects doing                     Raven Score De nsity for Drivers
all five sections.                           Compared to SPM Benchmark
         After both verbal
                                  3.5
and written instructions
and two practice                    3
questions, subjects fill
                                   Density at IQ Score




                                  2.5
out a “confidence
question” that asks them            2

how they think they will          1.5
do as compared to other             1
subjects in the room, by
placing themselves in             0.5

the correct quintile of             0
                                                         23
                                                              25
                                                                   28
                                                                        30
                                                                             32
                                                                                  34
                                                                                       36
                                                                                            39

                                                                                                 41
                                                                                                      44
                                                                                                           46
                                                                                                                48
                                                                                                                     51
                                                                                                                          53
                                                                                                                               55
                                                                                                                                    58
                                                                                                                                         60
the distribution of
scores. When the                                               IQ Score
Raven’s task has been
                                                         Drivers       SPM Sample
completed, the same
confidence question is
asked again. Subjects          Figure 15: Distribution of (adapted) Non-verbal IQ
are paid an additional $2      Instrument
for placing themselves in the correct quintile. In addition, two subjects are randomly
chosen to be paid $1 per correct answer, for total possible earnings of $48 each for their

45
   Pilot work was done with two other instruments, but one had irresolvable licensing issues, and the other
proved unsuitable for our setting. The first several administrations of the Raven’s instrument were done
with paper and pencil, while we arranged the license for the computerized adaptation (used by permission
of Harcourt Assessment).
46
   There is one published benchmark from a French subject pool using a 30-minute time limit, but including
all five sections.


                                                          Page 40 of 50
question answers. Starting at about subject 200, we also began asking whether subjects
want to find out their own score and the group average, when they receive their payout.47
        Figure 15 shows approximately how our panel compares to a standard benchmark
population (citizens of Iowa City, IA, in the late 1990’s.) On a scale of 0 to 60, our
subject pool has a higher density between 36 and 44, and a lower one from 54 on up. The
median for our subjects is about two points lower than that for the benchmark population.
The distribution looks reasonable compared to groups of workers in other countries
against which the regular version of the instrument has been benchmarked. The primary
use of this measure in the project analysis will be as a control variable in predicting on-
the-job outcomes. But we also expect to look at the relationships between this indicator
of non-verbal IQ and the other participant characteristics that we measure. We will also
examine how IQ, confidence about one’s performance both before and after the task, and
the desire for full information about one’s performance, are related.

         6.5.3. Numeracy (Quantitative Literacy)
         This instrument is part of the test of adult quantitative literacy from the
Educational Testing Service. The full instrument consists of two sections, of which only
the first section was used here, due to time constraints. The section is made up of 12
questions and subjects are given exactly 20 minutes to complete the test. The test
requires subjects to be able to add, subtract, compare numbers, fill out a form, and to be
able to read and understand a short problem, among other things.
         As with the non-verbal IQ, after instructions and a brief practice question,
subjects fill out a “confidence question” that asks them how they think they will do as
compared to other subjects in the room, by quintiles. When the numeracy task has been
completed, the same confidence question is asked again. Subjects are paid an additional
$2 for placing themselves in the correct quintile. Two subjects are randomly chosen to be
paid $2 per correct answer, for total possible earnings of $24 each for their question
answers. In addition, at about subject 200 we began asking whether subjects want to find
out their own score and the group average, when they receive their payout.48




47
   The two selected to be paid for correct answers will learn their score from their payoff, so they will just
get the average as new information, but these two subjects are selected after this question is asked.
48
   As with the non-verbal IQ indicator, the two selected to be paid for correct answers will learn their score
from their payoff, so they will just get the average as new information, but these two subjects are selected
after this question is asked.


                                            Page 41 of 50
        The
distribution is not




                                      .15
directly comparable
to the distribution for
the full instrument
(i.e.    when      both




                                      .1
sections            are



                           Fraction
administered), but we
appear to be getting
good dispersion in

                                      .05
performance        (see
Figure 16). The mean
score is 71%. The
primary use of this in
                                      0




the project analysis             0         .2        .4          .6      .8         1
will be as a control                                   NumeracyScore
variable in predicting
on-the-job outcomes.
The job of TL driver Figure 16: Distribution of Numeracy Scores
requires continual application of numeracy skills, e.g. in map reading and route planning,
or in calculating hours remaining and hours coming available at specific future times,
under the hours of service regulations for commercial motor vehicle operators. But we
also expect to look at the relationships between this indicator of numeracy and the other
participant characteristics that we measure. We will also examine how numeracy,
confidence about one’s performance both before and after the task, and the desire for full
information about one’s performance are related.

         6.5.4. Ambiguity Aversion
         Our ambiguity aversion experiment is identical to the risk/loss aversion
experiment described above
in section 6.3.3, except for
                                                          7




one detail: it is no longer
                                                          6




known to be a 50/50 gamble
                                            AmbigRiskyChoicesFirstPanel
                                                                    5




if the subject chooses the
uncertain option. Two blue
                                                              4




poker chips and two green
                                                        3




poker chips are placed in the
bowl from which the winning
                                                  2




color is drawn, and then out
                                             1




of sight of the subjects, six
more chips are added which
                                                          0




can be all green, all blue, or
                                                          -1




any mixture thereof. As a             -1     0     1       2       3        4   5   6   7
result, subjects only know                               RiskyChoicesFirstPanel

that there is at least a 20%
chance that green will be       Figure 17: Ambiguity and Lottery Choice



                                                             Page 42 of 50
drawn and at least a 20% chance that blue will be drawn. All other features of the
experiment are unchanged: there are four panels of six choices each, with the dollar
values for certain and lottery outcomes as before. All subjects choose the certain payoff
of the lottery in each question in each panel, and then which color is theirs for the lottery
outcomes.
        Figure 17 shows results for the first panel, when the choice is between a fixed
amount ranging from $2.00 to $7.00, or a lottery with outcomes of $2 or $10. The
horizontal axis shows the total number of lotteries chosen in the initial risk/loss aversion
task, while the vertical axis shows the same total for the ambiguous version. Participants
who made the same choices in both cases would be on the 45 degree line. The size of the
circles shows the number of participants at each node of the grid, and it is apparent that
many subjects did change the number of lotteries they selected, and in widely varying
ways. We will be looking to see which subjects choose more or fewer risky options, and
whether their shift, if any, is related to other experimental or survey measures, and to on-
the-job success.

        6.5.5. Hit Fifteen Points
        This is a backward induction, or planning, task, in the form of a small game
between subject and computer. The computer and the subject take turns adding points to
the “points basket” and during each turn the subject or the computer must add either one,
two, or three points to the points basket. The goal is to be the player to add exactly the
15th point. The number of points in the points basket at the beginning of the round varies,
and the computer and participant take turns going first. The first round is set so as to give
the subjects an example of how the first stage of backward induction works.. Before each
decision is made by the
                                               .3




subject as to what
number of points they
want to add to the points
basket, the subject is
                                               .2




asked whether he or she
will win, or the computer
                                    Fraction




will win. The subjects
are paid $1 for each
round that they win.
                                               .1




        Figure 18 shows
the distribution of scores
on this task. The median
falls between two and
                                               0




                                     -1      0          1          2        3        4
three correct rounds of                                     Hit15Score
           49
the game. Together
with numeracy, we             Figure 18: Success in the Hit 15 Points Game
anticipate that this
measure will be predictive of on-the-job success, and especially of high versus low
productivity. TL truck drivers have to do numerical backward induction every day, to

49
  As mentioned earlier, the N is 893 for this task, as we discovered a programming error in the zTree code
for the game after 176 subjects had already taken part.


                                                    Page 43 of 50
calculate back from routing and delivery goals that are from a few hours to a few days
ahead, in order to decide on the optimal course of action in the present. One regularly-
used application is in figuring out how many hours they have to get to their destination
and how many hours they are available to drive under the hours of service regulations.

        6.5.6. Risk, Impatience, and Cooperation Survey
        The last instrument used during the Saturday initial data collection events with the
panel study participants is a list of attitude questions about risk preferences, patience and
impatience, and cooperation. It was assembled from a selection of papers in the literature
that propose various survey-response measures for these characteristics of subjects. We
intend these to also be tried out as control variables, in order to see if they are useful, and
if so, whether they are substitutes or complements to the experimental measures, in
predicting behavior on other measures, and on-the-job success.

     6.6. Other Measures of Interest
         The applicant information collected by the cooperating firm on trainees provides a
few other data items of interest. There is an indicator of whether or not the participant is
a smoker (whether they requested a hotel room in which smoking is permitted during
initial training). This may turn out to be related to risk attitudes. In addition, since the
trainees apply for credit for the training contract, the firm is able to supply us with a
credit score. We want to ask what relationship there is among our measures of risk/loss
aversion, ambiguity aversion, time preference, and impatience, on the one hand, and the
credit score, on the other. We also are interested in determining whether the credit score
useful in predicting on-the-job success, and if so, whether it is a complement or substitute
for our other measures.


7. Some Implications of the Truckers & Turnover Project
        The present paper has presented the context and design of the Truckers &
Turnover Project, at a stage when much of the initial data collection has taken place, but
while follow-up data is still being collected, and before results are available. The proof
of this pudding will, of course, be in the eating, when data collection is complete and
results are available. But there are three points that can be made about the project at this
stage. The first two are about research methodology, and the third is about the policy
significance of the subjects of the project.

    7.1. For the Industry Studies Community
        First, for the industry studies research community, the project stands as a kind of
“proof of concept” for adding behavioral economic experiments to the already rich mix
of data collection techniques it utilizes. The Sloan Foundation’s website states that the
Foundation's goal in supporting industry studies is “to build a strong community of
industry studies scholars who contribute to academia, to industries, and to government."
Along with an interdisciplinary approach, the defining feature of this work according to
the Foundation is that "industry studies scholars develop a deep understanding of
particular industries by grounding their research in direct observation”(2007). The
conventional tools for direct observation range from in-depth participant observation, to



                                      Page 44 of 50
shorter structured site visits and interviews, to the collection of proprietary internal data
for statistical analysis. To this list, the Truckers & Turnover Project prospectively adds
behavioral economic field experiments. The key, in addition to having an existing
cooperative research relationship between academics and firm(s), is to design the
behavioral experiments to fit the specific institutional and business context, so the new
data collection techniques both complement more traditional approaches, and also
credibly add value, from both an academic and a business standpoint. In this regard the
essentially individualized production process of TL motor freight is especially suited for
an initial exploration of the uses of experiments that measure individual characteristics of
employees. But one can easily imagine more complex social dilemma experiments being
applied in teamwork employment settings, for instance.50

    7.2. For the Experimental and Behavioral Economics Communities
         Second, for the behavioral and experimental economics communities, the project
also stands as a kind of “proof of concept” for the specific manner of applying behavioral
experiments to the workplace used. As mentioned above in Section 6.1, there are a wide
variety of scientific motives for conducting specific types of economic experiments, but
one large cross-cutting categorization is whether the primary interest is in treatment
effects or in measuring the characteristics of individual subjects. The latter is the purpose
here, in keeping with the goal mentioned in the preceding paragraph about targeting the
design to the specific institutional context. The laboratory and the field are both relevant
sources of empirical data to be used in the generation and evaluation of economic theory.
But it is often difficult to translate the import of findings from studies in the fully
controlled, abstract, and simplified setting of the lab directly to the uncontrolled and
complex world of real employment relations and production processes. The approach
here is close to what Harrison and List (2004) call a "framed field experiment", in which
the experiments are similar to those that might be done in a lab with student subjects, but
they are instead conducted in the field setting of the driver training school, with new
driver-trainees as subjects, so that the framing for the (relatively abstract) experimental
tasks is provided by these contextual factors. We anticipate finding some new empirical
regularities when we examine the ability of our experiments to predict on-the-job
outcomes, and if so, we will have provided significant evidence for their "external
validity", that is, for the ability of the lab measurements we use to capture individual
characteristics that are important in practice in a specific real workplace setting.

     7.3. The Larger Significance of Our Subject Pool
         The last point we want to make is about the economic and human importance of
the subjects of our study, driver-trainees in the truckload segment of the motor freight
industry. Much has been made in the last decade of the growth of the knowledge
economy and of the role of workers who have the specific education and skills to prosper
in it. But what about those who do not fit this description? In 2005 fully 40% of the U.S.
workforce had a high school degree or less, and only 29% had a four-year college degree
or more (Mishel et al. 2006, p. 153). As the U.S. continues its transition from a
manufacturing economy to one in which service occupations and service industries

50
  For some promising work along these lines, see the series of papers on fruit pickers in England by
Bandiera et al. (2005; 2006).


                                           Page 45 of 50
dominate total employment, non-knowledge service workers will become an increasingly
important part of the overall picture. The job of TL tractor-trailer driver is perhaps an
archetypal example of non-knowledge work that is important in the knowledge economy.
         The U.S. is a geographically large economy, so transportation and distribution
have always been a key complement to U.S.-based production. And as the international
trade in goods becomes looms larger and larger in U.S. production and consumption, the
relatively more essential become the tasks associated with physically transporting traded
goods and their ingredients here in the U.S. Unlike some other types of services, the
tasks involved in physically moving freight here are not subject to direct competition
from abroad. According to the 2002 quinquennial economic census, trucking is the
largest single industry in transportation services by employment, and the truckload
segment of trucking had a headcount of approximately 800,000. This means that about
600,000 persons are TL tractor-trailer drivers at any one time. 51 Yet, the American
Trucking Associations' survey results say that the typical turnover rate at TL firms is at
least 50% per year.52 If these figures are taken at face value, it means that several
hundred thousand people train for and try out this job each year, only to leave it within a
few months, probably having incurred a significant debt for training that most have little
hope of repaying. Our pilot findings on turnover at the cooperating firm do not contradict
this interpretation of the industry facts.
         In this context a primary goal of the Truckers & Turnover Project is to use the
best available means to measure the individual characteristics that make for success in
this job. We will then ask whether the findings have actionable implications for business
strategy, and for public policy with respect to the labor market and education. Clearly,
improving the match between job and employee by even a small amount would be a real
improvement in economic circumstances for both firms and employees. It may even be
that our findings will help in understanding how and to what extent the nature of these
jobs can be improved, by quantifying more clearly the costs and benefits of lowering
turnover.




51
  By the rule of thumb that drivers make up about 75% of employment at a typical TL firm
52
  The rate for large carriers typically averages over 100%, but most firms are small, and the rates for this
group are usually between 50% and 100% per year.


                                            Page 46 of 50
8. Appendix A. The Truckers and Turnover Project Team

Project Organizer:
        1) Stephen Burks, Division of Social Science, University of Minnesota, Morris;
           IZA; and Sloan Trucking Industry Program

Project Co-Investigators (each colleague is collaborating on at least one component of the
project, some on multiple components):
        2) Jon Anderson, Division of Science and Math, University of Minnesota, Morris
        3) Jeffrey Carpenter, Department of Economics, Middlebury College; IZA; and
           Norms and Preferences Research Network
        4) Andrew Clark, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, PSE (France),
           and IZA
        5) Lorenz Götte, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, and IZA
        6) Aldo Rustichini, Department of Economics, University of Minnesota, Twin
           Cities
        7) Kristen Monaco, Department of Economics, California State University at
           Long Beach; and Sloan Trucking Industry Program
        8) Augustin Villard, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, PSE (France)

On-site Research Team Members 2005-06:
       9) Kay Porter, Business Research Manager, Cooperating Firm
       10) Adam Durand, Research Intern (fall, 2005), University of Minnesota, Morris
       11) William Leuthner, Research Intern (spring, 2006), University of Minnesota,
           Morris
       12) Erin Christenson, Research Intern (summer, 2006), University of Minnesota,
           Morris




                                    Page 47 of 50
9. References

ATA Economic & Statistics Group (2005). "Employee Turnover and Workforce
        Changes: Q4: 2004". Trucking Activity Report. 13: 7.
Bandiera, O., I. Barankay and I. Rasul (2005). "Social Preferences and the Response to
        Incentives: Evidence from Personnel Data". Quarterly Journal of Economics
        120(3): 917-62.
Bandiera, O., I. Barankay and I. Rasul (2006). "The Evolution of Cooperative Norms:
        Evidence from a Natural Field Experiment". B.E. Journals in Economic Analysis
        and Policy: Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy 6(2): 1-26.
Beadle, A. D. (2004). "Building Driver Shortage". Traffic World 268(42): 26-27.
Belman, D. L., K. Monaco and T. Brooks (2005). Sailors of the Concrete Sea: A Portrait
        of Truck Drivers' Work and Lives. Lansing, MI, Michigan State University Press.
Belman, D. L. and K. A. Monaco (2001). "The Effects of Deregulation, De-Unionization,
        Technology, and Human Capital on the Work and Work Lives of Truck Drivers".
        Industrial and Labor Relations Review Volume 54(No. 2A): 502-524.
Belzer, M. H. (1995). "Collective Bargaining After Deregulation: Do the Teamsters Still
        Count?" Industrial and Labor Relations Review 48(4): 636-655.
Belzer, M. H., D. Rodriguez and S. Sedo (2002). "Paying for Safety: An Economic
        Analysis of the Effect of Compensation on Truck Driver Safety", Federal Motor
        Carrier Safety Administration.
Boyer, K. and S. V. Burks (2007). "Stuck in the Slow Lane: Traffic Composition and the
        Measurement of Labor Productivity in the U.S. Trucking Industry". Discussion
        Paper #2576, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).
Bureau of Labor Statistics (2002). "Historical hours and earnings--Average hours and
        earnings of production or non-supervisory workers on private non-farm payrolls
        by major industry sector, 1964 to date", U.S. Department of Labor.
Burks, S. V. (1999). "The Origins of Parallel Segmented Labor and Product Markets: A
        Reciprocity-Based Agency Model with an Application to Motor Freight".
        Amherst, MA, Graduate School of the University of Massachusetts, Amherst: 1-
        181.
Burks, S. V., J. Carpenter and L. Götte (2006). "Performance Pay and the Erosion of
        Worker Cooperation: Field Experimental Evidence". Discussion Paper #2013.
        Bonn, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).
Burks, S. V., K. Monaco and J. Myers-Kuykindall (2004a). "The Balance between
        Private and For-Hire Carriage and Trends in the Use of Large Trucks (1977 to
        1997)". Journal of the Transportation Research Forum 43(2): 159-71.
Burks, S. V., K. Monaco and J. Myers-Kuykindall (2004b). "Trends in the Use of Large
        Trucks by Truckload and Less-than-Truckload Motor Carriers in the 1990s".
        Journal of the Transportation Research Forum 43(2): 173-87.
Cain, G. G. (1976). "The Challenge of Segmented Labor Market Theories to Orthodox
        Theory: A Survey". Journal of Economic Literature 11(4): 1215-1257.
Camerer, C. and E. Fehr (2004). "Measuring Social Norms and Preferences Using
        Experimental Games: A Guide for Social Scientists". Foundations of Human
        Sociality; Economic Experiments and Ethnographic Evidence from Fifteen Small-




                                   Page 48 of 50
        Scale Societies. J. Henrich, R. Boyd, S. Bowles et al. Oxford, Oxford University
        Pres: 55-95.
Casey, J. F. (1987). "An Assessment of the Truck Driver Shortage", American Trucking
        Associations: 12.
Cleves, M. A., W. A. Gould and R. G. Gutierrez (2004). An Introduction to Survival
        Analysis Using Stata, Revised Edition. College Station, TX, Stata Press.
Corsi, T. and J. R. Stowers (1991). "Effects of a Deregulated Environment on Motor
        Carriers: A Systematic Multi-Segment Analysis". Transportation Journal 30(3):
        4-28.
Cox, K. (2004). "TL Driver Turnover Rate Reaches New Record High". Transport
        Topics: p. 5 & 35.
Cullen, D. (1996). "You get what you pay for: J.B. Hunt Transport Services Inc.'s driver
        compensation package". Fleet Owner 91(11): 82-3.
Dickens, W. T. and K. Lang (1993). "Labor Market Segmentation Theory: Reconsidering
        the Evidence". Labor Economics: Problems in Analyzing Labor Markets. W.
        Darity, Jr. Norwell, MA, Kluwer Academic: 141-180.
Fischbacher, U. (2007). "z-Tree: Zurich Toolbox for Ready-made Economic
        Experiments". Experimental Economics (forthcoming).
Gallup Organization, S. (1997). "Empty Seats and Musical Chairs: Critical Success
        Factors in Truck Driver Retention", ATA Foundation.
Global Insight Inc. (2005). "The U.S. Truck Driver Shortage: Analysis and Forecasts".
Griffin, G. and L. Kalnbach (2002). "Predicting and Classifying Voluntary Turnover
        Decisions for Truckload Drivers". Fargo, ND, Upper Great Plains Transportation
        Institute, North Dakota State University: 40.
Griffin, G. C., J. M. Rodriguez and B. M. Lantz (1992). "Job Satisfaction in U.S.
        Commercial Drivers". Fargo, North Dakota, The Upper Great Plains
        Transportation Institute, North Dakota State University: 1-20.
Harrison, G. W. and J. A. List (2004). "Field Experiments". Journal of Economic
        Literature 42(4): 1009-55.
Isidore, C. (1997). "Hunt gambles on pay raise to keep drivers". Journal of Commerce
        411(28917): 1A.
Kiefer, N. M. (1988). "Economic Duration Data and Hazard Functions". Journal of
        Economic Literature 26: 646-679.
Mishel, L., J. Bernstein and S. Allegretto (2006). The State of Working America, 2006-
        2007. Ithaca, NY, ILR Press.
Patrick, C. J., J. J. Curtin and A. Tellegan (2002). "Development and Validation of a
        Brief Form of the Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire". Psychological
        Assessment 14(2): 150-163.
Raven, J., J. C. Raven and J. H. Court (2000). "Section 3: The Standard Progress
        Matrices". Manual for Raven’s Progressive Matrices and Vocabulary Scales. San
        Antonio, TX, The Psychological Corporation.
Reiskin, J. (2006). "Shipper Changes Cut Distances That Truckload Freight Travels".
        Transport Topics(March 13): 1 and 49.
Rodriguez, J., M. Kosir, B. Lantz, G. Griffin and J. Glatt (2000). "The Costs of Truckload
        Driver Turnover". Fargo, Upper Great Plains Transportation Institute: 1-18.




                                    Page 49 of 50
Stephenson, F. J. and R. J. Fox (1996). "Driver retention solutions: strategies for for-hire
       truckload (TL) employee drivers". Transportation Journal 35(4).
U.S. Census Bureau (2004). "Truck Transportation: 2002". Economics and Statistics
       Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce: 1-40.
Waxler, C. (1997). "J.B. Hunt Transport shares may drop further". Forbes 159(8): 382-3.
Website (2007). "Industry Studies". Programs: Standard of Living and Economic
       Performance, Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.




                                     Page 50 of 50
