ADJUSTING IMPERFECT DATA:
OVERVIEW AND CASE STUDIES
Lars Vilhuber
WORKING PAPER 12977

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ADJUSTING IMPERFECT DATA:
OVERVIEW AND CASE STUDIES
Lars Vilhuber
Working Paper 12977
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12977

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2007

I am indebted to all the authors of the country-specific chapters for having provided me with detailed
data descriptions, allowing me to write this chapter. Juhana Vartiainen, Lia Pacelli, Roberto Leombruni,
Claudio Villosio, and Bruno Contini provided valuable contributions beyond their data descriptions.
I am thankful to all of the above, John Abowd, and Julia Lane for comments on drafts of this text.
All errors, of course, remain mine. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Lars Vilhuber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Adjusting Imperfect Data: Overview and Case Studies
Lars Vilhuber
NBER Working Paper No. 12977
March 2007
JEL No. C81,C82,J0
ABSTRACT
Research users of large administrative have to adjust their data for quirks, problems, and issues that
are inevitable when working with these kinds of datasets. Not all solutions to these problems are identical,
and how they differ may affect how the data is to be interpreted. Some elements of the data, such as
the unit of observation, remain fundamentally different, and it is important to keep that in mind when
comparing data across countries. In this paper (written for Lazear and Shaw, 2007), we focus on the
differences in the underlying data for a selection of country datasets. We describe two data elements
that remain fundamentally different across countries -- the sampling or data collection methodology,
and the basic unit of analysis (establishment or firm) -- and the extent to which they differ. We then
proceed to document some of the problems that affect longitudinally linked administrative data in
general, and we describe some of the solutions analysts and statistical agencies have implemented,
and explore, through a select set of case studies, how each adjustment or absence thereof might affect
the data.
Lars Vilhuber
Cornell University
CISER
391 Pine Tree Rd.
Ithaca, NY 14850
lars.vilhuber@cornell.edu

1

Introduction

This book combines an astonishing variety of data sets in a coherent analytical framework. Data
have been extracted from the administrative systems of countries with very different uses for the
data contained in these systems: from tax administration in countries such as France and Sweden,
to calculation of unemployment benefits in the United States, to administration of centralized
bargaining agreements in Norway and Sweden. The size of the countries, and thus the datasets,
ranges from countries with as few as 5 million inhabitants (Finland, Norway, Denmark) to the 293
million inhabitants of the United States. Some statistical agencies conduct coordinated surveys to
gather the data; others rely on purely administrative tasks to co-incidentally gather the data.
The ease with which the reader can compare the analyses presented in this book was purchased
through much hard work by the authors from each country. In particular, each set of authors had to
adjust their data for quirks, problems, and issues that are inevitable when working with large
administrative datasets, and handled them in what their experience told them was the best manner,
given the constraints both of their data and the homogenization imposed on all by this project. It
goes without saying that not all solutions are identical, and how they differ may affect how the data
is to be interpreted. Furthermore, some known issues with the data were left untouched, in order to
make the data more comparable between countries. Finally, some elements of the data, such as the
unit of observation, remain fundamentally different, and it is important to keep that in mind when
comparing data across countries. Howver, although the starting points vary widely, the end result of
the authors’ efforts is a very high degree of comparability of the analytical datasets across countries,
as evidenced by the different chapters in this book.
In this chapter, instead of using the similarity in the cleaned datasets to investigate economic
fundamentals, we focus on the differences in the underlying ‘dirty’ data. We describe two data
elements that remain fundamentally different across countries – the sampling or data collection
methodology, and the basic unit of analysis (establishment or firm) - and the extent to which they
differ. We then proceed to document some of the problems that affect longitudinally linked
administrative data in general, and we describe some of the solutions analysts and statistical
agencies have implemented, and some that they did not implement. In each case, we explain the
reasons for and against implementing a particular adjustment, and explore, through a select set of
case studies, how each adjustment or absence thereof might affect the data. By giving the reader a
look behind the scenes, we intend to strengthen the reader’s understanding of the data. Thus

equipped, the reader can form his or her own opinion as to the degree of comparability of the
findings across the different countries.
The structure of this chapter is as follows. A first section provides an overview of select data
elements of all data sets, and discusses the similarities and differences. The next several sections
discuss longitudinal and other linking issues, outline why it is important to properly handle such
issues, and provide examples of applications in the data sets underlying the other chapters of this
book. Case studies are summarized where appropriate and available. The case studies differ from
the applications in that they (typically) do not use the same data sets, but provide a deeper analysis
of the same method used on the data sets in this book. They are thus able to provide some empirical
insight into the importance of the data adjustment.

2

Overview of data sets

We start out with a brief overview of all data sets used in this book. The reader is referred to each
chapter itself for a detailed description of each data set. Some of the data sets used in this book have
also been described previously in Abowd and Kramarz (1999), which also contains an exhaustive
list of other matched employer-employee datasets.
[ Table 1 here : sampling frame, plant unit, ]

2.1

Sampling schemes

The data sets used in this book were constructed using several different types of sampling schemes
(see column Table 1). Essentially three sampling schemes are present: worker-and-firm universe
files, worker-based samples, and firm-based samples.
Worker-and-firm universe files are not samples, though there may be some smaller coverage issues.
Workers and firms appear in the dataset because they are covered by a universal entitlement or tax
system. The Danish CCP data, the Swedish RAMS data, and the US LEHD data are examples of
such files. However, while the Scandinavian data are national registers and thus cover all firms and
workers within each country, the US data is compiled from state-level wage record registers and
only covers a select number of states within the United States. Within those states, the LEHD
covers almost all firms and workers within those states (Stevens, 2002).
The German and the remaining Nordic data sets (Finland, Norway, and the Swedish SAF dataset)
are firm-based samples. For a select number of firms, all workers can be identified, but if those
workers work for a firm outside of the sample frame, that employment is not captured. Transitions

to firms outside of the sampling frame are also not captured. The remaining Nordic data sets are in
fact similar to the worker-and-firm universe files used in the United States, with a critical
difference. Whereas the LEHD data set covers all workers within a certain geographic area, but
does not cover the full geographic area of the United States, the Nordic data sets cover all firms
within each respective country that are members of national employer organizations, and have data
on all workers working for those firms. From an economy-wide perspective, this more closely
resembles a firm-based sample than a universe file. In fact, if not for the sectoral coverage, the
sample obtained looks very similar to the German data, which is an explicitly stratified firm sample
of all firms in the economy. The firm-based samples have in common that, in principle, data on all
workers working for the firms in the sample are available, although some authors have chosen to
work with a sub-sample of workers. Note that a Norwegian national register does exist, and a
selection of it is used in conjunction with the selected firm sample in the chapter on Norway, but the
full Norwegian register is not used in this book.
The French DADS and the Italian WHIP data are worker-based samples. For some fraction of
workers, all jobs with all employers are tracked. Whenever a worker changes firms, his move to
another employer is included in the data base, no matter what the activity or sector of the next
employer. The constraint of worker-based sampling is that not all workers within a given firm show
up in the sample, imposing some restrictions on analysis of the within-firm structure. For this
reason, instead of using firms as the basic unit of analysis for within-unit wage levels and wage
changes, the Italy chapter chose to compute these statistics on cells, where cells are defined by
unique combinations of 4 geographic areas by 6 firm size classes by 8 industry sectors. The
technical appendix to the Italian chapter addresses the issue of cell-level versus firm-level statistics.
How does the sampling frame affect the analysis? Worker-based samples provide excellent data to
provide worker-based statistics. The amount of work experience a worker accumulates is well
documented, non-employment is well captured, and the earnings trajectory, and earnings changes
associated with employer changes, can be followed accurately. On the other hand, firm-based
statistics are less well defined. The computation of firm size, if not reported by the firm itself, can
be noisy for small firms, and small firms themselves may not be well represented in the data. For
instance, consider a 10-person firm, and 1-in-25 worker sample. Naïve estimates for the size of this
firm can range from 25 to 250 workers, conditional on at least one worker being sampled, and there
is a 66 percent probability that the firm never appears in the data, i.e., none of its workers get
sampled. Proper adjustments can be made, but for small firms, firm size estimates will remain
noisy. Turnover rates, where employment enters the denominator, and estimates of the within-firm

variation can be particularly noisy. The chapter on French data contains some further discussions
and analysis of the bias introduced by worker-based sampling.
On the other hand, firm-based samples capture most of the firm measures well, while performing
less ably for the worker-based statistics. For instance, the earnings of workers who switch firms can
only be measured if workers stay within the sample. Differences will arise here between the
German and Scandinavian samples, both of which use firm-based samples. The latter will most
likely capture only workers who stay within the sector, whereas the former will capture more of the
industry-switchers, while missing some of the industry-stayers. How this will affect the estimates of
earnings changes will depend on whether industry switchers predominantly have larger or smaller
earnings differentials than stayers. Neal (1995), using U.S. data, reports average wage losses for
industry switchers of 14 percent, for industry stayers of 6 percent (see also Parent, 2000). For
France and Germany, the literature seems to indicate that workers tend to have earnings gains rather
than losses (Bender et. Al, 2002), but whether there is a differential gain between stayers and
switchers is unknown. For Italy, Leombruni and Quaranta (2002) report average wage changes for
industry switchers about 3 percentage points lower than those of job movers within the same
industry, although Contini and Villosio (2003) find small wage gains for industry switchers.

2.2

Aggregation levels and the concept of an employer

The datasets also differ substantially in another dimension. Whereas the unit of observation on the
person side is always well defined, the entity represented in the data on the employer side is not as
clearly specified. Although all entities are “employers” in the sense that they have hired the
workers, different levels of aggregation are present in the data. Some correspond to physical plants,
some are administrative units that may be smaller or larger than any single plant, and some are
“firms” or “enterprises” that are better defined by ownership relationships than physical location.
Each aggregation level typically has a different identifier, though link files may exist.
The administrative data for each country typically have observations on one specific level of
aggregation, although additional variables or links to other datasets may allow for higher-level
aggregations. Furthermore, since some of the data are merged from different sources, not all the
detail may be available at the lowest aggregation level. Table 1 tabulates what the lowest level of
aggregation is for data on employer characteristics for each country. The aggregation level on the
files containing job characteristics, if different, is pointed out in the discussion below.
The Nordic data, for the most part, report employer and job characteristics at the level of a physical
plant or establishment. This allows allocating an individual to a particular plant, at least once a year.

However, the data obtained from employer associations may have the feature that only the workers
of a particular type (blue- or white-collar) are identifiable. While in Norway, blue- and white-collar
datasets can be recombined by firm, this is not feasible in the Swedish SAF data, and an imperfect
process in Finland. On the other hand, the Norwegian, Finnish, and the Swedish RAMS data can
typically identify both the firm and the plant a worker is associated with, and can thus explore both
within-firm and within-plant variation in wages and other measures.
In Italy and the United States, the smallest unit of observation on the employer characteristics file is
a reporting unit respectively for the social security pension system and for the unemployment
insurance system, which typically corresponds to a plant, but maybe either larger or smaller. In both
countries, the choice is up to the employer, and some employers report all establishments within a
large geographic area (a state) on a single record. Furthermore, the records can be aggregated up to
a “firm.” In the American data, only a state-specific identifier identifies this firm, and the data used
in this book cannot identify which firms in different states are actually the same employer. In Italy,
as in France, the firm is defined at the national level. However, whereas in Italy, a worker’s job can
be associated with a particular reporting unit, this is not possible for the United States and France.
Finally, in Belgium, as in France, only a “employer” can be identified, and associated both with
additional details on the firm as well as with the worker.
In summary, the Nordic data, in general, report statistics calculated at the both the firm and the plant
level in this book, whereas France, Belgium, Italy, the Swedish SAF data, and the United States
calculate statistics at the firm level. This aspect of the data needs to be taken into account when
comparing “firm” size statistics, turnover, and the variability of earnings within a “firm” or “plant.”
The difference between plant and firm is a critical distinction and is discussed in more detail in
many other locations in this book.

3
3.1

Longitudinal linking (Identifier issues)
Coding errors in person identifiers

The data used in this book are typically used for administrative purposes, and the widespread
perception is that administrative data are objective and comprehensive. However, that does not
ensure that they are perfect. One particular problem affecting the millions of person records in each
of the administrative databases is coding errors. And although coding errors can occur in every item
on the “wage record,” the variable analysts are most worried about is the person identifier.

3.1.1

When do coding errors occur

Coding errors occur for a variety of reasons. A survey of 53 state employment security agencies in
the United States over the 1996-1997 time period found that most errors are due to coding errors by
employers, but that when errors were attributable to state agencies, data entry was the culprit
(Bureau of Labor Statistics 1997b, pg. ii). The report noted that 38% of all records were entered by
key entry, while another 11% were read in by optical character readers. OCR and magnetic media
tend to be less prone to errors. Similar errors are known to be present in European data as well, but
the extent will vary considerably from one country to the next.
The types of errors differ by the source of the error. When a record is manually transcribed by an
employer onto a paper form, scanned, or entered by hand when entering the state agency’s data
warehouse, the most likely error is a random digit coding error for a single record in a worker’s job
history. Errors that occur persistently over time will typically be the result of recording a wrong or
mistyped person identifier in an employer’s data system, which is then repeatedly transmitted to the
state agency.
Check digits allow the verification of the validity of a person identifier without reference to any
external data, and generally prevent, or at least highlight the presence of coding errors, allowing for
easy correction at data entry. However, most person identifiers do not incorporate check digits. In
the data used in this book, only the Norwegian and Italian data are known to have checksums on the
person identifier.
One last reason why such errors persist, and are not corrected, is that none of the involved parties
has a strong incentive to actively search for and obtain more accurate records on an ongoing basis.
The primary focus of the data collection is typically cross-sectional. In the United States, the wage
records are collected in the course of the administration of payroll taxes and unemployment
insurance systems. Only the sum of wages by firm is used by the collecting agency at the time of
collection, ensuring that the firm identifier is generally considered very reliable (but see the next
section for exceptions to that statement). In Italy, the primary purpose of collecting the contribution
data is for the national pension system. In both cases, for the ultimate beneficiary, the worker,
longitudinal consistency only becomes relevant when filing an unemployment or pension benefit
claim, possibly years after the coding error was entered into the database. Absences in contributions
are corrected using workers’ copies of contribution reports, and at least in the U.S. are known not to
flow back into the actual wage record database. The Italian data typically does not have the coding
problem, in part because incentives may be properly aligned, in part because of the presence of a
check digit on the person identifier number (Revelli 1996).

3.1.2

What is the impact

Most flow variables (accessions, separations, length of tenure at a firm, etc.) are constructed by
associating a person entity – a human being – with a particular person identifier, and constructing
job histories based on that identifier. Continuity of employment for a given person is inferred from
the presence of two records at different points in time bearing the same person identifier. Coding
errors in the person identifiers will generate spurious job interruptions that affect all flow variables.
Systematic and random errors in the person identifier will generally bias upwards flow statistics, but
tenure will be biased downwards.
The necessity of making a valid longitudinal integration of information for the same individual
collected at two different points in time with incomplete linking information is not a new problem
in economic measurement. Indeed, probabilistic record linking applications have flourished as a
part of research programs that seek to improve such measures. For example, there is a large
literature discussing the difficulty of inferring the continuing employment status of an individual
between two reference dates using consecutive months of the CPS (Fienberg & Stasny 1983,
Abowd & Zellner 1985, Poterba and Sommers, 1985, and others). Flows into employment,
unemployment and nonparticipation are biased by incorrect longitudinal linkage for exactly the
same reason as the accession and separation statistics based on the UI wage records are potentially
biased.

3.1.3

Solutions

Methods exist that can avoid or correct for such coding errors. The national person identifiers in
some countries have a check digit, which allows the identification at data entry of whether or not
the person identifier was correctly entered. However, for many countries and administrative
systems, changing a pervasive identifier without a checksum to a more stable identifier system is
not a feasible alternative, or at least a very costly one, and certainly won’t work with historical data
files.
The practical solution to most coding error problems is automatic and manual editing procedures.
Most wage record data bases contain names, and inspection and matching of records based on
names is a reliable, though not perfect method of linking records into one consistent job or
employment history. Additional information, such as demographic information on the file with the
miscoded record and matching information on other files, may facilitate the matching exercise and
improve the match rate. The problem is the sheer number of records, which at least for person
identifiers makes regular manual editing impossible, and has only made automatic editing

procedures feasible in the last couple of years, at great computational cost. Often, the simplest
solution is to simply drop records that are identifiable as being miscoded. This is the case in
Finland, whereas most other countries continue to include such records.

3.1.4

Application: Imputation to correct for coding errors in France

In the French data, a different approach was taken to tackle the same problem (coding errors in the
person identifier NNI due to key punch error). As before, as a consequence of coding errors, some
job observations, identified by a NNI-SIREN (firm identifier) combination, appear only for a single
year in the data. Furthermore, this job is the only one ever registered for this particular NNI. Other
job histories will present a single one-period interruption. Consider now the case of a worker with
observations in, say, 1978 and 1980 in the same firm (SIREN) but no observation for 1979. If true,
this history would mean that the worker was employed until some date in 1978 (depending on the
number of days worked, December 31 most likely) and also employed after some date in 1980
(depending on the number of days worked, January 1 most likely) in this firm but not employed at
all during year 1979. This is very improbable. INSEE thus adopted the following solution:
Whenever an observation was missing in a given year while the same NNI-SIREN combination
exists for the preceding and the following year, an observation is created for the missing year with
the same NNI-SIREN combination. Earnings are computed as the geometric mean of the preceding
and following wages (in real terms). All other variables are taken at lagged values. For the entire
French data set, this procedure added 193,148 observations, or about 1.2% of all records.

3.1.5

Case study: The Sensitivity of Economic Statistics to Coding Errors in Personal
Identifiers in the USA (Abowd and Vilhuber, 2005)

Abowd and Vilhuber (2005) describe the method used by the Longitudinal Employer-Household
Dynamics (LEHD) Program at the U.S. Census Bureau to identify coding errors in the person
identifier (Social Security Number, SSN), and provide an analysis of the impact that correcting for
such errors has on statistics generated from the corrected and the uncorrected data. Their analysis
only covered one of the states that are used in the U.S. data chapter of this book, but are
generalizable.
First, job histories (the unique combination of an employer identifier SEIN and a person identifier
SSN) are constructed. It is posited that the most likely coding error (random transposition of
identifiers) results in (a) a single-period job history for some SSN-SEIN combination and (b) a job
history with a single-period interruption. Records are extracted from the wage record database that

fit one or the other of the job history profiles. A probabilistic matcher is then used to compare
names, the miscoded SSNs themselves, as well as earnings to identify matches.
The process verified over half a billion records. The number of records that are recoded is slightly
less than 10 percent of the total number of unique individuals appearing in the original data, and
only a little more than 0.5% of all wage records. Trials in the late 1980s using Unemployment
Insurance wage records found an average error rate of 7.8 percent, with significant variation across
states (Bureau of Labor Statistics 1997b). The authors estimate that the true error rate in their data is
higher, in part due to the conservative setup of the process. Over 800,000 job history interruptions
in the original data are eliminated, representing 0.9% of all jobs, but 11% of all interrupted jobs.
Despite the small number of records that are found to be miscoded, the impact on flow statistics can
be large. Accessions in the uncorrected data are overestimated by 2%, and recalls are biased
upwards by nearly 6%. Payroll for accessions and separations are biased upward by up to 7 percent.

3.2

Quality of firm links, measures undertaken and not undertaken to improve links.

The same mechanisms that generate coding errors in person-level data can work on employer data
as well. Whether mistyping a person or a firm identifier when transferring information from paper
to electronic format, the result is a break in the time series for the affected entity. However, several
factors combine to make this a problem both less pervasive and more difficult to correct for in firmlevel data.

3.2.1

Administrative vs. economic identifier changes: the concept of a ‘firm’ in
administrative data

People can and do change names, and possibly other theoretically permanent physical attributes, but
they always remain a single human entity. The numeric person identifier attributed to a person is
only changed in very rare and exceptional instances.
That same intertemporal uniqueness does not necessarily hold for firms. Tracking firms in data, and
in particular administrative data, thus poses additional challenges. Firms can be born, split, merge,
and disappear. Changes in ownership, of legal and organizational form, and changes in products and
services offered can all lead to legitimate and legal changes in administrative identifiers. The very
boundaries of what constitutes a single economic entity called a “firm” are often fluid.
For the purposes of the papers in this book, the fundamental focus is on firms as places of work for
workers, i.e., the firm as employer. As such, the fundamental economic activity that the authors

have attempted to isolate is the employment of a set of individuals which, taken together, constitute
the “firm”. Under that premise, the tenure of a worker should not be affected by purely
administrative changes of the employer identity. But should it be affected by a merger or the
transfer of a plant from one firm to another? The identification of an economic, rather than legal
successor to a firm becomes an important distinction.

3.2.2

Impact of failure to properly link firms

One of the focal statistics used in this book is the “average change in wage from workers who
change firms”. The failure to properly link firms that change administrative identifiers without an
underlying economic event can, under certain circumstances, bias that statistic. Consider an
economy with strongly hierarchical firms having few ports of entry and positive returns to tenure.
The literature describes various theories, and provides examples of firms, that have at least some
aspects of such a personnel policy (Baker, Gibbs, and Holmström, 1994; Lazear, 1995). By
definition, these ports of entry will be at the lower end of the firm-internal pay scale. A worker
entering this firm will typically do so at one of the ports of entry, and thus receive a wage that is
below the firm average. As a consequence, the average wage of all workers entering this firm will
most likely be below the firm-average wage.
Now consider a firm that changes legal form, thus changing its administrative ID in the system, and
for some reason, this is not captured in the administrative follow-up. No workers leave the firm, and
no workers join the firm. The average change in wage from workers changing firms calculated from
this particular subset will be equal to the firm-average wage, substantially higher than if firm
changes were measured accurately. If such occurrences are frequent enough, the entire statistic can
be biased upwards by a significant margin. For instance, Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan (1993b)
estimate that in Pennsylvania administrative data for the 1980s, such “bogus job changes” would
have been the primary source of all worker movements between employers within industries
(Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan, 1993b, pg. 39).
Other research would also be affected. An extensive literature shows that a large fraction of workers
that are part of a mass layoff have some difficulty re-entering the labor market, showing
significantly negative effects on the earnings history (Jacobson, Lalonde and Sullivan, 1993a) or
difficulties in finding a new job (Margolis 1999). An identifier change results necessarily in the
observation of a mass layoff, albeit not a real one. However, the workers of such an identifierinduced “mass layoff” do not suffer any earnings problems since in fact they are never laid off.
Measures of turnover – separation and accession rates – are also driven by the quality of the link,

with missing links biasing both measures upwards (Spletzer, 2000, Benedetto et al., forthcoming,
Vartiainen, 2004).

3.2.3

Methods of linking firms

To counter the linkage problem identified above, a variety of methods are used. All corrective
methods reduce the likage failure to varying degrees, but it matters who performs the corrective
measure – the researcher or the administrative. Since their motives differ, the goals achieved by
corrective measures will also vary.

3.2.3.1 Following up with firms
Administrations are interested in linking firms for reasons other than longitudinal consistency of
research data sets. In particular in the United States, payroll taxes are often experience rated, i.e.,
the tax rate increases as firms lay off large numbes of workers. Firms with a higher payroll tax rate
have an incentive to change identity, and become an apparently new entity not subject to the
predecessor’s higher tax rates. To prevent this form of tax evasion, administrations follow-up on
firms, and the US administrative data contain a field that identifies a possible legal or legally
obligated successor. In Italy, the Italian Institute for Social Security (INPS) distinguishes “insurance
records” (the basic entity on the firm-level file) from “firms”, identified by a single (firm) social
security number. The level of disaggregation, i.e., the number of insurance records that a firm
decides to have, is arbitrary, and at the discretion of the firm. But all insurance records can be
linked back to the same legal entity, identified by a social security number.
Thus, administrations typically have incentives to properly identify the firm, both at any point in
time and across time periods. Most administrative data sets on firms contain some information
about a firm’s legal predecessors and successors, and this can, if so desired, be used to link firms.
This mechanism is known to be used in the United States (Spletzer 2000). In other jurisdictions,
administrative follow-up may simply mean that no new identifier gets assigned if the firm or
establishment is economically the same (Vartiainen, 2004).
The method relies on accurate information on the firms involved being available, and (typically)
substantial expenses for clerical review. In particular in the United States, where the data are
administered by individual states, the success rate of such linkages will vary across states. It is
likely to work better in smaller states and for larger firms, where information about individual firms
is more easily obtained. It is known to be used by the Finnish and Italian data sources used in this
book.

3.2.3.2 Reverse-engineering code changes
In some cases, changes to the coding system have radically altered the identifying codes, resulting
in a discontinuity in the time series. One of the reasons this may arise is that the agency collecting
the data is not obligated to provide continuity, as in the case of the Finnish employer organization
(Vartiainen, 2004). Also, the purpose of collecting data may (again) be primarily cross-sectional,
with little benefit to the agency of maintaining longitudinal consistency. Finally, extraction and
transcription problems when accessing or retrieving historical data series may introduce errors to all
records of certain time periods.
When such coding changes occur, researchers do not always have access to the historical
documentation detailing the code changes, and need to reverse-engineer the coding changes. Many
of the methods described subsequently in this section (probabilistic matching, flow analysis) can be
used as intermediate tools, rather than actual corrective measures, to identify the way in which
coding conventions have changed. Vartiainen (2004) used flow measures to identify pairs of likely
“stayers,” workers who did not change employers despite a change in their employer’s
identification code. The resulting pairs of consecutive-year records for the same worker combined
with visual inspection allowed the researchers to correct algorithmically for the changes in the
establishment codes that had occurred in several years of the Finnish data (Vartiainen, 2004).

3.2.3.3 Using probabilistic matching again
Statistical agencies and researchers also employ probabilistic name matching techniques to link
firms. The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics attributes about one third of the quarter-to-quarter
matches that are not directly linked through firm identifiers to each of (a) the use of the
administrative follow-up described in the preceding paragraph, (b) probabilistic matching (c)
clerical review of otherwise unmatched records (Pivetz, Searson, and Spletzer, 2001; Clayton and
Spletzer, 2004). Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh (1996), and Abowd, Corbel, and Kramarz (1999),
among others, have also used probabilistic name matching in research using US and French data,
respectively. In this book, the French data incorporates knowledge gained from the previous
probabilistic name matching exercise.

3.2.3.4 Correcting by sample selection
The fundamental problem with not correcting for administrative ID changes remains pollution of
statistics based on changes in employers. In order not to misclassify the disappearance of
administrative numbers as plant closings, most researchers in this book only include plants that
existed in two consecutive years when studying changes. Thus, the calculated exit rates will not

include plant closings, but will also not include administrative ID changes misclassified as plant
closings. To the extent that misclassified plant closings bias the statistics upwards, the usual bias
described earlier is eliminated. However, to the extent that the earnings changes of workers that are
part of true plant closings differ from workers separating for other reasons, a new bias is introduced.

3.2.3.5 Using worker flows to correct for firm identifier changes
Most of the merged employer-employee data used in all these papers allow for a further solution to
the problem. If workers can be followed from one employer to the next, then worker flows can be
used to identify firms that are economically identical despite changing administrative identifiers. At
the extreme, if all workers of firm A simultaneously “separate”, to then be collectively hired by firm
B, where they constitute the totality of employment, then firms A and B are very likely to be the
same firm having changed administrative identifiers. More generally, in order for a firm B to be the
economic successor of firm A, some fraction f(A) of workers leaving firm A must be linkable to
firm B, and possibly some fraction f(B) of workers at firm B must have come from firm A. How to
set the cutoff levels f(A) and f(B) is the subject of academic discussion, and no clear consensus
arises.
This solution helps address more clearly the problem of economic successor versus legal successor,
mentioned above, but conditional on the cutoff levels chosen. Among the data sets used in this
book, Denmark, Italy, Finland, and the United States are known to apply such mechanisms. The
cases of Finland, Italy and the United States are described in more detail below, but Table 2
describes how each of these countries handles linking firms based on the cutoff levels just
described.
[Table 2 about here]
Several researchers have also linked firms longitudinally into time-coherent “hiring entities.”
Because the technique is richer than the simple longitudinal linking which will be described here, it
can also be used to identify changes in firm relationships such as mergers, acquisitions, and
outsourcing. Using worker flows to identify predecessor-successor links has been used in Italian
data (Revelli 1996, Contini 2002), French data, Swedish data, Finnish data (Vartiainen 2004) and
US data (Benedetto et al. forthcoming). We will discuss some of these approaches and their results
in the next sections.

3.2.4

Application: Using worker flows to link firms

Among the data sets presented in this book, the Danish, Finnish, and Italian data have used worker
flows to link firms. In this section, we describe results for these three data sets, and summarize the
detailed analysis performed by Benedetto et al (forthcoming). We point out that the US data set
used in this book pre-dates the implementation of the worker flow method at the U.S. Census
Bureau.

3.2.4.1 The Italian case
The Italian WHIP data, which is a 1 in 90 extract of the underlying universe, uses weighting and a
cutoff in absolute numbers to define flow-based links. The fundamental hypothesis is that it is
unlikely to observe large numbers of workers simultaneously and within a short period of time (one
month) moving between two different firms. Since each record in the WHIP worker file represents
90 workers, observing two workers move between firms in the WHIP extract is equivalent to the
movement of approximately 180 workers. Such an event is defined a link, and all movements in
preceding and succeeding months between the firms linked in this way are classified as spurious
movements. About 3.4% of all job spells have been corrected according to the spurious movements
identifier.

3.2.4.2 Case study: Firm identifier changes in the USA and the concept of the firm (Benedetto,
Haltiwanger, Lane, and McKinney, forthcoming)
This section draws on Benedetto, Haltiwanger, Lane, and McKinney (forthcoming, henceforth
BHLM). For 18 states, some of which are also used in the U.S. chapter of this book, BHLM track
all movements between firms with more than 5 employees at the time of the movement, between
1992 and 2001. About 2.5 billion such movements are observed. Four conditions are defined. Two
characterize the life-cycle of predecessor and successor, two characterize the movements between
predecessors and successors. The link quality is defined on how many of these conditions are met.
A predecessor-based link is of the highest rank if (1) the predecessor exits within two quarters of
the movement that defines the link and (2) 80% of the predecessor’s pre-link employees move to
the successor. Not meeting one or the other condition reduces the quality rank attributed to the link.
Equivalent conditions characterize the successor link. BHLM use these link variables to identify
successor-predecessor relationships related to a change in administrative ID, merger-acquisition
activity, and the presence of outsourcing. The relation type of relevance to the analyses presented in
this book is the “ID change” relation, depends only on the second condition for both predecessor
and successor based links. Thus, an ID change occurs when at least 80% of a predecessor’s

employees move to a successor, where they constitute at least 80% of the successor’s employees
(BHLM, Table 2).
Events characterized as “ID changes” account for about 12% of all events that meet at least one of
the conditions (BHLM, Table 3). More importantly, movements of this type account for 1-2% of all
accessions in the data. It can be speculated that this symmetrically holds for separations as well.
BHLM also find significant number of smaller clusters moving between firms. Such movements
can be due to small portions, possibly individual establishments, being transferred between firms, or
for movements of workers across divisions of a firm that appears under multiple identifiers.
Additional linkage to the Census Business Register, which allows the identification of more
complex firm relationships, indicates that about a fifth of all ID changes occur within the same firm.
Using worker movements to identify predecessor-successor relationships of firms is not the only
way to establish such links. BHLM compare the worker flow-based links with information present
on the ES202 data establishing such links from administrative information. Among “ID changes”,
more than half of all link events prior to 1998, and approximately half of link events after 1998 are
not identified in the administratively defined links. Independent research by other researchers at the
U.S. Census Bureau has shown that some of the links defined administratively do not have a
corresponding flow.
Overall, the research reported in BHLM highlights that using flow-based links as well as
administrative information is an important element in accurately defining flows in US data. In the
absence of such controls, the bias in separation rates can be as high as 2.5% in state-level
aggregates.

3.2.4.3 Application: Firm identifier changes in Finland, flow-based identifiers, and worker
separation rates (Vartiainen, 2004)
Vartiainen (2004) describes the impact of using flow-based identifier correction on the computation
of worker separation rates from firms and establishments in Finish data. In a first step, flow-analysis
was used to help in reverse-engineering identifier code changes (see Section 3.2.4). One particularly
problematic problem was the change in the coding systems between 1989 and 1990. Although about
two-thirds of all firms as identified by their 1990 identifier have a clear flow of workers from a
single firm as identified by the 1989 firm identifier, and could thus be readily classified as being the
same firm, enough problematic firms, both with multiple predecessors and multiple successors,
remain. These problematic firms are likely true mergers or firm splits commingled with the

identifier change. As a result, the Finish authors in this book decided not to report exit rates for
1989-1990, since such data would have been too unreliable.
For the remainder of the Finish employer organization data, Vartiainen analyzes the impact of two
different firm and establishment identification strategies on separation rates. The administrative
identify of a firm is defined as a unique identifier in the data. In the sample of worker records, a
worker is recorded as having separated from a firm in year Y, and thus contributing to the separation
rate, if the code of his or her employer in year Y+1 is different than the employer code in year Y, or
if the worker no longer appears in the data in the following year. Yearly separation rates based on
this criterion are tabulated in Column (1) of Table 3, adapted from Vartiainen (2004).
[ Table 3 about here ]
The flow-based identity of a firm is established by considering the movements of groups of
workers. A link between two firms is established if at least 80% of ABC’s worker in Y re-appear at
a single firm DEF in year Y+1, and constitute 80% of DEF’s employment in year Y+1. Note that
DEF might or might not be called ABC – the flow criterion ignores the actual administrative
identifier code. A worker I at firm ABC is considered a stayer if he then also is observed working
for DEF in year Y+1. All other workers are considered to have separated. Separation rates using
only the flow-based criterion are tabulated in Column (2) of Table 3.
The difference between the two columns varies between 1 and 10 percentage points. For the bulk of
separating workers, whether administrative or economic entities are tracked is irrelevant. However,
for a significant fraction of workers, it does matter. The reason for the difference is broken out in
Columns (3) and (4). Column (3) tabulates the portion of Column (2) that is due to a worker being
qualified as a stayer by the flow criterion, but as a separating worker by the administrative criterion.
A worker is observed changing identifiers between two years, but moves with over 80% of his old
and new colleagues to the new identifier. This may be a pure administrative code change, or it could
be a large spin-off or de-merger. It turns out that only a small portion of the separation rate is due to
such movements.
Column (4) considers the portion of the separation rate in Column (2) that is due to workers being
classified as stayers by the administrative criterion, but exiters by the flow criterion. Such a
situation may arise when a large layoff, affecting over 20% of a firm’s workforce, occurs. By the
flow criterion, no successor firm exists, since no group, including the surviving workforce, qualifies
for the double-80% criterion. Thus, by the flow criterion, such a firm died. The successor or
survivor by the administrative criterion is a new firm by the flow criterion, and all workers, whether

part of the layoff or part of the surviving workforce, are classified as separators. This situation
accounts for almost the entire difference between Columns (1) and (2).
Clearly, the situation captured by Column (4) is not necessarily the desired outcome, since most
analysts would consider the administratively surviving firm to be legitimately in continuous
existence. Column (5) thus adopts the following strategy. A firm is in continuous existence if a
continuous administrative identifier exists (administrative criterion). If a firm death occurs by the
administrative criterion, but a successor entity exists by the flow criterion, then the firm is still in
continuous existence. Only if no administrative and no flow successor can be found does a firm
cease to exist. A worker is only counted as a exiter if leaving a firm for an administrative entity that
is not a successor either by the administrative or by the flow criterion. In essence, Column (5) is
obtained by combining Columns (1) and (3). Since the Finnish data seems to track administrative
successors quite well by maintaining a single identifier throughout time, the difference between a
purely administratively based “firm death criterion” and one moderated by worker flows is
insignificant. One can conclude that in the Finnish data, the administrative codes seem to track the
economic entity quite accurately.

3.3

Crossing borders and boundaries: The concept of a firm again

In most of the data sets used here, the firm and person identifiers are national identity numbers. This
defines a particular concept of a firm. Both finer and broader definitions of a “firm” typically exist,
but are invisible in this data. For instance, most data sets do not allow the connection of firms in a
parent company – subsidiary relationship.
Exceptions, however, appear even here. The Swedish SAF data has person and firm identifiers that
are internal to each of the two distinct data sets (blue and white-collar) it encompasses. Thus, a
worker can be followed within the sample of firms reporting data for blue-collar workers even when
they switch firms. But a worker switching from a blue-collar occupation to a white-collar
occupation within the same firm will appear as an exit from the blue-collar sample and an accession
to the white-collar sample. Neither the firm nor the worker can be linked between the blue and
white-collar samples.
In the US data, firms are represented by a state-specific account number within the state
unemployment insurance system. Thus, although workers can be traced across state lines, firms
cannot be linked across states using the data from the unemployment insurance system (it is feasible
to do this using Census-internal data links). A worker transferring from one unit in state A to
another unit owned by the same “company” in a different state will be identified as a separation.

Again, as before, the interpretation of certain statistics depends on the granularity of the entity
defnition, i.e., whether a firm or an establishment is the basic unit of accounting on the employer
side. Intra-firm transfers between establishments show up in countries that are able to pinpoint
employment to an establishment, but are hidden in data that can only identify worker movements at
the firm level. Thus, turnover statistics – separation and accession rates – will appear higher in
establishment data than in firm-level data.

4

Missing data and related issues

Data captured by most data sources goes back up to three decades. Inevitably, computer systems are
no longer the same today as they were at the start of the data collection period. The same applies to
the legal environment in which data is collected.
One manifestation of the changing environment is that in many cases, certain portions of the data
are no longer available today for reasons outside of the control even of the data collectors. Norway,
France, and others all had to face this problem, and there are as many solutions as there are
problems.

4.1.1

Application: Tackling unavailable data in France

The French DADS (Déclaration Annuelles de Données Sociales) was not collected in some years
surrounding the 1982 and 1990 Censuses. As a result, data for 1981, 1983, and 1990 were missing.
Data were imputed in the same way as in the case of the person identifier miscoding described in
Section 3.1.4, thus adding 759,017 observations to the data, equivalent to approximately 4.7% of all
records.

4.1.2

Application: Tackling unavailable data in Norway

In the Norwegian NHO data, the year 1987 is no longer available. However, all years of the NHO
data contain lagged values, and so most of the 1987 data can be reconstructed from 1988 data. The
only records that cannot be reconstructed are those for workers who left the data in 1987, and for
which no lagged values are available

4.2
4.2.1

Censoring issues
Earnings

For the most part, the data used in this book are collected not to produce data for researchers, but to
administer a government program, to collect payroll taxes or unemployment insurance contributions

from firms, or to compute income taxes for workers. In particular the insurance contributions often
have a top-code, beyond which contributions are no longer computed. The data then only record
that top-code value, rather than the true income or wage earned by that worker.

4.2.2

Application: Correcting for right-censored earnings in German data

In the German IAB data, gross monthly earnings are censored at a time-varying threshold defined
by the limitation of payments into the social security system. The following procedure was used to
circumvent the censoring problem. A Mincerian earnings equation is estimated, including sector
and occupation dummies. From the parameters of this regression, predicted earnings are computed
and replace the top-coded values. Across time, between ten and fifteen percent of all observations
are imputed, but within some more narrowly defined demographic groups, this percentage increases
dramatically. Among workers with a university degree, about 50% of all observations are found to
be censored.

4.2.3

Tenure

Although the most frequent censoring issues affect earnings, other variables can be incompletely
recorded as well. In particular the tenure variable suffers from such problems. In most data sets,
tenure is computed as the number of years an individual appears in the data, starting at the earliest
date. However, if an individual is present in the first year of the data, his or her actual start date is
unknown, and thus tenure is censored at a point that varies by individual.

4.2.4

Application: Correcting for left-censored tenure in French data

Individuals for whom the first year of observation was in 1976, the start of the data set, and who
had worked 360 days in that year, the actual start date is unknown. Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis
(1999, AKM hereafter) estimated the expected length of the in-progress employment spell by
regression analysis using a supplementary survey, the 1978 Enquête sur la Structure des Salaires
(ESS, Salary Structure Survey). In this survey, respondent establishments provided information on
seniority, occupation, date of birth, industry, and work location for a scientific sample of their
employees. Separate regressions were used for men and women. The coefficients were then used to
predict seniority for the in-progress spells in 1976 with 360 days worked.

5

Conclusion

In this chapter, we have taken a look at the data underlying the other chapters in this book, with an
eye for the adjustments that needed to be made in order to make the data both usable and

comparable. Each administrative data set, in each state, country, or other organization, has its
particularities, including differences in coverage, basic definitions of entities, and data quality.
These differences can have a significant impact on the comparability of results obtained from such
data. Precisely because the data collection is administrative in nature, and beyond the control of
most researchers, any attempt to make the actual data collection comparable across countries is
bound to fail. An exception to this rule is the collection of administrative surveys coordinated by
Eurostat (“Structure of Earnings Survey”), the Belgian portion of which was used in the chapter by
Thierry Lallemand, Robert Plasman and François Rycx. Such specially administered surveys are
costly to produce and coordinate. To wit, the “Structure of Earnings Survey,” while providing
comprehensive cross-sectional coverage, is administered only every four years, and releases can
take up to 3 years to become available to the public.
Researchers accessing the longer time series of conventional administrative data thus need to take
extra steps in order to make the data meaningful for analysis, and comparable to the data used by
others. For the data used in this book, this chapter has outlined their methods, and provided, where
available, the results of comparing the data used in this book to data produced using alternate
scenarios and processing methods. The reader of this chapter should take away a better appreciation
of the methods needed to make the data comparable across so many countries, and the reassurance
that the data can be combined and compared in meaningful ways because of the application and use
of these methods.

6

Bibliography

Abowd, John M. and Arnold Zellner (1985) “Estimating Gross Labor Force Flows,” Journal of
Business and Economics Statistics, 3, pp. 254-283.
Abowd, John M. and Corbel, Patrick and Kramarz, Francis (1999) “The Entry and Exit of Workers
and the Growth of Employment: An Analysis of French Establishments”, Review of Economics and
Statistics, 81(2) pp. 170-87.
Abowd, John and Francis Kramarz (1999) ”The Analysis of Labor Markets Using Matched
Employer-Employee Data”, in: Orley Ashenfelter and David Card (eds), Handbook of labor
economics, Vol. 3, North-Holland, Amsterdam, New York, chapter 40, pp. 2629-2710
Abowd, John M. and Lars Vilhuber (2005) ”The Sensitivity of Economic Statistics to Coding
Errors in Personal Identifiers,” Journal of Business and Economics Statistics.

Anderson, Patricia and Meyer, Bruce (2000), “The Effects of the Unemployment Insurance Payroll
Tax on Wages, Employment, Claims and Denials”, Journal of Public Economics, v78, n1-2
(October 2000): 81-106
Baker, George and Michael Gibbs and Bengt Holmstrom (1994) “The Internal Economics of the
Firm: Evidence from Personnel Data,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(4), pp. 881-919
Bender, Stefan, and Christian Dustmann, David Margolis and Costas Meghir (2002), “Worker
Displacement in France and Germany,” in Peter Kuhn and Randal Eberts (eds.), Losing Work,
Moving On: International Comparisons of Worker Displacement, Upjohn Institute, Kalamazoo, MI.
Benedetto, Gary and John Haltiwanger and Julia Lane and Kevin McKinney (forthcoming), “Using
Worker Flows in the Analysis of the Firm,”. Journal of Business and Economics Statistics.
Bureau of Labor Statistics (1997), “Quality Improvement Project: Unemployment Insurance Wage
Records”, U.S. Department of Labor, report.
Clayton and Spletzer (2004), Presentation made at the NBER Summer Institute.
Contini, Bruno (2002) (Edited by) Labour mobility and wage dynamics in Italy, Rosenberg and
Sellier, Torino
Contini, Bruno and Claudia Villosio (2003) ” Worker mobility, job displacement and wage
dynamics: Italy 1985-91”, LABORatorio Revelli Working Paper, n. 24
Davis, Steven J. and John C. Haltiwanger and Scott Schuh (1996) Job creation and destruction,
MIT Press,Cambridge, MA.
Fienberg, Stephen E. and Stasny, Elizabeth A. (1983) “Estimating monthly gross flows in labour
force participation”, Survey Methodology, 9, pp. 77-102.
Jacobson, Louis S. and Robert J. LaLonde and Daniel G. Sullivan (1993a) “Earnings Losses of
Displaced Workers,” American Economic Review 83(4), pp. 685-709.
Jacobson, Louis S. and Robert J. LaLonde and Daniel G. Sullivan (1993b) The Costs of Worker
Dislocation, W.E. Upjohn Institute, .
Lazear, Edward P. (1995) Personnel Economics, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Leombruni, Roberto and Roberto Quaranta (2002), “The Unemployment Route to Versatility”,
LABORatorio Revelli Working Paper, n. 16
Neal, Derek (1995), “Industry-Specific Human Capital: Evidence from Displaced Workers,”
Journal of Labor Economics, 13 (4), pp. 653-77.
Parent, Daniel (2000), “Industry-Specific Capital and the Wage Profile: Evidence from the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics”, Journal of Labor
Economics 18(2), pp. 306-23
Pivetz, Timothy R. and Searson, Michael A. and Spletzer, James R. (2001) “Measuring job and
establishment flows with BLS longitudinal microdata,” Monthly Labor Review 124(4), pp. 13-20
Poterba, James M.

and Lawrence H. Summers (1986) “Reporting Errors and Labor Market

Dynamics,” Econometrica 54(6), pp. 1319-1338.
Revelli R. (1996), "Statistics on Job Creation: Issues in the Use of Administrative Data", in OECD
Job Creation and Loss. Analysis, Policy, and Data Development, OECD, Paris
Spletzer, James R. (2000) “The Contribution Of Establishment Births And Deaths To Employment
Growth,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 18, pp. 113-26.
Stevens, David (2002) “Employment that is not covered by state unemployment” LEHD Technical
Paper No. TP-2002-16.
Vartiainen, Juhana (2004) “Measuring interfirm mobility with an administrative data set”, mimeo,
November 2004.

Country
USA (LEHD)
Denmark (CCP)
France (DADS)
Germany (IAB
Panel)
Sweden (SAF)

Table 1: Sampling schemes
Sampling scheme
Lowest employer
aggregate a worker can
be associated with
firm and worker universe,
Firm
selected states
firm and worker universe
Plant
worker sample
Employer
firm sample
Plant
firm sample

Finland
Norway (NHO)
Italy (WHIP)

firm sample
firm sample
worker sample

Belgium
Sweden (RAMS)

firm sample (cross-section)
firm and worker universe

white- or blue-collar
plant
Plant
Plant
insurance record/
aggregated to firm
firm
Plant

Table 2: Worker flow cutoff for firm linkage
Country
Denmark (CCP)
Finland
USA (LEHD)
Italy (WHIP)
France (DADS)
Germany (IAB
Panel)
Sweden (SAF)
Norway (NHO)
Belgium
Sweden (RAMS)

Predecessor cutoff level

Successor cutoff level

50%
75%
80%
approximately 100 workers
n.a.
n.a.

any
any
80%
any
n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

Table 3: Administrative vs flow-based firm linkage
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
of which:
Administrative
Administrative
Pure Flow- stayers by
Year
criterion + flow
exiter
by
flow,
criterion
based
flow, exiter by
criterion
stayer by code
code
1980
16%
17%
-0.01%
1.46%
16%
1981
15%
17%
0.00%
1.94%
15%
1982
16%
19%
0.00%
2.88%
16%
1983
17%
21%
0.00%
3.82%
17%
1984
18%
20%
-0.01%
2.37%
18%
1985
19%
25%
0.00%
6.37%
19%
1986
23%
33%
-0.01%
9.77%
23%
1987
22%
29%
0.00%
6.44%
22%
1988
24%
32%
-0.56%
8.29%
24%
1989
NA
NA
1990
26%
29%
-0.26%
3.07%
26%
1991
23%
26%
-0.38%
3.64%
23%
1992
33%
37%
-0.38%
4.20%
33%
1993
21%
25%
-0.13%
4.52%
21%
1994
22%
26%
-1.82%
5.51%
22%
1995
21%
23%
-0.06%
1.81%
21%
1996
16%
17%
-0.04%
1.55%
16%
1997
15%
15%
-0.34%
0.82%
15%
1998
19%
20%
-0.60%
1.83%
19%
1999
18%
19%
-1.26%
2.31%
18%
2000
24%
27%
-0.22%
3.74%
24%
2001
22%
24%
-0.04%
2.08%
22%
Excerpted from Vartiainen (2004)

