NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF TUITION REIMBURSEMENT ON TURNOVER:
A CASE STUDY ANALYSIS
Colleen N. Flaherty
Working Paper 12975
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12975

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2007

This paper was presented at the Conference on the Analysis of Firms and Employees (CAFE) held
Septermber 29-30, 2006 in Nurenberg, Germany. I would like to gratefully acknowledge the financial
support provided by the Institute for Employment Research (IAB), the Data Access Center (FDX-BA/IAB),
The Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (German Research Foundation), their Research Network
"Flexibility in Heterogenous Labour Markets", the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and the National Science
Foundation. I would like to the conference participants for their comments and suggestions, particularly
David Neumark, Edward Lazear, and Kathryn Shaw. The Hawley-Shoven Fellowship Fund, through
a grant to Stanford Institute of Economic Policy Research, also supported this research. In addition
to thanking my advisors and members of the labor reading group at Stanford University for comments
and feedback, I would also like to thank Harley Frazis, Merrisa Piazza, Maury Gittleman and James
Spletzer of the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) for granting me access to the SEPT95 dataset
through the BLS Student Volunteer Program. The views presented in this paper are mine alone and
do not reflect those of the aforementioned individuals or organizations. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2007 by Colleen N. Flaherty. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Effect of Tuition Reimbursement on Turnover: A Case Study Analysis
Colleen N. Flaherty
NBER Working Paper No. 12975
March 2007
JEL No. J24
ABSTRACT
Tuition reimbursement programs provide financial assistance for direct costs of education and are
a type of general skills training program commonly offered by employers in the United States. Standard
human capital theory argues that investment in firm-specific skills reduces turnover, while investment
in general skills training could result in increased turnover. However, firms cite increased retention
as a motivation for offering tuition reimbursement programs. This rationale for offering these programs
challenges the predictions of the standard human capital model. This paper tests empirically whether
participation in tuition reimbursement programs increases employee retention using data from a non-profit
institution. To document the prevalence of tuition reimbursement programs, the case study analysis
is supplemented with findings from the Survey of Employer-Provided Training, 1995 (SEPT95). This
paper finds that participation in tuition reimbursement programs reduces employee turnover.
Colleen N. Flaherty
P.O. Box 13645
Stanford, CA 94309
cflare@stanford.edu

1.0

Introduction
Becker’s (1964) seminal work on investment in human capital makes a fundamental

distinction between general and firm-specific skills, which has implications for investment and
employee turnover. Firm-specific human capital is defined as having value only to the current
employment relationship, while general human capital is valuable to both current and potential
employers. Becker’s theory predicts that employees will bear the full cost of general skills
training – either by paying for training directly or by accepting lower wages during training
periods – because employers face the threat of not capturing the return on their investment due to
“poaching” of trained employees by other employers. In a competitive labor market, workers
have the incentive to invest efficiently in general human capital because they receive a wage
equal to the value of their marginal product. In the case of investment in firm-specific human
capital, employers and employees share the costs. Neither party is willing to bear the full amount
due to the risk of opportunistic behavior by the other. The employer and the employee share the
surplus, or rents, from the investment; the relative bargaining power of the two parties
determines how these rents are allocated.
This standard theory on investment in human capital has implications for turnover.
Investment in firm-specific human capital reduces turnover because rents accrue only if the
employment relationship is maintained. However, this result does not hold for investments in
general human capital because these skills are transferable across employers. According to
Becker’s theory, offering employees general skills training would increase turnover.
Despite the predictions of this theory, recent empirical studies show that firms provide
general training to their workers and argue that firms bear part of the cost.2 Tuition
reimbursement programs are an example of general skills training provided by firms. Employers
reimburse employees for direct costs of coursework taken at accredited academic institutions.
Because instruction and degree accreditation occur at third-party institutions, skills acquired are
transferable – as well as observable – to many potential employers. Hence, tuition
reimbursement programs closely resemble general skills training as described by Becker.

2

These include, but are not limited to Loewenstein and Spletzer (1999a, 1999b), Acemoglu and Pischke (1998,
1999), Autor (2001), and Cappelli (2004).

2

A primary reason firms give for offering these programs is to reduce turnover, which is
an apparent challenge to standard human capital theory.3 This paper examines empirically
whether employees who participate in tuition reimbursement have higher retention rates using a
case study analysis of workers at a non-profit institution. Results from the case study indicate
that participation reduces employee turnover. Hence, the firm’s motivation for offering this
program is supported by this analysis: general skills training increases retention.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 documents the prevalence
of tuition reimbursement programs using the Survey of Employer-Provided Training, 1995
(SEPT95) and describes the typical characteristics of these programs. Section 3 reviews previous
studies of tuition reimbursement, while the case study analysis is presented in Section 4.
Conclusions and areas for future research are given in Section 5.
2.0

Background on Tuition Reimbursement Programs

2.1

Program Prevalence
Employer-provided tuition reimbursement programs are widespread and constitute a

nontrivial part of non-wage compensation. One of the few datasets that collects information on
tuition reimbursement programs is SEPT95. This survey collects information on data on
employer-provided training practices for a cross section of establishments. The survey was
conducted by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), part of the U.S. Department of Labor, from
May to August of 1995 with the purpose of collecting nationally representative data (Bureau of
Labor Statistics 2006a). The sample represents private, non-agriculture establishments
employing 50 or more. The amount spent on these programs is substantial: these establishments
spent $2.8 billion in 1994 on tuition reimbursement.4 In addition, the trade magazine Workforce
Management estimates that companies paid $10 billion toward tuition reimbursements in 2003.5
Hence, expenditures on tuition reimbursement programs represent a significant source of
investment in general skills of employees and appear to be on the rise.
3

Increased retention is a response given by human resource professionals in interviews with the author. Cappelli
(2004) and Corporate Leadership Council (2002) report the same finding.
4
The confidence interval for this estimate is $2.6 to $3.0 billion
5
Workforce Management, May 1, 2004. Copyright 2004 Crain Communications Inc.

3

A substantial fraction of firms offer tuition reimbursement. Results from SEPT95 show
that 61 percent of establishments employing 50 or more workers offer tuition reimbursement
programs. Using the 1994 National Employer Survey of Educational Quality in the Workforce
(NES-EQW), Lynch and Black (1998) report that 47 percent of firms employing 20 or more
employees offer tuition reimbursement programs. The estimates from SEPT95 and 1994 NESEQW are comparable because larger establishments are more likely to offer a tuition
reimbursement program (Frazis et al. 1998). Examining the access of workers to this program,
over three-quarters of the employees that work in these establishments are offered tuition
reimbursement by their employer. Hence, these general training programs are widespread and yet
relatively unexamined in the academic literature.
Using SEPT95 allows for a comparison of establishment characteristics across those with
and without a tuition reimbursement program. Seventy-five percent of respondents in SEPT95
offer a tuition reimbursement program, but 14 percent of these firms had zero expenditures on
reimbursements in 1994. Unfortunately, SEPT95 does not contain information on the specifics of
these tuition reimbursement programs so these data cannot be used to evaluate how plan
characteristics affect participation or retention rates. However, expenditures of $0 for 1994 imply
a participation rate of zero for the entire year. To be considered as having a tuition
reimbursement program in this analysis, firms must indicate that they both have a program and
have positive expenditures in 1994. Using this requirement, 64 percent of establishments have an
operational tuition reimbursement program.
Table 1 shows mean characteristics of responding establishments by whether they offer
tuition reimbursement. Establishments with a tuition reimbursement program, on average, offer
more benefits, have higher wages, have lower separation rates, and employ more workers than
firms without a program.6 Table 2 shows how provision of tuition reimbursement programs
varies by industry. Industries that are more production-intensive, such as mining and
manufacturing, are more likely to offer this program. The financial, insurance, and real estate
industry also has a high provision rate, which probably reflects the certifications and licensing
required of employees in this industry. Establishments in retail have the lowest provision rate:
only one-quarter of retail establishments offer tuition reimbursement. Table 3 shows that the
6

Separation rate = (current employment + hires – previous employment)/(.5*(current employment + previous
employment), where previous employment is the number of employees on staff three months prior to survey.

4

provision of tuition reimbursement across the U.S. is relatively uniform; establishments in New
England and the Atlantic have slightly higher provision percentages.
Whether tuition reimbursement is provided in conjunction with other training programs
can be examined empirically. If tuition reimbursement programs are offered as a complement to
other training programs, rather than as a substitute, then there is likely an interaction between
firm-specific and general skills training. Table 1 shows that establishments with tuition
reimbursement programs are both more likely to hire trainers from outside the firm and to
employ in-house trainers.7 In addition to this finding, the degree of firm-specificity is arguable
higher in production-intensive industries. These results regarding the determinants of providing
tuition reimbursement are consistent with tuition reimbursement programs being used to
complement investments in firm-specific human capital, thereby increasing worker productivity
at the current firm. If tuition reimbursement increases firm-specific skills, making her more
valuable at the current firm relative to outside employers, then participation would increase
retention – supporting the firm’s motivation for providing these programs. This paper examines
the effect of participation in tuition reimbursement on the employee’s separation propensity.
2.2

Program Characteristics
Tuition reimbursement programs typically consist of three components: 1) a maximum

reimbursement amount; 2) an eligibility requirement; and 3) a reimbursement policy based on
academic performance. The first characteristic is affected by the tax-advantage status of these
programs. Reimbursements from employer-provided programs are exempt from income taxation
under Section 127 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code.8 The maximum income exclusion for a
single calendar year is $5,250, and reimbursements under this level are exempt from federal
income tax, payroll tax, and state income tax. A 2002 survey by Eduventures of human resource
professionals and managers at over 500 firms finds that 70 percent of firms offering a tuition
reimbursement program cap annual reimbursement, and over half of these firms (57 percent)
7

Firms are classified as hiring an outside trainer if they had positive expenditures for this training category in 1994;
similarly for expenditures on in-house trainers (fulltime or part-time).
8
Section 127 of the Internal Revenue Code outlines the tax-advantaged status of educational assistance plans
provided by employers: “Gross income of an employee does not include amounts paid or expenses incurred by the
employer for educational assistance to the employee if the assistance is furnished pursuant to a [educational
assistance] program” (26 U.S.C.§ 127).

5

have maximums that exceed $4,000 (Eduventures 2003).9 Table 4 shows the distribution of
reimbursement maximums from the Eduventures survey. The majority of firms impose a cap
below or equal to the maximum annual tax exclusion of $5,250, but a substantial fraction of
firms have reimbursement maximums that exceed the tax exempt limit or have no maximum
reimbursement amount. Of those imposing a cap, the most common maximum is within the
$4,000 to $5,250 range, reflecting the influence of the tax exclusion.
Most firms in the Eduventures survey allow employees to become eligible for the
program after six months of service; rarely do eligibility requirements exceed one year. Twenty
percent of firms impose service requirements after participation. Service requirements after
participation are more common in plans that have unlimited tuition reimbursement. The 2002
survey by Eduventures also reports that over 90 percent of programs have a minimum grade
standard for reimbursement, typically set at a “C” or better. Many companies tie grades directly
to reimbursement percentages, making the cost of participation higher for workers who receive
lower grades. The tuition reimbursement program analyzed in the case study has an eligibility
requirement of one year of service and does not have a service requirement after participation.
The maximum reimbursement amount is $5,250 for a single year and the program only
reimburses costs of tuition for participants obtaining a “C” grade or better. Hence, the case study
program is typical in its reimbursement amount and requirements, making it a good candidate for
case study analysis.
In addition to the above characteristics, the firm must follow guidelines set by the U.S.
Internal Revenue Code for tuition reimbursements to qualify for the aforementioned tax
exclusion. A firm must have a written plan for the exclusive benefit of providing employees with
educational assistance, the program must meet non-discrimination clauses, and employees cannot
be offered a choice between educational assistance and other forms of compensation for
reimbursements to qualify for the tax exclusion. Before 1978, all employer-provided educational
expenses fell under Section 162 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code. Section 162, enacted in
1954, excludes employer-provided educational assistance from taxation as long as the
coursework is “job-related”. Over time, the job-related requirement became narrowly interpreted
9

The survey was sponsored by Cenquest, a provider of managed education solutions, which helps companies create
and manage tuition assistance programs (www.cenquest.com). Eduventures, who conducted the survey, is an
independent research and advisory firm of corporate, post-secondary, and pre-K-12 learning markets
(www.eduventures.com).

6

due to court case rulings, thus limiting the educational opportunities of employees in low-level
positions relative to employees in higher-level positions who typically have broad job
descriptions. The legislative intent of the tax exclusion in Section 127 was to provide educational
opportunities at the workplace for lower-level employees – those employees who could not take
advantage of educational assistance for job-related coursework because they were limited by
narrow job descriptions. Not only are tuition reimbursement program interesting to study from a
labor economics perspective because they clearly meet Becker’s definition of investment in
general skills, the tax-advantaged status of these programs makes them relevant to matters of
public policy.
3.0

Literature on Tuition Reimbursement Programs
Despite the prevalence of tuition reimbursement programs, few academic studies have

looked explicitly at these programs. The primary reasons given by firms as to why they offer
tuition reimbursement programs are: recruitment and retention. The first reason implies that
tuition reimbursement programs are a non-wage benefit. The rationale for the second reason is
that tuition reimbursement programs are training programs that affect worker productivity, and
thus retention.
3.1

Tuition Reimbursement Programs and Recruitment
The use of benefits as a recruiting device is prevalent in labor and personnel economics.

Rosen’s (1986) work on “equalizing differences” established a theory for how non-wage benefits
affect the composition of workers attracted to a firm. In the case of a tuition reimbursement,
workers who value continuing education are willing to trade-off wages (at some rate) for tuition
payments. This tradeoff implies that the incidence of tuition reimbursement is on the worker. The
tax-advantaged status increases the value of a given level of tuition benefits; the value increases
with the worker’s marginal tax rate.
A common reaction to these programs is to attribute their provision by firms solely to
their tax-advantaged status. However, this overlooks the trade-off between wage and non-wage
compensation. If total compensation reflects the value of a worker’s marginal product, then

7

benefits and wages are substitutes at the margin. Firms offer tuition reimbursement instead of
additional wages or other benefits if tuition benefits are more effective at attracting a certain type
of workers. The tax-advantaged status of tuition reimbursement programs increases the value of
these benefits to a worker facing a positive tax rate, but cannot explain why a firm offers tuition
benefits instead of other forms of compensation.
Cappelli (2004) addresses the effect of tuition reimbursement programs on recruitment by
developing a model in which provision of these programs generates a separating equilibrium in
which only high-ability workers choose to work at firms with a tuition program. Using
educational attainment as a proxy for ability, Cappelli tests his theory using the 1997 National
Employer Survey (NES-EQW) and finds that the average education attainment of new hires is
higher for firms with tuition reimbursement programs, which is consistent with his theory if
educational attainment is a direct measure of ability. However, the sharp prediction of his model
– all high ability types participate – is inconsistent with empirical participation rates.
Participation rates in tuition reimbursement programs by employees is typically between three
and five percent.10 The Corporate Leadership Council (2002) reports that low participation rates
could be due to a lack of marketing by firms. If employees lack information about the program,
it cannot influence an employee’s selection of employer.
Aside from the sharp prediction, the general idea of Cappelli’s (2004) model is attractive
because it is consistent existing studies of sorting due to non-wage benefits (Rosen 1986). The
low participation rates found empirically could be reconciled in his model by thinking of workers
as attaching an option value to participation: non-participants at firms that offer the program
could be systematically different (i.e. of higher ability) than workers at firms that do not offer
this program if high ability workers are willing to trade-off wages for the option of
participating.11 Data on how implementation of a tuition reimbursement program affects the
applicant pool would be ideal to test the effect of these program on recruitment. However, this
type of data is difficult to obtain. Results from the case study in Section 4 provide inconclusive
evidence that implementation of a tuition reimbursement program differentially affects new hires
and existing employees in terms of the impact of participation on employee retention.
10

References include: Corporate Leadership Council, statistics from Watson Wyatt, Buddin and Kapur (2004), and
conversations with HR personnel at firms with a program.
11
Low participation rates could be explained by adding a exogenous shock that decreases the cost of participation,
or by modeling heterogeneity in ability as a continuous distribution.

8

3.2

Tuition Reimbursement and Retention
In contrast to using tuition benefits as a recruiting device, the claim by firms that they use

tuition reimbursement programs to reduce turnover does not have support in the theoretical
literature. Rather, the literature predicts the opposite: provision of general skills training would
increase turnover. Becker’s (1964) theory of investment in human capital argues that, because
general skills are fully transferable (by definition) firms risk having their trained employees
poached or “cherry-picked” by outside firms if they provide workers with general skills training.
The labor market is assumed to be competitive, resulting in the worker’s wage set equal to the
value of her marginal product. Because the worker captures the full return on the investment,
Becker’s theory implies that the worker bears the full cost of general training. Because the
market is competitive and skills are transferable, the worker is indifferent between employers.
Therefore, even if the incidence of general skills training falls on the worker, turnover would be
non-decreasing in the provision of general skills training. This disconnect between the theoretical
literature and the intended use of these programs by firms presents an opportunity to analyze
empirically the effect of tuition reimbursement programs on retention.
There are several case studies that examine the tuition reimbursement programs offered
by the U.S. Department of Defense.12 The two studies most similar in their econometric
methodology to the case study analysis in this paper are Garcia, Arkes, and Trost (2000) and
Buddin and Kapur (2005), which examine the impact of tuition reimbursement on retention in
the U.S. Navy. Garcia, Arkes, and Trost (2000) follow a cohort of enlistees who began service in
1992 and study the effect of participation on the probability of remaining with the Navy for at
least six years. They find that participation increases the probability of staying in the Navy by
nearly 13 percentage points.
Buddin and Kapur (2005) find the opposite: participation in tuition reimbursement
decreases the probability of re-enlisting after four years by 16.5 percent. Buddin and Kapur
criticize Garcia, Arkes, and Trost’s (2000) definition of retention and instead use re-enlistment
after the end of a four-year contract as the relevant measure. Buddin and Kapur (2005) argue that
12

These include Boesel and Johnson (1988), Garcia and Joy (1998), Garcia, Arkes, and Trost (2000), and Buddin
and Kapur (2002, 2005).

9

the time window for which enlistees have access to participation in tuition reimbursement should
be held fixed, and so they limit their sample only to those enlistees who served a full four-year
contract. These two studies also differ in the variables used as exclusion restrictions in their
bivariate probit estimation: Garcia, Arkes, and Trost (2000) use participation in the orientation
session for educational opportunities offered to enlistees, while Buddin and Kapur (2005) use the
enlistee’s proximity to a four-year college before enlistment and an interaction between the
number of courses offered on base and the size of the base. Buddin and Kapur argue that the
instrument used by Garcia, Arkes, and Trost (2000) fails the exogeneity test.13
While the exclusion restriction in Garcia, Arkes, and Trost (2000) is untenable, this paper
does not agree with Buddin and Kapur’s (2005) criticism that the window of opportunity for
participation needs to be held constant for “leavers” and “stayers”. If enlistees jointly determine
their participation and retention decisions, constraining the duration of service to be the same
across participants and non-participants imposes restrictions on the effect of the program. By
using different criteria for their samples, Garcia, Arkes, and Trost (2000) and Buddin and Kapur
(2005) are addressing slightly different research questions. Garcia, Arkes, and Trost (2000)
examine the effect of participation on the probability of staying six years, while Buddin and
Kapur (2005) analyze the effect of participation on the probability of staying a fifth year after
already completing four years with the Navy. Even in the absence of these complications,
generalizing results from the Armed Services to civilian workers is difficult due to the
fundamentally different employment relationship.
Benson, Finegold and Mohrman (2004) present a civilian analysis of the impact of
participation in tuition reimbursement on retention using a case study of a large U.S.
manufacturing firm (roughly 10,000 employees). Employees at this firm have a high
participation rate in the tuition program – nearly 60 percent – which may be due to the program’s
unlimited reimbursement of tuition, stock rewards for degree completion, and the fact that the
firm strives to be a leader in the provision of continued education for its workers. This number is
also inflated because it includes individuals who took only a single course rather than limiting
the sample to those enrolled in a degree program. Hence, their study examines an atypical tuition
reimbursement program in terms of characteristics and participation rates. Benson, Finegold and
13

Participation in the orientation session is not random, but is positively correlated with an individual’s intention to
use the program, and thus also is correlated with the probability of staying in the Navy.

10

Mohrman (2004) use a Cox-proportional hazard model to analyze how degree completion affects
the probability of leaving the firm between January 1996 and June 2000. They argue that
promotion after degree completion would reduce the probability of leaving because it produces a
better match between responsibilities and skills sets. However, their theory falls short of fully
explaining their empirical findings. They find that promotion decreases the probability of leaving
for employees who obtain a graduate degree. However, these individuals have a greater
probability of leaving than non-participants. Additionally, promotion does not affect the
probability of leaving for those employees earning a Bachelor’s or Associate’s degree. More
importantly, their assumption that hazard rates are proportional might not be appropriate. They
claim there is a sharp increase in the hazard upon degree completion, which suggests that the
effect of participation on the separation hazard is not proportional over time.
While few studies examine tuition reimbursement programs, there have been many
studies that examine the provision of general skills training by employers. These studies develop
models in which a variety of mechanisms, such as asymmetric information or mobility costs,
could create a wedge between wages and productivity. This wedge provides firms with an
incentive to offer and pay for general skills training.14 These studies relax Becker’s assumption
that labor market is competitive to explain why firms offer general training.
This paper contributes to the literature by empirically evaluating the effect of employerprovided general training – provided through tuition reimbursement programs – on employee
retention. If general training decreases employee turnover then a central prediction of Becker’s
model is incorrect. In order to continue to use this standard theory, it would need to be amended
to account for this negative relationship between general training and turnover. Allowing for
general human capital and firm-specific human capital to interact is one possible modification to
the standard model, which is addressed briefly in Section 4.4.

14

These include, but are not limited to: Black and Lynch (1998), Loewenstein and Spletzer (1999) and Acemoglu
and Pischke (1999a, 1999b), Autor(2001), and Cappelli (2004).

11

4.0

Case Study Program: CSP
To examine the impact of tuition reimbursement programs on employee retention, this

paper analyses data from a single firm as well as from a cross-section of firms. This section
focuses on the case study, presenting the program characteristics, an econometric framework,
and the results. The data were obtained from a non-profit institution in the education sector,
which implemented a tuition reimbursement program in September 1999. (The case study
program will be referred to as CSP in the remainder of the text.) Employees considered in this
analysis are staff members in supervisory and non-supervisory positions who were employed on
December 15, 1999, and those who were hired between December 15, 1999 and September 1,
2001. A panel of observations was constructed based on seven “point-in-time” observations
from administrative records. Individuals are observed on December 15 of each year from 1999 to
2005. The data include gender, age, and race as well as start date, job characteristics, and annual
wage rates. One shortcoming of the data is that those employees who start and end employment
between December 15 of one year and December 15 of the subsequent year are not included in
the sample. Individual records of participation in CSP include the amount reimbursed, the degree
type, and the major or area of concentration from September 1, 1999 to August 31, 2004.15 Total
expenditure on tuition reimbursement over these five years totaled over $2 million dollars
(nominal) with a participation rate of 4.5 percent.
4.1

Characteristics of CSP and Descriptive Statistics
As mentioned in Section 2, employees are required to have one year of service to be

eligible for CSP. Employees need to be admitted into a degree program, but the program does
not need to be job-related. The intent of CSP at the case study institution is given below:
[CSP] supports employee development by providing partial or full reimbursement of
costs of courses, seminars and workshops that enable employees to improve performance
in current jobs, prepare for career development, or meet requirements of degree programs
related to current performance or planned career development (Administrative Guide
Memo 22.11).

15

Major or area of concentration was not available for 22 participants.

12

The employee’s supervisor must approve the request to participate in CSP, but this is not a
binding constraint since the employee can appeal directly to the benefits department for
reimbursement if her supervisor does not grant the request. A staff member working full-time
(more than 30 hours per week) qualifies for $5,250 in reimbursement per year; this amount is
pro-rated for members working part-time. The maximum reimbursement amount was $2,000 for
the first two years of the program, September 1, 1999 through August 31, 2001, but was
increased to $5,250 as of September 1, 2001. CSP qualifies under Section 127 of the Internal
Revenue Code, allowing reimbursements to be exempt from income and payroll taxation
Under CSP, reimbursements are only allowable for costs of tuition fees. Tuition
reimbursements are made directly to the institution prior to the quarter or semester. The
employee assumes responsibility of satisfactory completion of the course (grade C or better); if
not, the funds must be repaid in total to the employer.
Table 5 displays sample means for workers used in the case study analysis. Participants
in CSP differ from non-participating employees in terms of observable demographic and
employment variables. Participants are more likely to be female, younger, identify themselves as
Black, have a lower starting wage and are less likely to be in a supervisory role.16 Of those who
participate between September 1, 1999 through August 31, 2004, average total reimbursement
was approximately $5,200 and participants spend an average of two years in the program. The
participation rate of an employee’s peers is also higher for participants. Peer groups were
constructed using both the location of an employee’s department and the general classification of
her job to define a group of workers whose participation behavior could influence that individual
employee’s participation decision, such as through the dissemination of information about the
program. The peer participation rate assigned to each employee does not include that particular
employee’s participation behavior. This variable will be used later in the paper as an exclusion
restriction for the separation equation in the econometric analysis.
Tables 6 and 7 show the retention behavior of non-participants and participants. The raw
data show that participants are less likely to leave in each year compared to non-participants. The
largest difference in the leaving percentages occurs for the three-year time window, but the
16

“Exempt” and “Non-exempt” refer to whether the employee is subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938
(FLSA), which establishes minimum wage and over-time pay laws for full-time and part-time workers in the private
and government sectors. Workers who are non-exempt from FLSA are those paid on an hourly basis and occupy
non-supervisory positions; salary of exempt workers must also meet the minimum wage.

13

difference still persists for the five-year mark. Whether the worker separates from the institution
before five years is the outcome evaluated in this study. Unfortunately, the data do not contain
information on degree completion, so the retention behavior of participants after completing their
coursework cannot be directly examined. The five-year time window is used as an approximation
for degree completion.
Figures 1 and 2 graphically show differences between participants and non-participants in
their propensities to separate from the institution using plots of the survival functions. These
survival functions use actual employment start dates, but end dates are randomly assigned for the
year in which the employee leaves the institution to produce a smoothed curve.17 The survival
function of participants lies to the right of non-participants, meaning that for any year of service,
participants are more likely to still be employed by the institution. Differences in survival rates
are largest just before three years of service.
Figures 3 and 4 show that survival rates differ by the type of degree pursued: participants
in undergraduate programs have higher survival rates than those in graduate programs. The
analysis in the next section examines whether this difference between degrees persists when
controlling for characteristics of the participants. While these tables and figures show lower
survival rates for non-participants, a proper analysis of the effect of participation on retention
needs to account for differences across individuals and the interdependence of the participation
and retention decision. The next section of the paper will examine how participation affects
retention using econometric analyses to control for differences in observable characteristics as
well as unobservable characteristics.
4.2

Estimation
This section models the event of an employee leaving the institution using a latent

variable framework. The individual compares the utility from staying with the employer to that
obtained from separating. The propensity to separate from the employer is a continuous variable,
but the observed outcome is binary, taking a value equal to 1 if the individual separates, and
equal to 0 otherwise. The likelihood of leaving depends on observable characteristics, X,
17

For employees hired before September 1999, length of service is measured as the difference between
implementation of the program (September 1, 1999) and end date, or censoring date (December 15, 2005) when
relevant.

14

participation in CSP, P, and factors unobservable to the researcher, ε. Let S* be the underlying
index – unobservable to the researcher – that determines whether the individual separates from
the employer within a specified time frame:
S * = X 'β + αP + ε
S=

1 if S * ≥ 0

(1)
'Xβ + αP ≥ −ε

(2)

0 if S * < 0 ⇔ X 'β + αP < −ε

If we assume ε to have a standard normal distribution, then we can estimate how worker
characteristics affect the probability of separating from the institution using a probit model.
The same framework can be applied to participation in CSP because participation is also
a binary outcome. Let P* be the underlying latent variable that determines whether the
individual participates, while Z represents individual characteristics and let u be unobservable
characteristics. Again, the individual compares the utility from participating to that from not
participating.
P* = Z '
γ +u
P=

(3)

1 if P* ≥ 0

Z'
γ ≥ −u

(4)

0 if P* < 0 ⇔ Z '
γ < −u

As with the analysis of the probability of separation, determinants of participation can be
examined using a probit model if u has a standard normal distribution.
If participation in CSP were exogenous in equation 1, then α would measure the effect of
participation in CSP on the probability of separation. For participation to be exogenous, the
decision to participate cannot be related to the decision to leave the employer in terms of
unobservable characteristics, or cov(ε,u) = 0. However, because participation in CSP affects
employment and promotion opportunities due to an increase in general skills, arguing that the
two decisions are uncorrelated is tenuous. This paper models the two decisions jointly, allowing
for participation in CSP to be endogenous in equation 1, or that cov(ε,u) ≠ 0. The distribution of
(ε,u) is assumed to be bivariate standard normal with cov(ε,u) = corr(ε,u) = ρ, or that:

ε
u

~ BVN

0 1 ρ
,
0 ρ 1

(5)

15

Equations 1 and 2 are estimated jointly using bivariate probit maximum likelihood estimation.
Garcia, Arkes and Trost (2000) and Buddin and Kapur (2005) use this technique in their studies
of the U.S. Navy. In order to estimate the model, Z in equation 3 needs to include a variable that
affects the likelihood of participating, but does not affect the likelihood of leaving (i.e. not
contained in X from equation 1). This paper uses an information effect or knowledge “spillover”,
measured by the participation rate of peers, to satisfy this exclusion restriction. Peer groups were
created based on the division (18 in total) in which the employee worked and a broadly defined
job classification (administrative, professional, researcher, or manager). The participation rate of
peers attached to each individual does not include the participation decision of that particular
individual. This rate is used as a measure of how informed an individual is about CSP.18
Because the sample consists of both employees hired before and after the implementation
of CSP, the empirical analysis will be conducted on two groups: 1) employees hired before
September 1, 1999; and 2) employees hired after September 1, 1999. The groups need to be
separated because, as discussed in Section 3, implementation of CSP could affect the applicant
pool. The effect of CSP on retention for future hires will be determined based on results
collected from the second group, which is the measure most applicable to firms who have an
established program. If a firm is considering implementing a tuition reimbursement program, the
effect of CSP on current and future workers is relevant.

4.3

Results from Case Study
The first set of results estimate the effect of participation in CSP on the probability of

separating from the employer (voluntarily or involuntarily) within 5 years when participation is
treated as exogenous. Table 8 lists the marginal effects from a simple probit estimation with
leave as the dependent variable. For workers hired before CSP was implemented, S = 1 if they
separate from institution within five years measured from September 1, 1999; and = 0 otherwise.
18

The direction of the effect in unclear: Does the participation of peers inform the individual or does participation
by the individual inform her peers? While it does not matter for the purposes of this study, a robustness check was
performed that assigned participation rates by workers hired before September 1, 1999 in the first year of the
program (1999) to new hires. Because these new hires were not eligible to participate in the first year due to the
eligibility rule while the existing employees were, the direction of this information effect is clear. By distinguishing
between these two cohorts, concerns regarding whether the individual and her peer group experience the same shock
to their participation probabilities are also mitigated. This alternative measure of peer participation does not affect
the results.

16

For workers hired after implementation, S = 1 if separate within five years of hire date; and S = 0
otherwise. Individual and employment characteristics, such as age, wage, and years of service,
are taken as of December 15 of the first year observed. Participation in CSP is equal to 1 if the
individual ever participated in the program from September 1, 1999 through August 31, 2003.
This definition of participation is used because when workers participate, they typically spend
the maximum amount possible, which corresponds to a binary decision.19
As seen in Table 8, if participation in CSP were exogenous, participation would lower the
probability of leaving by over 20 percentage points for employees hired before or after
September 1, 1999. This impact on retention is equivalent to the effect of being three and a half
years older, or having six additional years of experience (as of December 15, 1999) for those
employees hired before September, 1999. For recent hires, the effect is similar to being four and
half years older.
Table 9 separates the effect of undergraduate and graduate degrees on retention assuming
exogeneity of participation. The effect of pursuing an undergraduate degree in CSP is roughly
one and a half times as large as the effect of pursuing a graduate degree across the two groups.
However, if participation is endogenous, these estimates of how participation in CSP affects
retention are inconsistent.
Tables 10 and 11 display the marginal effects from the bivariate probit maximum
likelihood estimation for employees hired before and after September 1, 1999, which allows for
an interdependence between participation and retention decisions. For those hired before
implementation of CSP, the probability of participation is significantly higher for females
(relative to males) and Blacks (relative to those identifying themselves as White), and lower for
Asians and for those with higher weekly wages. While the magnitude of the marginal effects
appears small, they are influential when compared to the average participation rate of 4.5
percent. The probability of participating in CSP increases in step with the participation rate of
peers. The probability of leaving is decreasing (at a decreasing rate) in age and experience, and is
lower for Hispanics and Asians. At mean values, a $500 dollar increase in the weekly starting
wage increases the probability of leaving by one percent.

19

The results do not change when spending as a percent of the maximum reimbursement amount is used instead of
the binary indicator.

17

The impact of participation in CSP on retention is estimated as negative for both groups
and significantly different from zero for those hired after the program was implemented (hired
after September 1, 1999). As opposed to the estimates in Table 8 when participation is assumed
to be exogenous, the estimated effect of participation in CSP is only slightly negative and not
significantly different from zero for those employees hired before September 1, 1999. The
change in the magnitude can be attributed to the correlation between the unobservable
characteristics. A negative correlation implies that individuals (those hired before September 1,
1999) who participate in CSP were those predisposed to staying at the institution.
For those hired after September 1, 1999, participation in CSP is significantly higher for
workers in a non-supervisory role and is increasing in wage (Table 11). Participation in CSP has
a large effect on retention: it reduces the probability of separating within five years by 50
percentage points. The correlation between the error terms is positive and significant at the ten
percent level. A positive correlation implies that those individuals who are more likely to
participate in CSP are more inclined to leave within 5 years.
The estimated effect of participation in CSP on retention in Tables 10 and 11 is a
specification in which the type of degree pursued does not matter for separation rates. A second
specification is found in Tables 12 through 15, which allows the effect to vary by degree
pursued. Tables 12 and 13 give the estimate for how pursuing an undergraduate in CSP affects
retention. The effect is large and negative for both groups of hires: the probability of leaving
within five years is reduced by over 40 percent for those hired before September 1, 1999, and
nearly 60 percent for recent hires. The correlation between the error terms is positive for both
groups, meaning that those most likely to participate are those predisposed to separating from the
institution.
The effects of pursuing a graduate degree in CSP on retention are listed in Tables 14 and
15. Unlike undergraduate degrees, the effect of pursuing a graduate degree differs across the two
cohorts of employees. For those hired before CSP was implemented, pursuing a graduate degree
increases the probability of leaving the institution by 22 percentage points; although, the effect is
not statistically significant at conventional levels. The correlation between the errors is negative
for this group, meaning that those who are more likely to pursue a graduate degree are also more
likely to stay.

18

For those hired after September 1, 1999, pursuing a graduate degree reduces the
probability of leaving within five years by fifty percent. Similar to undergraduate degrees, the
correlation between the errors is positive. Hence, those employees pursuing graduate degrees
who were hired before September 1, 1999 behave differently from the other three groups of
participants.20
These results indicate that participation in CSP increases retention for those employees
hired after the program was implemented, and for those employees hired before implementation
who choose to pursue undergraduate degrees. This analysis shows that participation in CSP is
endogenous: the correlation between the error terms is positive for the aforementioned groups.
Because of this endogeneity, single-equation estimation of the effect of CSP on the probability of
separation underestimates the impact of participation on retention due to the positive correlation
between the error terms. Participation in CPS decreases the probability of separating from the
employer within 5 years by 50 percentage points when participation is allowed to be
endogenous, up from 20 percent point decrease in the probability of separation when
participation is treated exogenously. Hence, the effect of CSP on retention is even larger in
magnitude when we take into account the correlation between the unobservable factors contained
in the error terms.
For those employees hired before implementation of CSP who pursue graduate degrees,
CSP reduces retention. The correlation between the unobserved heterogeneity affecting
participation and separation is negative for these workers, which means that those more likely to
participate are less likely to separate from the institution within five years. When treated
exogenously, participation appears to decrease the probability of leaving by 18 percentage
points; however, when participation is modeled as endogenous, participation increases the
probability of leaving by nearly 22 percentage points. Hence, participation in CSP accelerates
departure from the institution for those existing employees who choose to pursue graduate
degrees.
This case study finds that tuition reimbursement programs increase retention of
new hires. Hence, this paper finds empirical support for the explanation given by firms for
providing tuition reimbursement programs – to increase employee retention – despite the
20

This difference could be explained by dynamics leading to the implementation of CSP, which is currently being
explored.

19

predictions of the standard theory of human capital that provision of general training could
increase turnover. It is important to note that implementation of a program appears to affect
existing and future employees differentially. This difference provides some evidence that tuition
programs affect the composition of a firm’s applicant pool. However, this evidence is not fully
conclusive due to the fact that it only applies to those workers pursuing graduate degrees.
Because CSP is a typical program in terms of its characteristics, this paper’s findings improve
the literature’s understanding of tuition reimbursement programs and their effect on retention,
especially for civilian employees.

4.4

Interpreting the Results
The result that general skills decrease turnover can be interpreted within standard human

capital theory if general and firm-specific skills interact, such as through complementarities. In
the extreme, this necessarily holds because basic, general skills such as writing and reading are
essential for further skill development. Recall that investment in firm-specific skills lowers
turnover because rents from the investment are shared between the worker and firm; both parties
have an incentive to continue employment because rents only accrue if the relationship is
maintained. If provision of general skills training by a firm increases the stock or productivity of
firm-specific skills, then general skills training could reduce turnover.
If complementarities exist between general and firm-specific human capital in
production, general skills training could increase employee retention. Acemoglu and Pischke
(1999a, 1999b) argue that if general and firm-specific human capital are complements, wage
structures could become compressed, thereby giving firms an incentive to provide general skills
training. Acemoglu and Pischke define compression in the wage structure to mean that profits
from trained workers are higher than those from untrained workers.21 With complementarities
between general and specific human capital, general skills acquired through participation in
tuition reimbursement could increase the productivity of firm-specific human capital, thereby
increasing employee retention.

21

Acemoglu and Pischke (1999a, 1999b) list several other market imperfections that could result in compressed
wages, including search costs, mobility costs, and minimum wage laws.

20

The case study shows that workers who are predisposed to having a higher probability of
separating from the institution are more likely to participate in the tuition program. This suggests
that these workers may have intended to acquire general skills through tuition reimbursement to
make a career or firm change. However, participation substantially reduces the probability of
leaving within five years. This is consistent with participants accumulating firm-specific human
capital during the time period before they become eligible and during participation in the
program, as well as possibly due to the increase in productivity of firm-specific skills from the
interaction of these skills with general skills acquired through tuition reimbursement. Because
those who participate stand to gain the most from participation in terms of wage increases and
promotion opportunities, tuition reimbursement programs are effective at lowering the separation
rate of the most ambitious and marketable employees.
There are other mechanisms that could result in general skills training reducing turnover
in the presence of firm-specific human capital. Lazear (2005) presents a model in which all skills
are general, but how these skills are combined in production is specific to the firm. Hence, in his
model providing general skills training is essentially equivalent to investing in firm-specific skills.
Alternatively, firms could use general training as an insurance mechanism: if workers are
reluctant to work at a firm which requires investment in firm-specific human capital due to the
risk of wage loss in the event of involuntary separation, firms could offer general training as a
way to mitigate this risk (Feuer, Glick, and Desai 1987). Additionally, if providing general skills
training attracts a type of worker who values investment in human capital, these workers likely
have a lower discount rate, and thus could be less likely to turnover a priori. For the case of
tuition reimbursement programs, in particular, participation could increase the amount of firmspecific skills if these skills increase over time because coursework takes several semesters to
complete. Service length requirements before and after participation would add to this effect
(Cappelli 2004).
It is important to note that the presence of firm-specific human capital is not required for
the provision of general training if other market imperfections are present (Acemoglu and
Pischke 1999a, 1999b). While these rigidities, such as mobility costs, could explain why firms
invest in general human capital of its workers, they cannot explain why the provision of general
training reduces separation rates. Evidence from SEPT95 indicates that firms who offer tuition
reimbursement programs are more likely to offer other types of training programs. Because

21

“high-training” firms are more likely to offer tuition reimbursement programs, this suggests that
these firms rely more heavily on firm-specific skills in production. Testing this hypothesis
explicitly would require developing an index of firm-specificity, which could then be related to
the provision of tuition reimbursement programs.

5.0

Concluding Remarks
Tuition reimbursement programs are a type of general training commonly offered by

employers. Counter to the prediction of Becker’s theory of investment in human capital, firms
claim that they use these programs to increase employee retention. Results from the case study
show that participation in CSP substantially reduces the probability of separating from a firm:
participation by those employees hired after the program was implemented reduced their
probability of leaving within five years by over 50 percentage points. This result overturns the
prediction of standard theory that investment in general human capital by firms increases
turnover. However, the establishment-level factors that determine which firms offer this general
training program suggest that it is offered to complement investments in firm-specific human
capital. By allowing for an interaction between firm-specific and general human capital, the
empirical finding that general training reduces turnover can be interpreted within standard
theory.
A shortcoming of the case study analysis is whether the findings can be generalized to
other employers and programs. While the tuition reimbursement program is typical in terms of
its program characteristics, future work will examine the effect of tuition reimbursement
programs on turnover rates using the cross section of establishments such as those surveyed in
the SEPT95. In addition, future work will extend the case study analysis by using a hazard rate
model rather than modeling separation as a binary outcome.

22

References
Acemoglu, Daron and Jorn-Steffen Pischke, 1998, “Why do firms train? Theory and evidence.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 113: 1, 79-119.
Acemoglu, Daron and Jorn-Steffen Pischke, 1999a, “Beyond Becker: Training in imperfect Labour
Markets.” The Economic Journal, 109 (February), F112-F142.
Acemoglu, Daron and Jorn-Steffen Pischke, 1999b, “The Structure of Wages and Investment in General
Training.” Journal of Political Economy, 107(3): 539-72.
Autor, David H., 2001, “Why Do Temporary Help Firms Provide General Skills Training?” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 116 (4): 1409-48.
Babson, S.D. 1999, “How to get financial aid for graduate education.” Knight Rider Tribune Business
News, January 12.
Barrett, Alan and Phillip J. O’Connell, 2001, “Does Training Generally Work? The Returns to InCompany Training.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 54(3):647-662.
Becker, Gary S., 1964, Human Capital, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Benson, George S., David Finegold and Susan Albers Mohrman, 2004, “You Paid for the Skills, Now
Keep Them: Tuition Reimbursement and Voluntary Turnover.” Academy of Management
Journal, 4 (3): 315-333.
Black, Sandra E. and Lisa M. Lynch, 1998, “Beyond the Incidence of Employer-Provided Training.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 52 (1): 64-81.
Black, Sandra E, and Lisa M. Lynch, 2001, “How to Compete: the impact of workplace practices and
information technology on productivity.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 83(3): 434445.
Buddin, Richard and Kanika Kapur, 2002, “Tuition Assistance Usage and First-Term Military
Retention.” Santa Monica, CA: RAND.
Buddin, Richard and Kanika Kapur, 2005, “The Effect of Employer-Sponsored Education on Job
Mobility: Evidence from the U.S. Navy.” Industrial Relations, 44(2): 341-363.
Boesel, David, and Kyle Johnson, 1988, “The DoD Tuition Assistance Program: Participation and
Outcomes.” Defense Manpower Data Center: Arlington, Virginia:
Bulow, Jeremy and Wayne Landsman, 1985, “The Relationship between Wages and Benefits.”
Pensions, Labor, and Individual Choice, University of Chicago Press: Chicago.

23

Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1996, “BLS Reports on the Amount of Employer-Provided Formal
Training.” United States Department of Labor News: Washington, D.C., July 10.
Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1996, “BLS Reports on the Amount of Formal and Informal Training
Received by Employees.” United States Department of Labor News: Washington, D.C.,
December 19.
Bureau of the Census, 1994, “Dollars for scholars – postsecondary costs and financing.” Statistical
Brief, U.S. Department of Commerce. Economics and Statistics Administration, Bureau of the
Census, Washington, DC.
Cappelli, Peter, 2004, “Why do employers pay for college?” Journal of Econometrics, 121: 213-241.
Corporate Leadership Council, 2003. “Trends in Tuition Aid Programs,” Corporate Executive Board,
Catalogue No.: CLC1-1100OH.
Eduventures, 2003. “Tuition Assistance Plan Benchmark: Managing TAP as a Strategic Asset,” by
Adam Newman and Matt Stein, Eduventures, Inc., Boston, MA.
Feuer, Michael J., Henry A. Glick, and Anand Desai, 1987, “Is Firm-sponsored Education Viable?”
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 8: 121-136.
Franz, Wolfgang and David Soskice, 1995, “The German Apprentice System,” In Institutional
Frameworks and Labor Market Performance: Comparative Views on the U.S. and German
Economies, edited by Freidrich Butler et al. London: Routledge.
Frazis, Harley, Maury Gittleman, Michael Horrigan, and Mary Joyce, 1998, “Result from the 1995
Survey of Employer-Provided Training,” Monthly Labor Review, June.
Frazis, Harley, Maury Gittleman, and Mary Joyce, 2000, “Correlates of Training: An Analysis Using
Both Employer and Employee Characteristics,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
53(3):443-462.
Garcia, Federico, Jeremy Arkes, and Robert Trost, 2000, “Does employer-financed general training pay?
Evidence from the US Navy,” Economics of Education Review 21: 19-27.
Hewitt Associates, 1993, On Employee Benefits, Hewitt Associates, Lincolnshire, IL.
International Foundation of Employee Benefit Plans, 2002, The Many Faces of Educational Benefits,
Brookfield, WI.
Kenny, Lawrence W., Lung-Fei Lee, G. S. Maddala, and R.P. Trost, 1979, “Returns to College
Education: An Investigation on Self-Selection Bias Based on the Project Talent Data”,
International Economic Review 20 (30): 775-789.

24

Lazear, Edward P., 2005, “Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-weights Approach,” National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Papers: 9679.
Loewenstein, Mark and Spletzer, James R., 1999a, “General and Specific Training: Evidence and
Implications,” Journal of Human Resources 34(4): 710-33.
Loewenstein, Mark and Spletzer, James R., 1999b, “Formal and Informal Training: Evidence from the
NLSY.” in John Robst, ed., Research in labor economics, Volume 18, Stamford, Connecticut:
JAI Press: 403-38.
Maddala, G.S., 1986, Limited Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics. Cambridge
University Press: New York.
Rosen, Sherwin, 1986, “The Theory of Equalizing Differences” in Orley Ashenfelter and Richard
Layard, eds., Handbook in Labor Economics, Volume 1, New York: Elsevier Science: 641-92.

25

Appendix: Tables and Figures

Table 1: Means of Firm Characteristics
(SEPT95)
Number of Employees
Average Monthly Wage*
One of Multiple Establishments (0 or 1)*
Separation Rate
Total Number of Benefits (0 to 11)
Training Programs
Tuition Reimbursement Program
Hire In-house trainers
Hire trainers from outside the firm
Occupation Composition
Managers
Professionals
Sales
Administrative Support
Service
Production
Number of Firms

668
$2,966
40.21%
11.00%
6.1

No Tuition
Reimbursement
210
$2,470
31.33%
16.89%
4.9

Offer Tuition
Reimbursement
926
$3,267
45.59%
7.68%
6.8

63.95%
45.13%
72.18%

23.47%
50.67%

100.00%
57.48%
84.15%

10.24%
14.68%
7.80%
13.37%
7.97%
45.90%

8.65%
8.14%
10.32%
10.33%
12.95%
49.51%

11.13%
18.37%
6.39%
15.08%
5.16%
43.87%

1057

381

676

Full Sample

*Not available for all States (N = 838; 522 offer tuition reimbursement and 316 do not).
Column 3 Significantly Different from Column 4 at 1% Level

26

Table 2:
Tuition Programs by Industry
(SEPT95)
Mining
Construction
Non-Durable Manufacturing
Durable Manufacturing
Transportation/Utilities
Wholesale
Retail
Financial/Insurance/Real Estate
Services

Table 3:
Tuition Reimbursement by Region
(SEPT95)
New England
Middle Atlantic
East North Central
West North Central
South Atlantic
South Central
Mountain
Pacific

% in Sample

% Offer Tuition
Reimbursement

11.64%
11.54%
11.54%
13.25%
10.50%
10.12%
9.37%
9.93%
12.11%

73.98%
50.00%
72.13%
82.86%
62.16%
54.21%
26.26%
81.90%
63.28%

% in Sample

% Offer Tuition
Reimbursement

5.62%
9.81%
19.52%
8.10%
16.38%
19.62%
7.52%
13.43%

81.36%
70.87%
66.34%
68.24%
70.93%
53.88%
63.29%
54.61%

27

Table 4: Distribution of Maximum
Reimbursements for Tuition Programs
Less than $1,000
$1,001 to $2,500
$2,501 to $4,000
$4,001 to $5,250
$5,251 to $7,000
More than $7,000
No Maximum

6.22%
19.12%
15.67%
19.82%
4.84%
3.69%
30.65%

Observations

434

Source: Eduventures (2003)

Table 5: Sample Means (CSP)

Non-Participants

Participants

Female
Age
White
Black
Hispanic
Asian
Leave within 5 years
Weekly Wage ($2001)
Supervisor (Exempt)
Non-Supervisor (Non-Exempt)
Hired Before Sept. 1999
Years in Tuition Program
Tuition Spending (nominal)
Participation Rate of Peers

66.86%
40.8
68.96%
5.01%
7.33%
18.70%
48.32%
$1,485
62.88%
37.12%
67.86%
1.98%

73.77%
34.6
62.60%
10.65%
9.61%
17.14%
33.25%
$1,237
48.31%
51.69%
62.85%
1.96
$5,213
2.49%

Observations

8229

385

Bolded = Participants and Non-Participants different at 5% significance level

28

Table 6: Retention of Participants (Unconditional)
Year Hired

Number

% Leave before
3 Years

% Leave before
4 years

% Leave before
5 years

1999 or before

253

13.83%

20.95%

30.43%

2000

74

11.84%

19.74%

32.89%

2001

58

24.14%

31.03%

44.83%

Table 7: Retention of Non-Participants (Unconditional)
Year Hired

Number

% Leave
before 3 Years

% Leave
before 4 Years

% Leave
before 5 Years

1999 or before

5621

33.45%

39.35%

44.39%

2000

1378

41.51%

51.16%

58.85%

2001

983

41.20%

50.05%

56.97%

29

Table 8: Probability of Separating from Employer Before 5 years
Probit Model: Pr(S=1)

Hired Before Sept., 1999

Hired After Sept., 1999

dF/dX

St. Error

dF/dX

St. Error

Participation in CSP

-0.217

0.027**

-0.238

0.042**

Years of Service

-0.034

0.003**

0.136

0.149

Years of Service - Squared

0.001

0.000**

-0.274

0.143

Female

0.010

0.015

0.007

0.021

Age

-0.062

0.004**

-0.050

0.006**

Age - Squared

0.001

0.000**

0.001

0.000**

Black

0.034

0.031

-0.019

0.046

Hispanic

-0.055

0.026*

-0.080

0.038*

Asian

-0.087

0.018**

-0.101

0.025**

Non-Supervisor (Not Exempt)

-0.018

0.016

-0.072

0.023**

Weekly Wage (in thousands), $2001

0.020

0.010*

-0.045

0.015**

Observations
Log-Likelihood

5826
-3565.0

2788
-1790.1

* significant at 5% level ** significant at 1% level

30

Table 9: Probability of Separating from Employer Before 5 years
Probit Model: Pr(S=1)

Hired Before Sept., 1999

Hired After Sept., 1999

dF/dX

St. Error

dF/dX

St. Error

Graduate Degree

-0.180

.036**

-0.204

.051**

Undergraduate Degree

-0.267

0.36**

-0.307

.066**

Years of Service

-0.034

0.000**

0.135

0.149

Years of Service - Squared

0.001

0.000**

-0.274

0.143

Female

0.010

0.512

0.007

0.021

Age

-0.062

0.000**

-0.049

.006**

Age - Squared

0.001

0.000**

0.001

.000***

Black

0.035

0.262

-0.015

0.046

Hispanic

-0.054

0.040*

-0.078

.038*

Asian

-0.087

0.000**

-0.101

.025**

Non-Supervisor (Not Exempt)

-0.017

0.311

-0.071

.023**

Weekly Wage (in thousands), $2001

0.020

0.046*

-0.045

.015**

Observations
Log-Likelihood

5826
-3563.6

* significant at 5% level ** significant at 1% level

31

2788
-1789.4

Table 10: Probability of Participating in CSP and
Separating from Employer before 5 years
Bivariate Probit Model

Pr(CSP=1)

Hired Before Sept., 1999

dF/dX

Pr(S=1)

St. Error

dF/dX

St. Error
0.2291
.0026**
.0001**
0.0155
.0048**
.0001**

Participation in CSP
Years of Service
Years of Service - Squared
Female
Age
Age-squared

0.0014
-0.0001
0.0096
-0.0002
0.0000

0.0010
0.0000
.0045*
0.0016
0.0000

-0.0299
-0.0340
0.0007
0.0071
-0.0607
0.0006

Black

0.0273

.0120*

0.0264

0.0318

Hispanic

0.0045

0.0079

-0.0565

.0260*

Asian
Non-Supervisor (Not Exempt)

-0.0127
0.0023

.0046*
0.0054

-0.0834
-0.0209

.0182**
0.0166

Weekly Wage (in thousands), $2001

-0.0122

.0059*

0.0209

.0102*

Participation in CSP by Peers (%)

0.0100

.0019**

Correlation Between Errors

-0.2516

0.2668

Log-Likelihood

-4488.3

Observations

5826

* significant at 5% level ** significant at 1% level

32

Table 11: Probability of Participating in CSP and
Separating from Employer before 5 years
Bivariate Probit Model

Pr(CSP=1)

Hired After Sept., 1999
Participation in CSP
Years of Service
Years of Service - Squared
Female
Age
Age - Squared
Black
Hispanic
Asian
Non-Supervisor (Not Exempt)

dF/dX

St. Error

0.0667
-0.0279
-0.0024
0.0010
0.0000
0.0243
-0.0062
0.0078
0.0288

Weekly Wage (in thousands), $2001

0.0121

Participation in CSP by Peers (%)
Correlation Between Errors
Log-Likelihood
Observations

0.0148
0.5051
-2317.2
2788

* significant at 5% level ** significant at 1% level

33

Pr(S=1)

0.0599
0.0559
0.0082
0.0028
0.0000
0.0201
0.0125
0.0098
.0094**

dF/dX
-0.5188
0.1521
-0.2693
0.0061
-0.0493
0.0005
-0.0071
-0.0824
-0.0948
-0.0585

St. Error
.0788**
0.1476
0.1419
0.0209
.0062**
.0001**
0.0452
.0373*
.0246*
.0239*

.0056*

-0.0422

.0148*

.0033**
0.2379

Table 12: Probability of Pursuing an Undergraduate Degree in CSP and Separating from
Employer before 5 years
Bivariate Probit Model
Pr(Undergrad=1)
Pr(S=1)
Hired Before Sept., 1999
dF/dX
St. Error
dF/dX
St. Error
Undergraduate Degree in CSP
-0.4197
.0285**
Years of Service
0.0004
0.0005
-0.0335
.0026**
Years of Service - Squared
0.0000
0.0008
0.0008
.0001**
Female
0.0040
0.0026
0.0107
0.0152
Age
0.0005
0.0009
-0.0609
.0044**
Age-squared
0.0000
0.0000
0.0006
0.0001**
Black
0.0136
0.0076
0.0433
0.0313
Hispanic
0.0075
0.0057
-0.0480
0.0263
Asian
-0.0010
0.0030
-0.0829
.0176**
Non-Supervisor (Not Exempt)
0.0131
.0042**
-0.0051
0.0172
Weekly Wage (in thousands), $2001
-0.0015
0.0031
0.0215
.0102*
Participation in CSP by Peers (%)
0.0024
.0011*
Correlation Between Errors
0.5522
0.3155
Log-Likelihood
Observations

-4027.9
5826

* significant at 5% level ** significant at 1% level

34

Table 13: Probability of Pursuing an Undergraduate Degree in CSP
and Separating from Employer before 5 years
Bivariate Probit Model
Pr(Undergrad=1)
Pr(S=1)
Hired After Sept., 1999
dF/dX
St. Error
dF/dX
St. Error
Undergraduate Degree in CSP
-0.5823
.0132**
Years of Service

0.0235

0.0249

0.1342

0.1477

Years of Service - Squared

-0.0191

0.0238

-0.2716

0.1419

Female
Age

0.0035
0.0002

0.0033
0.0012

0.0087
-0.0478

0.0210
.0062**

Age-squared

0.0000

0.0000

0.0005

.0000**

Black

0.03239

.0157*

0.01678

0.0443

Hispanic

0.0086

0.0080

-0.0660

0.0371

Asian

0.0021

0.0045

-0.0971

.0243**

Non-Supervisor (Not Exempt)

0.0190

.0061**

-0.0596

.0231**

Weekly Wage (in thousands), $2001

0.0024

0.0036

-0.0440

.0149**

Participation in CSP by Peers (%)
Correlation Between Errors

0.0029
0.8128**

0.0016
0.1540

Log-Likelihood
Observations

-2002.9
2788

* significant at 5% level ** significant at 1% level

35

Table 14: Probability of Pursuing an Graduate Degree in CSP and
Separating from Employer before 5 years
Bivariate Probit Model
Pr(Grad=1)
Pr(S=1)
Hired Before Sept., 1999
dF/dX
St. Error
dF/dX
St. Error
Graduate Degree in CSP
0.2198
0.1951
Years of Service
0.0009
0.0007
-0.0339
.0026**
Years of Service - Squared
0.0000
0.0000
0.0008
.0001**
Female
0.0048
0.0033
0.0046
0.0152
Age
-0.0004
0.0012
-0.0588
.0046**
Age-squared
0.0000
0.0000
0.0006
0.0001**
Black
0.0116
0.0084
0.0237
0.0305
Hispanic
-0.0011
0.0052
-0.0560
.0258*
Asian
-0.0108
.0032**
-0.0790
.0180**
Non-Supervisor (Not Exempt)
-0.0097
.0034**
-0.0197
0.0164
Weekly Wage (in thousands), $2001
-0.0106
.0044*
0.0219
.0102*
Participation in CSP by Peers (%)
0.0065
.0014**
Correlation Between Errors
-0.4449
0.2120
Log-Likelihood
Observations

-4200.2
5826

* significant at 5% level ** significant at 1% level

36

Table 15: Probability of Pursuing an Graduate Degree in CSP and
Separating from Employer before 5 years
Bivariate Probit Model

Pr(Grad=1)

Hired After Sept., 1999

dF/dX

St. Error

Graduate Degree in CSP

Pr(S=1)
dF/dX

St. Error

-0.5024

.1087**

Years of Service

0.0402

0.0501

0.1345

0.1476

Years of Service - Squared

-0.0101

0.0068

-0.2589

0.1422

Female
Age

-0.0050
0.0003

0.0068
0.0024

0.0043
-0.0493

0.0210
.0062**

Age-squared

0.0000

0.0000

0.0005

.0001**

Black

-0.0152

0.0094

-0.0363

0.0455

Hispanic

-0.0161

0.0078

-0.0888

.0375*

Asian

0.0040

0.0077

-0.0982

.0246**

Non-Supervisor (Not Exempt)

0.0065

0.0072

-0.0734

.0232**

Weekly Wage (in thousands), $2001

0.0085

.0043*

-0.0437

.0150**

Participation in CSP by Peers (%)

0.0111

.0027**

Correlation Between Errors

0.4913

0.2926

Log-Likelihood
Observations

-2194.4
2788

* significant at 5% level ** significant at 1% level

37

38

39

