                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




WHAT WORKS IN FIGHTING DIARRHEAL DISEASES IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES?
                         A CRITICAL REVIEW

                                        Alix Peterson Zwane
                                          Michael Kremer

                                        Working Paper 12987
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12987


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2007




This article builds on a report submitted to the Center for Global Development Global Health Policy
Research Network. Support from the Gates Foundation, Google.org, Brookings Institute, and the USDA/
Foreign Agricultural Service is gratefully acknowledged. Lucie Heinzerling, Anthony Keats, Jessica
Leino, Kavita Shukla, Jesse Tack, and Heidi Williams provided valuable research assistance. The authors
thank three anonymous reviewers, Jeff Albert, Tom Clasen, Rachel Glennerster, Ranjiv Khush, Steve
Luby, Ted Miguel and the participants in a Berkeley Water Center workshop on diarrheal diseases
for helpful comments and discussion. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Alix Peterson Zwane and Michael Kremer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
What Works in Fighting Diarrheal Diseases in Developing Countries? A Critical Review
Alix Peterson Zwane and Michael Kremer
NBER Working Paper No. 12987
March 2007
JEL No. O22,Q52,Q56

                                                ABSTRACT

The Millennium Development Goals call for reducing by half the proportion of people without sustainable
access to safe drinking water. This goal was adopted in large part because clean water was seen as
critical to fighting diarrheal disease, which kills 2 million children annually. There is compelling evidence
that provision of piped water and sanitation can substantially reduce child mortality. However, in dispersed
rural settlements, providing complete piped water and sanitation infrastructure to households is expensive.
Many poor countries have therefore focused instead on providing community-level water infrastructure,
such as wells. Various traditional child health interventions have been shown to be effective in fighting
diarrhea. Among environmental interventions, handwashing and point-of-use water treatment both
reduce diarrhea, although more needs to be learned about ways to encourage households to take up
these behavior changes. In contrast, there is little evidence that providing community-level rural water
infrastructure substantially reduces diarrheal disease or that this infrastructure can be effectively maintained.
Investments in communal water infrastructure short of piped water may serve other needs and may
reduce diarrhea in particular circumstances, but the case for prioritizing communal infrastructure provision
needs to be made rather than assumed.

Alix Peterson Zwane
Dept. of Agricultural and Resource Econ.
UC, Berkeley
207 Giannini Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720
zwane@are.berkeley.edu

Michael Kremer
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center M20
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mkremer@fas.harvard.edu
       The sole quantitative environmental target in the Millennium Development Goals

is the call to “reduce by half the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe

drinking water.” Providing water has a number of benefits, but a key rationale for this

goal is the impact of poor quality water on human health, particularly on diarrheal

disease, which kills 2 million children in poor countries each year (WHO 2002; Kosek,

Bern, and Guerant 2003).

       Providing piped water and sanitation infrastructure can drastically reduce child

mortality. In the United States these interventions were jointly responsible for most of the

rapid decline in the child mortality rate in the early twentieth century (Cutler and Miller

2005) and more recently for substantial health improvements on Native American

reservations (Watson 2006). For this class of interventions a key outstanding question is

what institutional arrangements can best support investment in infrastructure and its

maintenance. Galiani, Gertler, and Schargrodsky (2005) find major health gains from

privatization of water service in Argentina in the 1990s.

       However, it is expensive to provide piped water and sanitation to dispersed rural

populations, and many countries find this beyond their means. In much of Africa rural

residents typically live on their farms rather than being concentrated in villages. In such

circumstances policy often focuses on providing improved drinking water sources outside

the home, such as communal taps, wells, and protected springs. About 30 percent of

people living in rural areas of developing countries (or about 926 million people) lack a

safe and accessible water supply as defined by the World Health Organization (a

communal standpipe or borehole well within a reasonable distance) (WHO 2000). Nearly

all of the $5.5 billion the World Bank invested in rural water and sanitation programs



                                                                                        2
during 1978–2003 focused on improving water supply sources and quality through

interventions such as well digging (Iyer and others 2006).

       This article critically reviews the research on what works in preventing and

treating diarrheal diseases in developing countries. It examines evidence on the medical

effectiveness of a series of alternative means of fighting diarrhea and on ways of

encouraging the individual or collective behavior necessary for uptake. 1

       A series of randomized trials have established that several child health

interventions—including exclusive breastfeeding, immunization, oral rehydration

therapy, and micronutrient supplementation—are effective in preventing or treating

diarrhea. Several interventions that rely on individual behavior change have also been

shown to be effective. Researchers have convincingly demonstrated that increased

handwashing can significantly reduce diarrhea incidence (Luby and others 2004a; Khan

1982; Han and Hlaing 1989), and randomized impact evaluations of point-of-use water

treatment systems (disinfection of water in the home, for example) suggest that these

technologies can reduce diarrhea incidence some 20–30 percent (Quick and others 1999;

Reller and others 2003). Identifying successful strategies for promoting adoption is an

important next step.

       But while there is a large body of evidence for the effectiveness of piped water in

the reduction of diarrhea incidence, there is much less evidence for the effectiveness of

the provision of communal rural water infrastructure and latrines. Although several older

prospective studies appear to identify large impacts of this class of interventions, that

1
 For other recent reviews, focusing primarily on medical effectiveness, see Keusch and
others (2006), Cairncross and Valdmanis (2006), Fewtrell and others (2005), and
Martines and others (1993).


                                                                                            3
work has important methodological shortcomings. It relied on analyses of data from a

handful of sites, was conducted in ways that make it difficult to disentangle the impact of

provision of improved communal water sources from latrine construction, and was not

based on random assignment of communities. More recent work based on randomized

trials with large samples does not find substantial health impacts from improved

communal water sources (Kremer and others 2006). Moreover, while rural water

facilities can be long-lived if properly serviced, they often fall into disrepair quickly due

to poor maintenance, and though many different approaches to maintenance have been

advocated, there is little evidence on their relative effectiveness.

       Because of the lack of evidence on effectiveness and the maintenance challenge,

the case has not been made for prioritizing communal rural water infrastructure for

fighting diarrheal disease. Investing in piped water and sanitation in areas where that is

feasible and expanding the provision of standard child health interventions have both

been shown to work. Finding ways to promote handwashing effectively and point-of-use

water treatment also seems a priority. In some circumstances there may be a strong case

for investing in rural water infrastructure for other reasons, and in some environments

such infrastructure may have important health benefits. But the case for prioritizing

communal water infrastructure will need to be made rather than assumed.

       This article first provides a brief background on water-related diseases and their

transmission and discusses traditional child health interventions that prevent and treat

diarrhea. Next, it reviews the evidence on individual behavior change interventions that

can prevent diarrhea, including handwashing and point-of-use water treatment systems,

and discusses the outstanding question of how to induce people to adopt these methods. It



                                                                                         4
then reviews the evidence on the effectiveness of source water quality improvements and

sanitation investments and discusses the challenge of rural infrastructure maintenance.

Finally, it sketches an agenda for further work.



Child Health Interventions


       Water destined for human contact that is exposed to the environment is a potential

source of diarrheal disease. In developing countries, in particular, surface water is often

contaminated with pathogens (including bacteria, viruses, and parasites) due to contact

with human and livestock waste. Drinking, handling, cooking, and bathing in such water

exposes people, especially young children, to a wide range of health risks, including

diarrheal diseases. Moreover, the lack of adequate water of any kind reduces the

opportunity to wash people, food, dishes, and clothes and thus contributes to the spread

of disease.

       One standard method of classifying the disease burden associated with water

summarizes the potential health costs of relying on unsafe water according to pathogen

transmission path (table 1). In this taxonomy diarrheal diseases are spread through fecal-

oral transmission and fall into both the waterborne and water-washed categories (White,

Bradley, and White 1972; Feachem 1977; Cairncross 1996; IIED 2000). The health cost

of diseases transmitted in this way is tremendous and falls disproportionately on young

children. Diarrheal illnesses accounted for at least 8 percent of total lost disability-

adjusted life years in developing countries in 1990 (Smith, Corvalan, and Kjellstrom

1999) and for some 20 percent of deaths among children under age five (Kosek, Bern,

and Guerant 2003). Acute diarrhea can result in severe dehydration, and persistent


                                                                                           5
diarrhea may predispose children to malnutrition (Briend 1990; Schorling and others

1990; Lancet 1991; Guerrant, Lima, and Davidson 1992), making them more susceptible

to other infectious diseases. Prospective (though nonrandomized) community-based

fieldwork in Sub-Saharan Africa summarized by the Child Health Research Project (CHR

1998) concludes that diarrhea leads to impaired weight gain, particularly in infants less

than one year old and those not exclusively breast-fed. Malnutrition is in turn associated

with increased risk of death from childhood illnesses (Pelltier and others 1995). 2

    {Table 1 about here}

       Several child health interventions—including breastfeeding, immunization against

diarrheal diseases, oral rehydration therapy, and micronutrient supplementation—have

been shown to be both effective and cost-effective in treating and preventing diarrhea in a

series of randomized trials (for a review see Hill, Kirkwood, and Edmond 2004).

       Exclusive breastfeeding is widely accepted as a means of preventing diarrhea in

infants up to six months of age, and continued breastfeeding also has protective effects

for older children (Raisler, Alexander, and O’Compo 1999; Perera and others 1999;

WHO Collaborative Study Team 2000). Weaning foods prepared in unhygienic

conditions are frequently heavily contaminated with pathogens and are thus a cause of

diarrhea and associated malnutrition (Lanata 2003; Hendricks and Badruddin 1994 Monte

and others 1997 Mortajemi and others 1993). Interventions to improve nutrition during
2
  Perhaps because of the endogenous relationship between diarrhea and malnutrition,
some observational studies also suggest that early childhood diarrhea is correlated with
reduced fitness and cognitive performance for children ages 6–9 but have not been able
isolate a causal effect (Guerrant and others 1999; Berkman and others 2002; Niehaus and
others 2002). Impact evaluations of programs providing food supplements to primary
school children generally show a positive relationship with schooling and cognitive
outcomes, in addition to nutritional indicators (Chavez and Martinez 1986; Martorell
1993; Pollitt and others 1993).


                                                                                       6
weaning compliment interventions that encourage early exclusive breastfeeding and

extended breastfeeding.

       Rotavirus is a leading cause of severe diarrheal disease and dehydration in infants.

It most frequently attacks children 6–24 months and causes 20 percent of all diarrheal

deaths among children under age five (Motarjemi and others 1993). In developing

countries rotavirus gastroenteritis is responsible for approximately half a million deaths

per year among children under age five (Parashar and others 2003). Two new vaccines

have shown efficacy against rotavirus gastroenteritis (Ruiz-Palacios and others 2006;

Vesikari and others 2006) and are now on the market. The inclusion of these vaccines in

national vaccination programs is a promising intervention against diarrheal disease and

mortality.

       Oral rehydration therapy appears to have been responsible for significant

reductions in diarrheal mortality since 1980 (Miller and Hirschorn 1995; Victora and

others 1996; Victoria and others 2000). Micronutrient supplementation, including

therapeutic and preventative supplementation with zinc and therapeutic supplementation

with vitamin A, has also been found to have positive impacts on diarrheal disease and

death (Grotto and others 2003; Zinc Investigators’ Collaborative Group 1999, 2000;

Black 1998; Ramakrishnan and Martorell 1998; Beaton and others 1993).

       As coverage is still incomplete, finding ways to increase access to traditional

child health programs in an affordable way remains critical. For example, continuous zinc

supplementation can be costly where high levels of home food production make

fortification infeasible and households must be induced to adopt micronutrient

“sprinkles” sachets (Zlotkin and others 2005; USAID 2004a). Similarly, identifying


                                                                                         7
effective mechanisms for encouraging breastfeeding and consistent use of oral

rehydration therapy remains a challenge (Sikorski and others 2003).



Individual-Level Behavior Change


       Individual choices and investments, such as handwashing and point-of-use water

treatment (including improved storage), can break the chain of transmission of fecal-oral

diseases. This section reviews the evidence on the health impact of these hygiene

behavior modifications and discusses the need for further work investigating how to

increase uptake of these behaviors.


Handwashing


       Hands are a common vector for the transmission of fecal-oral diseases (Curtis,

Cairncross, and Yonli 2000). Handwashing with soap after defecation, after cleaning

children, and before and after food handling can interrupt this diarrheal disease

transmission path.

       The effectiveness of handwashing as a means of reducing diarrhea has been

convincingly established in several settings. Luby and others (2004a) report the results of

a recent cluster-randomized trial in a large sample of households in Karachi, Pakistan, of

a handwashing promotion campaign aimed at mothers. Infants and malnourished children

under age five living in treatment households had 39 percent fewer days of diarrhea

compared with the control group after one year of intervention and observation. Gains

roughly doubled after a second year of promotion as relatively poor households increased

their compliance (Luby and others 2004b).


                                                                                      8
       A recent survey of the literature evaluating the effect of handwashing with soap

on diarrhea risk in developing countries (Curtis and Cairncross 2003) identified two other

randomized controlled trials with more than two communities in their samples (Khan

1982; Han and Hlaing 1989). Each study had a relatively large sample size randomly

divided into treatment and control groups and measured compliance by observing or

weighing provided bars of soap as well as by tracking diarrhea cases. The studies report

large positive effects of handwashing and soap provision programs on diarrhea incidence.

Khan (1982) reports that the provision of either soap and water storage containers or soap

alone, along with initial instructions to increase the frequency of handwashing, reduced

shigella reinfection by 67 percent in Bangladesh. Han and Hlaing (1989) report a 40

percent reduction in diarrhea incidence among children under age two (though no

reduction in incidence for older children) following hand washing education and the

provision of soap to a random sample of mothers in Rangoon (Yangon).


Point-of-Use Water Treatment


       Point-of-use water treatment and improved water storage practices reduce the

microbacteriological contamination of water held in homes. Numerous technologies have

been developed, including chemical disinfection, that rely on simple household bleach or

other methods such as use of flocculants, adsorption, filtration, boiling, or solar

disinfection.

       Evidence from randomized evaluations assessing the health impacts of various

interventions to improve water quality at the point of use suggests that this is a promising

way to reduce diarrheal incidence (Semenza and others 1998; Quick and others 1999;



                                                                                       9
Quick and others 2002; Sobsey, Handzel, and Venczel 2003; Reller and others 2003;

Clasen and others 2004). Randomized impact evaluations of point-of-use water treatment

systems observe statistically significant reductions of 20–30 percent in diarrheal

incidence at the household level (Quick and others 1999; Reller and others 2003) 3, 4 . In at

least one setting this level of reduction was sufficient to generate measurable reductions

in mortality from all causes (Crump and others 2005).


Strategies to Promote Individual Behavior Change


       The studies reviewed in this section suggest that the effectiveness of handwashing

and point-of-use water treatment has been well established and that attention should now

be given to efforts to understand effective promotion strategies and how to sustain

behavior change. The health benefits of this class of interventions depend on individual

decisions to adopt and consistently adhere to certain behaviors. For both types of

3
  Despite these large reported gains, however, many of the same studies also find that the
observed reductions in diarrhea incidence associated with the intervention are
concentrated among children under age one and over age five. Surprisingly, the age
group with the highest rate of diarrhea incidence, children ages 1–5, may be least affected
by this intervention (Quick and others 1999; Reller and others 2003; Sobsey and others
2003). However, in two cases larger gains from point-of-use water treatment are
identified in children under age five. In Uzbekistan diarrhea incidence in children under
five fell by 85 percent after the provision of a chlorine-stock solution and a narrow-
necked storage container. In rural Bolivia Clasen and others (2004) identified reductions
in diarrhea incidence of about 83 percent in children under age five with a sample size of
30 children in 50 households. In this case, the treatment system provided to households
was a ceramic water filter that left the taste of water unchanged. Uptake appears to have
been around 70 percent, suggesting that improved compliance with treatment relative to
the studies that supplied disinfectant cannot explain the observed result. It is unclear why
the large gains identified in these two studies for the most vulnerable group have not been
found in other contexts.
4
  Findings from a few randomized trial studies of solar disinfection of water in homes are
also consistent with this conclusion. In a Maasai community in Kenya researchers
identified large health benefits for children under age six from the exposure of drinking
water to sunlight (Conroy and others 1999, 2001).


                                                                                       10
behavior the observed impacts were generated in settings where high uptake (around 70

percent in the case of point-of-use water treatment) was supported by weekly or daily

reminders by fieldworkers. Such extremely high-intensity contact with fieldworkers is

prohibitively expensive to provide on a large-scale basis. 5 The challenge of increasing

uptake is further complicated by infectious disease externalities; because private benefits

of product use are smaller than the social benefits, to the extent that take up affects the

disease environment, inefficiently low levels of adoption can be expected even at

subsidized product prices. Kremer and Miguel (forthcoming) describe such a

phenomenon in the case of deworming drug use in western Kenya.

       Identifying cost-effective ways to facilitate long-term behavior change and

technology adoption requires additional research comparing alternative messages and

message delivery avenues in several cultural contexts. 6 For example, rigorous evaluations

are needed that compare health education messages directed toward women emphasizing

family health and those emphasizing children’s well-being in particular. The comparative



5
  Some follow-up studies several years after soap provision and hygiene behavior change
efforts find that the behavior change can persist (Wilson and Chandler 1993; Shordt and
Cairncross 2004). However, as the initial interventions studied were not randomized, this
finding is somewhat difficult to interpret. A follow-up study five years after a quasi-
randomized community-level education intervention in Bangladesh (described in greater
detail later in this article) suggests that the hygiene education effort there may have been
relatively ineffective as five years later treatment households did not exhibit better
hygiene than control households (Hoque and others 1996).
6
  Low handwashing rates in U.S. elementary schools have prompted interest in the use of
instant hand sanitizers (which do not require water) in classrooms as an alternative means
of breaking disease transmission. A review of the evidence on the efficacy of sanitizers
(Meadows and LeSaux 2004) identified one (clustered) randomized control trial of this
technology to date. That trial found that sanitizers can effectively reduce absenteeism as a
result of illness (White and others 2001). Based solely on that study, it is unclear whether
sanitizers may be suitable for a developing country context, but this may be another
avenue for future research


                                                                                        11
usefulness of positive and negative messages should also be explored, as has been done

in other campaigns aimed at inducing behavioral changes in developed countries.

       There is some evidence that inducing health or hygiene behavioral change may be

especially difficult among the poorest groups. For example, Pant and others (1996)

divided a random sample of 40,000 children from 75 locations in Nepal into two

randomly assigned groups and provided one group with vitamin A supplements and the

other with nutrition education. The risk of child mortality declined equally in the two

groups, but the education program was more costly to deliver. In addition, education was

the least cost-effective when maternal literacy was low. In the handwashing evaluation

described above, Luby and others (2004b) report that it took longer for the poorest

households to increase their compliance with the program, resulting in lower initial

reductions in diarrhea incidence compared with the full effect ultimately demonstrated.

       In the case of point-of-use water treatment another important next step is to

examine whether people are willing to permanently adopt or pay for systems that affect

the taste of water, slow the rate at which water can be consumed (filtration, for example),

or require that traditional storage containers be abandoned (Makutsa and others 2001).

       Donors and governments are likely to be especially interested in the impact of

price on uptake in the market for point-of-use water treatment products. There is some

new evidence on these questions in recent work by Ashraf, Berry, and Shapiro (2006).

This randomized evaluation suggests that demand depends on the price for in-home

chlorination products in Zambia, with 80 percent of a representative sample of

households (in a door-to-door sale) agreeing to purchase a chlorine-based point-of-use

water treatment product at a price that is about 60 percent less than the subsidized market


                                                                                       12
price, and about 50 percent willing to purchase the product at the subsidized price

available in markets. No information is available about the elasticity of demand at higher

prices that would reflect full cost-recovery pricing.

       Further research investigating appropriate subsidy levels and marketing strategies

for point-of-use water treatment products is a critical open area for future work. Ashraf,

Berry, and Shapiro (2006) present some evidence based on random assignment of

households that charging a nonzero price screens out customers who are less likely to use

the product. They argue that charging thus avoids waste of the product. However, the

non-use may reflect saving of the product for later use, perhaps during times of

epidemics. Moreover, the waste is likely to be quantitatively much smaller in the context

of an ongoing program, because while people may accept a few bottles and never use

them, it is unlikely that they would accept bottles month after month that they would

never use. It is much more likely that they would build up a small stock of the product,

and then not take more free bottles unless they were depleting their existing stock. Thus,

the “waste” potentially avoided by charging a positive price on the basis of screening

considerations is likely to be small, unless people develop alternative uses for the

product.

       In some contexts and for some behaviors households may not be the most cost-

effective entry point for message dissemination. Evaluations are needed that examine the

relative effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of community-level efforts to stimulate

demand for services or hygiene education efforts like the Total Sanitation Campaign, a

community-based campaign to encourage sanitary habits, with a special emphasis on

eliminating open defecation near villages. Chaudhury and Hammer (2006) are currently



                                                                                        13
evaluating the Total Sanitation Campaign in India, and an evaluation of the program in

Bangladesh is also under way. Manandhar and others (2004) demonstrate that

community-level education of women’s groups can improve birth outcomes. Further

work might assess whether such education efforts can influence other hygiene behaviors,

and the scalability of this approach.

       Other feasible delivery mechanisms for inducing sustained uptake might include

programs that work through maternity clinics (potentially providing incentives for

women to take up antenatal services) or school-based programs. It is possible, for

example, that providing soap, handwashing facilities, and messages about the importance

of handwashing after defecation in primary schools might be an effective and cost-

effective means of promoting long-term behavior change.

       Research is also needed to identify how social learning about hygiene behavior

and water treatment occurs. For example, little is known about who the opinion leaders

are for water-related matters, and identifying them and encouraging them to adopt

treatment systems or hygiene behaviors might be critical to wider community adoption.

Research could examine, for example, whether encouraging women’s groups to use water

treatment systems is a particularly effective means of targeting mothers of young children

and thus increasing uptake among the young when weaning occurs. Such targeted

dissemination to women could be compared with targeted dissemination to political

leaders (likely men) and wider service provision.



Infrastructure provision




                                                                                     14
        This section reviews the evidence on the provision of piped water and sanitation

and of community-level infrastructure.


Piped Water and Sanitation


        There is strong evidence that large-scale investments in water and sanitation

infrastructure can have massive impacts on child mortality. Cutler and Miller (2005) use

historical variation in the timing and location of water filtration and chlorination

technology adoption across U.S. cities to identify the contribution of improved water

quality to the epidemiological transition in American cities. They find that clean water

was responsible for about half the observed decline in mortality and nearly two-thirds of

the reduction in child mortality in cities.

        In a rural setting Watson (2006) exploits the fact that a series of water and

sanitation interventions introduced on Native American reservations in the United States

during 1960–98 were likely uncorrelated with other factors affecting infant health and

plausibly exogenous to local community characteristics after accounting for county and

year fixed effects. This research suggests that a 10 percent increase in the fraction of

homes with improved water and sanitation services reduced infant mortality by 4 percent.

Infant mortality rates fell among local residents not living on the reservation as well—a

result Watson uses as a means to measure the significant positive externalities associated

with the program.

        An important question is how to deliver piped water and sanitation services in

developing countries. There is some evidence that, at least in some settings, allowing

private firms to provide piped water service can improve health outcomes. Galiani,



                                                                                        15
Gertler, and Schargrodsky (2005) study a privatization reform that took place for about

30 percent of municipal water companies in Argentina in the 1990s to identify the impact

of ownership on child health. They estimate that child mortality overall fell 5–7 percent

in areas that privatized their water services because in this context privatization improved

service and expanded coverage,, and that the effect was largest in the poorest areas, at

around 24 percent. While privatization of water supply is associated with significant

reductions in deaths from infectious and parasitic diseases, it appears uncorrelated with

deaths from causes unrelated to water conditions.


Limited Rural Water and Sanitation Infrastructure


       A large body of epidemiological literature investigates the impact of improved

rural water supply and sanitation service provision (often as part of a package of

interventions that includes hygiene education) on health outcomes (reviews include Blum

and Feachem 1983; Esrey, Feachem, and Hughes 1985; Esrey and Habicht 1986; Esrey

and others 1991; Rosen and Vincent 1999; and Fewtrell, Kaufmann and others 2005).

       Many of the studies that find health effects for water and sanitation infrastructure

improvements short of piped water and sewerage suffer from critical methodological

problems. Moreover, more recent research that addresses some of these problems seems

to find little evidence of substantial health impacts from rural water infrastructure.

       Some have interpreted the existing literature as suggesting that providing water

infrastructure short of pipes is not enough on its own and must be combined with other

interventions, such as improved sanitation or hygiene. As discussed in the following

section, however, there does not seem to be much evidence for such complementarity and



                                                                                         16
in fact there is some evidence against it. Even if complementarity exists between

communal rural water infrastructure and other interventions at some level of provision,

not enough is known about the nature of the complementarity to use this information

operationally. Finally, there are not yet adequate models for maintaining small-scale rural

infrastructure, as discussed later, although contracting methods deserve further

exploration.

       Two studies by Esrey (1991, 1996) argue that water infrastructure is less effective

than sanitation provision and hygiene education in fighting diarrheal disease. These

publications are frequently cited as evidence for the relative importance of sanitation

investments and hygiene education over the provision of improved water (see, for

example, USAID 1996; Vaz and Jha 2001; and World Bank 2002). In a review of 25

studies deemed by the authors to be relatively rigorous, Esrey and others (1991) attempt

to separate the impacts of water supply, sanitation, and hygiene education interventions

on diarrheal illness. They conclude that either sanitation supply or hygiene education

provision results in nearly twice the median reduction in diarrheal incidence as an

investment in water quality alone or in water quantity and water quality together.

       Using multivariate regression analysis of household infrastructure status and

diarrhea prevalence from several countries, Esrey (1996) argues that the benefits of

improved water quality occur only together with improved sanitation and only when there

is a water source within the home. One hypothesis for the relative ineffectiveness of

communal water infrastructure is that a high degree of recontamination of water occurs in

transport and storage when people fail to wash their hands frequently. A low correlation

between source and home water quality has been demonstrated frequently in



                                                                                        17
nonexperimental data (Wright, Gundry, and Conroy 2004). A limited impact of communal

water supply would also be consistent with an epidemiological model in which the

primary causes of diarrheal disease are water-washed (not waterborne), in which case

improvements in water quality are likely to be less effective than interventions that make

handwashing less costly, such as providing taps.

       Many studies of water and sanitation infrastructure provision in developing

countries lack a plausible comparison group and thus, without a credible counterfactual,

cannot isolate a causal treatment effect from service provision. In the case of sanitation,

for example, several case-control studies that compare health outcomes among children

presenting at hospitals or clinics with diarrhea and children with similar observable

characteristics but presenting with other illnesses (such as upper respiratory infections)

have found that access to latrines reduces acute diarrhea incidence (Daniels and others

1990; Meddings and others 2004). However, this research strategy is vulnerable to the

same methodological critique as cross-sectional regression analyses: cases that are similar

across observable characteristics may differ systematically along dimensions that are

difficult to measure, “confounding” the interpretation of results.

       The two early evaluations (Aziz and others 1990, and Huttly and others 1987) of

infrastructure provision that used a prospective design, albeit in a very low number of

communities, appeared to demonstrate that the provision of wells and latrines can be

effective. Aziz and others (1990) compare the impact of an intervention in Bangladesh

that provided multiple interventions, including water pumps, hygiene education, and

latrines, to two villages (820 households) with three control villages (750 households),

about 5 kilometers away. The published article does not mention whether the villages



                                                                                        18
were randomly selected. Children six months to five years of age in the intervention area

experienced 25 percent fewer episodes of diarrhea than those in the comparison area.

       Huttly and others (1987) and Blum and others (1990) study the impact of the

provision of borehole wells with hand-pumps, pit latrines, and health education on

dracunculiasis (guinea worm disease), diarrhea, and nutritional status in Nigeria in 1983–

86. The study compared three intervention villages (850 households) and two comparison

villages (420 households). Because of implementation difficulties, their results largely

reflect the effect of the installation of wells with pumps. The prevalence of wasting

(defined as less than 80 percent of desirable weight for height) among children under

three years of age declined significantly in the intervention villages, though diarrhea

incidence did not decline measurably (perhaps because diarrhea is notoriously difficult to

measure).

       A key shortcoming of these studies is that they examine a very small number of

communities and the statistical hypothesis testing fails to adequately account for the fact

that the interventions being evaluated are provided at the community rather than the

household level. Because households within a community are likely to resemble each

other, this clustered sampling reduces the power of statistical tests to determine the

existence and size of the treatment effect, implying that reported confidence intervals are

incorrect. To capture the variance in outcome variables across space and time, many

localities should be included in both the treatment and comparison groups. Though the

exact number of clusters required for a study depends on context-specific estimates of the

intracluster correlation of outcome variables, Esrey (1996) suggests that at least 20

clusters should be included in both treatment and comparison samples.



                                                                                          19
       More recent work in this area covers a large enough number of communities to

draw statistical inferences and finds little evidence that communal rural water

infrastructure substantially improves health. Kremer and others (2006) evaluate a spring

protection intervention at a sample of 1,200 households in 175 communities using a

randomized approach as part of a larger impact evaluation of a series of water and

hygiene interventions in western Kenya. They find that spring protection is very effective

in improving the quality of water at the source. Among households that collected all of

their drinking water from the sample spring at baseline, spring protection is also highly

effective in improving household water quality. Nonetheless, preliminary results from a

subset of the data suggest that the improvements in water quality do not have substantial

effects on diarrhea incidence, child weight, or child height. Consistent with this, revealed

preference estimates of willingness to pay for the improved source water quality decline

over time. There is also little evidence of significant spillover benefits of the program on

neighboring communities. In related work, initial results from a World Bank financed

five-armed randomized trial in Afghanistan indicate that only a combination of hygiene

education, provision of wells, and treatment of water with dilute sodium hypochlorite had

a significant effect on diarrhea incidence among all age groups (Loevinsohn 2007). No

effect was found from these interventions, either alone or in combination, on diarrhea

incidence among children under five.


Complementarity between Source Water Quality and Other Factors




                                                                                       20
       Some researchers have argued that although improved communal water supply

does not reduce diarrhea on its own, it does do so in combination with other interventions

and should therefore be part of a larger package.

       Both Kremer and others (2006) and Luby and others (2006) use experimental

approaches to directly address complementarity. Kremer and others estimate that access

to sanitation or hygiene knowledge before an improved water supply program does not

appear to enable households to better translate quality improvements in source water into

either household water quality gains or health improvements in their study region in

Kenya. Luby and others report the result of a clustered randomized control trial in

Karachi in which a random sample of households received handwashing promotion and a

random sample received point-of-use drinking water technologies. A subset of these

households received both interventions. While each of the home-based interventions

reduced diarrhea incidence, there was no statistically significant additional benefit from

the combined intervention. That is, the interventions function more as substitutes than as

complements.

       As Luby and others discuss, their findings are consistent with an epidemiological

model in which disease thresholds are qualitatively important. If a large proportion of

diarrhea incidence is caused by pathogens that must be present in large doses to cause

disease, substantially reducing the organisms ingested may reduce diarrhea incidence, but

further marginal reductions could be much less important.

       The results from these two studies suggest that it would be a mistake to assume

that improvements in communal water supply will be effective in combination with other




                                                                                       21
interventions. Even if complementarities are present in certain circumstances, without

better knowledge of when they are important this is of limited operational relevance.


The Challenge of Infrastructure Maintenance


       To remain effective, water and sanitation infrastructure require management and

upkeep. This section reviews the evidence on various infrastructure management

schemes, cost-sharing efforts, and the involvement of women in managing public goods

provision.

       Infrastructure maintenance has historically been a major problem in developing

countries, in particular in the rural water sector. For instance, a quarter of India’s water

infrastructure is believed to be in need of repair (Ray 2004). World Development Report

2004 (World Bank 2003) estimates that more than a third of rural water infrastructure in

South Asia is not functional. Miguel and Gugerty (2005) report that in western Kenya

nearly 50 percent of borehole wells dug in the 1980s, and subsequently maintained using

a community-based maintenance model, had fallen into disrepair by 2000. Difficulties

with maintaining water infrastructure, particularly in rural areas, reduce the cost-

effectiveness of these interventions relative to other measures that prevent diarrhea.

       Involving women in managing environmental public goods. Some of the

sociology literature has predicted that increasing the involvement of women in user

committees will improve the management of collectively owned natural resources

because women’s social networks provide them with prior experience with collective

action (Agarwal 2000). In addition, since women are major users of these goods,




                                                                                         22
women’s involvement in creating the rules may be especially important for compliance

(Zwarteveen and Meinzen-Dick 2001).

       However, the evidence on the impact of women’s involvement in public goods

management is limited. Efforts using laboratory experiments to assess whether women

supply different levels of public goods than men or are more cooperative (Nowell and

Tinkler 1994; Eckel and Grossman 1998; Solow and Kirkwood 2002) seem to be

sensitive to the form of the experiment. Much of the field evidence on this question is

hampered by concerns about reverse causality (for example, Dollar, Fisman, and Gatti

2001). It is difficult to determine whether the inclusion of women causes a particular

outcome to occur, whether the fact that an outcome occurs encourages the participation

and inclusion of women, or whether some other factors are driving these results. This

problem affects both retrospective analyses (Prokopy 2004) and case studies

(INSTRAW-UN 1990; Wijk-Sijbesma 1998; Gross, Wijk, and Mukherjee 2001), neither

of which is able to establish a causal relationship between women’s participation and

observed outcomes.

       Chattopadhyay and Duflo (2004) identify a causal relationship between women’s

participation and project outcomes in their study of a randomized policy change in India

that increased the role of women in policy decisionmaking. A 1993 constitutional

amendment called for a third of village council leader positions to be reserved for

women. Rules ensured random assignment of the leadership reservations. Chattopadhyay

and Duflo show that village councils headed by women were more likely to invest in

public infrastructure for drinking water, and, more generally, that councils dominated by

one gender were more likely to invest in goods important to that gender. Of course, a



                                                                                      23
finding that women are more likely to invest in water infrastructure does not necessarily

imply that they will be more effective in maintaining it.

       Community-level infrastructure management schemes. A standard model for

maintaining donor-funded infrastructure projects in developing countries is to establish

user groups responsible for maintenance and management. Giving communities direct

control or ownership over key project decisions is intended to improve the quality of

public services and increase financial sustainability, thus reducing the need for ongoing

donor funding or involvement. 7

       There is little convincing empirical evidence, however, that local user-committee

management of local public goods such as improved drinking water sources results in

either greater financial sustainability or better quality service than ongoing centralized

funding from public budgets. Collective action problems may be difficult to overcome,

and voluntary committees tasked with collecting user fees may be difficult to sustain or

empower. The rural water sector is characterized by both significant infectious disease

externalities, as discussed earlier, and, in most poor countries, by weak fundraising

capabilities because of weak local institutions generally.

       In a recent comprehensive review of community-based development projects,

Mansuri and Rao (2004) note that existing research examining “successful” community-

based projects does not compare these projects with centralized mechanisms for service

delivery or infrastructure maintenance (for example, city or state financed). This makes it

difficult to determine whether alternative project designs would have had different


7
 Other goals may also be important. For example, community-based development may
be expected to empower poor people or strengthen local governance.


                                                                                        24
results. The limited empirical evidence suggests the impact of the community-based

development approach on infrastructure maintenance is mixed at best. 8

       Contracting for private maintenance service may be a promising alternative to

committee-based management schemes. The evidence from Argentina discussed earlier

(Galiani, Gertler, and Schargrodsky 2005) suggests that contracted private provision of

service can expand coverage and improve health outcomes at least in certain settings or in

middle-income countries. Several other nonrandomized studies in the water sector also

provide suggestive evidence that continued support (financial and otherwise) may be

necessary for effective infrastructure investments and public service delivery (Katz and

Sara 1998; Kleemeier 2000; Dayton-Johnson 2000; Newman and others 2002). In other

public health settings contracting for private service provision has been demonstrated to

be effective. Bloom and others (2006) show that government contracting of health

services in Cambodia improved service at least for specifically targeted outcomes.

Certainly, further research is needed that transparently compares the counterfactual of

subsidized public service provision and community-based management schemes.



Conclusion and Recommendations

8
  In a study of water projects in 44 Indonesian villages Isham and Kahkonen (1999) find
that the existence of local water committees had either no effect or a negative effect on
service performance, though greater community participation in the design of
community-based water projects did improve water supply and health outcomes
somewhat. On the other hand, Khwaja (2003) finds that community-managed projects in
Pakistan, including investments in irrigation and drinking water, performed better than
projects implemented by the government without community participation. However, he
also finds that project-specific factors, such as the quality of the outside facilitator, may
have a larger impact on project success than community characteristics.




                                                                                        25
       Randomized controlled trials have established that vaccination, oral rehydration

therapy, breastfeeding, and micronutrient supplementation are effective in reducing the

burden of diarrhea. Convincing evidence from rigorous evaluations has also

demonstrated the effectiveness of point-of-use water treatment and handwashing. There

is evidence that piped water and sanitation infrastructure can improve health and that

private management of such services can work well. In contrast, there is little evidence of

the effectiveness of communal rural water infrastructure in fighting diarrheal disease.

Reviews of older work with retrospective data yield mixed results but have generally

found that sanitation and hygiene are more important than water quality. Two prospective

studies indicated gains from communal water infrastructure in particular, but these are

methodologically problematic. Recent evidence from randomized evaluations provides

little evidence for substantial effects of communal water infrastructure on diarrheal

disease. Communal water infrastructure may be effective in fighting diarrhea in certain

environments, but unless this is demonstrated, other approaches seem a higher priority for

reducing the burden of diarrheal disease.

       While this review suggests that investments in communal water infrastructure

may not be a priority for fighting diarrheal diseases, these projects may be justified on

other grounds. Women’s time may be freed from water transport duties. In urban and

peri-urban areas improved water supply may also free households of the need to purchase

drinking water from vendors (Briscoe 1984; Okun 1988; Varley, Tarvid, and Chao 1998;

Meddings and others 2004). Standard cost-benefit techniques can establish whether

individual projects are justified on these grounds.




                                                                                        26
       More work is needed to develop and assess alternative strategies for generating

sustained uptake of handwashing and point-of-use treatment of water. Where possible,

projects should be designed from the outset to accommodate a rigorous evaluation.

Projects should also be designed to allow for estimation of the impact of both individual

interventions and packages of interventions, so that alternative approaches can be directly

compared and issues of complementarity can be more fully assessed.




References


Agarwal, B. 2000. “Conceptualizing Environmental Collective Action: Why Gender

       Matters.” Cambridge Journal of Economics 24 (3): 283–310.

Ashraf, N., J. Berry, and J. M. Shapiro. 2006. “Can Higher Prices Stimulate Product Use?

       Evidence from a Field Experiment in Zambia.” Harvard Business School,

       Cambridge, Mass.

Aziz, K., B. Hoque, K. Hasan, M. Patwary, S. Huttly, M. Rahaman, and R. Feachem.

       1990. “Reduction in Diarrhoeal Diseases in Children in Rural Bangladesh by

       Environmental and Behavioral Modifications.” Transactions of the Royal Society

       of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 84 (3): 433–38.

Beaton, G. H., R. Martorell, K. Aronson, A. B. Edmonston, G. McCabe, A. C. Ross, and

       others. 1993. “Effectiveness of Vitamin A Supplementation in the Control of

       Young Child Mortality in Developing Countries.” Nutrition Policy Discussion




                                                                                     27
       Paper 13. United Nations Administrative Committee on Coordination,

       Subcommittee on Nuitrition, Geneva.

Berkman, D.S., A.G. Lescano, R.H. Gilman, S.L. Lopez, and M.M. Black. 2002. “Effects

       of Stunting, Diarrhoeal Disease, and Parasitic Infection During Infancy on

       Cognition in Late Childhood: A Follow-Up Study.” Lancet 359 (9306): 564–71.

Bloom, Erik, Elizabeth King, Michael Kremer, Indu Bhushan, David Clingingsmith,

       Benjamin Loevinsohn, Rathavuth Hong, and J. Brad Schwartz. 2006.

       “Contracting for Health: Evidence from Cambodia.” Harvard University,

       Cambridge.

Black, R. E. 1998. “Therapeutic and Preventive Effects of Zinc on Serious Childhood

       Infections Diseases in Developing Countries.” American Journal of Clinical

       Nutrition 68 (supplement): 476s–9s.

Blum, D., and R. G. Feacham. 1983. “Measuring the Impact of Water Supply and

       Sanitation Investments on Diarrheal Diseases: Problems of Methodology.”

       International Journal of Epidemiology 12 (3): 357–65.

Blum, D., R. Emeh, S. R. A. Huttly, O. Dosunmu-Oganbe, N. Okeke, M. Ajala, J. I.

       Okora, C. Akeijobi, B. R. Kirkwood, and R. G. Feachem. 1990. “The Imo State

       (Nigeria) Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Project 2: Impact on

       Dracunculiasis, Diarrhoea, and Nutritional Status.” Transactions of the Royal

       Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 84 (2): 316–21.




                                                                                    28
Briend, A. 1990. “Is Diarrhea a Major Cause of Malnutrition among the Under-Fives in

       Developing Countries? A Review of Available Evidence.” European Journal of

       Clinical Nutrition 44: 611–28.

Briscoe, J. 1984. “Water Supply and Health in Developing Countries: Selective Primary

       Health Care Revisited.” American Journal of Public Health 74 (9): 1009–13.

Cairncross, S. 1996. “Water Quality, Quantity, and Health.” In J. O. Drangert, R.

       Swiderski, and M. Woodhouse, eds., Safe Water Environments. Water and

       Environmental Health Studies 24. Sweden: Linkoping University.

Cairncross, S., and V. Valdmanis. 2006. “Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene

       Promotion.” In Jamison and others, eds., Disease Control Priorities in Developing

       Countries. 2nd edition. New York: Oxford University Press.

Chattopadhyay, R., and E. Duflo. 2004. “Women as Policy Makers: Evidence from a

       Randomized Policy Experiment in India.” Econometrica 72 (5): 1409–43.

Chaudhury, N., and J. Hammer. 2006. “Sanitation and Child Health: Evaluation of a

       Randomized Hygiene and Sanitation Information Campaign in an Indian State.”

       World Bank, Washington, D.C. Development Economics Research Group

Chavez, A.V., and C. Martinez. 1986. “Efectos de la Desnutricion Moderada Sobre el

       Rendimiento Escolar Temprano.” La Revista de Investigacion Clinica 38

       (Suplemento): 115–19.

CHR (Child Health Research Project). 1998. “Childhood Diarrhea in Sub-Saharan

       Africa.” Child Health Research Project Special Report 2 (1). Cambridge, MA




                                                                                    29
Clasen, T. F., G. Parra, S. Boisson, and S. Collin. 2004. “Reducing Diarrhea Through the

       Use of Household-Based Ceramic Water Filters: A Randomized Controlled Trial

       in Rural Bolivia.” American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 70 (6):

       651–57.

Conroy, R. M., M. Meegan, T. Joyce, K. McGuigan, and J. Barnes. 1999. “Solar

       Disinfection of Water Reduces Diarrheal Disease: An Update.” Archives of

       Disease in Childhood 81 (4): 337–8.

———. 2001. “Solar Disinfection of Drinking Water Protects Against Cholera in

       Children Under Six Years of Age.” Archives of Disease in Childhood 85 (4): 293–

       95.

Crump J. A., P. O. Otieno, L. Slutsker, B. Keswick, D. Rosen, R. Hoekstra, J. Vulule,

       and S. Luby. 2005. “Household Based Treatment of Drinking Water with

       Flocculant-Disinfectant for Preventing Diarrhoea in Areas with Turbid Source

       Water in Rural Western Kenya: Cluster Randomised Controlled Trial.” British

       Medical Journal 331: 478–83.

Curtis, V., and S. Cairncross. 2003. “Effect of Washing Hands with Soap on Diarrhea

       Risk: A Systematic Review.” Lancet Infectious Disease 3 (5): 275–81.

Curtis, V., S. Cairncross, and R. Yonli. 2000. “Domestic Hygiene and Diarrhea—

       Pinpointing the Problem.” Tropical Medicine and International Health 5 (1): 22–

       32.

Cutler, D., and G. Miller. 2005. “The Role of Public Health Improvements in Health

       Advances: The 20th Century United States.” Demography 42 (1): 1–22.



                                                                                   30
Daniels, D. L., S. Cousens, L. Makoae, and R. Feachem. 1990. “A Case-Control Study of

       the Impact of Improved Sanitation on Diarrhea Morbidity in Lesotho.” Bulletin of

       the World Health Organization 68 (4): 455–64.

Dayton-Johnson, J. 2000. “The Determinants of Collective Action on the Commons: A

       Model with Evidence from Mexico.” Journal of Development Economics 62:

       181–208.

Dollar, D., R. Fisman, and R. Gatti. 2001. “Are Women Really the ‘Fairer’ Sex?

       Corruption and Women in Government.” Journal of Economic Behavior and

       Organization 46 (4): 423–29.

Eckel, C., and P. J. Grossman. 1998. “Are Women Less Selfish Than Men? Evidence

       from Dictator Experiments.” Economic Journal 198: 726–35.

Esrey S. A. 1996. “Waste, Water, and Well-Being: A Multicountry Study.” American

       Journal of Epidemiology 143 (6): 608–22.

Esrey S. A., and J.-P. Habicht. 1986. “Epidemiologic Evidence for Health Benefits from

       Improved Water and Sanitation in Developing Countries.” Epidemiology Review

       8: 117–28.

Esrey S. A., R. Feachem, and J. Hughes. 1985. “Interventions for the Control of Diarrheal

       Diseases among Young Children: Improving Water Supplies and Excreta

       Disposal Facilities.” Bulletin of the World Health Organization 63 (4): 757–72.

Esrey S. A., J. B. Potash, L. Roberts, and C. Shiff. 1991. “Effects of Improved Water

       Supply and Sanitation on Ascariasis, Diarrhea, Dracunculiasis, Hookworm




                                                                                    31
       Infection, Schistosomiasis, and Trachoma.” Bulletin of the World Health

       Organization 69 (5): 609–21.

Fewtrell, L., R. B. Kaufmann, D. Kay, W. Enanoria, L. Haller, and J. M. Colford. 2005.

       “Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene Interventions to Reduce Diarrhoea in Less

       Developed Countries: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” Lancet

       Infectious Diseases 5 (1): 42–52.

Galiani, S., P. Gertler, and E. Schargrodsky. 2005. “Water for Life: The Impact of the

       Privatization of Water Services on Child Mortality.” Journal of Political

       Economy 113 (1): 83–120.

Gross, B., C. van Wijk, and N. Mukherjee. 2001. “Linking Sustainability with Demand,

       Gender, and Poverty: A Study in Community-Managed Water Supply Projects in

       15 Countries.” World Bank Water and Sanitation Program, Washington, D.C.

Grotto, I., M. Mimouni, M. Gdalevich, and D. Mimouni. 2003. “Vitamin A

       Supplementation and Childhood Morbidity from Diarrhea and Respiratory

       Infections: A Meta-Analysis.” Journal of Pediatrics 142: 297–304.

Guerrant, D. I., S. Moore, A. Lima, P. Patrick, J. Schorling, and R. Guerrant. 1999.

       “Association of Early Childhood Diarrhea and Cryptosporidiosis with Impaired

       Physical Fitness and Cognitive Function Four to Seven Years Later in a Poor

       Urban Community in Northeast Brazil.” American Journal of Tropical Medicine

       and Hygiene 61 (5): 707–13.

Guerrant, R. L., Aldo A. M. Lima, and Frances Davidson. 1992. “Diarrhea as a Cause

       and Effect of Malnutrition: Diarrhea Prevents Catch-up Growth and Malnutrition



                                                                                       32
       Increases Diarrhea Frequency and Duration.” American Journal of Tropical

       Medicine and Hygiene 47 (1): 28–35.

Han, A. M., and T. Hlaing. 1989. “Prevention of Diarrhoea and Dysentery by Hand

       Washing.” Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene

       83 (1): 2128–31.

Hendricks K. M., and S. H. Badruddin. 1994. “Weaning and Diarrheal Disease.” Journal

       of Diarrhoeal Disease Research 12 (1): 4–13.

Hill, Z., B. Kirkwood, and K. Edmond. 2004. “Family and Community Practices that

       Promote Child Survival, Growth, and Development: A Review of the Evidence.”

       World Health Organization, Geneva.

Hoque, B. A., T. Juncker, R. Sack, M. Ali, and K. Aziz. 1996. “Sustainability of a Water,

       Sanitation and Hygiene Education Project in Rural Bangladesh: A 5-Year Follow-

       Up.” Bulletin of the World Health Organization 74 (4): 431–37.

Huttly S. R., A. D. Blum, B. R. Kirkwood, R. N. Emeh, and R. G. Feachem. 1987. “The

       Epidemiology of Acute Diarrhea in a Rural Community in Imo State, Nigeria.”

       Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 81: 865–70.

IIED (International Institute for Environment and Development). 2000. “Drawers of

       Water II: Thirty Years of Change in Domestic Water Use and Environmental

       Health in East Africa.” International Institute for Environment and Development,

       London.




                                                                                    33
INSTRAW-UN (International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of

       Women). 1990. “Women, Water and Sanitation.” In S. Sontheimer ed., Women

       and the Environment: A Reader. New York, N.Y.: Monthly Review Press.

Isham, J., and S. Kahkonen. 1999. “What Determines the Effectiveness of Community-

       Based Water Projects? Evidence from Central Java, Indonesia on Demand

       Responsiveness, Service Rules, and Social Capital.” Social Capital Initiative

       Paper 14. World Bank, Environmentally and Socially Sustainable Development

       Network, Washington, D.C.

Iyer, Param, Jennifer Davis, Elif Yavuz, and Barbara Evans. 2006. “Rural Water Supply,

       Sanitation, and Hygiene: A Review of 25 Years of World Bank Lending (1978–

       2003).” World Bank Water Supply and Sanitation Working Note 10. World Bank

       Water and Sanitation Program, Washington D.C.

Katz, T., and J. Sara. 1998. “Making Rural Water Supply Sustainable: Recommendations

       from a Global Study.” United Nations Development Programme and World Bank

       Water and Sanitation Program [www.wsp.org/publications/global_ruralstudy.pdf].

Keusch G.T., O. Fontaine, A. Bhargava, C. Boschi-Pinto, Z. Bhutta, E. Gotuzzo, J.

       Rivera, J. Chow, S. Shahid-Salles, and R. Laxminarayan. 2006. “Diarrheal

       Diseases.” In Jamison and others, eds., Disease Control Priorities in Developing

       Countries. 2nd edition. New York: Oxford University Press.

Khan, M. U. 1982. “Interruption of Shigellosis by Hand Washing.” Transactions of the

       Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 76 (2): 164–68.




                                                                                       34
Khwaja, A. I. 2003. “Can Good Projects Succeed in Bad Communities? The

       Determinants of Collective Success in Maintaining Local Public Goods.”

       Working Paper RWP01-043. Harvard University, Kennedy School of

       Government, Cambridge, Mass.

Kleemeier, E. 2000. “The Impact of Participation on Sustainability: an Analysis of the

       Malawi Rural Piped Scheme Program.” World Development 28 (5): 929–44.

Kosek, M., C. Bern, and R. L. Guerant. 2003. “The Global Burden of Diarrheal Disease,

       As Estimated from Studies Published between 1992 and 2000.” Bulletin of the

       World Health Organization 81 (3): 197–204.

Kremer, M., J. Leino, E. Miguel, and A. Zwane. 2006. “Spring Cleaning: Results from a

       Randomized Impact Evaluation of a Source Water Quality Improvement.”

       University of California, Berkeley.

Kremer, M. and E. Miguel. Forthcoming. “The Illusion of Sustainability,” Quarterly

       Journal of Economics.

Lancet. 1991. “Diarrhea and Malnutrition.” Lancet 338: 921–22.

Loevinsohn, B. 2007. Personal communication. 14 February 2007.

Luby, S., M. Agboatwalla, A. Razz, and J. Sobel. 2004a. “A Low-Cost Intervention for

       Cleaner Drinking Water in Karachi, Pakistan.” International Journal of Infectious

       Diseases 5 (3): 144–50.

Luby, S., M. Agboatwalla, J. Painter, A. Altaf, W. Billhimer, and R. Hoekstra. 2004b.

       “Effect of Intensive Hand Washing Promotion on Childhood Diarrhea in High-




                                                                                   35
       Risk Communities in Pakistan: A Randomized Control Trial.” Journal of the

       American Medical Association 291 (21): 2547–54.

Luby, S. M. Agboatwalla, J. Painter, A. Altaf, W. Billhimer, B. Keswick, and R.

       Hoekstra. 2006. “Combining Drinking Water Treatment and Hand Washing for

       Diarrhea Prevention, A Cluster Randomized Control Trial,” Tropical Medicine

       and International Health 11(4): 479-89.

Manandhar, D. D. Osrin, B. Prasad, N. Mesko, K. Tumbahangphe, S. Tamang, S. Thapa,

       D. Shrestha, B. Thapa, J. Shrestra and others. 2004. “Effect of a Participatory

       Intervention with Women’s Groups on Birth Outcomes in Nepal: Cluster

       Randomized Control Trial,” Lancet 364: 970-79.

Makutsa, Philip, Kilungu Nzaku, Paul Ogutu, Peter Barasa, Sam Ombeki, Alex Mwaki,

        and Robert E. Quick, (2001), "Challenges in implementing a point-of-use water

       quality intervention in Rural Kenya," American Journal of Public Health 91(10):

       1571-1573.

Mansuri, G., and V. Rao. 2004. “Community-Based and -Driven Development: A

       Critical Review.” World Bank Research Observer 19 (1): 1–39.

Martines, J., M. Phillips, and R.G. Feachem (1993), Diarrheal Diseases, in Dean T.

       Jamison et al., eds., “Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries,” Oxford

       University Press: Oxford, U.K. and New York, p. 91.

Martorell, R. 1993. "Enhancing Human Potential in Guatemalan Adults through

       Improved Nutrition in Early Childhood." Nutrition Today (January/February): 6–

       13.




                                                                                     36
Meadows, E., and N. Le Saux. 2004. “A Systematic Review of the Effectiveness of

       Antimicrobial Rinse-Free Hand Sanitizers for Prevention of Illness-Related

       Absenteeism in Elementary School Children.” BMC Public Health 4 (50).

Meddings, D. R., L. Ronald, S. Marion, J. Pinera, and A. Oppliger. 2004. “Cost

       Effectiveness of a Latrine Revision Programme in Kabul, Afganistan.” Bulletin of

       the World Health Organization 82 (4): 281–89.

Miguel E., and M. K. Gugerty. 2005. “Ethnic Divisions, Social Sanctions, and Public

       Goods in Kenya.” Journal of Public Economics 89 (11–12): 2325–68.

Miller, P., and N. Hirschhorn. 1995. “The Effect of a National Control of Diarrheal

       Diseases Program on Mortality: The Case of Egypt.” Social Science Medicine 40

       (10): 1–30.

Monte, C. M., Ashworth, A., Nations, M. K., Lima, A. A., Barreto, A., Huttly, S. R.

       1997. “Designing educational messages to improve weaning food hygiene

       practices of families living in poverty.” Social Science Medicine 44(10): 1453-64.

Motarjemi, Y., Kaferstei, F., Moy, G., Quevedo, F. 1993. “Contaminated weaning food: a

       major risk factor for diarrhoea and associated malnutrition.” Bulletin of the World

       Health Organization 71(1): 79-92.

Newman, J., M. Pradhan, L. Rawlings, G. Ridder, R. Coa, and J. Evia. 2002. “An Impact

       Evaluation of Education, Health, and Water Supply Investments by the Bolivian

       Social Investment Fund.” World Bank Economic Review 16 (2): 241–74.

Niehaus, M.D., S. Moore, P. Patrick, L. Derr, B. Lorntz, and A. Lima. 2002. “Early

       Childhood Diarrhea is Associated with Diminished Cognitive Function Four to




                                                                                      37
       Seven Years Later in Children in a Northeast Brazilian Shantytown.” American

       Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 66 (5): 590–93.

Nowell, C., and S. Tinkler. 1994. “The Influence of Gender on the Provision of a Public

       Good.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 25 (1): 25–36.

Okun, D. A. 1988. “The Value of Water Supply and Sanitation in Development: An

       Assessment.” American Journal of Public Health 78 (11): 1463–67.

Pant C. R., G. Pokharel, F. Curtale, R. Pokharel, R. Grosse, J. Lepkowski, Muhilal, M.

       Bannister, J. Gorstein, S. Pak-Gorstein, and others. 1996. “Impact of Nutrition

       Education and Mega-Dose Vitamin A Supplementation on the Health of Children

       in Nepal.” Bulletin of the World Health Organization 74 (5): 533–45.

Parashar, U. D., Bresee, J. S., Glass, R. I. 2003. “The global burden of diarrhoeal disease

       in children.” Bulletin of the World Health Organization 81(4): 236. Epub 2003

       May 16.

Pelltier, D. E. Frongillo, D. Schroeder, and J. Habicht. 1995. “The Effects of Malnutrition

       on Child Mortality in Developing Countries.” Bulletin of the World Health

       Organization 73 (4): 443–48.

Perera, B. J. C., S. Ganesan, J. Jayarasa, and S. Ranaweera. 1999. “The Impact of

       Breastfeeding Practices on Respiratory and Diarrhoeal Disease in Infancy: A

       Study from Sri Lanka.” Journal of Tropical Pediatrics 45 (2): 115–18.

Pollitt, E., K.S. Gorman, P.S. Engle, R. Martorell, and J. Rivera. 1993. “Early

       Supplementary Feeding and Cognition.” Monographs of the Society for Research

       in Child Development 58 (7): 1–99.



                                                                                      38
Prokopy, L. S. 2004. “Women’s Participation in Rural Water Supply Projects in India: Is

       it Moving Beyond Tokenism and Does it Matter?” Water Policy 6 (2): 103–16.

Quick, R. E., L. Venczal, E. Mintz, L. Soleto , J. Aparicio, M. Gironaz, L. Hutwagner, K.

       Greene, C. Bopp, K. Maloney, D. Chavez, M. Sobsey, and R. Tauxe. 1999.

       “Diarrhea Prevention in Bolivia through Point-of-Use Disinfection and Safe

       Storage: A Promising New Strategy.” Epidemiology Infections 122 (1): 83–90.

Quick, R. E., A. Kimura, A. Thevos, M. Tembo, I. Shamputa, L. Hutwagner, and E.

       Mintz. 2002. “Diarrhea Prevention through Household-Level Water Disinfection

       and Safe Storage in Zambia.” American Journal of Tropical Medicine and

       Hygiene 66 (5): 584–89.

Ramakrishnan, U., and R. Matorell. 1998. “The Role of Vitamin A in Reducing Child

       Mortality and Morbidity and Improving Growth.” Salud Publica de Mexico 40

       (2): 189–98.

Ray, I. 2004. “Water for All? Peri-Urban and Rural Water Delivery Options: The Case of

       India.” Paper presented to the University of California, Berkeley, Energy and

       Resources Group Fall Colloquium Series, 6 October.

Raisler, J., C. Alexander, and P. O’Compo. 1999. “Breastfeeding and Infant Illness: A

       Dose-Response Relationship?” American Journal of Public Health 89 (1): 25–30.

Reller, E., C. Mendoza, M. Lopez, M. Alvarez, R. Hoekstra, C. Olson, K. Baier, B.

       Keswick, and S. Luby. 2003. “A Randomized Control Trial of Household-Based

       Flocculant-Disinfectant Drinking Water Treatment for Diarrhea Prevention in




                                                                                    39
       Rural Guatemala.” American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 69(4):

       411–19.

Rosen, S., and J. R. Vincent. 1999. “Household Water Resources and Rural Productivity

       in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Review of the Evidence.” Harvard Institute for

       International Development Discussion Paper 673. Cambridge, Mass.

Ruiz-Palacios, G., I. Pérez-Schael, F. Velázquez, H. Abate, T. Breuer, S. Costa Clemens,

       B. Cheuvart, F. Espinoza, P. Gillard, B. Innis, and others. 2006. “Safety and

       Efficacy of an Attenuated Vaccine against Severe Rotavirus Gastroenteritis.” New

       England Journal of Medicine 354 (1): 11–22.

Schorling, J .B., J. F. McAuliffe, M. A. de Souza, and R. L. Guerrant. 1990.

       “Malnutrition is Associated with Increased Diarrhea Incidence and Duration

       among Children in an Urban Brazilian Slum.” International Journal of

       Epidemiology 19 (3): 728–35.

Semenza, J., L. Roberts, A. Henderson, J. Bogan, and C. Rubin. 1998. “Water

       Distribution System and Diarrheal Disease Transmission: A Case Study in

       Uzbekistan.” American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 59 (6): 941–

       46.

Shordt, K., and S. Cairncross. 2004. “Sustainability of Hygiene Behaviour and the

       Effectiveness of Change Interventions: Findings from a Multi-Country Research

       and Implications for Water and Sanitation Programmes.” International Water and

       Sanitation Centre, The Hague.




                                                                                       40
Sikorski, J., M. J. Renfrew, S. Pindoria, and A. Wade. 2003. “Support for Breastfeeding

       Mothers: A Systematic Review.” Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology 17 (4):

       407–17.

Smith, K. R., C. F. Corvalan, and T. Kjellstrom. 1999. “How Much Global Ill Health Is

       Attributable to Environmental Factors?” Epidemiology 10 (5): 573–84.

Sobsey, M. D., T. Handzel, and L. Venczel. 2003. “Chlorination and Safe Storage of

       Household Drinking Water in Developing Countries to Reduce Waterborne

       Disease.” Water Science and Technology 47 (3): 221–28.

Solow, J. and N. Kirkwood. 2002. “Group Identity and Gender in Public Goods

       Experiments.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 48 (4): 403–12.

Stanton, B. F., and J. D. Clemens. 1987. “An Educational Intervention for Altering

       Water-Sanitation Behaviors to Reduce Childhood Diarrhea in Urban Bangladesh

       II: A Randomized Trial to Assess the Impact of the Intervention on Hygienic

       Behaviors and Rates of Diarrhea.” American Journal of Epidemiology 125 (2):

       292–301.

USAID (United States Agency for International Development). 1996. “Environment,

       Health and People: An Update on USAID’s Environmental Health Project.”

       USAID Environmental Health Project. Arlington, Va.

———. 2004. “Cost Analysis of the National Vitamin A Supplementation Programs in

       Ghana, Nepal, and Zambia: A Synthesis of Three Studies.” USAID Micronutrient

       Program, Arlington, Va.




                                                                                     41
Varley, R. C. G., J. Tarvid, and D. Chao. 1998. “A Reassessment of the Cost-

       Effectiveness of Water and Sanitation Interventions in Programmes for

       Controlling Childhood Diarrhea.” Bulletin of the World Health Organization 76

       (6): 617–31.

Vaz, L., and P. Jha. 2001. “Note on the Health Impact of Water and Sanitation Services.”

       World Health Organization Commission on Macroeconomics and Health

       Working Paper Series Paper WG5: 23, Geneva.

Vesikari T., D. Matson, P. Dennehy, P. Van Damme, M. Santosham, Z. Rodriguez, M.

       Dallas, J. Heyse, M. Goveia, S. Black, and others. 2006. “Safety and Efficacy of a

       Pentavalent Human-Bovine (WC3) Reassortant Rotavirus Vaccine.” New

       England Journal of Medicine 354: 23–33.

Victora, C. G., M. Olino, L. Nobre, and F. Barros. 1996. “Falling Diarrhoea Rates in

       Northeastern Brazil: Did ORT Play a Role?” Health Policy and Planning 11 (2):

       132–41.

Victora, C. G., J. Bryce, O. Fontaine, and R. Monasch. (2000). “Reducing Deaths from

       Diarrhea through Oral Rehydration Therapy.” Bulletin of the World Health

       Organization 78 (10): 1246–56.

Watson, T. 2006. “Public Health Investments and the Infant Mortality Gap: Evidence

       from Federal Sanitation Interventions and Hospitals on U.S. Indian Reservations.”

       Journal of Public Economics 90 (8–9): 1537–60.




                                                                                   42
White C. G., F. Shinder, L. Shinder, and D. Dyer. “Reduction of Illness Absenteeism in

       Elementary Schools Using an Alcohol-Free Instant Hand Sanitizer.” Journal of

       School Nursing 17 (5): 258–65.

White, G. F. D. Bradley, and A. White. 1972. Drawers of Water: Domestic Water Use in

       East Africa. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2000. Global Water Supply and Sanitation

       Assessment. Geneva: WHO.

WHO Collaborative Study Team on the Role of Breastfeeding on the Prevention of Infant

       Mortality. 2000. “Effect of Breastfeeding on Infant and Child Mortality Due to

       Infectious Diseases in Less Developed Countries: A Pooled Analysis.” Lancet

       355 (9202): 451–55.

Wijk-Sijbesma, C. van. 1998. “Gender in Water Resources Management, Water Supply,

       and Sanitation: Roles and Realities Revisited.” International Water and Sanitation

       Centre, The Hague.

Wilson, J., and G. Chandler. 1993. “Sustained Improvements in Hygiene Behaviour

       Amongst Village Women in Lombok, Indonesia.” Transactions of the Royal

       Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 87 (6): 615–16.

World Bank. 2002. Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene at a Glance. Washington, D.C.:

       World Bank.

World Bank. 2003. World Development Report 2004: Making Services Work for Poor

       People. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.




                                                                                   43
Wright, J. S. Gundry, and R. Conroy. 2004. “Household Drinking Water in Developing

       Countries: A Systematic Review of Microbiological Contamination between

       Source and Point of Use.” Tropical Medicine and International Health 9 (1):

       106–17.

Zinc Investigators’ Collaborative Group. 1999. “Prevention of Diarrhea and Pneumonia

       by Zinc Supplementation in Children in Developing Countries: Pooled Analysis

       of Randomized Control Trials.” Journal of Pediatrics 135 (6): 689–97.

———. 2000. “Therapeutic Effects of Oral Zinc in Acute and Persistent Diarrhea in

       Children in Developing Countries: Pooled Analysis of Randomized Control

       Trials.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 72: 1516–22.

Zlotkin, S.H., C. Schauer, A. Christofides, W. Sharieff, M. Tondeur, and S. Hyder. 2005.

       “Micronutrient Sprinkles to Control Childhood Anemia.” PLoS Medicine 2 (1):

       24–28.

Zwarteveen, M., and R. Meizen-Dick. 2001. “Gender and Property-Rights in the

       Commons: Examples of Water Rights in South Asia.” Agriculture and Human

       Values 18 (1): 11–25.




                                                                                   44
Table 1. Transmission Routes of Water-Related Diseases

Classification         Transmission route                                 Examples of diseases transmitted
Waterborne              • Through ingestion of pathogens in                • Diarrheal diseases
                           drinking water                                  • Enteric fevers, such as
                                                                             typhoid
                                                                           • Hepatitis A

Water-washed           •    Through incidental ingestion of               •    Diarrheal diseases
                           pathogens in the course of other activities;   •    Trachoma
                           results from having insufficient water for     •    Scabies
                           bathing and hygiene

Water-based            •    Through an aquatic invertebrate host;         •    Guinea worm
                           results from repeated physical contact         •    Schistosomiasis
                           with contaminated water

Water-related insect   •    Through an insect vector that breeds in or    •    Malaria (parasite) and
vector                     near water                                         yellow fever (virus)

Source: White, Bradley, and White 1972; [reference cut]; Cairncross and Valdmanis

2004.




                                                                                                    45
