                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THREE GREAT AMERICAN DISINFLATIONS

                                           Michael D. Bordo
                                           Christopher Erceg
                                            Andrew Levin
                                            Ryan Michaels

                                         Working Paper 12982
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12982


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2007


Bordo is a Professor of Economics at Rutgers University and an NBER Research Associate; during
the 2006-2007 academic year, he is also the Pitt Professor of Economic History at Cambridge University
and a Fellow at Kings College Cambridge. Erceg is chief of the Trade and Financial Studies section
in the Division of International Finance at the Federal Reserve Board. Levin is an assistant director
and chief of the Monetary Studies section in the Division of Monetary Affairs at the Federal Reserve
Board and is a CEPR Research Fellow. Michaels was a research assistant at the Federal Reserve Board
and is now a graduate student in economics at the University of Michigan. We thank Dale Henderson,
Jinill Kim, Lee Ohanian, Thomas Sargent, Anna Schwartz, Lars Svensson, Francois Velde, Marc Wiedenmeier,
and Tack Yun for helpful comments and suggestions, as well as seminar participants at the annual
American Economic Association Meeting in Chicago, Columbia University, the Federal Reserve Board,
Harvard University, at the fourth International Research Forum on Monetary Policy conference, and
at an NBER workshop honoring Anna Schwartz. Bordo received financial support from the Federal
Reserve Board on this project. The views expressed in this paper are solely the responsibility of the
authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research,
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, or of any other person associated with the
Federal Reserve System.

© 2007 by Michael D. Bordo, Christopher Erceg, Andrew Levin, and Ryan Michaels. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Three Great American Disinflations
Michael D. Bordo, Christopher Erceg, Andrew Levin, and Ryan Michaels
NBER Working Paper No. 12982
March 2007
JEL No. E32,E42,E52,E58

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the role of transparency and credibility in accounting for the widely divergent
macroeconomic effects of three episodes of deliberate monetary contraction: the post-Civil War deflation,
the post-WWI deflation, and the Volcker disinflation. Using a dynamic general equilibrium model
in which private agents use optimal filtering to infer the central bank's nominal anchor, we demonstrate
that the salient features of these three historical episodes can be explained by differences in the design
and transparency of monetary policy, even without any time variation in economic structure or model
parameters. For a policy regime with relatively high credibility, our analysis highlights the benefits
of a gradualist approach (as in the 1870s) rather than a sudden change in policy (as in 1920-21). In
contrast, for a policy institution with relatively low credibility (such as the Federal Reserve in late
1980), an aggressive policy stance can play an important signalling role by making the policy shift
more evident to private agents.

Michael D. Bordo                                    Andrew Levin
Faculty of Economics                                Federal Reserve Board
Cambridge University                                Mail Stop 71
Austin Robinson Building                            20th and C Street, NW
Siegwick Avenue                                     Washington, DC 20551
Cambridge                                           andrew.levin@frb.gov
ENGLAND CD3, 9DD
and NBER                                            Ryan Michaels
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu                              Department of Economics
                                                    University of Michigan
Christopher Erceg                                   Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
The Federal Reserve Board                           rmikes@umich.edu
Mail Stop 42B
20th and C Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20551
christopher.erceg@frb.gov
1     Introduction

Since at least the time of David Hume (1752) in the mid-18th century, it has been recognized

that episodes of deﬂation or disinﬂation may have costly implications for the real economy, and

much attention has been devoted to assessing how policy should be conducted to reduce such

costs. The interest of prominent classical economists in these questions, including Hume, Thornton,

and Ricardo, was spurred by practical policy debates about how to return to the gold standard

following episodes of pronounced wartime inﬂation.1 Drawing on limited empirical evidence, these

authors tried to identify factors that contributed to the real cost of deﬂation, including those factors

controlled by policy. They advocated that a deﬂation should be implemented gradually, if at all;

in a similar vein a century later, Keynes (1923) and Irving Fisher (1920) discussed the dangers

of trying to quickly reverse the large runup in prices that occurred during World War I and its

aftermath.

    While the modern literature has provided substantial empirical evidence to support the case that

deﬂations or disinﬂations are often quite costly, there is less agreement about the underlying factors

that may have contributed to high real costs in some episodes, or that might explain pronounced

diﬀerences in costs across episodes.2 Indeed, disagreement about the factors principally responsible

for inﬂuencing the costs of disinﬂation helped fuel contentious debates about the appropriate way to

reduce inﬂation during the 1970s and early 1980s. Many policymakers and academics recommended

a policy of gradualism–reﬂecting the view that the costs of disinﬂation were largely due to structural

persistence in wage and price setting–while others recommended aggressive monetary tightening on

the grounds that the credibility of monetary policy in the 1970s had sunk too low for gradualism

to be a viable approach.

    In this paper, we examine three notable episodes of deliberate monetary contraction: the post-

Civil War deﬂation, the post-WWI deﬂation, and the Volcker disinﬂation. One goal of our paper

is to use these episodes to illuminate the factors that inﬂuence the costs of monetary contractions.
   1
     Humphrey (2004) provides an excellent survey of the views of leading classical economists regarding the macroe-
conomic eﬀects of deﬂation and the associated challenges for policymakers.
   2
     For example, see Gordon (1982), Taylor (1983), and Ball (1994a).




                                                         1
These episodes provide a fascinating laboratory for this analysis, insofar as they exhibit sharp

diﬀerences in the policy actions undertaken, in the credibility and transparency of the policies, and

in the ultimate eﬀects on inﬂation and output. Our second objective is to evaluate the ability of a

variant of the New Keynesian model that has performed well in ﬁtting certain features of post-war

U.S. data to account for these historical episodes.

   Our paper begins by providing a historical overview of each of these episodes. In the decade

following the Public Credit Act of 1869, which set a 10 year timetable for returning to the Gold

standard, the price level declined gradually by 30 percent, while real output grew at a robust 4-5

percent per year. We argue that the highly transparent policy objective, the credible nature of

the authorities’ commitment, and gradual implementation of the policy helped minimize disruptive

eﬀects on the real economy. By contrast, while prices fell by a similar magnitude during the

deﬂation that began in 1920, the price decline was very rapid, and accompanied by a sharp fall

in real activity. We interpret the large output contraction as attributable to the Federal Reserve’s

abrupt departure from the expansionary policies that had prevailed until that time; fortunately,

because the ultimate policy objective was clear (reducing prices enough to raise gold reserves), the

downturn was fairly short-lived. Finally, the Volcker disinﬂation succeeded in reducing inﬂation

from double digit rates in the late 1970s to a steady 4 percent by 1983, though at the cost of a severe

and prolonged recession. We argue that the substantial costs of this episode on the real economy

reﬂected the interplay both of nominal rigidities, and the lack of policy credibility following the

unstable monetary environment of the previous 15 years.

   We next attempt to measure policy predictability during each of the three episodes in order to

quantify the extent to which each deﬂation was anticipated by economic agents. For the two earlier

periods, we construct a proxy for price level forecast errors by using commodity futures data and

realized spot prices. While these commodity price forecast errors provide very imperfect measures of

errors in forecasting the general price level, we believe that they provide useful characterizations of

the level of policy uncertainty during each period: in particular, the commodity price forecast errors

in the early 1920s were much larger and more persistent than in the 1870s. This pattern conﬁrms

other evidence on policy predictability during each episode taken from bond yields, contemporary

                                                  2
narrative accounts, and informal surveys. Finally, for the Volcker period, we utilize direct measures

of survey expectations on inﬂation to construct inﬂation forecast errors, and show that forecast

errors were large and extremely persistent, suggesting a high degree of uncertainty about the

Federal Reserve’s policy objectives.

   We then examine whether a relatively standard DGSE model is capable of accounting for these

diﬀerent episodes. The model that we employ is a slightly simpliﬁed version of the models used

by Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2003). Thus, our model

incorporates staggered nominal wage and price contracts with random duration, as in Calvo (1983)

and Yun (1996), and incorporates various real rigidities including investment adjustment costs

and habit persistence in consumption. The structure of the model is identical across periods, aside

from the characterization of monetary policy. In particular, we assume that the monetary authority

targets the price level in the two earlier episodes, consistent with the authorities desire to reinstate

or support the Gold standard; by contrast, we assume that the Federal Reserve followed a Taylor-

style interest rate reaction function in the Volcker period, responding to the diﬀerence between

inﬂation and its target value. Moreover, we assume that agents had imperfect information about

the Federal Reserve’s inﬂation target during the Volcker episode, and had to infer the underlying

target through solving a signal extraction problem.

   We ﬁnd that our simple model performs remarkably well in accounting for each of the three

episodes. Notably, the model is able to track the sharp but transient decline in output during the

1920s, as well as generate a substantial recession in response to the monetary tightening under

Volcker. More generally, we interpret the overall success of our model in ﬁtting these disparate

episodes as reﬂecting favorably on the ability of the New Keynesian model – augmented with some

of the dynamic complications suggested in the recent literature – to ﬁt important business cycle

facts. However, one important twist is our emphasis on the role of incomplete information in

accounting for the range of outcomes.

   Finally, we use counterfactual simulations of our model to evaluate the consequences of alter-

native strategies for implementing a new nominal target (i.e., either a lower price level, or a lower

inﬂation rate). We ﬁnd that under a highly transparent policy regime, a new nominal target can

                                                   3
be achieved with minimal fallout on the real economy, provided the implementation occurs over a

period of at least 3-4 years. In this vein, we use model simulations to show that a more predictable

policy of gradual deﬂation – as occurred in the 1870s – could have helped avoid the sharp post-

WWI downturn. However, our analysis of the Volcker period emphasizes that the strong argument

for gradualism under a transparent and credible monetary regime becomes less persuasive if the

monetary regime lacks credibility. In this lower credibility case, an aggressive policy stance can play

an important signalling role insofar as it makes a policy shift – such as a reduction in the inﬂation

target – more apparent to private agents. Because inﬂation expectations adjust more rapidly than

under a gradualist policy stance, output can rebound more quickly.

    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the three episodes, while Section

3 examines empirical evidence on the evolution of expectations during each episode. Section 4

outlines the model, and Section 5 describes the calibration. Section 6 matches the model to the

salient features of the three episodes, and considers counterfactual policy experiments. Section 8

concludes.


2     Historical Background
2.1   The Post-Civil War Episode

Given the high cost of ﬁnancing the Civil War, the U.S. government suspended gold convertibility

in 1862 and issued ﬁat money (”greenbacks”). The monetary base expanded dramatically in the

subsequent two years, precipitating a sharp decline in the value of greenbacks relative to gold. The

dollar price of a standard ounce of gold rose from its oﬃcial price of $20.67 that had prevailed since

1834 to over $40 by 1864 (the lower panel of Figure 1 shows an index of the greenback price of

gold relative to its oﬃcial price of $20.67). Despite some retracing in the late stages of the war, the

dollar price of gold remained about 50 percent above its oﬃcial price by the cessation of hostilities

in mid-1865.

    Following the war, there was widespread support for reverting to a specie standard at the pre-

war parity. In the parlance of the period, this meant eliminating the “gold premium,” the diﬀerence

between the market price of gold and the oﬃcial price. Using simple quantity theory reasoning,

                                                  4
                                           Figure 1: The Post-Civil War Deﬂation
                             Price Level                                                                Real Output
                                                 (log scale, base=1869)                                                      (log scale, base=1869)
      0                                                                        60
                                   GDP Deflator (Romer)                                    Industrial Production (Davis)
     −5                            GDP Deflator (Balke & Gordon)               50          Real GDP (Romer)
                                                                                           Real GDP (Balke & Gordon)
                                                                               40
    −10
                                                                               30
    −15
                                                                               20
    −20
                                                                               10
    −25
                                                                                0

    −30                                                                       −10

    −35                                                                       −20
           1869    1871     1873       1875     1877          1879                  1867   1869     1871     1873     1875     1877        1879


                    Price of Gold (in Greenbacks)                                           Commodity Price Forecast Errors
                                                  (index, 1861=100)
    220                                                                        20

                                                                               15
    200
                                                                               10

    180                                                                         5

                                                                                0
    160
                                                                               −5

    140                                                                       −10

                                                                              −15
    120
                                                                              −20

    100                                                                       −25
          1861 1863 1865 1867 1869 1871 1873 1875 1877 1879                     1871   1872     1873     1874     1875     1876      1877       1878




policymakers regarded monetary tightening as the appropriate instrument for achieving this ob-

jective: if the overall price level fell suﬃciently, the dollar price of gold would drop, and the gold

premium eventually disappear. Accordingly, Congress passed the Contraction Act in April 1866,

with the backing of President Johnson. This act instructed the U.S. Treasury – the eﬀective mone-

tary authority during that period - to retire the supply of greenbacks. Given initial public support

for a quick return to convertibility, the Treasury proceeded aggressively, reducing the monetary

base about 20 percent between 1865 and 1867. However, the sharp price deﬂation that ensued had

a contractionary impact on the economy, with certain sectors experiencing disproportionate eﬀects

(e.g., heavily leveraged farmers). Thus, Congress and President Johnson were forced to temporarily

suspend monetary tightening in the face of strong public protest (Friedman and Schwartz, 1963).

   President Grant promised to renew the march toward resumption when he delivered his ﬁrst

inaugural in March 1869, but with the important diﬀerence that the deﬂation would be gradual. The

president received key legislative support with the passage of the Public Credit Act of 1869, which


                                                                          5
pledged that the Federal Government would repay its debt in specie within ten years. The long

timeframe reﬂected the new political imperative of a gradualist approach. With further monetary

contraction deemed infeasible, supporters of resumption planned to keep the money stock roughly

constant, and allow prices to fall slowly as the economy expanded. This philosophy helped guide

legislation, and in turn the U.S. Treasury’s operational procedures for conducting monetary policy.

Thus, Treasury policy kept the monetary base fairly constant through most of the 1870s, oﬀsetting

the issuance of National Bank notes with the retirement of Greenbacks. The Treasury’s ability to

adhere to this policy was facilitated by the passage of the Resumption Act in 1875, which sealed

January 1, 1879 as the date of resumption of convertibility, and by the election of the hard-money

Republican candidate Rutherford Hayes in the 1876 election.

       As seen in the upper-left panel of Figure 1, these policies succeeded in producing a fairly smooth

and continuous decline in the aggregate price level, and allowed the authorities to comfortably meet

the January 1879 deadline for the resumption of specie payments. Furthermore, as shown in the

upper-right panel, all three of the available measures of real output grew at a fairly rapid and

steady pace over the period from 1869 to 1872. Of course, the worldwide ﬁnancial panic of 1873

had marked consequences for U.S. markets and economic activity; nevertheless, real output growth

over the decade of the 1870s was remarkably strong, averaging about 4 to 5 percent per year.3

       This strong economic growth in the face of persistent deﬂation seems to have been made possible

because of the slow and fairly predictable nature of the price decline between the passage of the

Public Credit Act in 1869 and resumption a decade later. Two factors played an important role in

making the price decline predictable. First, the ultimate objective of restoring the gold price to its

oﬃcial (pre-war) level was highly credible. This served to anchor expectations about the long-run

expected price level within a fairly narrow range, so that uncertainty about the future price level

mainly reﬂected uncertainty about the path of the real value of gold (in terms of goods). Second,

it was clear after 1868 that the target of restoring convertibility would be achieved gradually. As
   3
    As seen in Figure 1, available output measures suggest that growth was relatively strong throughout the period
surrounding the passage of the Public Credit Act in 1869. In particular, Davis’ (2004) industrial production series
(which is available prior to 1869, the year the GDP series begin) grows at about 6 percent per year between 1867 and
1873, notwithstanding about a 25 percent appreciation of the dollar relative to gold and major foreign currencies.




                                                         6
discussed above, there was little support in Congress for returning to the rapid pace of monetary

contraction that followed the Civil War.

       Our contention that the policy of restoring gold convertibility at the oﬃcial pre-war price was

highly credible may seem diﬃcult to reconcile with the political agitation in favor of Greenbacks

that seemed a salient feature of the 1870s. But support for the Gold standard – both within the U.S.

government, and the public at large – remained extremely strong in the post-Civil War period, so

that the net eﬀect of the political agitation was simply to graduate progress towards convertibility.4

This support for resumption stemmed in part from historical precedent: the United States had been

on a specie standard for almost its entire history, dating to the passage of the Coinage Act of 1792.

It also reﬂected deeply-seated views about how a specie standard protected private property rights

against unjust seizure, which was regarded as a moral and political imperative.

       Overall, this analysis suggests that it is appropriate to characterize the U.S. deﬂation experience

over at least the 1869-79 period as one in which both the ﬁnal objective of policy was transparent and

credible, and which implied a fairly clear path for the overall price level. Moreover, the authorities

appeared to place a large weight on minimizing the adverse consequences to the real economy, and

hence were content to achieve convertibility gradually in an environment of predictable deﬂation.5

2.2       The Post-WWI Episode

The U.S. government suspended the gold standard de facto shortly after it entered World War I and

began an enormous arms build-up that fueled inﬂation. President Wilson ordered the suspension

and placed an embargo on the export of gold in order to protect the country’s stock. In the absence

of the embargo, high inﬂation likely would have triggered large outﬂows of gold: GNP prices rose

almost 40 percent while the U.S. was at war, which was equal to the cumulative increase in prices
   4
     The restoration of specie convertibility was supported by all three branches of government. It had the enthusiastic
backing of the three successive Republican presidents who held oﬃce during the period (Johnson, Grant, and Hayes),
and, through its decisions, the indirect support of the Supreme Court. While there was less unanimity in Congress,
especially after the 1873 Panic, the debate hinged more on the appropriate speed of restoring convertibility at the
oﬃcial price, rather than on the ultimate goal.
   5
     There was admittedly some uncertainty about what the target for the dollar price of gold implied for the long-run
price level, i.e., for how much price deﬂation would ultimately have to take place. However, while the real price of
gold rose through the 1870s, it seems unlikely that this slow and steady rise signiﬁcantly exacerbated the problem
faced by private agents of making price-level forecasts to set the terms of multiperiod contracts.



                                                           7
                                            Figure 2: The Deﬂation of 1920–21
                            Price Level                                                     Real Output and Employment
                                             (log scale, base=1919:1)                                                    (log scale, base=1919:1)
        40                                                                   30
                                      Consumer Prices (BLS)                                               Industrial Production (FRB)
        30                            Wholesale Prices (BLS)                                              Manufacturing Employment (BLS)
                                                                             20
        20
                                                                             10
        10

         0                                                                    0

       −10
                                                                            −10
       −20
                                                                            −20
       −30

       −40                                                                  −30
             1919   1920           1921           1922                            1919            1920         1921           1922


                           Interest rates                                                 Commodity Price Forecast Errors
                                                                                                                               (in percent)
         9                                                                   80

         8                                                                   60

                                                                             40
         7
                                                                             20
         6
                                                                              0
         5
                                                                            −20
         4
                                                                            −40
                                                                                         Corn
         3                            Discount Rate                         −60          Oats
                                      Commercial Paper Rate                              Cotton
         2                                                                  −80
             1919   1920           1921           1922                        1919                 1920               1921                    1922




over the previous 15-year period. Wartime inﬂation had its roots in a roughly twenty-fold increase

in federal government expenditure from the time the U.S. entered the war in April 1917 to the

armistice in November 1918 (see Firestone, 1960, Table A3).6

       When the war ended, the embargo was lifted, and the Treasury and the Federal Reserve had

to negotiate monetary policy in order to protect the Gold standard.7 The Federal Reserve’s Board

of Governors included ﬁve appointees and two ex-oﬃcio members, the Secretary of Treasury and

the Comptroller of the Currency. This governance structure gave the Secretary of the Treasury

a disproportionate inﬂuence over monetary policy, since the ﬁve appointees to the Board were

reluctant to cross the Treasury. Faced with a 25-fold increase in gross public debt after the War

(Meltzer 2003), the Secretary refused to support an increase in discount rates despite an acceleration
   6
     While the war was primarily ﬁnanced through higher taxes and the issuance of government bonds, money creation
by the Federal Reserve System also played a signiﬁcant role (Rockoﬀ, 2005).
   7
     Unlike the Civil war period, in which the dollar was allowed to ﬂoat, the oﬃcial price of gold remained ﬁxed
during WWI. Thus, the task facing policymakers was to ensure that gold reserves were suﬃcient to support free
convertibility after the lifting of the embargo.



                                                                        8
in inﬂation into double digits in 1919.8 However, the Treasury’s reputation was strongly linked to

the success of the gold standard. In particular, U.S. law required the Federal Reserve to ensure a

stock of monetary gold equal to at least 40 percent of the supply of base money. By November

1919, sizeable gold outﬂows put the legal minimum in sight, and the Treasury ﬁnally supported

Board action to raise the discount rate.

       Once freed to act, the Board raised the System-wide average discount rate over 2 percentage

points between late 1919 and mid-1920 (see Figure 2). Although an eventual tightening of policy

was anticipated insofar as private agents believed that the government was committed to defending

the Gold standard, both the timing and severity of the contraction were a surprise. The highly

persistent rise in nominal rates in the face of rapidly shifting expectations about inﬂation (i.e.,

towards deﬂation) represented a much tighter policy stance than agents had anticipated. As seen

in Figure 2, the aggregate price level plunged 20 percent between mid-1920 and mid-1921, and

commodity prices declined much more precipitously. Output also declined very abruptly, especially

in manufacturing. As seen in Figure 2, the FRB’s index of industrial production fell more than

30 percent between mid-1920 and early 1921, while manufacturing employment showed a commen-

surate decline. But the short-lived nature of the depression appears equally striking, as a robust

expansion pushed output back to its pre-deﬂation level by early 1922.

       The deﬂation of 1920 was recognized both by contemporary observers and by later historians

as a dramatic event in U.S. monetary history. Irving Fisher (1934) was strongly critical of the

Federal Reserve’s role in engineering a “disastrous deﬂation” for which “millions of workers were

thrown out of work.” Friedman and Schwartz (1963) observed that the price decline was “perhaps

the sharpest in the entire history of the United States” and characterized the output contraction

as “one of the severest on record.”

       The industrial production and employment measures shown in Figure 2 indicate a much more

severe recession than would be suggested from annual data for the aggregate economy.9 First, the
   8
      The System’s most potent policy instrument was the discount rate charged by the System’s Reserve Banks to
its member commercial banks on short-term loans. The Reserve Banks could request an adjustment in its discount
rate, but the Board had to approve.
    9
      While government statistics indicate a very sharp recession–with real GNP in 1921 nearly 15 percent lower than
in the previous year–the analysis of Romer (1988) and Balke and Gordon (1989) indicates that real output declined


                                                         9
magnitude of the downturn is obscured by its relatively transitory nature, particularly since the

decline in output and employment began in mid-1920 and ended partway through the following year;

indeed, Friedman and Schwartz argued that this recession was so abrupt that “annual data provide

a misleading indicator of its severity.” Second, the ﬂuctuations in real GNP were dampened by the

stability of real agricultural output (which comprised a substantial fraction of aggregate output)

and hence this measure is somewhat less relevant for gauging the eﬀects of monetary policy during

this period.10

   As in the post-Civil War episode, the authorities’ commitment to supporting the Gold Standard

after WWI seems beyond doubt. By the 1920s, the Gold standard was entrenched as both a national

and international norm, and even countries that had experienced much larger wartime inﬂations

expected to return to gold. The high credibility of the monetary regime ultimately served an

important role in allowing the economy to recover quickly once it was clear that prices had fallen

enough. But clearly, the major diﬀerence between the episodes was in the Federal Reserve’s decision

to implement a very rapid deﬂation in the early 1920s, which contrasted starkly with the gradualist

policy of 1869-1879. Inﬂuential Federal Reserve policymakers including Benjamin Strong believed

that it was of foremost importance to reverse quickly most of the price level increase that had

occurred since the U.S. entry into the war; while they acknowledged this might cause a substantial

output contraction, they believed the recessionary eﬀects would be transient and did not warrant

dragging out the deﬂation (Meltzer 2003). Thus, policymakers kept nominal interest rates at

elevated levels even as prices fell dramatically. This departure from traditional gold standard rules

– which would have prescribed cutting interest rates in the face of a massive deﬂation and sizeable

gold inﬂows – helped create a depression in activity through its eﬀect on real interest rates.

2.3    The Volcker Disinflation

As of 1979, the Federal Reserve had been in operational control of U.S. monetary policy for about

25 years, even if it remained sensitive to the political climate. The Accord of 1951 between the
by roughly 3 to 6 percent over the period from 1919 through 1921.
  10
     The National Industrial Conference Board estimated that nonagricultural employment contracted nearly 10
percent from 1919 through 1921.



                                                    10
                                         Figure 3: The Volcker Disinﬂation
               Inflation and Expected Inflation                                             Output Gap
    12
                                    Current (yr/yr)                4                                            OECD Estimate
    10                              Expected(4 qtr ahead)                                                       HP Filter
                                    Realized (4 qtr ahead)
                                                                   2
     8
                                                                   0
     6

                                                                  −2
     4

     2                                                            −4


     0                                                            −6


    −2                                                            −8
     1979   1980   1981   1982   1983    1984     1985             1979     1980     1981   1982     1983    1984      1985


                     Federal Funds Rate                                            Long−term Expected Inflation
    20                                                            12
                                            Nominal                                                    Current Inflation (yr/yr)
                                            Real (ex post)        10                                   Barclay 5−10 Yr Ahead
                                                                                                       Ph. Fed 10 Yr Ahead
    15
                                                                   8

                                                                   6
    10
                                                                   4

                                                                   2
     5

                                                                   0

    0                                                             −2
    1979    1980   1981   1982   1983    1984     1985                    1981       1982     1983       1984        1985




central bank and the Treasury had ceded monetary policy to the Federal Reserve. For a dozen

years after the Accord, the Federal Reserve generally maintained a low and steady inﬂation rate.

But beginning in the mid-1960s, the Federal Reserve permitted inﬂation to rise to progressively

higher levels. By the time President Carter appointed in 1979 a well-known inﬂation “hawk”, Paul

Volcker, to run the Federal Reserve, (GNP) price inﬂation had reached 9 percent.

   Two months after taking oﬃce in August 1979, Volcker announced a major shift in policy

aimed at rapidly lowering the inﬂation rate. Volcker desired the policy change to be interpreted as

a decisive break from past policies that had allowed the inﬂation rate to rise to double digit levels

(Figure 3). The announcement was followed by a series of sizeable hikes in the federal funds rate:

the roughly 7 percentage point rise in the nominal federal funds rate between October 1979 and

April 1980 represented the largest increase over a sixth month period in the history of the Federal

Reserve System. However, this tight monetary stance was temporarily abandoned in mid-1980 as

economic activity decelerated sharply. Reluctantly, the FOMC imposed credit controls and let the


                                                             11
funds rate decline – moves that the Carter Administration had publically supported. The FOMC’s

policy reversal and acquiesence to political pressure was widely viewed as a signal that it was not

committed to achieving a sustained fall in inﬂation (Blanchard, 1984). Having failed to convince

price and wage setters that inﬂation was going to fall, GNP prices rose almost 10 percent in 1980.

    The Federal Reserve embarked on a new round of monetary tightening in late 1980. The federal

funds rate rose to 20 percent in late December, implying an ex post real interest rate of about

10 percent. Real ex post rates were allowed to fall only slightly from this extraordinarily high

level over the following two years. Newly-elected President Reagan’s support of Volcker’s policy

was signiﬁcant in giving the Federal Reserve the political mandate it needed to keep interest rates

elevated for a prolonged period, and provided some shield from growing opposition in Congress;

cf. Feldstein (1993). This second and more durable round of tightening succeeded in reducing the

inﬂation rate from about 10 percent in early 1981 to about 4 percent in 1983, but at the cost of

a sharp and very prolonged recession. The OECD’s measure of the output gap expanded by 6

percent between mid-1980 and mid-1982, and the unemployment rate (not shown) hovered at 10

percent until mid-1983.

    While policymakers in the Gold standard environment examined in the earlier episodes had

the advantage of a transparent and credible long-run nominal anchor, the Volcker disinﬂation was

conducted in a setting in which there was a high degree of uncertainty about whether policymakers

had the desire and ability to maintain low inﬂation rates. But notwithstanding that Federal Reserve

policy during the 1970s and early 1980s merits some criticism for a lack of transparent objectives,

it seems unlikely that simple announcements about long-run policy goals (e.g., an inﬂation target

of three percent) would have carried much weight given the poor track record of the preceding

two decades. Thus, it seems arguable that Volcker’s FOMC had little hope of harnessing inﬂation

expectations in a way that could facilitate lower inﬂation without sizeable output costs.


3    Policy Predictability: Empirical Evidence

Empirical evidence about the predictability of price decline that preceded Resumption in 1879

appears fairly limited. However, as argued by Friedman and Schwartz (1963) and later Calomiris

                                                12
                    Figure 4: The Evolution of Long-Term Bond Yields, 1867–1870
                        9




                      8.5




                        8




                      7.5




                        7




                      6.5




                        6




                      5.5
                                   U.S. Treasury (1881, gold)
                                   Pennsylvania RR (1880, greenback)
                                   Hudson RR (1885, greenback)
                        5
                            1867                  1868                 1869   1870




(1985 and 1993), the behavior of longer term bond yields seems at least consistent with the view

that private agents expected the dollar to appreciate (and prices to fall) by enough to support

an eventual return to gold. As seen in Figure 4, the nominal yields on high quality greenback-

denominated railroad bonds were actually somewhat lower than the yield on gold-denominated

U.S. treasury bonds at the passage of the Public Credit Act in 1869. By that time, conﬁdence was

very high that the government would satisfy its obligation to repay its bonds in gold. Thus, drawing

on uncovered interest parity, Friedman and Schwartz interpreted the lower interest rate on privately

issued railroad bonds as suggesting that private agents on balance expected some appreciation of

the greenback relative to gold. Of course, the simple diﬀerence between the interest rate series

would understate expected appreciation of the Greenback to the extent that the interest rate on

the railroad bonds included a premium for default risk.11

    Some evidence from commodity futures markets also appears consistent with our interpretation

that the gradual price decline prior to Resumption was largely anticipated. Taking the futures price
  11
     It is diﬃcult to assess the magnitude of this premium, which presumably ﬂuctuated considerably with the business
cycle. However, for some quantitative guidance, it is useful to consider the period after Resumption in 1879, when
both railroad bond interest rates and U.S. treasury bond rates were denominated in gold. In 1880, the risk spread on
high quality railroad bonds appeared to be in the range of 100-150 basis points. For example, the average yield on
the Chicago and Alton Railroad 7’s maturing in 1893 was about 5.3 percent in 1880 (Macaulay Table A51), compared
with a yield on U.S. treasury bonds (4-1/2s of 1891) of 4.1 percent (Homer and Sylla, 1996).


                                                                       13
as a proxy for the expected price of a given commodity at a date K months ahead, we constructed

a series of forecast errors as the diﬀerence between the realized commodity price and the (futures-

based) forecast. The futures prices are on 4-5 month contracts (the longest maturities regularly

available during that period) on pork, corn, wheat, and lard.12 Given the paucity of observations on

each individual commodity, Figure 1 pools forecast errors for all four of the commodities (yielding 30

observations over our 1871-78 sample period). The forecast errors seem relatively small, especially

given the substantial volatility in spot prices of the underlying commodities: the average absolute

error using these pooled observations is around 10 percent. Moreover, realized prices do not appear

consistently lower than forecast (i.e., the forecast errors are not consistently negative). Despite

obvious limitations of our data – including the short duration of futures contracts, and small

number of observations – they are at least suggestive that agents were not surprised by declining

prices.

    There is considerably more evidence about the predictability of policy in the case of the deﬂa-

tionary episode following WWI. One very useful source is Harvard’s Monthly Survey of General

Business Conditions, which appeared as a monthly supplement to the Review of Economics and

Statistics beginning in 1919. Harvard’s Monthly Survey (HMS) interpreted recent ﬁnancial and

macroeconomic developments, and also made projections about the future evolution of output,

prices, and short-term interest rates. While projections about individual macroeconomic series

were primarily qualitative, the HMS did make some explicit forecasts about the likely duration of

the business downturn during the course of 1920-21.

    Drawing on the surveys from the ﬁrst half of 1920, the HMS forecasters correctly predicted that

the post-war inﬂation would be followed by a period of monetary retrenchment, and appeared to

have a fairly clear understanding of the channels through which the monetary tightening would

operate. In particular, they argued that the Federal Reserve’s imposition of higher discount rates

beginning in late 1919 would precipitate a fall in commodity prices, followed by a decline in con-

sumer prices, wages, and business activity; but drawing on historical experience, they expected
 12
    Futures prices were obtained from various issues of the Chicago Tribune. Realized prices were taken from the
NBER’s macro history database, and from annual reports of the Chicago Board of Trade.



                                                      14
that lower prices would allow monetary easing, and promote a vigorous recovery within about a

year.

       The HMS forecasters turned out to be surprised by the severity of the monetary tightening,

and by the associated magnitude of price and output decline. At the onset of the tightening, the

HMS commented that “both the Treasury and the Federal Reserve Board have embarked on a

policy of orderly deﬂation,” and projected in April 1920 that “it does not seem probable . . . that

liquidation in the near future will cause prices to fall below the level of a year ago and perhaps

not below the level of November 1918,” suggesting an anticipated fall in commodity prices of only

15-20 percent.13 But in the wake of a 40 percent decline in commodity prices by early 1921 and

depression in business activity, Bullock (1921) observed that he and the other HMS forecasters

”had not expected a (monetary) reaction of such acute severity. We had looked for a return [of

commodity prices] to some such level as had prevailed in the few months following the armistice,

and as late as July expected nothing so drastic as the events of the last half of the year.” Moreover,

the HMS forecasters were forced to revise their optimistic initial predictions (made in the spring of

1920) that recovery would occur within a year as the sharp nature of the downturn became more

apparent. The HMS attributed the severity of the downturn in part to persistently high interest

rates, as interest rates remained elevated for a longer duration than in previous cyclical downturns

dating back to the 1890s.14 Nevertheless, given the enormous price contraction by early 1921, the

HMS forecasters were conﬁdent that prices would soon stabilize (as in fact occurred by late 1921),

and that an eventual easing of monetary conditions would facilitate a rebound in real activity.

       Commodity price forecast errors provide complementary evidence that prices fell more quickly

and by a greater magnitude than expected by private agents. Figure 2 shows commodity price

forecast errors for three individual commodities – corn, oats, and cotton – measured again as
  13
     The HMS drew on two diﬀerent measures of commodity prices: a Bureau of Labor Statistics index of wholesale
commodity prices, and an alternative index produced by the trade publication Bradstreet’s. Using the BLS measure
apparently favored by HMS researchers, commodity prices were about 19 percent higher in March 1920 than in March
1919, and about 15 percent higher than in November 1918 (using Bradstreet’s, commodity prices were 15 percent
higher than in March 1919, and 9 percent higher than in November 1918).
  14
     Given that the HMS forecasters saw the adjustment of retail prices to lag that of commodity prices, retail prices
were expected to fall through much of 1921 (e.g., Bullock, 1921), suggesting that ex ante real interest rates were
expected to remain at very elevated levels.




                                                         15
the realized price of each commodity minus the “forecast” implied by the futures price.15 In the

post-World War I deﬂation, commodity price forecast errors turned consistently negative shortly

after monetary policy was tightened in early 1920, and reached 50 percentage points or higher in

absolute value terms. The average forecast errors over the 1920-21 tightening period are several

times as large as the commodity price forecast errors derived from the post-Civil War data. But

interestingly, forecast errors are generally much smaller after early 1921. This seems consistent

with our intepretation that after a markedly lower price level was achieved, the policy environment

became much more predictable, as agents expected the aggregate price level to remain roughly

stable.

       Lastly, we turn to the Volcker disinﬂation, for which there is considerable survey data available

on inﬂation expectations at diﬀerent horizons. Figure 3 plots the median projection–taken from the

Survey of Professional Forecasters–for the four-quarter-average GNP price inﬂation rate over the

coming year. The forecast error (that is, the gap between the forecast and the realized four-quarter-

average inﬂation rate) averaged about 2 percentage points over the 1981–84 period. Importantly,

the inﬂation forecast errors show little tendency to die out, reﬂecting that inﬂation was consistently

lower than what agents projected. The lower right panel of Figure 3 also contrasts the relatively

quick decline in current inﬂation with the much more sluggish adjustment of long-run inﬂation

expectations (as proxied by Barclay’s projection of inﬂation 5 to 10 years ahead, and by the 10-

year-ahead inﬂation projection of the Philadephia Federal Reserve Bank). Taken together, the

survey data suggests that inﬂation expectations were very slow to react to the decline in realized

inﬂation, which we interpret as strong evidence that private agents doubted the ability or desire

of policymakers to maintain low inﬂation rates. This interpretation is consistent with that of

Goodfriend (1993) and Goodfriend and King (2005), who argued that the slow adjustment of

inﬂation expectations was a primary factor accounting for the high nominal interest rates on long-

term bonds that prevailed through most of the 1980s.
  15
    The futures data on corn and oats are from the Annual Reports of the Chicago Board of Trade, as in Hamil-
ton (1992). Cotton futures traded on the New York commodity futures exchange, with the data recorded in the
Commercial and Financial Chronicle.




                                                     16
4     The Model

We utilize the same basic model to analyze each of the three historical episodes, aside from diﬀer-

ences in the characterization of monetary policy. The model can be regarded as a slightly simpliﬁed

version of the model utilized by Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005), and Smets and Wouters

(2003). Thus, our model incorporates nominal rigidities by assuming that labor and product mar-

kets each exhibit monopolistic competition, and that wages and prices are determined by staggered

nominal contracts of random duration (following Calvo (1983) and Yun (1996)). We also include

various real rigidities emphasized in the recent literature, including habit persistence in consump-

tion, and costs of changing the rate of investment. Given that our characterization of monetary

policy diﬀers across episodes, we defer this discussion to Section 6 (when we present simulation

results for each episode).

4.1   Firms and Price Setting

Final Goods Production As in Chari, Kehoe, and McGratten (2000), we assume that there is a single

ﬁnal output good Yt that is produced using a continuum of diﬀerentiated intermediate goods Yt (f ).

The technology for transforming these intermediate goods into the ﬁnal output good is constant

returns to scale, and is of the Dixit-Stiglitz form:
                                               1                           1+θp
                                                                 1
                                                               1+θp
                                     Yt =            Yt (f )            df                       (1)
                                             0

where θp > 0.

    Firms that produce the ﬁnal output good are perfectly competitive in both product and factor

markets. Thus, ﬁnal goods producers minimize the cost of producing a given quantity of the output

index Yt , taking as given the price Pt (f ) of each intermediate good Yt (f ). Moreover, ﬁnal goods

producers sell units of the ﬁnal output good at a price Pt that is equal to the marginal cost of

production:
                                                   1                       −θp
                                                                   −1
                                                                   θp
                                      Pt =               Pt (f )        df                       (2)
                                                 0

It is natural to interpret Pt as the aggregate price index.



                                                          17
   Intermediate Goods Production A continuum of intermediate goods Yt (f ) for f ∈ [0, 1] is pro-

duced by monopolistically competitive ﬁrms, each of which produces a single diﬀerentiated good.

Each intermediate goods producer faces a demand function for its output good that varies inversely

with its output price Pt (f ) , and directly with aggregate demand Yt :

                                                         −(1+θp )
                                               Pt (f )       θp
                                     Yt (f ) =                        Yt                           (3)
                                                Pt

   Each intermediate goods producer utilizes capital services Kt (f ) and a labor index Lt (f ) (de-

ﬁned below) to produce its respective output good. The form of the production function is Cobb-

Douglas:

                                      Yt (f ) = Kt (f )α Lt (f )1−α                                (4)

Firms face perfectly competitive factor markets for hiring capital and the labor index. Thus,

each ﬁrm chooses Kt (f ) and Lt (f ), taking as given both the rental price of capital RKt and the

aggregate wage index Wt (deﬁned below). Firms can costlessly adjust either factor of production.

Thus, the standard static ﬁrst-order conditions for cost minimization imply that all ﬁrms have

identical marginal cost per unit of output. By implication, aggregate marginal cost M Ct can be

expressed as a function of the wage index Wt , the aggregate labor index Lt , and the aggregate

capital stock Kt , or equivalently, as the ratio of the wage index to the marginal product of labor

M P Lt :
                                                Wt Lαt      Wt
                                    M Ct =               =                                         (5)
                                             (1 − α) Ktα   M P Lt
   We assume that the prices of the intermediate goods are determined by Calvo-Yun style stag-

gered nominal contracts. In each period, each ﬁrm f faces a constant probability, 1 − ξp , of being

able to reoptimize its price Pt (f ). The probability that any ﬁrm receives a signal to reset its price

is assumed to be independent of the time that it last reset its price. If a ﬁrm is not allowed to

optimize its price in a given period, we follow Yun (1996) by assuming that it simply adjusts its

price by the steady state rate of inﬂation Π (i.e., Pt (f ) = πPt−1 (f )). Finally, the ﬁrm’s output

is subsidized at a ﬁxed rate τp (this allows us to eliminate the monopolistic competition wedge in

prices by setting τp = θp ).


                                                   18
4.2   Households and Wage Setting

We assume a continuum of monopolistically competitive households (indexed on the unit inter-

val), each of which supplies a diﬀerentiated labor service to the production sector; that is, goods-

producing ﬁrms regard each household’s labor services Nt (h), h ∈ [0, 1], as an imperfect substitute

for the labor services of other households. It is convenient to assume that a representative labor

aggregator (or “employment agency”) combines households’ labor hours in the same proportions

as ﬁrms would choose. Thus, the aggregator’s demand for each household’s labor is equal to the

sum of ﬁrms’ demands. The labor index Lt has the Dixit-Stiglitz form:
                                                   1                         1+θw
                                                                     1
                                         Lt =            Nt (h)    1+θw   dh                     (6)
                                                 0

where θw > 0. The aggregator minimizes the cost of producing a given amount of the aggregate

labor index, taking each household’s wage rate Wt (h) as given, and then sells units of the labor

index to the production sector at their unit cost Wt :
                                                       1                  −θw
                                                                    −1
                                         Wt =                Wt (h) θw dh                        (7)
                                                     0

It is natural to interpret Wt as the aggregate wage index. The aggregator’s demand for the labor

hours of household h – or equivalently, the total demand for this household’s labor by all goods-

producing ﬁrms – is given by
                                                                   − 1+θw
                                                   Wt (h)                 θw
                                          Nt (h) =                               Lt              (8)
                                                    Wt
   The utility functional of a typical member of household h is


                              ∞
                                    1
                         Et       βj {   (Ct+j (h) − κCt+j−1 (h))1−σ +                           (9)
                                   1−σ
                           j=0
                                                                   
                          χ0                 1−χ     μ0   Mt+j (h) 1−μ
                               (1 − Nt+j (h))    +                     }                       (10)
                         1−χ                        1−μ      Pt+j

where the discount factor β satisﬁes0 < β < 1. The dependence of the period utility function on

consumption in both the current and previous period allows for the possibility of external habit



                                                              19
persistence in consumption spending (e.g., Smet and Wouters, 2003). In addition, the period utility
                                                                                         Mt (h)
function depends on current leisure 1 − Nt (h), and current real money balances.          Pt .

   Household h’s budget constraint in period t states that its expenditure on goods and net pur-

chases of ﬁnancial assets must equal its disposable income:

                                                                                     2
                               Pt Ct (h) + Pt It (h) + 12 ψI Pt (It (h)−I t−1 (h))
                                                                      It−1 (h)

                                                    
                         Mt+1 (h) − Mt (h) +          s ξt,t+1 BD,t+1 (h)   − BD,t (h)            (11)

                       = (1 + τW )Wt (h) Nt (h) + RKt Kt (h) + Γt (h) − Tt (h)
    Thus, the household purchases the ﬁnal output good (at a price of Pt ), which it chooses either

to consume Ct (h) or invest It (h) in physical capital. The total cost of investment to each household

h is assumed to depend on how rapidly the household changes its rate of investment (as well as

on the purchase price). Our speciﬁcation of such investment adjustment costs as depending on

the square of the change in the household’s gross investment rate follows Christiano, Eichenbaum,

and Evans (2005). Investment in physical capital augments the household’s (end-of-period) capital

stock Kt+1 (h) according to a linear transition law of the form:


                                    Kt+1 (h) = (1 − δ)Kt (h) + It (h)                             (12)


In addition to accumulating physical capital, households may augment their ﬁnancial assets through

increasing their nominal money holdings (Mt+1 (h) − Mt (h)), and through the net acquisition of

bonds. We assume that agents can engage in frictionless trading of a complete set of contingent
                
claims. The term s ξt,t+1 BD,t+1 (h)−BD,t (h) represents net purchases of state-contingent domestic

bonds, with ξt,t+1 denoting the state price, and BD,t+1 (h) the quantity of such claims purchased

at time t. Each member of household h earns labor income (1 + τW )Wt (h) Nt (h) (where τW is a

subsidy that allows us to oﬀset monopolistic distortions in wage-setting) , and receives gross rental

income of RKt Kt (h) from renting its capital stock to ﬁrms. Each member also receives an aliquot

share Γt (h) of the proﬁts of all ﬁrms, and pays a lump-sum tax of Tt (h) (this may be regarded as

taxes net of any transfers).

   In every period t, each member of household h maximizes the utility functional (9) with respect

                                                        20
to its consumption, investment, (end-of-period) capital stock, money balances, and holdings of

contingent claims, subject to its labor demand function (8), budget constraint (11), and transition

equation for capital (12). Households also set nominal wages in Calvo-style staggered contracts that

are generally similar to the price contracts described above. Thus, the probability that a household

receives a signal to reoptimize its wage contract in a given period is denoted by 1 − ξw , and as in

the case of price contracts this probability is independent of the date at which the household last

reset its wage. However, we specify a dynamic indexation scheme for the adjustment of the wages

of those households that do not get a signal to reoptimize, i.e., Wt (h) = ωt Wt−1 (h),in contrast

to the static indexing assumed for prices. As discussed by Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans

(2005), dynamic indexation of this form introduces some element of structural persistence into the

wage-setting process. Our asymmetric treatment is motivated by the empirical analysis of Levin,

Onatski, Williams, and Williams (2005). These authors estimated a similar model using U.S. data

over the 1955:1-2001:4 period, and found evidence in favor of nearly full indexation of wages, but

not of prices (hence our speciﬁcation of prices as purely forward-looking).

4.3   Fiscal Policy and the Aggregate Resource Constraint

The government’s budget is balanced every period, so that total lump-sum taxes plus seignorage

revenue are equal to output and labor subsidies plus the cost of government purchases:


                        1                 1                             1
         Mt − Mt−1 +     0   Tt (h) dh =   0    τp Pt (f ) Yt (f ) df +   0    τw Wt (h) Nt (h) dh + Pt Gt   (13)

where Gt indicates real government purchases. We assume that government spending is a ﬁxed

share of output in our analysis. Finally, the total output of the service sector is subject to the

following resource constraint:

                                                Yt = Ct + It + Gt                                            (14)




                                                        21
5    Solution and Calibration

To analyze the behavior of the model, we log-linearize the model’s equations around the non-

stochastic steady state. Nominal variables, such as the contract price and wage, are rendered

stationary by suitable transformations. We then compute the reduced-form solution of the model

for a given set of parameters using the numerical algorithm of Anderson and Moore (1985), which

provides an eﬃcient implementation of the solution method proposed by Blanchard and Kahn

(1980).

    The model is calibrated at a quarterly frequency. Thus, we assume that the discount factor

β = .9925, consistent with a steady-state annualized real interest rate r of about 3 percent. We

assume that the subutility function over consumption is logarithmic, so that σ = 1, while we set

the parameter determining the degree of habit persistence in consumption κ = 0.6 (similar to the

empirical estimate of Smets and Wouters 2003). The parameter χ, which determines the curvature

of the subutility function over leisure, is set equal to 10, implying a Frisch elasticity of labor supply

of 1/5. This is considerably lower than if preferences were logarithmic in leisure, but within the

range of most estimates from the empirical labor supply literature. The scaling parameter χ0 is set

so that employment comprises one-third of the household’s time endowment, while the parameter

μ0 on the subutility function for real balances is set an arbitrarily low value (so that variation in

real balances has a negligible impact on other variables). The share of government spending of

total expenditure is set equal to 12 percent.

    We set the capital share parameter α = 1/3, the quarterly depreciation rate of the capital stock

δ = 0.02 (implying an annual depreciation rate of 8 percent), and the investment adjustment cost

parameter φI = 2. We assume that price contracts have an average duration of three quarters while

nominal wage contracts have an average duration of four quarters, and we set the price and wage

markup parameters θP = θW = 1/5.




                                                   22
6         Model Simulations
6.1        The Post Civil War Deflation

While we will attempt to use our model to account for the evolution of real activity during the

latter two episodes – on the premise that monetary changes played a principal role in driving the

output ﬂuctuations that occurred – our objective in applying the model to the post Civil War

deﬂation is narrower in scope. In particular, while a more complicated model with a richer set of

shocks would be required to account for output behavior over the long period prior to Resumption,

our focus here is simply to rationalize why the “secular” deﬂation of 2-3 percent per year appeared

to exert little drag on output growth in the decade following the Public Credit Act of 1869.

         In this vein, we characterize the monetary authorities in the 1869-1879 period as following a

simple targeting rule derived from minimizing a loss function that depends on the gap between the

price level pt and its target value p∗t (which we call the price level gap), and on the output gap

gt . Under a quadratic period loss function in each of these gaps, the targeting rule is derived by

minimizing a discounted conditional loss function of the form:

                                         ∞
                                         
                                    Et         β j (pt+j − p∗t+j )2 + λG gt+j
                                                                          2
                                                                                                             (15)
                                         j=0
subject to the behavioral constraints implied by household and ﬁrm optimization from the model

of Section 4.16

         The solid blue line in Figure 5 presents our benchmark characterization of the post Civil War

deﬂation period in response to a permanent reduction in p∗t of 30 percent. The weight on the output

gap in the loss function is chosen to stretch out the price decline over the course of a decade, so that

the simulated price level decline appears quite similar to the historical experience (this is achieved

by setting λG = 5000 in (15)). It is evident from the ﬁgure that the large cumulative decline in

prices has little impact on real activity: in fact, output never falls more than 0.1 percent below

potential. The optimal policy achieves this sizeable price decline at minimal output cost by relying

heavily on an “expectations channel”: current price-setters are willing to lower prices today in
    16
   See Svensson (2003) and Woodford (2003) for extensive discussions of the use of targeting rules to characterize
monetary policy.


                                                          23
                               Figure 5: Simulations of the Post-Civil War Episode
                              Price Level                                                      Real Output
       0                                                                  2
                                             Benchmark
     −5                                      Four−year Deflation
                                             Two−year deflation           0

     −10
                                                                        −2
     −15
                                                                        −4
     −20
                                                                        −6
     −25

     −30                                                                −8


     −35                                                                −10
       1869   1871     1873      1875       1877    1879                  1869   1871   1873      1875       1877   1879


              Long−term Real Interest Rate (5 year)                               Short−term Nominal Interest Rate
     1.4                                                                  2

     1.2                                                                  0

       1
                                                                        −2
     0.8
                                                                        −4
     0.6
                                                                        −6
     0.4
                                                                        −8
     0.2

       0                                                                −10

    −0.2                                                                −12
       1869   1871     1873      1875       1877    1879                  1869   1871   1873      1875       1877   1879




the expectation that future prices will be lower (and hence deﬂation does not require a recession).

A notable characteristic of the optimal policy is that it implies a persistent decline in short-term

nominal interest rates, which is consistent with the policy shift exerting little eﬀect on long-term

real interest rates.

   We believe that this simple characterization of policy captures many of the relevant features

of the historical environment following the passage of the Public Credit Act in 1869 that were

recounted in Section 2. These features included: ﬁrst, the mandate to eﬀect a substantial reduction

in the general price level, subject to the proviso that the deﬂation would be gradual enough to avoid

a reprise of the post war monetary recession; and second, the ability of the authorities to commit to

such a policy. Admittedly, our characterization abstracts from some aspects of implementation that

were discussed in Section 2, including the operational procedure of controlling the monetary base.

However, taking account of such features would require signiﬁcant complications to our model,

and would seem highly unlikely to change our basic message that a very gradual and predictable


                                                                   24
deﬂation exerts small eﬀects on real activity under a reasonable and well-understood rule (speciﬁed

either in terms of the money stock or nominal interest rate).17

       Given the negligible output losses under the ten year implementation window, it is also natural

to inquire whether the 1869-1879 price level decline could have occurred more rapidly without

signiﬁcantly exacerbating the eﬀects on the real economy: did the authorities perhaps become

overly cautious in response to the public acrimony that followed their ﬁrst attempts to deﬂate?

This rather general question about how quickly a deﬂation can be implemented without causing

substantial fallout on the real economy has close parallel in earlier work by Taylor (1983) and

Ball (1994b, 1995), but with the important diﬀerence that the latter authors assessed how the real

costs depended on the horizon over which the inﬂation rate was changed, rather than the price

level. While these authors found that a disinﬂation could be implemented over a short horizon

of roughly two years or less with minimal output costs, our results suggest that a considerably

longer horizon is required to implement a change in the price level; the diﬀerence reﬂects that while

the staggered contracts framework implies little endogenous persistence in the inﬂation rate – so

that it is relatively easy for inﬂation to jump – it implies considerably more price level persistence.

Under our baseline calibration, the implied tradeoﬀ between a shorter horizon for implementing the

disinﬂation and higher output losses can be derived by varying the relative weight on the output

gap (λG ) in the targeting rule (15). Two alternative cases are shown in Figure 5. The dashed green

line shows that a value of λG which causes the 30 percent price decline to occur over only four years

causes the output loss to rise to about 1 percent, which still seems quite modest. However, while

our benchmark model allows an inﬂation target to be reduced over a narrow 2 year window with

minimal output losses (as veriﬁed below, consistent with the earlier literature cited), implementing

a new price level target over such an abbreviated time frame causes a pronounced recession (as

depicted by the red dash-dotted line).

       These results suggest that the ten-year window for phasing in the deﬂation might have been
  17
    It is worth noting that the optimal targeting rule implies a complicated underlying interest rate reaction function
(see Woodford and Gianonni 2005). But at least for our baseline case of a very slow deﬂation, the targeting rule can
be approximated fairly well by a simple instrument rule in which the ex post real interest rate responds to the price
level gap and output gap.




                                                          25
reduced considerably without much of an adverse eﬀect on output. Moreover, to the extent that

wages and prices may have been somewhat more ﬂexible in this episode than implied by our

benchmark calibration, the output losses associated with shortening the implementation horizon

would be mitigated relative to those indicated in Figure 5. Nevertheless, provided there is some

sluggishness in prices and wages – even if less than embedded in our benchmark – real interest rates

must rise sharply to implement a discrete downward shift in the price level over a short horizon.

Thus, it is arguable that a short implementation window in the neighborhood of a year or two

might have risked a substantial recession.

6.2       The Post-WWI Deflation

We now turn to using our model to characterize the severe monetary recession that began in 1920.

As discussed above, the salient feature was a precipitous and largely unexpected decline in the price

level of about 20 percent over a period of less than two years, and a sharp but fairly short-lived

contraction in activity. Our model simulations in Figure 5 suggest that attempting to achieve a

new price level objective so quickly would precipitate a severe recession even under a well-designed

policy derived in an optimization-based setting. But given that monetary policy seemed far from

optimal during the 1920s, it remains of interest to assess the implications of a large shift in the

price level target under an alternative monetary rule that may better account for the nature of

policy.

   Despite obvious diﬃculties in characterizing policy during this turbulent period, we believe that

many of the prominent features of the policymaking framework can be summarized in a simple

instrument rule of the form:



                                      it = γi it−1 + γP (pt − p∗t )                               (16)

This rule posits the nominal interest rate it as responding to the price level gap (pt − p∗t ), as well

as to its own lag (a constant term is suppressed for simplicity). This speciﬁcation has two salient

features. First, policy rates are driven exclusively by the diﬀerence between the current price

level and its target p∗t . This speciﬁcation is intended to capture the belief of key Federal Reserve


                                                   26
policymakers that continued adherence to the Gold standard hinged on rolling back the rise in the

U.S. price level that had occurred following the U.S. entry into the war. While it was recognized

that real activity might suﬀer in the short-run, it was regarded of paramount importance to reduce

prices enough to faciliate an adequate buildup of gold reserves. The second key feature of (16) is

that nominal rates do not respond to inﬂation (either ex post or ex ante). As shown below, this

helps account for the empirical observation that nominal rates remained high despite an enormous

decline in the price level in 1920-21. This feature of the instrument rule evidently contrasts with

the behavior of nominal rates under the optimal rule shown in Figure 5, in which declining inﬂation

exerts sizeable downward pressure on nominal rates.

   The price level target is assumed to follow an exogenous random walk, so that any shift in the

target is perceived as permanent. The shock we consider involves a 20 percent cumulative reduction

in p∗t that begins in 1920q1. While private agents are assumed to observe the underlying price level

target, we assume that the shock is phased-in over three quarters, in part to match the modest

persistence suggested by the commodity price forecast errors discussed in Section 3. Finally, we

set γi = .5 to allow for a bit of interest rate smoothing, and γP = .12 in order to allow our model

to do reasonably well in matching the rise in nominal interest rates that occurred in the historical

episode.

   Simulation results for our benchmark case are shown by the solid blue lines in Figure 6. The

model simulation generates a large decline in the price level beginning in 1920 that is similar in

magnitude to that observed. The sharpness of this price decline is well-captured by our modelling

framework, in which prices are determined by Calvo-style contracts with no dynamic indexation.

The speed of the price decline would be much more diﬃcult to rationalize in a model that incor-

porated dynamic indexation or other forms of intrinsic inﬂation persistence.

   The model implies a pronounced output decline that is followed by a rapid recovery, which

is similar to the pattern observed historically. The output decline in our model simulation is

attributable to a sizeable and fairly persistent rise in the real interest rate. The substantial rise in

real long-term interest rates despite little movement in the nominal interest rate reﬂects both that

agents came to expect large price declines, and that policy would maintain high nominal rates even

                                                  27
                                      Figure 6: Simulations of the Post-WWI Episode
                                 Price Level                                                       Real Output
          0                                                                   5
                                                Benchmark
                                                Slower w/simple rule
        −5
                                                                              0

        −10
                                                                            −5
        −15

                                                                            −10
        −20


        −25                                                                 −15
              1920      1921      1922         1923       1924                    1920    1921      1922      1923      1924



                     Long−term Real Interest Rate (5 year)                               Short−term Nominal Interest Rate
          3                                                                   3

        2.5                                                                   2

          2                                                                   1

        1.5                                                                   0

          1                                                                 −1

        0.5                                                                 −2

          0                                                                 −3

       −0.5                                                                 −4
              1920      1921      1922         1923       1924                    1920    1921      1922      1923      1924




in a deﬂationary environment.18

       Thus, our simulation results suggest that the high costs of the 1920-21 deﬂation reﬂect that the

Federal Reserve attempted to engineer an extremely rapid deﬂation, and that it was perceived as

following a monetary policy stance in which future nominal rates were expected to remain high (at

least for a few quarters) in the face of deﬂation: in eﬀect, consistent with our historical analysis,

the Federal Reserve used the blunt instrument of a severe recession to push down prices, rather

than operating through an expectations channel. Accordingly, it is of interest to consider the

counterfactual simulation depicted by the dotted green lines, which shows a case in which the

central bank is assumed to change its target path level incrementally, and to follow a rule in which
  18
    In an earlier version of this paper, we attempted to account for the eﬀects of the massive decline in government
spending following the November 1918 armistice by including a sequence of contractionary government spending
shocks. We found that the inclusion of these shocks markedly dampened the eﬀects of the post-war monetary
expansion on output. However, given that the government spending declines were concentrated in 1919, they had
a small eﬀect on the behavior of output and prices thereafter. Hence, given our focus on the period following the
monetary contraction of early 1920, we have conﬁned our attention to monetary shocks.




                                                                       28
the nominal interest rate also responds to ex post inﬂation (but is otherwise identical to equation

(16)). Clearly, while allowing for nominal rates to decline with inﬂation would have induced a

more gradual convergence in prices to target, it would have greatly ameliorated the output costs.

Obviously, even more favorable outcomes could be derived to the extent that policy could better

approximate the optimal targeting rules discussed in the previous section rather than a simple ad

hoc instrument rule.

6.3    The Volcker Disinflation

A striking feature of the Volcker disinﬂation period was the fact that inﬂation forecast errors were

extremely persistent. Erceg and Levin (2003) argued that the persistence in the forecast errors –

and associated high persistence in realized inﬂation – may have reﬂected a high level of uncertainty

about the central bank’s inﬂation target.19 In this paper, we take a similar stylized approach to

characterizing uncertainty about the inﬂation target of the central bank by assuming that agents

cannot diﬀerentiate permanent shocks to the inﬂation target from transient shocks to the monetary

policy reaction function.

    We specify the central bank’s reaction function over the Volcker period as a slightly modiﬁed

version of the Taylor rule:



                    it = γi it−1 + (1 − γi )(r̄ + πt ) + γπ (πt − πt∗ ) + γy (Δyt − ḡ) + et               (17)

where it is the short-term nominal interest rate, πt is the four-quarter change in the GDP price

deﬂator, πt∗ is the central bank’s inﬂation target, Δyt is the four-quarter change in real GDP, and

et denotes the shock to the policy reaction function, where all variables are expressed at annual

rates in percentage points.

    In estimating this policy reaction function, we utilize the sample period 1980:4 through 1986:4,

thereby excluding the policy reversals that occurred during the ﬁrst year of Volcker’s tenure (as
  19
     These authors argued that inﬂation persistence was not structural, but due to uncertainty about the conduct
of monetary policy. Cogley and Sargent (2001) present econometric evidence that inﬂation persistence is regime-
dependent using a time-varying coeﬃcients model.




                                                      29
         Figure 7: The Estimated Policy Reaction Function during the Volcker Disinﬂation
                                                                                                             Actual
                                                                                                             Fitted
                                                                                                             Residual
          20




          15




          10




           5




           0




          −5
          1980.5      1981         1981.5           1982        1982.5           1983       1983.5         1984     1984.5



discussed in section 2.3).20 Least squares estimation over this sample period yields γi = 0.65,

γπ = 0.59, and γy = 0.30. As seen in Figure 7, this simple form of the reaction function accounts

reasonably well for the evolution of the funds rate over the sample period.

    Agents cannot directly observe the long-run inﬂation target πt∗ , or the monetary shock et ; but

given that agents observe interest rates, inﬂation, and output growth (as well as all of the structural

parameters of the model), they can infer a composite shock φt which is a hybrid of the inﬂation

target shock and the monetary policy shock:


                                                       φt = −γG πt∗ + et                                                     (18)

The unobserved components in turn are perceived to follow a ﬁrst-order vector autoregression:
                                                                                              
                                 πt∗               ρp 0          ∗
                                                                πt−1                 υ1 0        εpt
                                           =                                 +                                               (19)
                                 et                0 ρq         et−1                 0 υ2        εqt
The inﬂation target πt∗ is highly persistent, and has an autoregressive root ρp arbitrarily close to

unity. For simplicity, we assume that the random policy shock et is white noise (so ρq = 0). The

innovations associated with each shock, εpt and εqt , are mutually uncorrelated with unit variance.
  20
     In this regression, the short-term nominal interest rate is measured by the federal funds rate, the steady-state
real interest rate r̄ is set to 3 percent (consistent with our speciﬁcation of the discount factor β), steady-state output
growth ḡ is set to 2.5 percent, and the inﬂation target π ∗ is speciﬁed as 4 percent over this sample period.


                                                                 30
       Given this linear structure, we assume that agents use the Kalman ﬁlter to make optimal

projections about the unobserved inﬂation target πt∗ . The inﬂation target perceived by agents

evolves according to a ﬁrst order autoregression. Agents update their assessment of the inﬂation

target by the product of the forecast error innovation and a constant coeﬃcient. This coeﬃcient,

which is proportional to the Kalman gain, can be expressed as a function of the signal-to-noise ratio

(γπ vv12 ). Clearly, the signal-to-noise ratio depends on the relative magnitude of innovations to each

of the components of the observed shock φt ; but importantly, it also depends directly on the weight

γπ on the inﬂation target in the central bank’s reaction function. Intuitively, if policy is aggressive

in reacting to the inﬂation gap, agents will attribute more of any unexplained rise in interest rates

to a reduction in the central bank’s long-run inﬂation target, rather than to random policy shocks.

       As argued by Erceg and Levin (2003) in the context of a somewhat simpler dynamic model,

the signal-to-noise ratio plays a crucial role in aﬀecting model responses to a shock to the inﬂation
                                                                                        v1
target. Following their approach, we estimate this composite parameter (i.e.,           v2 ,   using the estimated

value of γπ ) by choosing the value that minimizes the diﬀerence between historical four-quarter-

ahead expected inﬂation (taken from survey data) and the corresponding expected inﬂation path

implied by our model.21 In particular, we minimize the loss function:

                              20
                              
                                            4                          4                       2
                     Loss =          Et+j (πt+3+j (survey data)-Et+j (πt+3+j (mod el)                        (20)
                               j=0

The estimation period is 1980:4 through 1985:4. The model expectation in (20) is the expected rate

of four-quarter ahead inﬂation that agents project at each date, given an assumed one-time shift

in the inﬂation target of six percentage points that occurs in 1980:4. Our estimation routine yields

a point estimate of ( vv21 ) that implies a Kalman gain coeﬃcient on the forecast error innovation of

about 0.10.

       Figure 8 shows the eﬀects of a six percentage point immediate reduction in the Federal Reserve’s

inﬂation target in our benchmark model. The learning problem about the inﬂation target plays a

critical role in allowing our model to account for the main features of the Volker disinﬂation episode
  21
     We use the median of four-quarter ahead inﬂation forecasts taken from the Survey of Professional Forecasters;
this series is plotted in Figure 4.


                                                       31
                        Figure 8: Benchmark Simulation of the Volcker Disinﬂation
           Output and Expenditure Components                                            Price Inflation
     2                                                             10
                                                                                               Current Inflation (4 qtr)
                                                                    8                          Expected Inflation 1 yr ahead
     0                                                                                         Inflation Forecast Error (1 yr)

                                                                    6

    −2
                                                                    4

                                                                    2
    −4

                                                                    0
                                                Output
    −6                                          Consumption
                                                Investment         −2
                                                Real wage
    −8                                                             −4
         1981    1982       1983         1984        1985               1981     1982        1983         1984        1985



                        Interest Rates                                    Long term Interest Rates and Inflation
    18                                                             10
                            Short−term Nominal Rate (1 qtr)                                   Expected Inflation (5 year avg)
    16                      Short−term Real Rate (1 qtr)            9                         Long−term Real Rate (5 yr)

    14
                                                                    8
    12
                                                                    7
    10
                                                                    6
     8
                                                                    5
     6

     4                                                              4

     2                                                              3
         1981    1982       1983         1984        1985               1981     1982        1983         1984        1985




discussed above, including sluggish inﬂation adjustment, a persistently negative output gap, and an

initial rise in the nominal interest rate. The inﬂation rate declines in roughly exponential fashion

in our model simulation, with about half of the eventual 6 percentage point fall occurring after four

quarters, and most of it after ten quarters. Our model’s predicted path for inﬂation is very similar

to that observed during the actual episode. Moreover, long-run expected inﬂation in our model (see

the lower right panel) declines much more slowly than current inﬂation, which is also consistent

with the historical experience. This pattern in our simulation reﬂects that long-run inﬂation is

largely determined by expectations about the future course of the inﬂation target, which evolve

very slowly, while short-run inﬂation can drop more quickly in response to the depressed state of

real activity.

   Our model does quite well in accounting for both the magnitude of the output decline and its

timing. As shown in the upper-left panel, real GDP exhibits a substantial and persistent decline,

with a cumulative loss (relative to trend) of about 10 percentage points over the period 1981 through


                                                              32
1984. This loss is consistent with a sacriﬁce ratio of about 1.7, remarkably close to the sacriﬁce

ratio implied by the OECD output gap data shown in Figure 3 and to Ball’s (1994a) estimate of

1.8 for this episode.

    Interestingly, the model does well in accounting for the timing of the output trough: as in the

OECD data, the trough occurs about 6 quarters after the initial shock. Our model’s ability to

capture the timing of the Volcker recession provides support for specifying adjustment costs as

dependent on the change in investment, rather than following a traditional Q-theory approach in

which adjustment costs depend on the change in capital stock.22 By contrast, Erceg and Levin

(2003) utilized a Q-theory speciﬁcation, and found that investment dropped precipitously following

the initial rise in interest rates, so that the peak decline in both output and the expenditure

components occurred roughly one quarter after the shock.

    The ability of our model to account for the Volcker period is enhanced by allowing for the

dynamic indexation of nominal wage contracts. In the absence of dynamic wage indexation, real

interest rates exhibit a smaller and less persistent increase, and output contracts much less than

under our benchmark speciﬁcation. It might be supposed that the additional inclusion of dynamic

price indexation would produce an even larger output decline, and hence improve on our benchmark

model’s ability to account for the output contraction under Volcker. We found, however, that

incorporating this form of structural persistence in the inﬂation rate produced only a marginally

larger output decline in our model simulation, while implying a much slower drop in inﬂation than

occurred in the historical episode.

    While we think that the ability of a relatively simple model to account for the broad features of

the Volcker recession is impressive, we suspect that the inclusion of credit market imperfections and

sectoral diﬀerentiation in production could enhance the model’s ability to account for the depth of

the Volcker recession. In particular, a model that could account for the massive increase in default

spreads that occurred in the early 1980s, such as the ﬁnancial accelerator framework of Bernanke,

Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999), might well provide an even closer quantitative match to the actual
  22
     Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) argued that such a speciﬁcation provides a much better account of
investment dynamics in response to a monetary policy shock.



                                                      33
    Figure 9: Counterfactual Simulation of Volcker Disinﬂation under Complete Information
                         Real GDP                                      Price Inflation (4 qtr)
     1                                                  10
                                                                                     Benchmark (γ = .58)
                                                                                                  π
     0                                                   9
                                                                                     Less aggressive (γ = .25)
                                                                                                       π
    −1                                                   8                           More aggressive (γπ = 2)

    −2                                                   7

    −3                                                   6

    −4                                                   5

    −5                                                   4

    −6                                                   3

    −7                                                   2
         1981   1983      1985      1987    1989             1981   1983     1985       1987          1989



                Short Term Real Interest Rate                       Long−run Expected Inflation
    18                                                  10

    16                                                   9

    14
                                                         8
    12
                                                         7
    10
                                                         6
     8
                                                         5
     6

     4                                                   4

     2                                                   3
         1981   1983      1985      1987    1989             1981   1983     1985       1987          1989




experience.

   We next turn to applying our model to evaluate some of the criticism levelled at the rapid

pace of the Volcker disinﬂation and the highly aggressive policy stance required to support it. Our

analysis indicates that this critique would have been justiﬁed if the Federal Reserve’s policies were

regarded as highly credible. In particular, Figure 9 reconsiders our benchmark scenario under

the assumption that agents have complete information about the shift in the inﬂation target πt∗ .

We interpret this setting as approximating the case of a highly credible and transparent policy

environment. As might be expected, inﬂation converges to the new target in a little more than a

year while the output decline is correspondingly much shorter-lived. Nevertheless, a policymaker

placing a suﬃciently high weight on the output gap relative to inﬂation might view this output

decline as unnecessarily costly. Accordingly, the ﬁgure also depicts a rule that responds much less

aggressively to the inﬂation gap; that is, γπ = 0.25 rather than 0.58 as in our benchmark rule. In

this case, the output decline is a bit smaller while inﬂation declines almost as rapidly. Conversely,


                                                   34
a more aggressive rule with a coeﬃcient of γπ = 2 would only succeed in bringing inﬂation down

a bit more quickly than under the benchmark rule but at the cost of a signiﬁcantly larger output

decline.

   Thus, in an environment with complete information about the central bank’s underlying in-

ﬂation target, the level of inﬂation comes down rapidly even if the monetary reaction function is

fairly nonaggressive in responding to inﬂation. This is because the expectation of slower growth in

future prices and wages immediately exerts a strong restraining eﬀect on current inﬂation. Never-

theless, because there is some structural persistence in inﬂation due to dynamic wage indexation,

attempting to disinﬂate too quickly – meaning faster than in roughly 5 or 6 quarters – can still

produce a sizeable contraction in activity. Given these tradeoﬀs, a more gradualist course would

seem preferable unless the policymaker placed virtually no weight on output gap stabilization.

   However, this argument in favor of a gradualist policy is predicated on high credibility and

transparency of the underlying inﬂation target, assumptions which seem implausible in the envi-

ronment faced by Volcker. Our benchmark model with imperfect information appears well suited to

examining some of the beneﬁts that might be derived from an aggressive policy stance that accrue

through a signalling channel. A given-sized change in the inﬂation target induces a sharper rise in

interest rates if γπ is large: thus, in an environment where agents must infer policy actions rather

than observe them directly, an aggressive policy stance can help them disentangle policy shifts from

“discretionary” departures from the perceived policy rule.

   In this vein, Figure 10 compares the implications of our benchmark policy rule under incomplete

information (repeating the analysis of Figure 8) to two alternative rules that vary the weight on

the inﬂation gap in the same way as just considered above: thus, we consider a less aggressive

response with γπ = 0.25, and a more aggressive response with γπ = 2. We model the signalling

value associated with an aggressive policy response by assuming that the innovations ν1 and ν2 of

the observable φt are constant in our experiments, which has the eﬀect of reducing the Kalman

gain coeﬃcient as γπ falls. Thus, the Kalman gain coeﬃcient falls from 0.10 in our benchmark to

0.04 in the alternative with a coeﬃcient of γπ = 0.25; conversely, the Kalman gain rises to 0.3 with

the aggressive coeﬃcient of γπ = 2.

                                                35
   Figure 10: Counterfactual Simulation of Volcker Disinﬂation under Incomplete Information
                           Output                                      Price Inflation (4 qtr)
     1                                                  10
                                                                                     Benchmark (γ = .58)
                                                                                                  π
     0                                                   9                           Less aggressive (γ = .25)
                                                                                                       π
    −1                                                                               More aggressive (γπ = 2)
                                                         8
    −2
                                                         7
    −3
                                                         6
    −4
                                                         5
    −5

    −6                                                   4

    −7                                                   3
         1981   1983      1985      1987    1989             1981   1983     1985       1987          1989



                Short Term Real Interest Rate                       Long−run Expected Inflation
    20                                                  10

    18
                                                         9
    16
                                                         8
    14

    12                                                   7

    10                                                   6
     8
                                                         5
     6
                                                         4
     4

     2                                                   3
         1981   1983      1985      1987    1989             1981   1983     1985       1987          1989




   Considering the same six percentage point shock to the inﬂation target, it is evident in the lower

right panel that long-term expected inﬂation declines much more gradually for the lower value of γπ .

In particular, long-run expected inﬂation is still close to 5 percent even at the end of the decade;

in contrast, under the benchmark rule, these expectations approach very close to the 4 percent

target within about ﬁve years. Unsurprisingly, output exhibits a smaller short-run contraction

under the alternative policy rules compared with the benchmark rule, reﬂecting less pronounced

increases in both short-term and long-term real interest rates. But importantly, because private

agents learn more slowly about the new inﬂation target under this alternative, output shows a

less rapid recovery in these cases than under the benchmark rule, and real interest rates remain

persistently above baseline. Conversely, while a policy that responded even more aggressively to

inﬂation than under the benchmark would produce a larger initial downturn, it causes inﬂation to

fall even more quickly, and hence generates a faster recovery.

   Overall, while the less aggressive rules succeed in reducing the severity of the initial output


                                                   36
downturn relative to our benchmark scenario, these rules also lead to a somewhat more protracted

recession, and markedly prolong the period over which inﬂation remains above target. Thus, even

if gradualism might seem highly attractive under policy credibility for a wide range of policymaker

preferences (provided preferences aren’t tilted toward reducing inﬂation at all cost), a much more

aggressive response might be warranted in cases of low policy credibility.


7    Conclusions

In this paper, we have examined three famous episodes of deﬂation (or disinﬂation) in U.S. history,

including episodes following the Civil War, World War I, and the Volcker disinﬂation of the early

1980s. Our model simulations suggest that the relatively robust output growth that occurred

during the post-Civil war deﬂation of the 1870s was facilitated by the highly predictable nature of

the price decline. By analogy, a more predictable policy of gradual deﬂation could have helped avoid

the sharp post-WWI downturn. However, our analysis of the Volcker period emphasizes that the

strong argument for gradualism that is apparent under a transparent and credible monetary regime

becomes less persuasive if the monetary regime lacks credibility: in the latter case, gradualism may

simply serve to prolong the suﬀering associated with a disinﬂationary episode.




                                                37
8    References
Anderson, G.S., Moore, G., 1985, A linear algebraic procedure for solving linear perfect foresight
models, Economic Letters 17, 247-252.

Balke, Nathan S. and Robert J. Gordon, 1986, Data Appendix B in Robert J. Gordon (ed.) The
American Business Cycle: Continuity and Change, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Balke, Nathan S. and Robert J. Gordon, 1989, The Estimation of Prewar Gross National Product:
Methodology and New Evidence, Journal of Political Economy, vol. 97, no. 1, 38-92.

Ball, Lawrence, 1994a, What determines the sacriﬁce ratio? in N.G. Mankiw (ed.), Monetary
Policy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

, Ball, Lawrence, 1994b, Credible disinﬂation with staggered price-setting, American Economic
Review, 84, 282-289.

Ball, Lawrence, 1995, Disinﬂation and Imperfect Credibility, Journal of Monetary Economics, 35,
5-24.

Beney, Ada, 1936, Wages, Hours, and Employment in the United States, 1914-1936, New York:
National Industrial Conference Board, Inc.

Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler and Simon Gilchrist, 1999, The Financial Accelerator in a Quan-
titative Business Cycle Framework, in J. Taylor and M. Woodford (eds.), Handbook of Macroeco-
nomics, Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Blanchard, Olivier, 1984, The Lucas Critique and the Volcker Disinﬂation, NBER Working paper
1326.

Blanchard, Olivier and Charles Kahn, 1980, The Solution of Linear Diﬀerence Models under Ra-
tional Expectations, Econometrica 48, 1305-1311.

Bullock, Charles J., 1921, Review of the Year 1920, Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 3
issue 1, 7-10.

Calomiris, Charles, 1985, “Understanding Greenback Inﬂation and Deﬂation: An Asset-Pricing
Approach,” Ph.D. dissertation.

Calomiris, Charles, 1993, “Greenback Resumption and Silver Risk: The Economics and Politics
of Monetary Regime Change in the United States, 1862-1900,” in Michael D. Bordo and Forrest
Capie (eds.), Monetary Regimes in Transition, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Calvo, Guillermo, 1983, Staggered Prices in a Utility Maximizing Framework, Journal of Monetary
Economics, 12, 383-98.

Christiano, Lawrence, Eichenbaum, Martin, and Charles Evans, 1999, Monetary Policy Shocks:
What Have We Learned, and to What End? In: Taylor, John and Michael Woodford (Eds.),
Handbook of Macroeconomics Vol 1A, 65-148.

Christiano, Lawrence, Eichenbaum, Martin, and Charles Evans, 2001, Nominal Rigidities and the
Dynamic Eﬀects of Shocks to Monetary Policy, National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper no. 8403.

                                               38
Cogley, Timothy and Thomas Sargent, 2001, “Evolving Post WWII Inﬂation Dynamics,” In
Bernanke, Benjamin and Kenneth Rogoﬀ (Eds), Macroeconomics Annual.

Commercial and Financial Chronicle, 1919-1922, various issues.

Davis, Joseph, 2004, An Annual Index of U.S. Industrial Production, 1790-1915, The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, vol. 99, issue 4, 1177-1215.

Erceg, Christopher, Dale Henderson, and Andrew Levin, 2000, Optimal Monetary Policy with
Staggered Wage and Price Contracts, Journal of Monetary Economics, 46, 281-313.

Erceg, Christopher, Luca Guerrieri, and Christopher Gust, 2005, Can Long Run Restrictions Iden-
tify Technology Shocks? Journal of the European Economic Association, forthcoming.

Erceg, Christopher, and Andrew Levin, 2003, Imperfect Credibility and Inﬂation Persistence, Jour-
nal of Monetary Economics 50, 915-944.

Feldstein, Martin, 1993, American Economic Policy in the 1980s: A Personal View,: in M. Feldstein
(Ed.), American Economic Policy in the 1980s, University of Chicago Press. 1993

Fisher, Irving, 1920, Stabilizing the Dollar, New York: The MacMillan Company.

Fisher, Irving, 1934, Stable Money, New York: Adelphi Company Publishers.

Firestone, John, 1960, Federal Receipts and Expenditures during Business Cycles, 1879-1958,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Friedman, Milton, and Anna Schwartz, 1963, A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Fuhrer, Jeﬀrey, 2000, Habit Formation in Consumption and Its Implications for Monetary-Policy
Models, American Economic Review, 90, 367-90.

Giannoni, Mark and Michael Woodford, 2005, Optimal Inﬂation Targeting Rules, in: Bernanke,
Ben. and Woodford, Michael (eds)., Inﬂation Targeting, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Goodfriend, Marvin, 1997, Monetary Policy Comes of Age: A 20th Century Odyssey, Federal
Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 83, 1–24.

Goodfriend, Marvin, 1993, Interest Rate Policy and the Inﬂation Scare Problem: 1979-1992, Federal
Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 79 vol 1, 2–23.

Goodfriend, Marvin and Robert King, 1997, The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the Role of
Monetary Policy, in: Bernanke, B.S., Rotemberg, J.J. (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997
(MIT Press: Cambridge), 231-283.

Goodfriend, Marvin and Robert King, 2005, The Incredible Volcker Disinﬂation, Journal of Mon-
etary Economics vol. 52 issue 5, 981-1015.

Gordon, Robert, 1982, Why Stopping Inﬂation May Be Costly: Evidence from Fourteen Historical
Episodes, in: Hall, Robert E. (ed.), Inﬂation: Causes and Eﬀects, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press,11-40.

                                               39
Homer, Sidney, and Richard Sylla, 1996, A History of Interest Rates, 3rd edition, New Brunswick,
NJ.: Rutgers University Press.

Humphrey, Thomas, 2004, “Classical Deﬂation Theory,” Federal Bank of Richmond Economic
Quarterly, 90, 11-32.

Meltzer, Allan, 2003, A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 1, 1913-1951, Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.

Macaulay, Frederick R., 1938, The Movements of Interest Rates, Stock Prices, and Bond Yields in
the United States since 1856, New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Miller, Adolph, 1921, Federal Reserve Policy, American Economic Review, 11, no. 2, 177-206.

Mitchell, Wesley, 1903, A History of the Greenbacks, with Special Reference to the Economic Con-
sequences of their Issue: 1862-1865, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Mitchell, Wesley, 1908, Gold, Prices, and Wages under the Greenback Standard, Berkeley: The
University Press.

Miron, Jeﬀrey and Christina Romer, 1990, A New Monthly Index of Industrial Production, 1884-
1940, The Journal of Economic History, vol. 50, issue 2, 321-337.

Review of Economics and Statistics, 1919-1921, Monthly Survey of General Business Conditions,
vol. 1-3, various issues.

Rockoﬀ, Hugh, 2005, Monetary Statistics before the National Banking Era, in Historical Statistics
of the United States, Millenial Editional, Colonial Times to the Present, Cambridge,: Cambridge
University Press.

Roll, Richard, 1972, Interest Rates and Price Expectations during the Civil War, The Journal of
Economic History, vol 32, issue 2, 476-498

Romer, Christina, 1988, World War I and the Postwar Depression: A Reinterpretation Based on
Alternative Estimates of GNP, Journal of Monetary Economics vol. 22, 91-115.

Romer, Christina, 1989, The Prewar Business Cycle Reconsidered: New Estimates of Gross Na-
tional Product, 1869-1908, Journal of Political Economy, vol. 97, no. 1, 1-37.

Rotemberg, Julio and Michael Woodford, An Optimization-Based Econometric Framework for the
Evaluation of Monetary Policy. in: Bernanke, Ben and Julio Rotemberg (eds.), NBER Macroeco-
nomics Annual 1997, . Cambridge: MIT Press, 297-346.

Sargent, Thomas, 1982, The Ends of Four Big Inﬂations, in: Hall, Robert (ed.), Inﬂation: Causes
and Eﬀects (University of Chicago Press: Chicago), 41-97.

Sargent, Thomas, 1999,. The Conquest of American Inﬂation, Princeton: Princeton University
Press.

Svensson, Lars, 2003. “What is Wrong with Taylor Rules: Using Judgement in Monetary Policy
through Targeting Rules” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 41, 426-477.


                                               40
Smets, F. and R. Wouters, 2003. An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium Model of
the Euro Area,Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 1, 1124-1175.

Taylor, John, 1980, Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts, Journal of Political Economy,
88, 1-24.

Taylor, John, 1983, Union Wage Settlements during a Disinﬂation,” The American Economic Re-
view, 73, no. 5, 981-994.

Timberlake, Richard H, 1975, The Resumption Act and the Money Supply, Journal of Economic
History, 43, no. 3, 729-739.

Woodford, Michael, 2003, Interest and Prices, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Yun, Tack. 1996, Nominal Price Rigidity, Money Supply Endogeneity, and Business Cycles. Journal
of Monetary Economics 37, 345-370.




                                               41
