NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FETTERS OF DEBT, DEPOSIT, OR GOLD DURING THE GREAT DEPRESSION?
THE INTERNATIONAL PROPAGATION OF THE BANKING CRISIS OF 1931
Gary Richardson
Patrick Van Horn
Working Paper 12983
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12983

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2007

Comments from Naomi Lamoreaux inspired us to investigate this topic. We thank colleagues and friends
for comments on drafts of this essay. NSF Grant D/SES-0551232 funded portions of this research.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Gary Richardson and Patrick Van Horn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Fetters of Debt, Deposit, or Gold during the Great Depression? The International Propagation
of the Banking Crisis of 1931
Gary Richardson and Patrick Van Horn
NBER Working Paper No. 12983
March 2007
JEL No. F02,F33,F34,N1,N12,N14,N2
ABSTRACT
A banking crisis began in Austria in May 1931 and intensified in July, when runs struck banks throughout
Germany. In September, the crisis compelled Britain to quit the gold standard. Newly discovered data
shows that failure rates rose for banks in New York City, at the center of the United States money
market, in July and August 1931, before Britain abandoned the gold standard and before financial
outflows compelled the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates. Banks in New York City had large exposures
to foreign deposits and German debt. This paper tests to see whether the foreign exposure of money
center banks linked the financial crises on the two sides of the Atlantic.
Gary Richardson
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
garyr@uci.edu
Patrick Van Horn
3151 Social Science Plaza
University of California
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
pvh@uci.edu

1. Introduction
In May 1931, the largest financial institution in Austria, the Creditanstalt, collapsed,
marking what is generally held to be the beginning of an international banking crisis. During the
next month, financial difficulties spread throughout central Europe, as troubles beset banks in
Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Romania, Poland, and Germany. On July 13, the failure of a large
German bank, the Darmstadter- und Nationalbank, triggered runs throughout that nation and
compelled the German government to close all depository institutions. Banks reopened for
limited operations after two days and resumed normal operations after one month. Later that
summer, the crisis spread to Britain. In September, sales of sterling and withdrawals from British
banks accelerated. In order to halt financial outflows, Britain abandoned the gold standard (Barry
Eichengreen, 1992; Peter Temin, 1989 and 1993; Charles Kindleburger, 1986).
According to the conventional academic wisdom, Britain’s departure from gold
transmitted the financial crisis from Europe to the United States (Milton Friedman and Anna
Schwartz, 1963; Eichengreen, 1981 and 1992; Temin, 1989 and 1993). Anticipating a similar
action on the part of American monetary authorities, central banks and private holders in Europe
converted dollar assets in the New York money market into gold. The unloading of bills swiftly
assumed panic proportions. Gold outflows rose rapidly, draining funds from the U.S. financial
system. To stop the international drain, the Federal Reserve System raised the discount rate from
1½ to 3½ percent between October 9 and October 16. This was the
sharpest rise within so brief a period in the whole history of the system, before or
since … the move intensified internal financial difficulties and was accompanied
by a spectacular increase in bank failures and runs on banks … in the six months
from August 1931 through January 1932, 1,860 banks with deposits of $1,449
million suspended operations, and the deposits of those banks that managed to
keep afloat fell by a much larger sum. Total deposits fell over the six-month
period by nearly five times the deposits in suspended banks or by no less than 17

1

percent of the initial level of deposits in operating banks (Friedman and Schwartz,
1963, p. 317).
Golden fetters, in other words, compelled the Federal Reserve to raise the discount rate and
restrict the supply of credit, contributing to (or in many accounts, causing) the largest surge in
bank suspensions in United States history.
Recent research, however, reveals additional links that may have existed between the
banking systems in the United States and Europe. Documents from the archives of “the Bank of
England show that an intricate system of cross-deposits was set up by the Austrian Central Bank
covertly to direct funds to the Creditanstalt via American and British banks – to compensate it
for taking over the bankrupt Bodencreditanstalt (Iago Gil Aguado 2001, p. 199).” All of the
American institutions involved in this shell game operated in New York City, the central money
market of the United States. The cross-deposit involved tens of millions of dollars, a substantial
multiple of the capital of the banks involved. In addition, bank balance sheets and clearing-house
association reports show that New York banks’ foreign branches held deposits totaling over $600
million dollars. Foreigners also held large sums in New York City. Thus, banks in the United
States’ central money market had large, direct exposure to European deposits.
Records resulting from the Senate Hearings on the Sale of Foreign Bonds or Securities in
the United States, which took place from December 18, 1931 to February 10, 1932, illuminate
another link between banks in New York and Europe.1 New York banks organized over $1.4
billion in loans to German corporations, utilities, and governments (including local, state, and
national) from 1924 through 1930. Nearly $1 billion of those loans floated in the United States
were outstanding in June 1931 (Robert Kuczynski, 1932). Econometric analysis of the links
between the German and United State’s economies during the 1930s suggests that German debt
1

72nd Congress, 1st Session, Sale of Foreign Bonds or Securities in the United States, Hearings on Senate
resolution 19 before the Committee on Finance, Parts 1-4.

2

played a role, perhaps substantial, in transmitting financial shocks across the Atlantic (Albrecht
Ritschl and Samad Sarferaz, 2006). Analysis of equity returns also suggests a link through this
channel (Hanan Morsy, 2002).
An initial inspection of recently discovered data on bank failures in the United States
reinforces the appearance of a direct link between the German and American banking crisis.
Previously available evidence aggregated information on bank suspensions for Federal Reserve
Districts at the quarterly level and for states at the annual level. This aggregation prevented
scholars from determining whether bank failures in the central money market of the United
States occurred in July and August, contemporaneous with the German crisis, or in September
and October, when golden fetters bound. The disaggregated data show that almost all of the
failures of banks in the central money market coincided with the crisis in Germany and preceded
Britain’s departure from gold. Bank distress in New York City, in other words, rose when bank
distress rose in Germany. Bank distress peaked in the weeks following the German panic. The
banking crisis struck the central money market of the United States more than a month before
financial pressures forced Britain off gold.
This correlation raises questions about the channels that transmitted banking crises across
the Atlantic. Temin (1993, pp. 93-4) describes three potential channels for the international
transmission of banking crises. The first is a contagion of fear which jumps across nationally
boundaries, when domestic depositors panic as foreigners withdraw funds. The second is the
impact on portfolios when values of foreign assets fall and patterns of financial flows change.
The third is the impact of capital flows on national economies and central bank policies,
particularly in nations on the gold standard which raise interest rates to defend gold reserves.
Temin indicates

3

that
… it would be nice to choose between the alternative models, [but] this does not
seem possible at the current state of our knowledge. … Economists do not yet
know enough about international transmission of financial crises to have a single
model, or even to choose which transmission channel was most important (Temin
1993 p. 93-4).
Our data-collection endeavors enable us to answer question such as: which channel transmitted
the banking crisis from Europe to the United States in the third quarter of 1931? Did direct links
exist between the banking crises in Germany and the United States? Did deposits, debt,
correspondent relationships, or some other financial factor link the fate of money-center banks in
New York to the fate of banks in Germany?
This remainder of this essay answers those questions. Section 2 describes the
quantitative, qualitative, and narrative sources of evidence. Section 3 examines patterns in the
aggregate evidence which suggest a direct link between the crisis in Europe and the United
States. Section 4 describes our statistical tests and econometric results. Section 5 examines
contemporary evidence of the causes of bank distress in the central money market during the
summer of 1931. Section 6 examines contemporary accounts of the regulatory regime changes
that raised rates of bank distress in the central money market of the United States during the
summer of 1931. Section 7 discusses the implications of our analysis.
While the aggregate evidence suggests that a direct link existed between the financial
crisis in Europe and the surge in bank failures in the central money market of the United States
during the summer of 1931, the microeconomic evidence proves otherwise. Banks in New York
City with substantial exposure to foreign financial flows survived the crisis of 1931 and the

4

contraction as a whole. Many of them remained profitable and paid dividends throughout the
1930s.
The correlation between the financial crisis on the continent and bank distress in New
York City was coincidental, not causal. Bank distress in the central money market of the United
States peaked during the summer of 1931 for reasons unrelated to financial incidents across the
Atlantic. Political pressure and regulatory reform determined the timing of events in New York
City. The impetus for these reforms arose from the failure of The Bank of United States in
December, 1930, and the criticism directed at the Superintendent of Banks for the State of New
York for his role in that institution’s collapse.

2. Data
Several sources provide the quantitative, qualitative, and narrative information needed to
investigate the issues at hand. Quantitative sources contain data useful for econometrically
analyzing the performance of New York City banks. Qualitative sources report contemporary
conclusions concerning the causes of bank distress. Narrative sources describe events in the
central money market during the financial crisis in the summer and fall of 1931 and the change
in the regulatory regime that occurred at that time.
Several sources provide quantitative information on banks’ characteristics. Rand
McNally Bankers’ Directory provides data balance sheet figures, correspondents networks,
Federal Reserve membership, and the services provided to depositors. Rand McNally also
indicates for most sizeable New York banks whether the institution provided its customers with
international transaction services and whether the institution possessed foreign branches. Rand
McNally published biennially. Observations drawn from the July issue provide a panel of annual
observations on state and national banks at their spring calls.

5

The Annual Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of New York provides
more detailed financial data for state-chartered banks and trust companies. The information
comes quarterly. It includes details of bank balance sheets, including the composition of
investments (e.g. loans by type of collateral, stocks, bonds, discounts, cash, and deposits in other
banks) and the composition of liabilities (e.g. time deposits, demand deposits, and borrowings
from banks). The New York Times provides information on bank balance sheets in a weekly
column entitled “New York Weekly Bank Statements.” The information includes demand, time,
and foreign-branch deposits for all members of the clearing house and for many additional
institutions. The Senate Hearings on the Sale of Foreign Bonds or Securities in the United States
report loans to Germany arranged by banks in New York and outstanding when the banking
crisis ignited on the continent.
The call reports collected by the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Reserve
Board provide more detailed information for banks belonging to the Federal Reserve System.
For state-chartered member banks, balance sheets and income statements survive for the
December and June calls for the first five years of the depression (i.e. December 1929 through
December 1933). For national banks, balance sheets survive from the December 1929 and
December 1931 calls. Income statements survive from the December 1929, June 1931, and
December 1931 calls. The balance sheets provide detailed data about bank’s foreign exposure.
Schedule G indicates holdings of foreign government bonds and other foreign securities.
Schedule I indicates balances due in dollars and foreign currencies from foreign banks and
foreign branches of U.S. banks. Schedule J indicates balances due to banks in foreign countries.
Schedule L indicates time deposits of foreign banks and trust companies. Schedule D indicates

6

the number of branches in foreign countries. A balance sheet also exists for each foreign branch,
which provides additional information about overseas operations.2
Information on changes in banks’ status – such as suspensions, liquidations, mergers of
solvent institutions, and consolidations forced by financial difficulties – comes from the archives
of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors’ Division of Bank Operations. From 1929 through
1933, the Board recorded information about changes in bank status on the St. 6386 series of
forms. The forms included information identifying each bank, financial information on the date
of the change in status, and additional information about the transaction, such as the identities of
the institutions with which it merged and whether a bank reorganized before it reopened. Form
St. 6386a reported bank consolidations. A consolidation was the corporate union of two or more
banks into one bank which continued operations as a single business entity and under a single
charter. Some consolidations involved banks in financial difficulties. These consolidations often
occurred at the behest of regulators, who sought to combine solvent but illiquid banks with
healthier institutions. The Federal Reserve classified these events as consolidations due to
financial difficulties.3
Form St. 6386b reported bank suspensions. A suspension occurred when a bank closed its
doors to depositors and ceased conducting normal banking business for at least one business day.
Some, but not all, suspended banks reopened for business. A liquidation was a permanent

2

3

The reports are available on microfilm from the Federal Reserve Board of Governors. See Joseph Mason, 1998
for a description of the available data.
The complete series of St. 6386 may be found in the National Archives, Record Group 82, Federal Reserve
Central Subject File, file number 434.-1, “Bank Changes 1921-1954 Districts 1929-1954 - Consolidations,
Suspensions and Organizations-St. 6386 a,b,c, (By States) 1930-1933.” The forms are filed alphabetically by
state, name of town or city, and name of bank. Multiple entries for individual banks appear in chronological
order. To avoid repeated, lengthy citations in the body of the essay, after quotations from the archival data, the
information required to locate the form (i.e. name of state, town, bank) is indicated in brackets. For additional
information about this source, see Gary Richardson, 2006a, 2006b, 2006c, 2006d, and Gary Richardson and
William Troost, 2006.

7

suspension. A liquidating bank closed its doors to the public, surrendered its charter, and repaid
depositors, usually under the auspices of a court appointed officer known as a receiver.
Form St. 6386b included a section indicating the cause of a bank’s suspension (for
descriptions of the process that Federal Reserve agents used to determine the cause and tests of
the quality of their conclusions, see Gary Richardson, 2006b and 2006d). Federal Reserve
attributed most suspensions to one (or more) of five common causes. The first was slow,
doubtful, or worthless paper. The term worthless paper indicated an asset with little or no value.
The term doubtful paper meant an asset unlikely to yield book value. The term slow paper meant
an asset likely to yield full value in time, but whose repayment lagged or which could not be
converted to full cash value at short notice. The second common cause of suspension was heavy
withdrawals, the typical example being a bank run. The third was failure a banking
correspondent. Correspondents were banks with ongoing relationships facilitated by deposits of
funds. A typical example is a county bank (the client or respondent) which kept its reserve
deposits within and cleared its checks through a national bank in a reserve city (the
correspondent). The fourth common cause was mismanagement. The fifth was defalcation, a
monetary deficiency in the accounts of a bank due to fraud or breach of trust.
Form St. 6386c reported all other changes in bank status, including reopenings of
suspended banks and voluntary liquidations. The latter was a category of closure in which banks
ceased operations and rapidly arranged to repay depositors the full value of their deposits.
Voluntary liquidations did not require the services of receivers and were not classified as
suspensions. The categories of bank distress were typically construed to be temporary
suspensions, terminal suspensions (i.e. liquidations), voluntary liquidations, and consolidations
due to financial difficulties.

8

Combining the St. 6386 forms and the bank-balance sheet data described above yields a
cross-sectional database of banks on the eve of the financial crisis at the beginning of July in
1931. These sources also yield a panel database of banks in July of each year from 1929 through
1932. These databases contain information about banks’ characteristics, financial health, and
fates of greater detail than in any other extant source.
Data on economic conditions comes from several sources. Bradstreet’s Weekly, Dun’s
Review, The Commercial and Financial Chronicle, the Federal Reserve Bulletin, and the Annual
Reports of the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York provide data
on building permits, business failures, commodity prices, market interest rates, Federal Reserve
discount rates, prices, and industrial production. The same sources also data on international
flows of gold, goods, and funds.
Several of the sources described above provide qualitative information on the causes of
bank distress. The St. 6386 database indicates the Federal Reserve Division of Bank Operation’s
conclusions concerning the cause of each bank suspension. The database also describes the
financial difficulties that forced banks to seek consolidations, typically with the encouragement
and assistance of regulators. The Annual Report of the Superintendent of Banks of the state of
New York and press releases from the office of the bank superintendent (published in the New
York Times and Wall Street Journal) indicate the conclusions of New York’s regulatory
authorities concerning the cause of each bank closure. The Annual Report also indicates
recoveries from banks in liquidation and payments to depositors, which reveals the extent of
insolvency at institutions in receivership. The microfilmed call reports for national and Federal
Reserve member banks contain examiners reports on the financial health of each institution.
These assessments indicate the extent of each bank’s losses on investments (both past and

9

predicted) and recommendations as to whether the bank should remain in operations, increase its
reserves, consolidate with another institution, or cease operations.
Several sources provide a narrative history of events influencing the central money
market in New York City during the summer and fall of 1931. The Annual Report of the
Superintendent of Banks discusses events perceived to be important, changes in the regulatory
regime, and the closure and consolidation of institutions. The report also indicates the number,
salaries, experience, and assignments of bank examiners as well as the reason for changes in the
size of the examination staff. Newspapers and periodicals – including the New York Times, Wall
Street Journal, Bradstreet’s Weekly, Dun’s Review, Commercial and Financial Chronicle, and
Bankers’ Magazine – regularly discussed events influencing banks in New York City. All of
these outlets, for example, published articles about the demise of The Bank of United States, the
investigation into the causes of its collapse, the public and legislative outcry over regulators’ role
in these events, and the regulatory agencies reactions to this adverse publicity.

3: Aggregate Patterns – Apparent Link Between Germany and New York
An initial inspection of the evidence suggests the existence of a direct connection
between the banking crisis in Germany and bank distress in New York. The chronological
correlation is striking.
Figure 1 illuminates the relationship. The figure plots weekly hazard rates for liquidation
and consolidation due to financial difficulties for banks in New York City from July 1930
through March 1933. The hazard function is a non-parametric estimate constructed by smoothing
raw hazard rates (i.e. the number of bank liquidations divided by the number of banks at risk
each week and the number of consolidations due to financial difficulties divided by the number
of banks at risk in each week). The kernel is Epanechnikov. The bandwidth is two weeks, which

10

is wide enough to reveal trends without obscuring short-term shifts in the probability of failure.
Figure 1 shows that the probability of failure rose rapidly at the beginning of July, as the
European banking panic spread through central Europe. The increase accelerated as bank runs
swept Germany, and the German government shut down their nation’s banking system. The
probability of failure peaked in August, immediately after the reopening of banks in Germany but
preceding Britain’s departure from gold.
Table 1 provides additional details about the banks that failed in New York City during
the Great Contraction. The table lists all of the banks forced to change status due to financial
difficulties from January 1, 1929 through December 31, 1933. The fourth column indicates the
type of change forced on the bank. Two types of changes predominated. The letter L indicates
that the bank entered receivership and experienced liquidation. In all cases but one, the
liquidation began at the behest of the superintendent of banks of the state of New York, after
bank examiners determined that the institution faced financial difficulties so severe that it had to
be closed to protect the interests of depositors and usually after determining that no other bank
wished to consolidate with the afflicted institution. The exception was the Queesnboro National
Bank, whose directors decided to turn the institution over to receivers. The letter C indicates that
financial difficulties compelled the bank to consolidate with another institution. Most of these
consolidations occurred at the behest of regulators after examinations revealed looming financial
problems. Typical situations involved banks lacking liquidity or banks whose capital had been
consumed by investment losses. Regulators threatened to close such institution unless their
directors resolved the problems by injecting additional funds or merging with another institution.
Many institutions that liquidated (i.e. L) had also sought consolidation, but failed to reach an
agreement with another organization in time to forestall receivership.

11

Table 1’s first column indicates the date at which the bank closed its doors to depositors
or consummated a consolidation with another institution. More than 60% of these transactions
(16 out of 26) occurred during the two month period bounded by the failure of the Darmstadterund Nationalbank on July 13, 1931 and Britain’s departure from gold on September 21, 1931.
Only two banks failed in the wake of Britain’s departure from gold. One additional institution
temporarily suspended payments during that period. For the sake of comparison, only two banks
failed in December 1930, a period that Friedman and Schwartz referred to as the First Banking
Crisis. Only one bank failed during the winter of 1933, when the drain of gold threatened to shut
down the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and forced the President to declare a national
banking holiday.
The pattern of events appears clear. Bank distress in the central money market of the
United States peaked during the European banking crisis in the summer of 1931. The correlation
suggests that a direct connection existed between financial events in New York and on the
continent, particularly Germany. Several channels could have linked banks on both sides of the
Atlantic including foreign deposits, foreign debts, and correspondent relationships.

4. Econometric Methods and Results
The existence of detailed microdata on the potential channels of transmission allows us to
test for a direct link between bank distress in Europe and New York. Our econometric methods
resemble those of Isabel Schnabel (2004), Martin Petri (1998), and Richardson and Troost
(2006). We regress indications of banks’ performance on (i) variables gathered from banks’
balance sheets, (ii) variables indicating banks’ financial health, (iii) variables indicating banks’
exposure to international debts, deposits, and financial flows, and (iv) variables indicating

12

fundamental forces affecting the aggregate economy. We examine a wide array of specifications
commonly used in the literature, and test the statistical robustness of our results.
Table 2 raises issues important for analyzing the evidence. The table reveals raw
correlations between distressed departures from the banking business (i.e. liquidations,
consolidations due to financial difficulties, and voluntary liquidations) and characteristics of
banks. The correlations come from data on national and state member banks because for them
detailed data on foreign exposure exists. The data comes from Comptroller of Currency call
reports described in the preceding section. Similar data does not exist for state banks that did not
belong to the Federal Reserve System. For those institutions, data on foreign holdings is limited.
For non-member banks, the New York State Bank Superintendent’s Office did not publish
information on the topic, in large part, because non-members lacked substantial foreign
operations. Rand McNally Bankers’ Directory published limited information on the topic,
consisting of the names of foreign correspondents institutions, and in some case, and in a few
cases, foreign branches and foreign holdings. The extant information indicates non-member
banks had little (and usually no) foreign operations and had limited foreign exposure. Excluding
them from our econometric analysis does not distort our findings.
In Table 2 column (3) reports results for the 51 national banks that operated in New York
City during the summer of 1931. For national banks, the only call reports that survive from the
five years preceding the time under investigation come from December 1929. This specification,
therefore, utilizes data from that source. Column (2) reports results for the 29 state-member
banks that operated in New York City during the summer of 1931. For state-member banks, call
reports survive for each of the June and December calls during the late 1920s and early 1930s.
The high frequency of the extant evidence enables us to draw data from the June 1931 call,

13

which indicates their financial status on June 30, 1931, a few weeks prior to the events under
investigation. This specification employs that source. Expanding the data to the entire available
panel yields similar results.
Column (1) reports results for the national and state-member banks pooled together, a
total of 80 institutions. For the variables in group (A), the correlation coefficients indicate the
relationship between basic indicators of financial health and distressed departures from the
banking business. The correlations are consistent with those commonly found in the literature.
Banks with higher net worth failed less often than banks with lower net worth. Banks with more
reserves failed less often than banks with fewer reserves. Banks with more liquid resources as a
percentage of assets failed less often than banks with less liquid resources. The correlation
coefficients in group (B) indicate the relationship between foreign exposure and distressed
departures from the banking business. All six of the correlation coefficients are negative,
indicating that the more foreign exposure possessed by banks, the lower the likelihood of their
failure. The correlation coefficients in group (C) indicate the relationship between bank distress
and foreign exposure as a share of total resources. The majority of these correlation coefficients
are negative, indicating once again, that banks with greater foreign exposure failed at lower rates.
The inverse correlation between foreign exposure and failure found in the microdata suggests
that foreign exposure may not have been the reason that banks failed in New York City during
the summer of 1931.
Table 3 reinforces this result. The table reports cross tabulations between the incidence of
bank distress and several measures of foreign exposure. The cross tabulation shows that none of
the banks that departed from the banking business in the summer of 1931 possessed foreign
branches, while two of the banks that survived the summer possessed such branches. The second

14

cross tabulation shows that none of the banks that departed from the banking business in the
summer of 1931 possessed time deposits from financial institutions in foreign countries, while
eight of the banks that survived the summer possessed such deposits. The third cross tabulation
shows that none of the banks that departed from the banking business in the summer of 1931
belonged to syndicates that extended loans to Germany during the 1920s, while four of the banks
that survived the summer lead such syndicates.
The final cross tabulation indicates the number of state and national banks forced to
depart from the banking business by the different forms of bank distress. For example, regulators
compelled two state-chartered banks belonging to the Federal Reserve System and seven
nationally-chartered banks to consolidate with other institutions. Regulators liquidated four state
member banks and one national bank. This cross tabulation highlights a feature of the data that
shapes our econometric strategy.
Discrete choice methods are a natural way to analyze the data at our disposal. For
example, logistic models yield optimal estimates for binomial choices (such close doors to
depositors or remain in operation) under a wide range of conditions. Multinomial logistic models
yield optimal estimates for multinomial choices (such as remain in operation, consolidate, enter
receivership, or voluntary liquidate) under a wide range of conditions. Table 3 reveals that for
our data, those conditions do not exist. Perfect classifiers are the principle problem. Many
measures of foreign exposure are perfect classifiers. Banks with foreign branches, for example,
never experienced distress. Many characteristics of banks are also perfect classifiers. State banks,
for example, never voluntarily liquidated. Perfect classifiers bedevil discrete choice methods,
because discrete choice estimators cannot be calculated in the cases of perfect classification.
Near perfect classifiers also impede accurate inference via discrete choice methods.

15

One way to circumvent this problem is to drop the perfect classifiers from the regression.
But in our case, that strategy appears unpromising. The perfect classifiers include three key
measures of foreign exposure: branches, deposits, and loans. In each case, banks that possessed
this type of foreign exposure survived the crisis of the summer of 1931 (and the remainder of the
contraction). This information is important and should not be discarded from the analysis for
computational convenience. The other measures of foreign exposure turn out to be near perfect
classifiers. For example, almost all banks with foreign exposure of any type survived the crisis in
the summer of 1931 (and the entire depression). In such circumstances, discrete choice
estimators do not possess optimal properties.
A solution to this problem is the linear probability model. This model incorporates
perfect classifiers without difficulty although coefficients estimated from it may be inefficient
and, in certain circumstances, biased. These properties could be cause for concern, but our
examination of the residuals from our regressions suggests that neither problem afflicts our
estimates to a substantial degree.
Table 4 presents estimates based upon this model. The unit of observation is an
individual bank. The data for each bank is drawn from the call report for the date closest to June
30, 1931. The dependent variable equals one if the bank consolidated due to financial
difficulties, entered receivership at the behest of regulators, or liquidated voluntarily between
July 1, 1931 and December 31, 1931. The dependent variable equals zero otherwise. This
indicator for bank distress is regressed on a vector of explanatory variables, including various
measures of exposure to foreign financial forces and a vector of bank characteristics. The
balance sheet characteristics includes standard measures of financial health such as net worth as
a share of total resources, government securities as a share of total resources, other securities as a

16

share of total resources, reserves as a share of total resources, total deposits, and demand deposits
as a fraction of total deposits. Other bank characteristics include the number of correspondents,
the jurisdiction of its charter, and the age of the organization. All of these coefficients possess
signs and magnitudes consistent with previously published studies, and therefore, are not
reported in the table. The coefficients of interest are those on the variables indicating exposure to
potential channels for the transmission of the foreign financial crisis.
Column (1) reports these coefficients for a regression pooling data on all of the national
and state member banks operating in the central money market on July 1, 1931. The signs of
many coefficients are negative, indicating that increasing foreign exposure along that dimension
reduced the likelihood of failure. For example, the coefficient on Foreign Government Bonds
Owned, -0.034, suggests that increasing a bank’s holdings of foreign government bonds by
$1,000,000 reduced the likelihood of the bank’s failure by 3.4%. The magnitudes of the positive
coefficients are small, suggesting that if increasing foreign exposure along that dimension
increased the probability of failure, the increase was minimal. The standard errors of the
coefficients are large relative to the magnitudes. T-tests indicate that for each coefficient, the
hypothesis that the coefficient equals zero cannot be rejected. An F-test indicates that the
hypothesis that the all of the coefficients jointly equal zero cannot be rejected.
Column (2) indicates the results when the sample is limited to the 29 state-member banks
that operated in New York City during the summer of 1931. The results are similar. The signs of
most of the coefficients are negative. The magnitudes of the positive coefficients are small. Ttests indicate that for each coefficient, the hypothesis that the coefficient equals zero cannot be
rejected. An F-test indicates that the hypothesis that the all of the coefficients jointly equal zero
cannot be rejected.

17

Column (3) indicates the results when the sample is limited to the 51 national banks that
operated in New York City during the summer of 1931. The results resemble those for the first
two regressions. The signs on several of the coefficients are negative. An F-test indicates that the
hypothesis that the all of the coefficients jointly equal zero cannot be rejected. T-tests on
individual coefficients reject the hypothesis of equality with zero in four cases at the five percent
level and in another case at the ten percent level. Their statistical significance entails an
examination of the magnitude of these effects.
Table 5 undertakes this task by comparing for each bank their foreign financial exposure
with the probability of failure predicted by the regression (1) in Table 4. The seven dimensions
of foreign financial exposure for which we have data are closely correlated. From the seven
vectors of these variables, we can create an index of foreign financial exposure by deriving the
principal components. The first principal component is a linear transformation of the vectors that
explains the greatest possible variance in the data. This first principal component serves as our
index. Banks for which the value of the index is lowest have the least foreign financial exposure.
Banks for which the value of the index is highest have the most foreign financial exposure.
For quintiles organized according to the extent of foreign exposure, Table 5 reports the
average probability of distress predicted by regression (1) in Table 4 and the standard deviation
of that average. The probability of failure appears constant across quintiles. Two-tailed tests
cannot reject the null hypotheses of equality among the averages of the quintiles at standard
significance levels. Only the banks with the largest foreign financial exposure appear to have a
significantly lower probability of distress. For the eight banks with the highest foreign exposure,
the predicted probability of distress is approximately 2%. For the two banks possessing networks
of foreign branches, the predicted probability of distress is less than 1%.

18

Figure 2 summarizes these results. The vertical axis indicates the predicted probability of
distress. The horizontal axis indicates our index of foreign financial exposure. The observations
plot the predictions for each of the 80 banks in our sample. The pattern appears clear. For banks
possessing low levels of foreign financial exposure, the probability of distress was independent
of the extent of exposure. For banks possessing the highest levels of foreign financial exposure,
however, the probability of distress was low and inversely correlated with the extent of exposure.
In other words, banks with substantial foreign exposure failed much lower rates than other
institutions, and as the extent of foreign exposure increased, the probability of failure fell. This
econometric result seems reasonable, since all of the banks in New York City with substantial
foreign financial exposure survived the depression.

5. Contemporary Conclusions about the Causes of Bank Distress
Econometric evidence has advantages and disadvantages. Econometrics employs the
power of statistics to illuminate relationships between variables after controlling for the influence
of others. But, statistical inference remains vulnerable to the dangers of misspecification and
misinterpretation. Statistical studies are also limited by paucity of data which, for financial
institutions operating during the Great Depression, consists of infrequent observations of a subset
of the relevant variables.
The conclusions of contemporary observers complement such statistical evidence.
Observers such as Federal Reserve agents, bank examiners, accountants, economists, and
journalists had access to an array of information unavailable to modern scholars, including
detailed, daily data about the financial status of and events affecting commercial banks.
Contemporary observers also had the ability to talk with the man on the spot and possessed indepth knowledge about the institutions and issues at hand.

19

Detailed records survive from several sets of contemporary observers. The first (and
arguably the most important) is the St. 6386 database constructed by the Federal Reserve
Board’s Division of Bank Operations. Table 6 summarizes the results of the Division’s analysis
of bank suspensions. In 11 of 14 cases, the primary cause of suspension was the depreciation in
the value of the bank’s assets. In two cases, heavy withdrawals were the primary cause of
suspension. In another case, a bank failed after losing a substantial share of its capital to
embezzlement. Comments written on the St. 6386 forms discuss reasons for the depreciation in
the value of the bank’s portfolio, principally the declining value of stocks, corporate bonds, and
real estate. In all cases, the comments refer to declines of domestic assets. In no instance do the
comments refer to foreign investments or German debt.
The Division of Bank Operations also tracked consolidations due to financial difficulties.
Table 7 summarizes the results of this endeavor. All but one of the banks forced to consolidate in
1931 suffered from frozen assets or impaired capital. The examiners who discovered these
afflictions reached conclusions like Midwood Trust Company’s condition was “such as to
necessitate its being taken over by some other institution.”4 Long Island National Bank’s health
was “such as to necessitate an immediate absorption.” “The condition of the International Trust
Company was such as to make desirable their being taken over by a stronger institution.” In
almost all of these cases, the absorbing bank took all of the assets of the troubled bank in
exchange for assuming the deposits and some, but not all, of the other liabilities of the troubled
institution. The Division of Bank Operations attributed the financial difficulties to domestic
factors. In no instance does the Division discuss international events, deposits, or debts.
Like the Division of Bank Operations, the New York State Bank Superintendent’s office
investigated the cause of suspension for each state-chartered bank, trust company, and private
4

Footnote number 3 explains how to locate the archival documents quoted in this paragraph.

20

bank. These amounted to 13 of the 14 institutions that closed their doors to depositors during the
summer of 1931. The superintendent released initial statements about the cause of each closure
on the date that the institution closed its doors and in the weekly bulletin of the Department of
Banking. Final conclusions appeared in the Department of Banking’s Annual Report. So did
information about the rate of recovery from institutions undergoing liquidation. These sources
described the cause of Chelsea Bank’s and Trust Companies demise to be “rumors” that
circulated “which have caused abnormal withdrawals of deposits,” prompting the examiners to
close the bank to conserve its assets. In all other instances, the sources contained statements such
as ‘because of a non-liquid condition and depreciation of its assets, it is unsafe and inexpedient
to permit the institution to continue in business.’ The Department of Banking attributed the
financial difficulties of all of these institutions to domestic factors, particularly the declining
values of securities, bonds, and real estate, which reduced the value and liquidity of banks’
portfolios. In no instance does the Department of Banking discuss international factors, such as
foreign deposits or German debt.
The conclusions of contemporary observers seem clear. During the summer of 1931, the
banks that ceased operations did so for reasons unrelated to the financial crisis in Europe. The
source of distress was the declining value of domestic assets – principally real estate, stocks, and
bonds – and withdrawals from banks which appeared to be headed for financial trouble. The
banks that closed their doors or consolidated with other institutions did not due so because
foreign depositors withdrew funds or because German debt declined in value.
Might there be something that contemporary observers missed? Perhaps the banking
crisis in Germany altered patterns of mergers among American banks. For years, depository
institutions had been combining operations, as growing banks absorbed smaller competitors and

21

turned them into branches. Perhaps patterns of these mergers changed, forcing banks that would
have merged voluntary into the hands of regulators who ordered them either to consolidate on
less advantageous terms or to depart from the banking business.
Figure 3 addresses this issue. It compares a non-parametric estimate of the hazard rate for
consolidations due to distress to a non-parametric estimate of the hazard rate for voluntary
mergers. The estimate for the former is identical to that in Figure 1. The estimate for the latter is
constructed by kernel-smoothing raw hazard rates for mergers of healthy banks (i.e. mergers per
week divided by number of banks at risk). The kernel is Epanechnikov. The bandwidth is five
weeks. The rate of mergers follows no discernible trend. It varies from month to month but the
distribution remains roughly constant over time. The rate of consolidations due to distress
follows a dramatically different pattern. Almost all the banks that consolidate this way do so
during 1931. The largest cluster occurs during July and August, the months when the banking
panic peaked on the continent.
Consider another possibility. Perhaps widespread withdrawals from foreign accounts
occurred, putting pressure on the central money market as a whole, which forced the weakest
banks in New York City out of business. Our econometric analysis might have missed an event
such as this, because the annual, quarterly, and cross-sectional databases which we analyze lack
high-frequency deposit data which could detect such shifts. But, other data sets contain weekly
data on deposits in New York City banks. These data sets include the column “New York
Weekly Bank Statements” published each week in the New York Times and the compilation of
member bank balance sheets released weekly by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
published in many periodicals (e.g. Bradstreet’s Weekly, Dun’s Review, The Commercial and
Financial Chronicle, and in the New York Times entitled “New York City Reporting Member

22

Banks”), and recapitulated in the records of the New York Fed and Board of Governors. Both
data sets show that deposits at New York City banks in August 1931 were comparable to
deposits at New York City banks in August 1930. The small fall in deposits during the summer
of 1931 (approximately 4%) resembled typical seasonal variation.

6. Contemporary Accounts Reveal the Cause of the Correlation
This essay began with an observation about the financial crises – the period of acute bank
distress in the central money market of the United States followed closely on the banking crisis
in Germany and preceded Britain’s abandonment of the gold standard – and then this essay
produced a puzzle. No financial link appears to have existed between the banking crisis on the
continent and in New York City. The banks that failed in New York lacked exposure to foreign
deposits, German debt, and other factors that might have transmitted the financial crisis across
the Atlantic. Numerous banks in New York had substantial exposure to such sources of
contagion. This exposure included hundreds of millions of dollars in foreign deposits, over one
billion dollars in German debt, and large holdings of foreign assets. But, the institutions engaged
in the international banking business survived the contraction. These internationally-oriented
institutions were an island of strength in a sea of turmoil. Their prosperity seems surprising,
relative to the performance of other American banks, which failed in droves during the
downturn.
What can resolve the riddle? Why was bank distress in the central money market
chronologically correlated with the banking crisis on the continent despite the fact that banks
with financial links to Europe weathered the storm? Our research reveals an important piece of
the puzzle. The behavior of the New York’s Banking Department changed during the summer of
1931. Eight months before, in December 1930, The Bank of United States failed. It was the

23

fourth largest depository institution in New York and the eighth largest in the nation. From
December 1930 through June 1931, “practically the entire examination force in the metropolitan
district was engaged in the liquidation of the Bank of United States (Superintendent of Banks
1931, p. 19).” The concentration of examination resources on this case compelled the
superintendent’s office to expand the size of its staff. The rigidity of civil service regulations,
however, slowed the process and impeded the hiring of experienced individuals. Eventually, “it
was necessary to obtain executive permission to employ temporary examiners not taken from
Civil Service lists and to reinstate former examiners whose wide experience was desperately
needed (Superintendent of Banks 1931, p. 19).” The Civil Service Commission insisted that for
each examiner appointed who was not a civil servant, an appointment had to be made from the
civil service list, which at the time, included few individuals with the training, talent, or aptitude
for bank-examination work. These restrictions slowed the department’s effort to respond to the
emergency.
The department managed to increase the examination staff to 192 members at the end of
1931, up from 131 in December 1930. In addition, for a period of seven months, the department
“obtained the assistance of twenty-eight men whose services were donated by various banks as
well as the aid of fifteen Federal Reserve examiners who were temporarily lent to the department
(Superintendent of Banks 1931, p. 17).” Bureaucratic delays and the time to train the new
examiners meant that the size of the effective examination staff increased substantially during
the summer of 1931. At the same time that these new resources came on line, the permanent
examination staff for the metropolitan district, which had focused on The Bank of United States
from January through June, finished that investigation and returned to regular duties. Thus, in the
summer of 1931, the effective number of examiners in New York City increased substantially.

24

The number of bank examinations, which had been conducted infrequently for many months,
increased commensurately.
The examinations also increased in intensity. The banking department adopted “new
regulations for the purpose of obtaining more complete information on loans and security
portfolios (Superintendent of Banks 1931, p. 17).” These changes included new reporting forms
designed to “instantly reflect trends and policies of each state bank and trust company” and new
methods for “arriving at fair values of securities (Superintendent of Banks 1931, p. 17).” These
innovations stemmed from a reorganization of the banking department begun in the spring of
1929 and completed in the wake of the failure of The Bank of United States.
The post-examination powers of the banking department also increased. In the spring, the
state legislature passed several reform bills introduced at the request of the state bank
superintendent. The first bill permitted the hiring of additional examiners in an emergency. The
second reduced from 30 to 20 days the time allowed for filing claims against a bank by the
superintendent after notice had been sent to creditors. The third allowed the superintendent to act
on the findings of Clearing House examinations as if they were examinations conducted by the
state banking department. Two other bills failed to progress past the banking committee. One
would have permitted the superintendent to consolidate banks overnight in emergencies. The
other would have authorized the superintendent to remove officers of a bank upon evidence
showing them responsible for improper conditions (Wall Street Journal, March 13, 1931, p. 8
“State Banking Bills”). The superintendent argued that the rejected reforms would have provided
him with the ability to forestall the failure of The Bank of United States. Critics of the
Superintendent, including many legislators on the banking committee, asserted that the

25

superintendent possessed more than enough authority to have prevented the crisis had he acted
when irregularities at The Bank of United States were first brought to his attention in 1929.
Criticism of the superintendent, Joseph Broderick, peaked in June, when the case against
the directors of the Bank of United States reached trial. A New York Times headline blared
“STATE CALLED LAX IN BANK FAILURES (New York Times, June 14, 1931, p. 1 –
emphasis in original).” Another headlined reported that the superintendent had been accused of
“Gross Negligence” for his performance on The Bank of United States (New York Times, June
27, 1931, p. 2). A former state attorney general circulated a letter calling for a general
investigation of the banking department and drawing parallels between its performance in the
current case and problems in the past. The chairman of the Republican State Committee sent a
letter to Governor Roosevelt requesting an inquiry and demanding the removal of Superintendent
Broderick (New York Times, June 26, 1931, p. 7). The state legislature discussed the creation of
a special committee to investigate the banking department and considered a bill authorizing suits
against state bank employees who performed their jobs negligently.
The chorus of criticism focused on the banking department’s slow response after
discovering the financial problems faced by The Bank of United States. In statement and
testimony in hearings concerning The Bank of United States, the superintendent revealed that the
irregularities which lead to the bank’s demise were first brought to his attention in the summer of
1929. Then, he believed that “he would have been ‘gravely remiss in his sworn duty if he did not
exhaust every possible resource to save the situation before deciding that the doors must be
closed’ (Wall Street Journal, March 6, 1931, p. 2).” He allowed The Bank of United States to
continue operations for more than a year, and during that time, to continue conducting certain

26

transactions, “which he admits were dishonest even if inside the letter of the law,” and to
continue to accumulate losses, in hopes that some remedy for the situation would be found.
Now, in the summer of 1931, the superintendent planned to deal with such situations
expeditiously, and requested an expansion of his powers to enable him to take control of banks
whenever he deemed it in the public interest. He planned to encourage the consolidation of banks
“in cases where it appeared the result would be generally beneficial. This tendency toward
consolidation, resulting as it does in the disappearance of many independent units, effects a
concentration of banking resources and improved management which should lend itself to the
development of sound policies and the elimination of unwarranted competition (Superintendent
of Banks, 1931, p. 7).”
The impact of the superintendent’s new policies and increased authority can be seen in
the wave of examinations that swept New York City in the summer of 1931. New stringent
procedures highlighted investment losses and potential problems at numerous institutions. The
superintendent’s office moved swiftly to rectify such shortfalls. The department demanded that
the bank’s shareholders, directors, and management come up with capital to cover the losses, or
consolidate with other institutions, which typically required them to realize large losses (in many
cases, their entire investment), or face seizure by the superintendent’s office. A dramatic climax
of the campaign came on August 5, when the Superintendent Broderick seized three banks
(American Union, International Madison, and Times Square Trust), on the same morning. The
seizures upset the plans of the joint legislative committee on banking to hold a hearing at the Bar
Association Building that afternoon to discuss the recommendations of Mr. Broderick and the
performance of the banking department. The announcement cancelling the hearings noted that
“the taking over of the three banks made it impossible for Mr. Broderick or the bankers to appear

27

before the committee (New York Times, August 6, 1931, p. 32).” During the next three weeks,
Superintendent Broderick oversaw the liquidation of those three depositories, compelled the
consolidation of an additional five New York City banks, and supervised the examination and
sanctioning of number other institutions. His office remained so busy that the public hearings on
his performance appear to have been postponed indefinitely.
While it is impossible to know for sure why bank supervision became more aggressive
during the summer of 1931, it seems likely that the change stemmed from pressure on the bank
superintendent, changes in the incentives and attitudes of the superintendent and his staff, the
growth of resources available to the banking department, and the expansion of de jure and de
facto regulatory authority. It seems clear that the aggressive behavior of the banking department
produced the spike in suspensions in the central money market that appears to be closely
correlated with the financial crisis in Europe. The timing of the suspensions in New York
appears to have been a delayed reaction to the failure of The Bank of United States. The reaction
took place eight months after the trigger because it took time to deploy additional regulatory
resources and because it took time for political pressures (and perhaps learning by doing) to alter
the mindset of the regulators. It is possible that concern about the banking crisis on the continent
could have played a role in altering the behavior of banking authorities, but our extensive
searches have uncovered no evidence to support this hypothesis.

7. Discussion
A chronological correlation exists between the banking crisis in Germany following the
collapse of the Creditanstalt and the banking crisis in New York City during the summer of
1931. Banks in New York City sponsored billions of dollars in German debt and held hundreds

28

of millions of dollars in European deposits. Those debts and deposits provided potential channels
for the transmission of the banking panic across the Atlantic.
A wide range of evidence indicates, however, that American banks with substantial
foreign exposure survived the contraction. Most continued to pay dividends throughout the
depression. In other words, the debt and deposit links between the banking systems in Europe
and America did not convey the banking crisis across the Atlantic. The chronological correlation
of the banking crises in Germany and New York was coincidental, not causal.
This realization raises several issues regarding the study of bank distress during the Great
Depression. The first pertains to the uniqueness of the United States central money market.
Scholars have long recognized that the pattern of bank distress in New York City differed from
the pattern of distress for the national as a whole. In New York City, few banks closed their
doors to depositors; while in the rest of the nation, nearly half of all banks went out of business.
Our study suggests that the behavior of the New York state banking department had much to do
with the stability of banks in the central money market. The superintendent’s office actively
merged weak banks with stronger institutions. The law required banks in New York City to hold
larger reserves and greater capital than depository institutions elsewhere in the nation. These
legal requirements left a large cushion between the onset of difficulties and the point of no
return. The superintendent used this cushion as a window of opportunity to resolve bank distress
short of receivership. The superintendent’s vigilance meant that few institutions failed in New
York City and those that did go out of business returned substantial sums to depositors.
A second issue is the political economy of bank regulation. Regulators determined the
fate of many banks. What influenced the decisions made by bank regulators, such as the New
York Superintendent of Banks and his subordinates? Ideology, experience, politics, legislation,

29

and self interest all played a part. The superintendent’s treatment of troubled banks changed over
time. Changing economic conditions may have been one reason. The optimal method of
resolving financial difficulties depends on the short-term prospects for sustaining cash flow and
the long-term prospects for earning profits. Both factors fluctuated during the 1930s. Changing
legislation was another reason. Politicians provided the banking department with additional tools
for dealing with bedeviled banks. Political decisions also changed the incentives of the
superintendent, who had been appointed as a reformer in the spring of 1929 and was criticized as
incompetent two years later. The failure of The Bank of United States was the principal cause of
criticism. Its demise led to political pressures which pushed the superintendent of banks to take a
prophylactic approach towards imperiled banks.
A third issue concerns correlations between events in financial centers in the United
States and Europe. Causal links may have created some of these correlations. But, this essay
shows that coincidences created others. This realization suggests that there is a danger of
drawing false inferences from correlations between events in different countries during the Great
Depression. With so many things going wrong in so many countries in such a short span of time,
numerous chronological correlations would have been generated by random chance.
A final issue concerns the international transmission of the banking crisis in the summer
and fall of 1931. Numerous channels could have transmitted the financial crisis across the
Atlantic. Direct links between banks in Europe and the United States appear to have been
plausible candidates, but this essay demonstrates that those direct links did not, in fact, spread of
the affliction. Thus, golden fetters remain the principal explanation for the trans-Atlantic
transmission of the financial panic in the fall of 1931.

30

While our conclusion conflicts with the claims of several recent scholars, it concurs with
the consensus of seminal scholars who have studied the issue, including Eichengreen, Friedman,
Schwartz, and Temin (Friedman and Schwartz, 1963; Eichengreen, 1981 and 1992; Temin, 1989
and 1993). Temin expresses this consensus clearly when he writes:
In one of the most memorable acts of misguided monetary policy in history, the
Federal Reserve raised interest rates sharply in October 1931 to protect the dollar
– in the midst of the greatest Depression the modern economy has ever known
(Temin 1993 p. 96).
Our essay supports this statement, by demonstrating that the Federal Reserve’s actions were the
principal mechanism transmitting the banking panic of 1931 from Europe to the United States.
Banks operating in New York City held more foreign deposits and had greater foreign exposure
than banks operating elsewhere. Since high levels of foreign exposure did not force banks out of
business in New York City, it is unlikely that low levels of foreign exposure forced banks out of
business in other places. The policy predispositions engendered by the gold standard and the
Federal Reserves monetary missteps were the ultimate cause of the banking crisis that struck the
United States in the fall of 1931.

31

Table 1
Bank Distress in New York City, 1929 to 1933
Date

Bank

Type

Distress

Capital

Loans and Investment

December 11, 1930
December 23, 1930

Bank of United States
Chelsea Bank and Trust Company

SM
S

L
L

25,250,000
2,500,000

213,403,000
19,673,000

March 20, 1931
March 31, 1931
July 15, 1931
July 28, 1931
August 4, 1931
August 5, 1931
August 5, 1931
August 5, 1931
August 10, 1931
August 22, 1931
August 22, 1931
August 24, 1931
August 25, 1931
August 25, 1931
August 28, 1931
August 29, 1931
September 15, 1931
September 15, 1931
October 30, 1931
October 31, 1931
December 4, 1931

World Exchange Bank
Bay Parkway National Bank
Lebanon National Bank
Prisco State Bank
Midtown Bank
American Union Bank
International-Madison Bank and Trust Company
Times Square Trust Company
Midwood Trust Company
Long Island National Bank of New York
Globe Bank and Trust Company
Queensboro National Bank of the City of New York
Bryant Park Bank
Brooklyn National Bank
Bank of Europe Trust Company
National Bank of Ridgewood
International Trust Company
Straus National Bank and Trust Company
Federation Bank and Trust Company
M. Bernandi State Bank
Sakser State Bank

S
N
N
S
S
SM
SM
SM
SM
N
SM
N
P
N
SM
N
SM
N
SM
S
S

L
C
C
L
C
L
L
L
C
C
L
L
C
C
L
C
C
C
TS
L
L

500,000
200,000
500,000
250,000
769,000
1,000,000
1,750,000
1,000,000
1,000,000
250,000
1,525,000
200,000
500,000
500,000
1,000,000
200,000
3,200,000
2,000,000
750,000
350,000
100,000

1,879,000
1,358,000
894,000
1,810,000
2,741,000
7,765,000
9,255,000
3,323,000
8,484,000
2,668,000
7,175,000
1,781,000
1,719,000
1,719,000
13,636,000
1,286,000
12,440,000
9,006,000
14,936,000
2,235,000
1,236,000

March 30, 1932
April 8, 1932

Washington National Bank
Liberty National Bank and Trust Company

N
N

VL
C

500,000
2,250,000

997,000
8,816,000

February 14, 1933

D.J. Faour and Bros.

P

L

100,000

711,000

Notes: N indicates national bank. S indicates state bank. SM indicates a state bank that is a member of the Federal Reserve System. P
indicates private bank. L indicates liquidation. C indicates a consolidation due to financial difficulties. TS indicates temporary
suspension. VL indicates a voluntary liquidation. Source: St. 6386 Database, see Richardson (2006) for details.

32

Table 2
Correlation Coefficients Between Distressed Departure and Balance Sheet Characteristics
For National and State Member Banks
All

State

National

(1)

(3)

(2)

Net Worth as a Percentage of Liabilities

-0.019

0.077

-0.046

U.S. Government Debt as a Percentage of Assets

-0.087

-0.163

-0.007

Stocks, Bonds, and other Securities as a Percentage of Assets

-0.038

0.045

-0.070

Reserves as a Percentage of Assets (Cash, due from Banks, Fed deposits)

-0.119

-0.289

-0.179

Demand Deposits as a Percentage of Liabilities

-0.118

0.110

-0.030

Balances Payable in Dollars Due from Foreign Branches of American Banks

-0.069

-0.105

-0.080

Due from Banks in Foreign Countries

-0.152

-0.201

-0.123

Due to Banks in Foreign Countries

-0.141

-0.180

-0.115

Time Deposits of other Banks and Trust Companies in Foreign Countries

-0.125

-0.185

-0.084

Foreign Government Bonds Owned

-0.157

-0.214

-0.151

Other Foreign Securities Owned, Including bonds of municipalities

-0.167

-0.214

-0.135

Balances Payable in Dollars Due from Foreign Branches of American Banks

-0.081

-0.105

-0.080

Due from Banks in Foreign Countries

-0.087

-0.090

-0.117

Due to Banks in Foreign Countries

-0.206

-0.250

-0.180

Time Deposits of other Banks and Trust Companies in Foreign Countries

(A) Basic Balance Sheet Characteristics

(B) Foreign Exposure in Dollar Values

(C) Foreign Exposure as a Share of Total Resources

-0.140

-0.187

-0.108

Foreign Government Bonds Owned

0.048

-0.215

-0.014

Other Foreign Securities Owned, Including bonds of municipalities

0.041

-0.052

0.038

Sources: See text.

33

Table 3
Foreign Exposure and Bank Distress
Selected Cross-Tabulations for National and State-Member Banks, 1931

No Distress
Distress

Foreign Branches
No
Yes
62
2
16
0

No Distress
Distress

Foreign Deposits
No
Yes
56
8
16
0

No Distress
Distress

German Loans
No
Yes
60
4
16
0

No Distress
Consolidation Due to Distress
Liquidation
Temporary Suspension
Voluntary Liquidation

State
22
2
4
1
0

National
42
7
1
0
1

Sources: See text.

34

Table 4
Foreign Exposure, Balance Sheet Characteristics, and Bank Distress
Linear Probability Model Regression Results
Dependent Variable: Distressed Departures from the Banking Business
All Fed
Members

State
Members

National
Banks

(1)

(2)

(3)

Balances Payable in Dollars Due from
Foreign Branches of American Banks

-0.030

-0.001

17.250

0.073

0.002

7.039

Due from Banks in Foreign Countries

-0.020

-0.411

-1.221

0.034

0.689

0.490

0.000

0.116

0.045

0.010

0.169

0.047

0.016

-0.098

-0.968

0.041

0.168

0.583

-0.034

-0.086

-1.458

0.028

0.148

0.685

Other Foreign Securities Owned, Including
bonds of municipalities

-0.002

0.013

1.175

0.044

0.473

0.5992

Number of Foreign Branches

-0.003

-0.411

0.007

0.191

Due to Banks in Foreign Countries

Time Deposits of other Banks and Trust
Companies in Foreign Countries
Foreign Government Bonds Owned

Bank Balance Sheet Characteristics Vector

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations
F-statistic
R-squared
Predictions < 0

80
1.55
0.06
4

29
0.91
0.2
4

51
0.77
0.18
6

Notes: All monetary variables measured in units of millions of dollars, except for Balances
Payable in Dollars Due from Foreign Branches of American Banks, which is measured in
thousands of dollars. Robust standard errors appear below coefficient estimates. Italic font
indicates significant at 10% level. Boldfaced font indicates significant at 5% level.
Sources: See text.
35

Table 5
Predicted Probability of Failure and the Extent of Foreign Exposure
Extent of Foreign Exposure

Predicted Probability of Failure
Average

Standard Observations
Deviation

Bottom Quintile
Below Average Quintile
Middle Quintile
Above Average Quintile
Top Quintile

0.171
0.226
0.242
0.257
0.120

0.071
0.065
0.070
0.053
0.117

16
16
16
16
16

Top Eight Banks
Banks with Foreign Branches

0.021
0.008

0.027
0.011

8
2

Notes: The extent of foreign exposure is measured as the first principal component
derived from the variables measuring exposure to foreign financial factors in the
regression in Table 6.
Source: See text.

36

Table 6
Causes of Suspensions in New York City, 1929 through 1933
Date of
Suspension

Name of Bank

December 11, 1930
December 23, 1930

Bank of United States
Chelsea Bank and Trust Company

March 20, 1931
July 28, 1931
August 5, 1931
August 5, 1931
August 5, 1931
August 22, 1931
August 24, 1931
August 28, 1931
October 30, 1931
October 31, 1931
December 4, 1931

World Exchange Bank
Prisco State Bank
American Union Bank
International-Madison Bank
Times Square Trust Company
Globe Bank and Trust Company
Queensboro National Bank
Bank of Europe Trust Company
Federation Bank and Trust Company
M. Bernandi State Bank
Sakser State Bank

February 14, 1933

D.J. Faour and Bros.

Deposits

202,965,000
18,801,000

Deposit
Losses

41,965,000

1,910,000
1,902,000
7,939,000
7,778,000
2,882,000
7,426,000
2,492,000
12,807,000
13,390,000
1,253,000
1,074,000

Days
Lost

Borrowings

78

200,000

527,000

Causes of Suspension
Primary

Contributing

Assets
Withdrawals

Withdrawals
Assets

845,000
967,000
1,444,000
2,060,000

36
36
36
53

628,000
1,004,000
300,000
973,000

3,307,000
1,220,000
153,000
134,000

59
31
31
65

200,000
858,000
750,000
400,000

Assets
Defalcation
Assets
Assets
Assets
Assets
Withdrawals
Assets
Assets
Assets
Assets

78,000

Assets

Withdrawals
Withdrawals
Withdrawals
Withdrawals

Withdrawals

Notes: Deposits indicates the deposits held by the bank on the last call date before suspension. Deposit losses indicates the decline in
deposits between the last call date and the date of suspension. The information needed to calculate this figure exists only in the listed
cases. Days lost indicates the number of days between the last call date and the date of suspension, or in other words, the number of
days over which the decline in deposits was calculated. Borrowings indicates loans outstanding from the Federal Reserve and other
banks on the date of suspension. See Section 2 for definitions of the primary and contributing causes of suspensions. Asset indicates
that slow, doubtful, or worthless investments were a source of bank distress. Withdrawal indicates that withdrawals of deposits were a
source of bank distress. Defalcation indicates that embezzlement was a source of bank distress.
Source: St. 6386 Database, see Richardson 2006 for details.

37

Table 7
Consolidations Due to Financial Difficulties in New York City, 1929 through 1933
Date

Consolidating Bank

Absorbing Bank

March 31, 1931
July 15, 1931
August 4, 1931
August 10, 1931
August 22, 1931
August 25, 1931
August 25, 1931
August 29, 1931
September 15, 1931
September 15, 1931

Bay Parkway National Bank
Lebanon National Bank
Midtown Bank
Midwood Trust
Long Island National Bank
Bryant Park Bank
Brooklyn National Bank
National Bank of Ridgewood
International Trust
Straus National Bank and Trust

Lafayette National Bank
Manufacturers Trust
Manufacturers Trust
Manufacturers Trust
National City Bank
Manufacturers Trust
Manufacturers Trust
The Richmond National Bank
Continental Bank and Trust
Continental Bank and Trust

April 8, 1932

Liberty National Bank and Trust

Harriman National Bank and Trust

Description of consolidation

Disposition

All except capital
All except capital
All except capital
Liquidation basis
Assets and deposits
Assets and deposits
All except capital

Branch
Discontinued
Branch
Branch
Discontinued
Discontinued
Branch
Branch
Branch
Branch

Notes: The consolidating bank was the institution suffering financial difficulties. The absorbing bank was a healthy
institution which took over the affairs of its weaker compatriot. Description of consolidation describes the financial details
of the transaction. “All except capital” indicates that the absorbing bank assumed all liabilities except the capital liability of
the consolidating institution and acquired all of its assets. “Assets and deposits” indicates that the absorbing bank assumed
only the deposit liabilities of the consolidating institution while acquiring all of its assets. “Liquidation basis” indicates that
the absorbing bank acquired all assets and liabilities of the consolidating bank, and if the assets proved more valuable than
the obligations of the consolidating institution, returned a portion of the surplus to the shareholders. Disposition indicates
what became of the offices of the consolidating bank. “Branch” indicates that the offices of the consolidating bank became
a branch of the absorbing institution. “Discontinued” indicates that the offices of the consolidating bank ceased operations.
Source: St. 6386 Database, see Richardson 2006 for details.

38

Figure 1
Weekly Hazard for Liquidation and Consolidation Due to Distress
New York City, July 1930 through March 1933
0.8%
German panic begins
0.7%
Creditanstalt collapses

Britain departs gold standard

0.6%
Federal Reserve raises discount rate
0.5%
Liquidations

0.4%

Consolidations Due to Distress
0.3%
0.2%
0.1%
0.0%
Jul '30

Jan '31

Jul '31

Jan '32

Jul '32

Jan '33

Notes: The hazard function is a non-parametric estimate constructed by smoothing raw hazard
rates (i.e. the number of bank liquidations divided by the number of banks at risk each week and
the number of consolidations due to financial difficulties divided by the number of banks at risk
in each week). The kernel is Epanechnikov. The bandwidth is two weeks, which is wide enough
to reveal trends without obscuring short-term shifts in the probability of failure.
Source: See text.

39

Figure 2
The Relationship Between Bank Distress and Foreign Exposure

Probability of Distress

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

−0.63

1.37

3.37

5.37

7.37

No Exposure

9.37

11.37

Max Exposure
Foreign Financial Exposure

Notes: The vertical axis indicates the probability of experiencing distress predicted by regression
(1) in Table 4. The horizontal access indicates the first principal component of the seven
measures of foreign financial exposure listed as independent variables in Table 4.
Sources: See text.

40

Figure 3
Weekly Hazard for Voluntary Mergers and Consolidation Due to Distress
New York City, January 1929 through March 1933
0.8%
0.7%
0.6%

Consolidations Due to Distress
Mergers

0.5%
0.4%
0.3%
0.2%
0.1%
0.0%
Jan '29

Jul '29

Jan '30

Jul '30

Jan '31

Jul '31

Jan '32

Jul '32

Jan '33

Notes: The series for consolidations is identical to that in Figure 1. The hazard rate for mergers
is a non-parametric estimate constructed by kernel-smoothing raw hazard rates (i.e. mergers per
week divided by number of banks at risk). The kernel is Epanechnikov. The bandwidth is five
weeks.
Source: St. 6386 Database, see Richardson 2006 for details.

41

Bibliography
Aguado, Iago Gil. “The Creditanstalt Crisis of 1931 and the Failure of the Austro-German
Customs Union Project.” The Historical Journal, 44, 1 (2001), pp. 199-221.
Bankers Magazine. New York: Bradford Rhodes, various issues.
Bernanke, Ben. “The Macroeconomics of the Great Depression: A Comparative Approach.”
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 27, no. 1, February 1995, pp. 1-28.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Annual Report. Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office. Various dates 1928 to 1933.
----- (various issues). Bulletin. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Bradstreet’s Weekly. New York: Bradstreet Company, various issues.
Calomiris, Charles W. and Joseph R. Mason. “Contagion and Bank Failures During The Great
Depression: The June 1932 Chicago Banking Panic.” American Economic Review,
December 1997, 87(5), pp. 863-883.
-----“Fundamentals, Panics, and Bank Distress During the Depression.” American Economic
Review, December 2003, 93(5): pp. 1615-1646.
Carlson, Mark. “Are Branch Banks Better Survivors? Evidence from the Depression Era.”
Economic Inquiry, January 2004, (42), pp. 111-126
Commercial and Financial Chronicle. New York: William B. Dana Company. Various issues.
Dun’s Review: A Weekly Survey of Business Conditions in the United States and Canada. R.G.
Dun and Company, various issues 1928 to 1935.
Eichengreen, Barry. “Bank Failures, Balance of Payments and the 1931 Sterling Crisis.” Harvard
University Discussion Paper No. 869, 1981.
-----

“Central Bank Cooperation under the Interwar Gold Standard.” Explorations in
Economic History 21, January 1984, pp. 64-87.

-----

Golden Fetters:The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919-1939. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1992.

Eichengreen, Barry and Jeffrey Sachs. “Exchange Rates and Economic Recovery in the 1930s.”
Journal of Economic History 45, December 1985, pp. 925-946.
-----

“Competitive Devaluation in the Great Depression: A Theoretical Reassessment.”
Economic Letters 22, June 1986, pp. 67-71.

42

Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Annual Report. New York: Federal Reserve. 1928 to 1933.
Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz. A Monetary History of the United States, 1867 to 1960.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1963.
Hamilton, James D. “Role of the International Gold Standard in Propagating the Great
Depression.” Contemporary Policy Issues 6, April 1988, pp. 67-89.
James, Harold. “The Causes of the German Banking Crisis of 1931.” Economic History Review
37, no. 1, February 1984, pp. 68-87.
-----

“Financial Flows across Frontiers during the Interwar Depression.” Economic History
Review, 45, 1, August 1992, pp. 594-613.

Kindleburger, Charles. The World in Depression, 1929-1939, Revised and Enlarged Edition. Los
Angeles: University of California Press, 1986.
Kuczynski, Robert. American Loans to Germany (1924-26). New York, 1927.
-----

Bankers’ Profits from German Loans. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution,
1932.

Mason, Joseph. “American Banks During the Great Depression: A New Research Agenda.”
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, May/June 1998, pp. 151-152.
Morsy, Hanan. “International Financial Crisis Contagion.” Mimeograph, George Washington
University, August 2002.
National Archives, Record Group 82, Federal Reserve Central Subject File, file number 434.-1,
“Bank Changes 1921-1954 Districts 1929-1954 - Consolidations, Suspensions and
Organizations-St. 6386 a,b,c, (By States) 1930-1933.”
New York Times (various issues).
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. Unpublished examination reports and letters
pertaining to national banks in New York City, 1929 and 1931.
Petri, Martin H. “The Causes of the German Banking Crisis of July 1931 Viewed from Bank
Balance Sheets and the Contemporary Financial Press.” Ph.D. dissertation, University of
California at Berkeley, 1998.
Rand Mc Nally. (various years). Rand-McNally Bankers’ Directory. Chicago: Rand McNally and
Co.
Reports of Condition of (Federal Reserve Member) Banks. Unpublished records, various calls.

43

Richardson, Gary, 2006a, “The Records of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors in the
National Archives of the United States,” Financial History Review 13(1), 123-134.
-----

2006b. “Quarterly Data on the Categories and Causes of Bank Distress during the Great
Depression,” NBER Working Paper w12715.

-----

2006c. “Correspondent Clearing and the Banking Panics of the Great Depression,” NBER
Working Paper w12716.

-----

2006d. “Bank Distress during the Great Contraction, 1929 to 1933, New Evidence from
the Archives of the Board of Governors” NBER Working Paper w12590.

Richardson, Gary and William Troost, 2006. “Monetary Intervention Mitigated Banking Panics
During the Great Depression: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from the Federal Reserve
District Border in Mississippi, 1929 to 1933.” NBER Working Paper w12591.
Ritschl, Albrecht and Samad Sarferaz. “Currency vs. Banking in the German Debt Crisis of
1931.” Mimeograph, August 2006.
Schnabel, Isabel. “The German Twin Crisis of 1931.” Journal of Economic History, 64, 3,
September 2004, pp. 822-871.
Schubert, Aurel. The Credit-Anstalt Crisis of 1931. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1991.
Superintendent of Banks for the State of New York. 1929–1932. Annual Report of the
Superintendent of Banks. Albany, NY: J.B. Lyon Company.
Temin, Peter. Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression? New York: W. W. Norton,
1976.
-----

Lessons from the Great Depression. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989.

-----

“Transmission of the Great Depression.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 7, Spring
1993, pp. 87-102.

United States Senate, Committee on Finance, 72nd Congress, 1st Session. Sale of foreign bonds or
securities in the United States: Hearings on Senate resolution 19 before the Committee
on Finance, Parts 1-4. December 7, 1931 – July 16, 1932.
Wall Street Journal (various issues).
White, Eugene. 1984. “A Reinterpretation of the Banking Crisis of 1930.” Journal of Economic
History 44 (March): 119-38.

44

45

