                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               DURABILITY OF OUTPUT AND EXPECTED STOCK RETURNS

                                            Joao F. Gomes
                                            Leonid Kogan
                                            Motohiro Yogo

                                         Working Paper 12986
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12986


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2007




For comments and discussions, we thank James Choi, Lars Hansen, John Heaton, Xiaoji Lin, Monika
Piazzesi, Valery Polkovnichenko, Robert Stambaugh, Selale Tuzel, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Lu Zhang,
and three anonymous referees. We also thank seminar participants at Brigham Young University; Federal
Reserve Board; Goldman Sachs Asset Management; London Business School; New York University;
PanAgora Asset Management; Stanford University; University of British Columbia; University of
California Berkeley; University of Chicago; University of Pennsylvania; University of Tokyo; University
of Utah; University of Washington; the 2006 North American Winter Meeting of the Econometric
Society; the 2006 NYU Stern Five-Star Conference on Research in Finance; the 2007 Utah Winter
Finance Conference; the 2007 Annual Meeting of the Society for Economic Dynamics; the 2007 NBER
Summer Institute Capital Markets and the Economy Workshop; the 2008 Annual Meeting of the American
Finance Association; the 2008 NBER Summer Institute Asset Pricing Workshop; and the 2009 LSE
Financial Markets Group Conference on Housing, Financial Markets and the Macroeconomy. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Joao F. Gomes, Leonid Kogan, and Motohiro Yogo. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Durability of Output and Expected Stock Returns
Joao F. Gomes, Leonid Kogan, and Motohiro Yogo
NBER Working Paper No. 12986
March 2007, Revised August 2009
JEL No. D57,E21,G12

                                              ABSTRACT

The demand for durable goods is more cyclical than that for nondurable goods and services. Consequently,
the cash flows and stock returns of durable-good producers are exposed to higher systematic risk. Using
the benchmark input-output accounts of the National Income and Product Accounts, we construct
portfolios of durable-good, nondurable-good, and service producers. In the cross-section, an investment
strategy that is long on the durable-good portfolio and short on the service portfolio earns a risk premium
exceeding 4 percent annually. In the time series, an investment strategy that is long on the durable-good
portfolio and short on the market portfolio earns a countercyclical risk premium. We explain these
findings in a general equilibrium asset-pricing model with endogenous production.


Joao F. Gomes                                        Motohiro Yogo
University of Pennsylvania                           University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School                                       The Wharton School
Philadelphia, PA 19104                               Finance Department
gomesj@wharton.upenn.edu                             3620 Locust Walk
                                                     Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
Leonid Kogan                                         and NBER
MIT Sloan School of Management                       yogo@wharton.upenn.edu
50 Memorial Drive, E52-434
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
lkogan@mit.edu
I.         Introduction

The cross-section of stock returns has been a subject of considerable research in ﬁnancial
economics. A key ﬁnding in this literature is that variation in accounting and ﬁnancial
variables across stocks generates puzzlingly large variation in average returns.1 In contrast,
variation in measured systematic risk across stocks generates surprisingly little variation in
average returns. For example, classic studies of the capital asset pricing model (CAPM)

have found no variation in average returns across portfolios of stocks sorted by the market
beta (Black, Jensen, and Scholes 1972; Fama and MacBeth 1973; Fama and French 1992).
         This paper shows that durability of a ﬁrm’s output is a characteristic that is related to
systematic risk, and therefore, is priced in the cross-section of stock returns. Our approach

builds on the core intuition of the consumption-based CAPM, which dictates that assets with
higher exposure to systematic risk command higher risk premia. Because some components
of aggregate consumption are more cyclical than others, ﬁrms producing the more cyclical
components must command higher risk premia. In particular, we argue theoretically and

verify empirically that ﬁrms that produce durable goods are exposed to higher systematic
risk than those that produce nondurable goods and services. An appealing aspect of our
approach is that we classify ﬁrms based on an easily observable and economically meaningful
characteristic related to systematic risk, instead of accounting and ﬁnancial variables that
have tenuous relation with risk. While durability may not be the only aspect of a ﬁrm’s

output that determines its exposure to systematic risk, our success raises hope for identifying
other proxies for systematic risk that are tied to variation in expected stock returns.
         To identify the durability of each ﬁrm’s output, we ﬁrst develop a novel industry clas-
siﬁcation using the benchmark input-output accounts of the National Income and Product

Accounts. Our classiﬁcation essentially identiﬁes each Standard Industrial Classiﬁcation
     1
    A partial list of accounting and ﬁnancial variables that are known to be related to average stock returns
are market equity (Banz 1981), earnings yield (Basu 1983), book-to-market equity (Rosenberg, Reid, and
Lanstein 1985; Fama and French 1992), leverage (Bhandari 1988), and past returns (Jegadeesh and Titman
1993).



                                                     2
(SIC) industry by its primary contribution to ﬁnal demand. We then sort ﬁrms into portfo-
lios representing the three broad categories of personal consumption expenditures: durable
goods, nondurable goods, and services. Because these portfolios have cash ﬂows that are
economically tied to aggregate consumption, they can be interpreted as consumption-risk

mimicking portfolios in the sense of Breeden, Gibbons, and Litzenberger (1989). Because
the benchmark input-output accounts allow us to sort ﬁrms precisely along a dimension
of economic interest, our portfolios are more appropriate for studying cash ﬂows and stock
returns than those based on more common (and somewhat arbitrary) industry classiﬁcations.
   We use the industry portfolios to document four new facts in the cross-section of cash

ﬂows and stock returns.

  1. The cash ﬂows of durable-good producers, relative to those of service producers and
     nondurable-good producers, are more volatile and more correlated with aggregate con-
     sumption.

  2. The returns on the durable-good portfolio are higher on average and more volatile.
     Over the 1927–2007 sample period, an investment strategy that is long on the durable-
     good portfolio and short on the service portfolio earned an average annual return
     exceeding 4 percent.

  3. The cash ﬂows of durable-good producers are conditionally more volatile whenever the
     durable expenditure-stock ratio (i.e., the ratio of aggregate durable expenditure to the

     stock of durables) is low, which generally coincides with recessions.

  4. The returns on the durable-good portfolio are more predictable. An investment strat-
     egy that is long on the durable-good portfolio and short on the market portfolio has
     countercyclical expected returns, reliably predicted by the durable expenditure-stock
     ratio.

   The ﬁrst ﬁnding is not surprising in light of the well-known fact that the aggregate
expenditure on durable goods is more cyclical than that on nondurable goods and services.

                                             3
Therefore, it is merely a statement of the fact that our industry classiﬁcation, based on the
benchmark input-output accounts, reliably sorts ﬁrms based on the characteristic of their
output. Although the second ﬁnding may seem like a natural implication of the ﬁrst, it is
surprising because empirical research in asset pricing has produced scarce evidence on an

economic (in contrast to merely statistical) relation between cash-ﬂow risk and return in
the cross-section of stocks. The third and fourth ﬁndings are less obvious implications of
durability that we discovered only after developing a model that guided our search.
   We develop a general equilibrium asset-pricing model to demonstrate that the durability
of output is a source of systematic risk that is priced in both the cross-section and the time

series of expected stock returns. We start with a representative household that has utility
over a nondurable and a durable consumption good. We then endogenize both household
consumption and ﬁrm cash ﬂows through a dynamic production economy with two types of
ﬁrms, a nondurable-good producer and a durable-good producer. The joint endogeneity of

production and cash ﬂows allows us to explicitly link the durability of output to the amount
of systematic risk faced by ﬁrms, in contrast to a model in which cash ﬂows vary exogenously.
   The basic mechanism of our model is fairly intuitive. A proportional change in the
service ﬂow (or the stock) of durable goods requires a much larger proportional change in

the expenditure on durable goods. This amplifying eﬀect is analogous to that present in
the relation between investment and the capital stock. As a result, the demand for durable
goods is more cyclical and volatile than that for nondurable goods and services, which
implies that the cash ﬂows and stock returns of durable-good producers have higher risk.
An additional implication of the model is that the amplifying eﬀect must be relatively large

when the existing stock of durables is high relative to current demand. Consequently, the
diﬀerence in the conditional cash-ﬂow risk between durable-good producers and nondurable-
good producers is relatively high when the existing stock of durables is high relative to current
demand. This mechanism leads to a testable implication that the durable expenditure-stock

ratio predicts cross-sectional diﬀerences in the conditional moments of cash ﬂows and stock


                                               4
returns, which is the basis for the third and fourth ﬁndings above.
   We assess the general equilibrium model in two ways. First, we calibrate the model
to match the demand for both nondurable and durable goods as well as the inventory of
ﬁnished durable goods in macroeconomic data. We show that the model generates an empir-

ically realistic amount of cyclical variation in cash ﬂows. We ﬁnd that the calibrated model
generates variation in risk premia across ﬁrms and over time that is consistent with the em-
pirical evidence. Second, we estimate the household’s Euler equations, which hold regardless
of speciﬁc assumptions about the production technology. We ﬁnd that the household’s in-
tertemporal marginal rate of substitution prices our industry portfolios in the sense that the

J-test fails to reject the model. Our ﬁndings suggest that, at the minimum, a two-factor
model in nondurable consumption growth and the market return is necessary to explain the
cross-section of returns on the industry portfolios. In particular, the standard CAPM fails
price our industry portfolios.

   Our work is part of a recent eﬀort to link expected stock returns to fundamental aspects
of ﬁrm heterogeneity. One branch of the literature shows that the size and book-to-market
eﬀects arise naturally from optimal production and investment decisions (e.g., Berk, Green,
and Naik 1999; Kogan 2001, 2004; Gomes, Kogan, and Zhang 2003; Carlson, Fisher, and

Giammarino 2004). A limitation of these earlier studies is that the underlying determinants
of stock returns are often diﬃcult to measure, and perhaps more importantly, they rely on
diﬀerences between ﬁrms that are not true primitives of the economic environment. Key
ingredients in these models include heterogeneity in ﬁxed costs of operation, the degree of
irreversibility in capital, and the volatility of cash ﬂows. Partly in response, Gourio (2005)

and Tuzel (2005) focus on more readily identiﬁable sources of ﬁrm heterogeneity, such as
diﬀerences in their production technology or the composition of their physical assets. This
paper is in the same spirit, but we focus on heterogeneity in the characteristics of the output,
instead of the technology or the inputs.

   The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section II explains our industry classiﬁ-


                                               5
cation based on the benchmark input-output accounts and documents the construction of our
industry portfolios. We then lay out the empirical foundations of the paper by documenting
key empirical properties of portfolios sorted by the durability of output. In section III, we
set up a general equilibrium asset-pricing model, based on a two-sector production econ-

omy, that incorporates the notion of ﬁrm heterogeneity based on the durability of output.
In section IV, we calibrate the general equilibrium model to match macroeconomic data
and examine its quantitative implications for asset prices. In section V, we estimate the
household’s Euler equations using cross-sectional and time-series moments of consumption
and industry-portfolio returns and test for an empirical relation between risk and return.

Section VI concludes.



II.    Portfolios Sorted by the Durability of Output

Most empirical studies in asset pricing are based on portfolios constructed along fairly ar-
bitrary dimensions. On the one hand, portfolios sorted by characteristics directly related
to stock prices or returns generate large variation in average returns, but little meaningful

variation in risk (Daniel and Titman 1997). On the other hand, industry portfolios based
on somewhat subjective industry classiﬁcations generate little variation in average returns,
but puzzling variation in risk (Fama and French 1997).
   In this paper, we propose a new set of portfolios that is related to macroeconomic risk,

carefully building a connection between consumption expenditures and cash ﬂows. As a
result, we believe that our portfolios provide a much more appropriate benchmark for eval-
uating the performance of existing asset pricing models. The notion of synthesizing assets
that mimic macroeconomic risk is hardly new (e.g., Shiller 1993). However, our methodol-

ogy diﬀers from the conventional procedure that starts with a universe of assets, and then
estimates portfolio weights that create maximal correlation with the economic variable of
interest (e.g., Breeden, Gibbons, and Litzenberger 1989; Lamont 2001). Our approach does



                                             6
not require estimation, and more importantly, the cash ﬂows are economically (and not just
statistically) linked to consumption risk.


A.       Industry Classification Based on the Benchmark Input-Output

         Accounts

The National Income and Product Accounts classify personal consumption expenditures into

the following three categories, ordered in decreasing degree of durability.

     • Durable goods are “commodities that can be stored or inventoried and have an average
         service life of at least three years.” This category consists of furniture and household
         equipment; motor vehicles and parts; and other durable goods.

     • Nondurable goods are “commodities that can be stored or inventoried and have an
         average service life of at most three years.” This category consists of clothing and
         shoes; food; fuel oil and coal; gasoline and oil; and other nondurable goods.

     • Services are “commodities that cannot be stored and that are consumed at the place

         and time of purchase.” This category consists of household operation; housing; med-
         ical care; net foreign travel; personal business; personal care; private education and
         research; recreation; religious and welfare activities; and transportation.

       Our empirical analysis requires a link from industries, identiﬁed by the four-digit SIC

code, to the various components of personal consumption expenditures. Because such a link
is not readily available, we create our own using the 1987 benchmark input-output accounts
(Bureau of Economic Analysis 1994).2 The benchmark input-output accounts identify how
much output each industry contributes to the four broad categories of ﬁnal demand: per-

sonal consumption expenditures, gross private investment, government expenditures, and
   2
    We use the 1987 benchmark input-output accounts because the industry identiﬁers in the CRSP database
are based on the 1987 SIC codes. However, we have examined the benchmark input-output accounts from
other available years (1958, 1963, 1967, 1977, 1992, and 1997) to verify that the industry classiﬁcation is
stable over time.


                                                    7
net exports of goods and services. Within personal consumption expenditures, the bench-
mark input-output accounts also identify how much output each industry contributes to the
three categories of durability. Based on this data, we assign each industry to the category of
ﬁnal demand to which it has the highest value added: personal consumption expenditures

on durable goods, personal consumption expenditures on nondurable goods, personal con-
sumption expenditures on services, investment, government expenditures, and net exports.
     The national accounts classify expenditure on owner-occupied housing as part of private
residential ﬁxed investment, instead of personal consumption expenditures. In the publicly
available ﬁles, the benchmark input-output accounts do not have a breakdown of private ﬁxed

investment into residential and nonresidential. Therefore, we are forced to classify industries
whose primary output is owner-occupied housing as part of investment, instead of personal
consumption expenditures on durable goods. SIC code 7000 (hotels and other lodging places)
is the only industry that has direct output to housing services in the benchmark input-output

accounts. We therefore keep housing services as part of personal consumption expenditures
on services.
     Appendix A contains further details on the construction of the industry classiﬁcation.
The industry classiﬁcation is available in spreadsheet format from Motohiro Yogo’s website.


B.     Construction of the Industry Portfolios

The universe of stocks is ordinary common equity traded in NYSE, AMEX, or Nasdaq,
which are recorded in the Center for Research in Securities Prices (CRSP) Monthly Stock
Database. In June of each year t, we sort the universe of stocks into ﬁve industry portfolios
based on their SIC code: services, nondurable goods, durable goods, investment goods, and

other industries. Other industries include the wholesale, retail, and ﬁnancial sectors as well
as industries whose primary output is to government expenditures or net exports. We use
the SIC code from Compustat if available (starting in 1983), and the SIC code from CRSP
otherwise. We ﬁrst search for a match at the four-, then at the three-, and ﬁnally at the


                                              8
two-digit SIC code. Once the portfolios are formed, we track their value-weighted returns
from July of year t through June of year t + 1. We compute annual portfolio returns by
compounding monthly returns.
     We compute dividends for each stock based on the diﬀerence of holding-period returns

with and without dividends. Since 1971, we augment dividends with equity repurchases from
Compustat’s statement of cash ﬂows (see Boudoukh, Michaely, Richardson, and Roberts
2007). We assume that the repurchases occur at the end of each ﬁscal year. Monthly
dividends for each portfolio are simply the sum of dividends across all stocks in the portfolio.
We compute annual dividends in December of each year by accumulating monthly dividends,

assuming that intermediate (January through November) dividends are reinvested in the
portfolio until the end of the calendar year. We compute dividend growth and the dividend
yield for each portfolio based on a “buy and hold” investment strategy starting in 1927.
     Since 1951, we compute other characteristics for each portfolio using the subset of ﬁrms

for which the relevant data are available from Compustat. Book-to-market equity is book
equity at the end of ﬁscal year t divided by the market equity in December of year t. We
construct book equity data as a merge of Compustat and historical data from Moody’s
Manuals, downloaded from Kenneth French’s website. We follow the procedure described

in Davis, Fama, and French (2000) for the computation of book equity. Market leverage is
liabilities at the end of ﬁscal year t divided by the sum of liabilities and market equity in
December of year t. Operating income is sales minus the cost of goods sold. We compute
the annual growth rate of sales and operating income from year t to t + 1 based on the subset
of ﬁrms that are in the portfolio in both years.


C.     Characteristics of the Industry Portfolios

Table 1 reports some basic characteristics of the ﬁve industry portfolios. We focus our
attention on the ﬁrst three portfolios, which represent personal consumption expenditures.
To get a sense of the size of the portfolios, we report the average number of ﬁrms and the


                                               9
average share of total market equity that each portfolio represents. In the 1927–2007 sample
period, the service portfolio represents 14.6 percent, the nondurable-good portfolio represents
35.2 percent, and the durable-good portfolio represents 15.5 percent of total market equity.
The service portfolio has the highest, and the nondurable-good portfolio has the lowest

average dividend yield. The service portfolio has the highest, and the durable-good portfolio
has the lowest average book-to-market equity.
     In the 1951–2007 sample period, the service portfolio has the highest, and the nondurable-
good portfolio has the lowest average book-to-market equity. Similarly, the service portfolio
has the highest, and the nondurable-good portfolio has the lowest average market leverage.

These patterns show that durability of output is not a characteristic that is directly related to
common accounting and ﬁnancial variables like book-to-market equity and market leverage.


D.      Link to Aggregate Consumption

If our industry classiﬁcation successfully identiﬁes durable-good producers, the total sales of
ﬁrms in the durable-good portfolio should be empirically related to the aggregate expenditure

on durable goods. In ﬁgure 1, we plot the annual growth rate of sales for four portfolios
representing ﬁrms that produce services, nondurable goods, durable goods, and investment
goods. The dashed line in all four panels, shown for the purposes of comparison, is the annual
growth rate of real durable expenditure from the National Income and Product Accounts.

As panel C demonstrates, the correlation between the sales of durable-good producers and
durable expenditure is almost perfect. This evidence suggests that our industry classiﬁcation
successfully identiﬁes durable-good producers.
     Table 2 reports more comprehensive evidence for the relation between cash-ﬂow growth

and consumption growth. Panel A reports descriptive statistics for the annual growth rate
of sales for the industry portfolios. In addition, the table reports the correlation between
sales growth and the growth rate of real service consumption, real nondurable consumption,
and real durable expenditure. (See Appendix B for a detailed description of the consump-


                                               10
tion data.) Durable-good producers have sales that are more volatile than those of service
producers and nondurable-good producers with a standard deviation of 7.80 percent. The
sales of durable-good producers have correlation of 0.72 with durable expenditure, conﬁrming
the visual impression in ﬁgure 1. The sales of both service producers and nondurable-good

producers have relatively low correlation with nondurable and service consumption. An ex-
planation for this low correlation is that a large share of nondurable and service consumption
is produced by private ﬁrms, nonproﬁt ﬁrms, and households that are not part of the CRSP
database.
   There is a potential accounting problem in the aggregation of sales across ﬁrms. Con-

ceptually, aggregate consumption in the national accounts is the sum of value added across
all ﬁrms, which is sales minus the cost of intermediate inputs. Therefore, the sum of sales
across ﬁrms can lead to double accounting of the cost of intermediate inputs. We therefore
compute the operating income for each ﬁrm, deﬁned as sales minus the cost of goods sold.

Unfortunately, the cost of goods sold in Compustat includes wages and salaries in addition
to the cost of intermediate inputs. However, this adjustment would eliminate double ac-
counting and potentially lead to a better correspondence between the output of Compustat
ﬁrms and aggregate consumption.

   Panel B reports descriptive statistics for the annual growth rate of operating income for
the industry portfolios. The standard deviation of operating-income growth for both service
producers and nondurable-good producers is less than 6 percent, compared to 12.11 percent
for durable-good producers. These diﬀerences mirror the large diﬀerences in the volatility of
real aggregate quantities (reported in table 9). In the 1951–2007 sample period, the standard

deviation of nondurable and service consumption growth is 1.16 percent, compared to 8.37
percent for durable expenditure growth. In comparison to sales, the operating incomes of
service producers and nondurable-good producers have somewhat higher correlation with
nondurable and service consumption. The correlation between the operating income of

service producers and service consumption is 0.15. The correlation between the operating


                                             11
income of nondurable-good producers and nondurable consumption is 0.22. Finally, the
correlation between the operating income of durable-good producers and durable expenditure
is 0.75.
     The fundamental economic mechanism in this paper is that durable-good producers have

demand that is more cyclical than that of nondurable-good producers. Table 2 provides
strong empirical support for this mechanism, consistent with previous ﬁndings by Petersen
and Strongin (1996). In the Census of Manufacturing for the period 1958–1986, they ﬁnd
that durable-good manufacturers are three times more cyclical than nondurable-good man-
ufacturers, as measured by the elasticity of output (i.e., value added) with respect to gross

national product. Moreover, they ﬁnd that this diﬀerence in cyclicality is driven by demand,
instead of factors that aﬀect supply (e.g., factor intensities, industry concentration, and
unionization).
     Table 3 shows that our ﬁndings for sales and operating income extend to dividends. The

dividends of durable-good producers are more volatile and more correlated with aggregate
consumption. In the next section, we examine whether these diﬀerences in the empirical
properties of cash ﬂows lead to diﬀerences in their stock returns.


E.     Stock Returns

Table 4 reports descriptive statistics for excess returns, over the three-month T-bill, on

the ﬁve industry portfolios. In the 1927–2007 sample period, both the average and the
standard deviation of excess returns rise in the durability of output. Excess returns on the
service portfolio have a mean of 6.11 percent and a standard deviation of 18.46 percent.
Excess returns on the nondurable-good portfolio have a mean of 8.81 percent and a standard

deviation of 18.51 percent. Finally, excess returns on the durable-good portfolio have a mean
of 10.30 percent and a standard deviation of 28.38 percent. The spread in average returns
between the durable-good portfolio and the service portfolio, reported in the last column, is
4.19 percent with a standard error of 2.08 percent.


                                             12
     The spread in average returns between the durable-good portfolio and the service portfolio
is larger prior to 1951. In unreported analysis, we tabulate excess returns on the industry
portfolios in ten-year sub-samples. The durable-good portfolio has higher average returns
than both the service portfolio and the nondurable-good portfolio in every decade, with the

exception of 1957–1966 and 1977–1986. Interestingly, the largest spread in average returns
occurred in the 1927–1936 period, during the Great Depression. The spread between the
durable-good portfolio and the nondurable-good portfolio is almost 11 percent, and the
spread between the durable-good portfolio and the service portfolio is almost 14 percent. In
the next section, we provide more formal evidence for time-varying expected returns that is

related to the business cycle.


F.     Predictability of Stock Returns

In this section, we examine whether expected returns on the industry portfolios are related
to the strength of demand for durable goods over the business cycle. Our key forecasting
variable is the ratio of net durable expenditure to the stock of durables, which we refer to

as the durable expenditure-stock ratio. As shown in ﬁgure 2, the durable expenditure-stock
ratio is strongly procyclical, peaking during business-cycle expansions.
     Panel A of table 5 reports evidence for the predictability of excess returns on the industry
portfolios. We report results for both the full sample, 1927–2007, and the postwar sample,

1951–2007. The postwar sample is often used in empirical work due to the possibility of
non-stationarity in durable expenditure during and immediately after the war (e.g., Ogaki
and Reinhart 1998; Yogo 2006). We focus our discussion on the postwar sample because the
results are qualitatively similar for the full sample.

     In an univariate regression, the durable expenditure-stock ratio predicts excess returns
on the service portfolio with a coeﬃcient of −3.52, the nondurable-good portfolio with a
coeﬃcient of −0.15, and the durable-good portfolio with a coeﬃcient of −5.38. The negative
coeﬃcient across the portfolios implies that the durable expenditure-stock ratio predicts the


                                                13
common countercyclical component of expected stock returns. This ﬁnding is similar to a
previous ﬁnding that the ratio of investment to the capital stock predicts aggregate stock
returns (Cochrane 1991). Of more interest than the common sign is the relative magnitude
of the coeﬃcient across the portfolios. The durable-good portfolio has the largest coeﬃcient,

implying that it has the largest amount of countercyclical variation in expected stock returns.
More formally, the last column of table 5 shows that excess returns on the durable-good
portfolio over the market portfolio are predictable with a statistically signiﬁcant coeﬃcient
of −3.41.
     In order to further assess the evidence for return predictability, table 5 also examines a

bivariate regression that includes each portfolio’s own dividend yield. The dividend yield
predicts excess returns with a positive coeﬃcient as expected, and adds predictive power
over the durable expenditure-stock ratio in the sense of R2 . However, the coeﬃcient for the
durable expenditure-stock ratio is hardly changed from the univariate regression.

     In a model of risk and return, the returns on the industry portfolios should be predictable
only if their conditional risk is also predictable. Table 6 reports reduced-form regressions
of the absolute value of excess returns onto the lagged forecasting variables. (See section V
for a structural estimation of risk and return.) In an univariate regression, the durable

expenditure-stock ratio predicts the absolute value of excess returns on the service portfolio
with a coeﬃcient of 0.39, the nondurable-good portfolio with a coeﬃcient of 1.39, and the
durable-good portfolio with a coeﬃcient of −1.41. While these coeﬃcients are not statis-
tically signiﬁcant in the postwar sample, the empirical pattern suggests that the volatility
of returns for the durable-good portfolio is more countercyclical than that for the service

portfolio or the nondurable-good portfolio.


G.      Predictability of Cash-Flow Volatility

Diﬀerences in the conditional risk of the industry portfolios are diﬃcult to isolate solely based
on stock returns. This is because stock returns can be driven by both aggregate news about


                                               14
discount rates and industry-speciﬁc news about cash ﬂows. In table 7, we therefore examine
direct evidence for the predictability of cash-ﬂow volatility. We use the same forecasting
variables as those used for predicting stock returns in table 5.
   As reported in panel A, the durable expenditure-stock ratio predicts the absolute value

of sales growth for service producers with a coeﬃcient of 1.16, nondurable-good producers
with a coeﬃcient of 1.61, and durable-good producers with a coeﬃcient of −0.97. This
empirical pattern suggests that the volatility of cash-ﬂow growth for durable-good producers
is more countercyclical than that for service producers and nondurable-good producers. This
evidence is robust to including the portfolio’s own dividend yield as an additional regressor.

Panel B shows that this evidence is also robust to using operating income instead of sales as
the measure of cash ﬂows.
   In panel C, we examine evidence for the predictability of the volatility of ﬁve-year div-
idend growth. We motivate ﬁve-year dividend growth as a way to empirically implement

the cash-ﬂow news component of a standard return decomposition (Campbell 1991). The
durable expenditure-stock ratio predicts the absolute value of dividend growth for service
producers with a coeﬃcient of 1.53, nondurable-good producers with a coeﬃcient of −4.55,
and durable-good producers with a coeﬃcient of −10.01. This evidence suggests that the

cash ﬂows of durable-good producers are exposed to higher risk than those of service pro-
ducers and nondurable-good producers during recessions, when durable expenditure is low
relative to the stock of durables.



III.     General Equilibrium Asset-Pricing Model

In the last section, we established two key facts about the cash ﬂows and stock returns

of durable-good producers in comparison to those of service producers and nondurable-
good producers. First, the cash ﬂows of durable-good producers are more volatile and
more correlated with aggregate consumption. This unconditional cash-ﬂow risk can be a



                                              15
mechanism that explains why durable-good producers have higher average stock returns
than nondurable-good producers. Second, the cash ﬂows of durable-good producers are
more volatile when the durable expenditure-stock ratio is low. This conditional cash-ﬂow
risk can be a mechanism that explains why durable-good producers have expected stock

returns that are more time-varying than those of nondurable-good producers.
     In this section, we develop a general equilibrium asset-pricing model as a framework to
organize our empirical ﬁndings. Our work builds on the representative-household model of
Dunn and Singleton (1986), Eichenbaum and Hansen (1990), Yogo (2006), and Piazzesi,
Schneider, and Tuzel (2007). We endogenize the production of nondurable and durable

consumption goods in a two-sector economy (see Baxter 1996). Our analysis highlights the
role of durability as an economic mechanism that generates diﬀerences in ﬁrm output and
cash-ﬂow risk, abstracting from other sources of heterogeneity. The model delivers most
of our key empirical ﬁndings in a simple and parsimonious setting. It also provides the

necessary theoretical structure to guide our formal econometric tests in section V.


A.     Representative Household

There is an inﬁnitely lived representative household in an economy with a complete set
of ﬁnancial markets. In each period t, the household purchases Ct units of a nondurable
consumption good and Et units of a durable consumption good. The nondurable good is

taken to be the numeraire, so that Pt denotes the price of the durable good in units of
the nondurable good. The nondurable good is entirely consumed in the period of purchase,
whereas the durable good provides service ﬂows for more than one period. The household’s
stock of the durable good Dt is related to its expenditure by the law of motion


                                 Dt = (1 − δ)Dt−1 + Et ,                                 (1)


where δ ∈ (0, 1] is the depreciation rate.


                                             16
     The household’s utility ﬂow in each period is given by the constant elasticity of substi-
tution function:
                         u(C, D) = [(1 − α)C 1−1/ρ + αD1−1/ρ ]1/(1−1/ρ) .                     (2)

The parameter α ∈ (0, 1) is the utility weight on the durable good, and ρ ≥ 0 is the
elasticity of substitution between the two consumption goods. Implicit in this speciﬁcation
is the assumption that the service ﬂow from the durable good is a constant proportion of its
stock. We therefore use the words “stock” and “consumption” interchangeably in reference

to the durable good.
     The household maximizes expected discounted utility, deﬁned by the recursive objective
function (Weil 1990; Epstein and Zin 1991):


                                                        1−γ 1/κ 1/(1−1/σ)
                   Ut = {(1 − β)u(Ct, Dt )1−1/σ + βEt [Ut+1 ] }           .                   (3)


The parameter β ∈ (0, 1) is the household’s subjective discount factor. The parameter σ ≥ 0
is its elasticity of intertemporal substitution, and γ > 0 is its relative risk aversion. We deﬁne

κ = (1 − γ)/(1 − 1/σ) to simplify notation.


B.     Firms and Production

The economy consists of two productive sectors, one that produces nondurable goods (in-
cluding services) and another that produces durable goods. For simplicity, we do not model
a third sector that produces investment goods (see Papanikolaou 2008). Each sector consists

of a representative ﬁrm that takes input and output prices as given. Each ﬁrm produces
output using a common variable factor of production and a sector-speciﬁc ﬁxed factor of
production.




                                               17
1.    Aggregate Productivity

Aggregate productivity evolves as a geometric random walk with time-varying drift. Specif-
ically, we assume that aggregate productivity in period t is given by


                               Xt = Xt−1 exp{μ + zt + et },                                (4)

                                zt = φzt−1 + vt ,                                          (5)


where et ∼ N(0, σe2 ) and vt ∼ N(0, σv2 ) are independently and identically distributed shocks.
The variable zt captures the persistent (business-cycle) component of aggregate productivity,
which evolves as a ﬁrst-order autoregression.


2.    Firm Producing Nondurable Goods

In each period t, the nondurable-good ﬁrm rents LCt units of a variable input at the rental

rate Wt and KCt units of a ﬁxed input at the rental rate WCt . This latter input is ﬁxed in the
sense that the input is only productive in the nondurable-good sector and is productive with
a one period lag. Let YCt denote production and Ct denote sales by the nondurable-good
ﬁrm in period t. The nondurable-good ﬁrm has the production function


                                                    1−θC η
                                YCt = [(Xt LCt )θC KC,t−1 ] ,                              (6)


where θC ∈ (0, 1) is the elasticity of output with respect to the variable input. The parameter
η ∈ (0, 1] determines the returns to scale. The production of the nondurable good must equal
its sales in each period because it cannot be inventoried (i.e., YCt = Ct ).
     Deﬁne the cash ﬂow of the nondurable-good ﬁrm in period t as


                              ΠCt = Ct − Wt LCt − WCt KCt .                                (7)


Let Mt be the stochastic discount factor used to discount any cash ﬂow in period t. The

                                                18
value of the ﬁrm is the present discounted value of its future cash ﬂows, that is
                                        ∞ s                    
                                         
                             VCt = Et               Mt+r ΠC,t+s .                         (8)
                                          s=1 r=1


The gross return on a claim to the cash ﬂows of the nondurable-good ﬁrm is

                                            VC,t+1 + ΠC,t+1
                                 RC,t+1 =                   .                             (9)
                                                  VCt

In each period t, the nondurable-good ﬁrm chooses the quantity of its inputs LCt and KCt
to maximize its value, ΠCt + VCt .


3.    Firm Producing Durable Goods

A key economic property of durable goods is that they can be inventoried, unlike nondurable
goods and services. The durable-good ﬁrm’s inventory of ﬁnished goods evolves according
to the law of motion


                                DIt = (1 − δ)DI,t−1 + EIt ,                             (10)


where EIt is the investment in inventory. Inventory investment can be negative whenever

the ﬁrm sells ﬁnished goods from its inventory.
     In each period t, the durable-good ﬁrm rents LEt units of a variable input at the rental
rate Wt and KEt units of a ﬁxed input at the rental rate WEt . This latter input is ﬁxed in
the sense that the input is only productive in the durable-good sector and is productive with

a one period lag. Let YEt denote production and Et denote sales by the durable-good ﬁrm
in period t. The durable-good ﬁrm has the production function


                                                1−θE −θI θI
                            YEt = [(Xt LEt )θE KE,t−1   DI,t−1 ]η ,                     (11)


where θE ∈ (0, 1) is the elasticity of output with respect to the variable input.

                                                19
   The ﬁrm keeps an inventory because it is a factor of production, following a modeling
convention in macroeconomics (e.g., Kydland and Prescott 1982). Because the inventory is
that of ﬁnished goods, our motivation is similar to that of Bils and Kahn (2000), in which an
inventory of ﬁnished goods is necessary to generate sales (e.g., cars in the showroom). We

assume that changes in the inventory incur adjustment costs, which introduces a realistic
friction between the household sector and the durable-good ﬁrm. In each period, the produc-
tion of the durable good must equal the sum of sales, inventory investment, and adjustment
costs:

                                                τ (DIt − DI,t−1 )2
                          YEt = Et + EIt +                         ,                    (12)
                                                     2DI,t−1

where τ ≥ 0 determines the degree of adjustment costs.

   Deﬁne the cash ﬂow of the durable-good ﬁrm in period t as


                            ΠEt = Pt Et − Wt LEt − WEt KEt .                            (13)


The value of the ﬁrm is the present discounted value of its future cash ﬂows, that is
                                       ∞ s                      
                                        
                            VEt = Et               Mt+r ΠE,t+s .                        (14)
                                         s=1 r=1


The gross return on a claim to the cash ﬂows of the durable-good ﬁrm is

                                             VE,t+1 + ΠE,t+1
                                  RE,t+1 =                   .                          (15)
                                                   VEt

In each period t, the durable-good ﬁrm chooses the quantity of its inputs LEt and KEt to

maximize its value, ΠEt + VEt .




                                                 20
C.     Competitive Equilibrium

1.    Household’s First-Order Conditions

The household’s consumption and portfolio-choice problem is the same as that in an endow-
ment economy. We therefore state the ﬁrst-order conditions here without derivation and
refer the reader to Yogo (2006, Appendix B) for a complete derivation.
     The sum of equations (7) and (13) imply the household’s aggregate budget constraint:


                Ct + Pt Et = Wt (LCt + LEt ) + WCt KCt + WEt KEt + ΠCt + ΠEt .                               (16)


In words, consumption expenditures must equal the sum of rental and capital income. Let
VM t be the present discounted value of future consumption expenditures, that is
                                                                                
                                             
                                             ∞ 
                                               s
                            VM t = E t                 Mt+r (Ct+s + Pt+s Et+s ) .                            (17)
                                             s=1 r=1


The gross return on a claim to the household’s consumption expenditures (equivalently,

rental and capital income) is

                                               VM,t+1 + Ct+1 + Pt+1 Et+1
                                RM,t+1 =                                 .                                   (18)
                                                         VM t

     The household’s wealth consists of the stock of durables and the present discounted value
of future rental and capital income. Deﬁne the gross return on aggregate wealth as

                                       −1                                                        
                           Qt Dt                             P t Dt           (1 − δ)Pt+1
     RW,t+1 =       1−                          RM,t+1 +                                  − RM,t+1       .   (19)
                       V M t + P t Dt                    V M t + P t Dt           Pt

In words, the return on wealth is a weighted average of returns on durable goods and the claim

to the household’s consumption expenditures. If the durable good were to fully depreciate
each period (i.e., δ = 1), aggregate wealth would simply be the present value of future
consumption expenditures (i.e., RW t = RM t ).


                                                           21
   Deﬁne the user cost of the service ﬂow from the durable good as


                                  Qt = Pt − (1 − δ)Et [Mt+1 Pt+1 ].                       (20)


In words, the user cost is equal to the purchase price today minus the present discounted
value of the depreciated stock tomorrow. The household’s ﬁrst-order conditions imply that

                                                              −1/ρ
                                                α         Dt
                                          Qt =                         .                  (21)
                                               1−α        Ct

Intuitively, the user cost for the durable good must equal the marginal rate of substitution

between the durable and good the nondurable good.
   Deﬁne the household’s intertemporal marginal rate of substitution, or the stochastic
discount factor, as
                              −1/σ                 1/ρ−1/σ        κ
                           Ct+1         v(Dt+1 /Ct+1 )           1−1/κ
               Mt+1   = β                                       RW,t+1 .                  (22)
                            Ct            v(Dt /Ct )

where                                      
                                                               1−1/ρ 1/(1−1/ρ)
                                  D                           D
                         v                = 1−α+α                                     .   (23)
                                  C                           C

As is well known, the absence of arbitrage implies that gross asset returns satisfy


                                           Et [Mt+1 Ri,t+1 ] = 1,                         (24)


for all assets i = C, E, M.




                                                      22
2.    Firms’ First-Order Conditions

The ﬁrms’ ﬁrst-order conditions imply that the competitive rental rate of the variable input
must equal its marginal product:

                                        ηθC Ct   ηθE Pt YEt
                                 Wt =          =            .                              (25)
                                         LCt       LEt

Similarly, the rental rate of the ﬁxed input in each sector must equal their respective marginal
products:

                                  η(1 − θC )Et [Mt+1 Ct+1 ]
                         WCt =                              ,                              (26)
                                            KCt
                                  η(1 − θE − θI )Et [Mt+1 Pt+1 YE,t+1 ]
                         WEt    =                                       .                  (27)
                                                 KEt

     Finally, the optimal level of inventory held by the durable-good ﬁrm is determined by
the ﬁrst-order condition

                                                                          
                             ηθI Et [Mt+1 Pt+1 YE,t+1 ]           DIt
                    Qt     =                            − τ Pt          −1
                                       DIt                       DI,t−1
                                                           2       
                               τ                    DI,t+1
                             + Et Mt+1 Pt+1                     −1      .                  (28)
                               2                        DIt

In words, the user cost of the durable good must equal the marginal product of inventory.


3.    Market Clearing

In each period, the household inelastically supplies the variable input and the sector-speciﬁc
ﬁxed inputs, which we normalize to one unit each. Market clearing in the input markets

requires that


                                        1 = LCt + LEt ,                                    (29)

                                        1 = KCt = KEt .                                    (30)


                                                23
       The goods markets also clear. In each period, the sales of the nondurable-good ﬁrm are
equal to the household’s nondurable consumption. The sales of the durable-good ﬁrm are
equal to the household’s durable expenditure.



IV.         Asset-Pricing Implications of the Production Econ-

            omy

A.       Calibration of the Model

Table 8 reports the parameters that we use for our calibration. We set the depreciation

rate to 4.63 percent, which is the average annual depreciation rate for the sum of consumer
durable goods and private residential ﬁxed assets.
       We must restrict household preferences and the ﬁrms’ production parameters in order to
obtain stationary dynamics, or prices and quantities that are cointegrated with the appro-

priate power of aggregate productivity.3 We restrict the production parameters so that all
the quantities in the economy are cointegrated with Xtχ , where

                                                      ηθE
                                       χ = ηθC =            .                                        (31)
                                                    1 − ηθI

Our choices for the production parameters are otherwise dictated by standard choices in
macroeconomics. We set the degree of returns to scale to η = 0.9 (see Burnside, Eichenbaum,
and Rebelo 1995; Basu and Fernald 1997). For the purposes of calibration, we view the

variable input as inputs such as labor and the ﬂexible part of capital. We view the ﬁxed
input as inputs such as land and the inﬂexible part of capital. For the nondurable-good ﬁrm,
   3
    The Epstein-Zin objective function restricts preferences to be homothetic, which is necessary for sta-
tionary dynamics in the model. Homothetic preferences suﬃce for our analysis because the volatility of
nondurable and service consumption is similar to that of the stock of durables (i.e., the sum of consumer
durable goods and private residential ﬁxed assets) at our level of aggregation. Bils and Klenow (1998)
and Pakoš (2004) analyze a model with non-homothetic preferences for more disaggregated categories of
consumption, where the evidence for non-homotheticity seems stronger.



                                                   24
we set the elasticity of output with respect to the variable input to θC = 0.8.
     Table 9 reports the empirical moments for the macroeconomic variables in panel A,
operating-income growth in panel B, and stock returns in panel C. We report the empirical
moments for two sample periods, 1930–2007 and 1951–2007. (Macroeconomic data from the

National Income and Product Accounts are not available prior to 1929, and cash-ﬂow data
from Compustat are not available prior to 1950.) Both nondurable and service consumption
and durable expenditure are somewhat more volatile in the longer sample, but otherwise,
the empirical moments are quite similar across the two samples. We calibrate our model
to the longer sample because the higher volatility of the macroeconomic variables in this

sample makes the task of explaining asset prices somewhat easier.
     We solve the model by numerical dynamic programming as detailed in Appendix C. We
simulate the model at annual frequency for 500,000 years to compute the population moments
reported in table 9. We compare the cash ﬂows and stock returns of the nondurable-good

ﬁrm in the model to those of the service (instead of the nondurable-good) portfolio in the
data, in order to set a higher hurdle for the model.


B.      Implications for Aggregate Consumption

Panel A of table 9 lists the macroeconomic variables that we target in our calibration:

     • log(Ct /Ct−1 ), the log growth rate of real nondurable and service consumption;

     • log(Et /Et−1 ), the log growth rate of real durable expenditure;

     • Pt Et /Ct , the ratio of durable expenditure to nondurable and service consumption;

     • (Dt − Dt−1 )/Dt , the ratio of net durable expenditure to the stock of durables;

     • DIt /Et , the ratio of inventory to sales for durable goods.

By matching the ﬁrst two moments and the autocorrelation for these variables, we ensure
realistic implications for aggregate consumption and the relative price of durable goods. In

                                                25
order to assess the cyclical properties of these variables, table 9 also reports the contempora-
neous correlation of each variable with nondurable and service consumption growth as well
as durable expenditure growth.
   Our parameter choices for aggregate productivity are dictated by the mean, the standard

deviation, and the autocorrelation of nondurable and service consumption growth. We ﬁrst
set μ = 2.78 percent, which implies that the average growth rate of nondurable and service
consumption is 2 percent. Following Bansal and Yaron (2004), we model productivity growth
as having a persistent component with an autoregressive parameter φ = 0.78. We then set
the standard deviation of the shocks (i.e., σe and σv ) so that the log growth rate of aggregate

productivity has the moments


                                                     σv2
                     Standard deviation =          σe2 +   = 2.5%,
                                                   1 − φ2
                                                    φ
                         Autocorrelation =                      = 0.7.
                                           1 + σe (1 − φ2 )/σv2
                                                2



These choices lead to a standard deviation of 2.67 percent and autocorrelation of 0.51 for
nondurable consumption growth in the model, which coincide with the empirical moments.

   An important parameter in the calibration is the elasticity of substitution between the
two consumption goods. Under the identifying assumption that the spot price and the user
cost of durable goods are cointegrated, the elasticity of substitution can be identiﬁed from a
dynamic ordinary least squares regression of log(Ct /Dt ) onto log(Pt ) (see Ogaki and Reinhart
1998; Yogo 2006). For the 1930–2007 sample period, we obtain an estimate of ρ = 0.57 with

a standard error of 0.06. Based on this estimate, we set ρ = 0.6 in the calibration. We then
set α = 0.5 to match the average ratio of durable expenditure to nondurable and service
consumption. The durable-nondurable expenditure ratio is procyclical in both the data and
the model; it has a positive contemporaneous correlation with both nondurable and service

consumption growth and durable expenditure growth.




                                              26
     We do not have any free parameters to match the moments for durable expenditure
growth and the durable expenditure-stock ratio. Nevertheless, the model is fairly successful
at matching the moments for these variables. The standard deviation of durable expenditure
growth is 14.79 percent in the model, which comes close to its empirical target of 16.93

percent.
     The ratio of inventory to sales for durable goods is pinned down by the inventory elasticity
of output θI and the degree of adjustment costs for inventory τ . We set θI = 0.11 to match the
average inventory-sales ratio. The restriction on the production parameters then requires
that θE = θC (1 − ηθI ) = 0.72. We set τ = 3 to roughly match the standard deviation

of the inventory-sales ratio, which is 12.69 percent in the data. The inventory-sales ratio is
countercyclical in both the data and the model; it has a negative contemporaneous correlation
with both nondurable and service consumption growth and durable expenditure growth.


C.      Implications for Cash Flows

One of the key facts established in section II is that durable-good producers have cash

ﬂows that are more volatile and cyclical than that of service producers and nondurable-good
producers. The model must match this fact in order to have successful implications for the
ﬁrms’ stock returns. Panel B of table 9 reports the mean and the standard deviation of
operating-income growth in the data as well as cash-ﬂow growth in the model.

     The standard deviation of cash-ﬂow growth for the nondurable-good ﬁrm in the model is
2.92 percent, which is slightly higher than the standard deviation of nondurable consumption
growth. This eﬀect is a consequence of the sector-speciﬁc ﬁxed input, which generates
operating leverage and makes cash ﬂows more volatile than sales.

     The standard deviation of cash-ﬂow growth for the durable-good ﬁrm is 31.59 percent,
which is signiﬁcantly higher than 14.79 percent for the standard deviation of durable expen-
diture growth. The correlation between cash ﬂows and durable expenditure is higher than
that between cash ﬂows and nondurable consumption in both the data and the model. The


                                                27
cash ﬂows of the durable-good ﬁrm are very volatile in the model because the existence of
inventory allows the ﬁrm to disconnect production from sales. Intuitively, the household
has preferences for smooth consumption, which the durable-good ﬁrm can support with very
cyclical production smoothed by changes in inventory.


D.      Implications for Asset Returns

We compute the one-period riskfree interest rate in the model as

                                                 1
                                     Rf t =              .                              (32)
                                              Et−1 [Mt ]

In order to compare ﬁrm returns in the model to stock returns in the data, we must ﬁrst
introduce ﬁnancial leverage. Equity is a levered claim on the ﬁrm’s cash ﬂows. Consider a
portfolio that is long Vit dollars in ﬁrm i and short bVit dollars in the riskfree asset. The

one-period return on the levered strategy is

                                        1         b
                               Rit =       Rit −     Rf t .                             (33)
                                       1−b       1−b

We compute stock returns in the model through this formula, using an empirically estimated
value for market leverage. We compute the market leverage for all Compustat ﬁrms as the
ratio of the book value of liabilities to the market value of assets (i.e., the sum of book
liabilities and market equity). While the market leverage varies over time, it is on average

52 percent in the postwar sample. We therefore set b = 52 percent in the calibration.
     As is well known, it is diﬃcult to generate a high equity premium and high volatility of
stock returns in a general equilibrium model, especially in models with production. Following
Bansal and Yaron (2004), we combine the persistence of productivity growth and an elasticity

of intertemporal substitution greater than one so that asset prices rise in response to a
positive productivity shock. Speciﬁcally, we choose a fairly high elasticity of intertemporal
substitution of σ = 2, which magniﬁes the volatility of stock returns while keeping the

                                                28
volatility of the riskfree rate low. To generate a nontrivial equity premium, we choose a
fairly high risk aversion of γ = 10.
     Panel C of table 9 reports the ﬁrst two moments of stock returns implied by the model.
The nondurable-good ﬁrm has excess returns, over the riskfree asset, with a mean of 5.03

percent and a standard deviation of 8.06 percent. The durable-good ﬁrm has excess returns
with a mean of 10.26 percent and a standard deviation of 16.55 percent. The spread in
average stock returns between the two ﬁrms exceeds 5 percent, which compares favorably
with the empirical evidence. However, the spread in the volatility of returns is somewhat
lower than the empirical target because our model is not designed to resolve the equity

volatility puzzle.
     The riskfree rate is 1.65 percent on average with low volatility, which is consistent with
the empirical evidence. One dimension in which the model deviates from the empirical
evidence is the correlation between the riskfree rate and nondurable consumption growth.

The riskfree rate is positively correlated with nondurable consumption growth in the model
through variation in the expected growth rate of consumption. The lack of such evidence
in the data may arise from the fact that the realized real interest rate (i.e., the T-bill rate
minus inﬂation) is an imperfect proxy for the ex ante real interest rate.


E.     Predictability of Stock Returns

If we rearrange the accumulation equation (1) and compute the conditional standard devia-
tion of both sides,

                                  Dt−1   σt−1 (Et /Et−1 )
                                       =                  .                               (34)
                                  Et−1   σt−1 (Dt /Dt−1 )

This relation between the stock of durables and the conditional volatility of durable expen-
diture is a natural consequence of durability. A low productivity shock causes the desired

future service ﬂow from durable goods to fall, which is accomplished through a reduction in


                                               29
durable expenditure. When the existing stock of durables is relatively high, such a reduction
must be more pronounced.
   The model therefore identiﬁes two channels for generating predictability of stock returns.
First, the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution (22) is more volatile when the stock

of durables is relatively high because it depends on the stock of durables as a ratio of
nondurable consumption. This common channel is responsible for the predictability of the
market portfolio. Second, the conditional volatility of the cash ﬂows of the durable-good ﬁrm
is increasing in the existing stock of durables. The durable-good ﬁrm must therefore earn a
higher expected return when the stock of durables is relatively high, as compensation for the

higher conditional cash-ﬂow risk. This independent channel is responsible for making the
stock returns of the durable-good ﬁrm more predictable than those of the nondurable-good
ﬁrm.
   To examine these implications of the model, we simulate 10,000 samples, each consisting

of 50 annual observations. In each sample, we run a regression of excess returns, over the
riskfree asset, onto the durable expenditure-stock ratio. Panel A of table 10 reports the
mean and the standard deviation of the regression coeﬃcient, the t-statistic, and the R2
across the simulated samples. We ﬁnd that the regression coeﬃcient is negative for both

ﬁrms, explained by the common channel of predictability. More importantly, the magnitude
of the coeﬃcient for the durable-good ﬁrm is greater than that for the nondurable-good
ﬁrm, explained by the independent channel of predictability. Although there is considerable
sampling error, as evidenced by the standard deviation of the coeﬃcient across the simulated
samples, the model produces results that are consistent with the empirical evidence in table 5.

   In panel B, we regress the absolute value of excess returns onto the lagged durable
expenditure-stock ratio in each of the simulated samples. The regression coeﬃcients for both
ﬁrms are negative, implying that the conditional volatility of stock returns is decreasing in
the durable expenditure-stock ratio. More importantly, the magnitude of the coeﬃcient is

larger for the durable-good ﬁrm. These patterns are consistent with the empirical evidence


                                              30
in table 6.
   In panel C, we regress the absolute value of cash-ﬂow growth onto the lagged durable
expenditure-stock ratio in each of the simulated samples. The regression coeﬃcient for the
durable-good ﬁrm is negative, implying that the conditional volatility of cash ﬂows for the

durable-good ﬁrm is decreasing in the lagged durable expenditure-stock ratio. In contrast,
the conditional volatility of the cash ﬂows for the nondurable-good ﬁrm is increasing in the
lagged durable expenditure-stock ratio. These patterns are consistent with the empirical
evidence for sales and operating income in table 7.



V.       Estimation of the Euler Equations

Section II provided evidence that the durability of output is a source of systematic risk that
is priced in both the cross-section and the time series of expected stock returns. This section
formalizes that analysis by estimating a model of risk and return using our ﬁve industry
portfolios. Speciﬁcally, we estimate the preference parameters and test the model through
the Euler equations (21) and (24). As is well known, the Euler equations must hold even

in an economy in which the production technology is diﬀerent from the particular model
described in section III. Therefore, this procedure provides a fairly general assessment of the
model.
   Although the estimation exercise here is similar to that reported in Yogo (2006), there

are three key diﬀerences. First, we include housing in our measure of the stock of durables,
so that our intertemporal marginal rate of substitution is closely related to that in Piazzesi,
Schneider, and Tuzel (2007). Second, our measure of the return on wealth includes the value
of both consumer durable goods and private residential ﬁxed assets, which were left out of the

analysis in Yogo (2006). Finally, our main test assets are the ﬁve industry portfolios, while
Yogo estimated the model on the Fama-French (1992) portfolios and beta-sorted portfolios.
Because our industry portfolios generate diﬀerences in consumption risk by construction,



                                              31
they provide an arguably tougher test for the consumption-based model.


A.     Estimation Methodology

Let Rf t denote the three-month T-bill rate, Rit (i = 1, . . . , 5) denote gross returns on the
ﬁve industry portfolios, and zt denote a vector of I instrumental variables known in period
t. Using the methodology developed by Hansen and Singleton (1982), we estimate and test

the model through the following moment restrictions:


               0 = E[(Mt+1 Rf,t+1 − 1)zt ],                                               (35)

               0 = E[Mt+1 (Ri,t+1 − Rf,t+1 )zt ],                                         (36)
                                                            −1/ρ          
                            (1 − δ)Mt+1 Pt+1           α     Dt
               0 = E   1−                        −                         zt .           (37)
                                    Pt             (1 − α)Pt Ct


Equation (35) represents I moment restrictions implied by the Euler equation for the three-
month T-bill. Equation (36) represents 5I moment restrictions implied by the Euler equa-
tions for the industry portfolios. Equation (37) represents I moment restrictions implied by
the intratemporal ﬁrst-order condition.

     We use annual data for the 1930–2007 sample period. As detailed in Appendix B, our
measure of the stock of durables includes private residential ﬁxed assets. In moment re-
striction (37), we ﬁx δ = 4.63% to match the annual depreciation rate for durable goods.
Using equation (19), we construct an empirical proxy for the return on wealth as a weighted

average of returns on durable goods and the CRSP value-weighted portfolio of all NYSE,
AMEX, and Nasdaq stocks. In our sample, the average portfolio weight on durable goods is
about 71 percent of wealth.
     We estimate the model by two-step generalized method of moments (GMM). We use the

identity weighting matrix in the ﬁrst stage, and the vector autoregressive heteroskedasticity-
and autocorrelation-consistent (VARHAC) covariance matrix estimator in the second stage




                                              32
(Den Haan and Levin 1997).4 The instruments are lags of nondurable and service consump-
tion growth, durable expenditure-stock ratio, dividend yield, and a constant. There are a
total of 28 moment restrictions to estimate ﬁve parameters (i.e., β, σ, γ, ρ, and α). Con-
sequently, there are 23 overidentifying restrictions of the model, which we test through the

J-test (Hansen 1982).


B.      Estimates of the Preference Parameters

Table 11 reports estimates of the preference parameters. The estimate of the subjective
discount factor is β = 0.91 with a standard error of 0.01. The estimate of the elasticity of
intertemporal substitution is σ = 0.66 with a standard error of 0.08. The estimate of relative

risk aversion is γ = 16 with a standard error of 4. Finally, the estimate of the elasticity of
substitution between nondurable and durable goods is ρ = 0.60 with a standard error of 0.04.
The preference parameters estimated here are almost entirely consistent with those that are
necessary for explaining asset prices in the production economy, reported in table 8. The
only exception is that the estimate of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution is somewhat

lower than the value used in the calibration.
      The Wald test for the hypothesis of additive separability, σ = ρ, fails to reject with a p-
value of 19 percent. However, the Wald test for the hypothesis of time separability, σ = 1/γ,
rejects strongly. The J-test fails to reject our model at conventional signiﬁcance levels. To

understand the implications of these results for asset prices, note that the intertemporal
marginal rate of substitution (22) can be linearized as a three-factor model in nondurable
consumption growth, durable consumption growth, and the return on wealth (see Yogo
2006, equation 18). The restriction σ = ρ implies that a two-factor model in nondurable

consumption growth and the return on wealth can explain the cross-section and the time
series of expected returns on the industry portfolios. Thus, our industry portfolios reject
  4
    Den Haan and Levin (2000) ﬁnd that the VARHAC covariance matrix estimator performs better than
kernel-based estimators (e.g., Newey and West 1987; Andrews 1991) in various Monte Carlo experiments.




                                                 33
standard one-factor models like the CAPM and the consumption-based CAPM.5
       Table 11 also reports estimates of the preference parameters using quarterly data for the
1951:1–2007:4 sample period. The disadvantage of quarterly data is that the sample period
is shorter. Its potential advantage is that the covariance between consumption and asset

returns is more accurately measured than in annual data. The estimate of the elasticity of
intertemporal substitution is σ = 0.03 with a standard error of 0.01. The low elasticity of
intertemporal substitution forces a high estimate of the subjective discount factor, which we
bound at β = 0.99 to ensure ﬁnite expected utility. The estimate of relative risk aversion is
γ = 231 with a standard error of 33, which is signiﬁcantly higher than the estimate in annual

data. This ﬁnding is a natural consequence of the fact that consumption is less volatile and
less correlated with stock returns in the 1951–2007 sample period, as reported in table 9.
Finally, the estimate of the elasticity of substitution between nondurable and durable goods
is ρ = 0.81 with a standard error of 0.23. Interestingly, our parameter estimates are quite

similar to those reported in Yogo (2006) for a diﬀerent set of test portfolios and instruments.
       The Wald tests for the hypotheses of additive separability as well as time separability
reject strongly. These rejections imply that neither the Epstein-Zin (1991) model nor the
nonseparable expected utility model can explain the cross-section and the time series of ex-

pected returns on the industry portfolios. The J-test fails to reject our model at conventional
signiﬁcance levels.



VI.         Conclusion

The literature on the cross-section of stock returns has documented a number of empirical
relations between characteristics, which are often directly related to stock prices or returns,

and expected returns. Although these studies provide useful descriptions of stock market
   5
    Our model does not nest the conditional CAPM in which the price of risk for the return on wealth is
time-varying. Thus, our model can be distinguished from the conditional CAPM in a long sample with a
complete set of test assets. In a ﬁnite sample, however, our industry portfolios may not be able to reject ad
hoc empirical implementations of the conditional CAPM.



                                                     34
data, they provide a limited insight into the underlying economic determinants of stock
returns. Consequently, numerous explanations have been proposed for these empirical ﬁnd-
ings, which include compensation for yet undiscovered economic risk factors (e.g., Fama
and French 1993), investor mistakes (e.g., Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny 1994), and data

snooping (e.g., Lo and MacKinlay 1990).
   Ultimately, stock prices should not be viewed as characteristics by which to rationalize
diﬀerences in expected returns. Instead, stock prices and expected returns should jointly be
explained by more fundamental aspects of ﬁrm heterogeneity, such as the demand for their
output. This paper has shown that the durability of output is an important characteristic

that determines the cross-section and the time series of stock returns. Firms that produce
durable goods have higher average stock returns, and their expected returns vary more over
the business cycle. We suspect that there are other, and perhaps more important, aspects
of demand that explain diﬀerences in expected stock returns.




                                            35
Appendix A.               Construction of the Industry Classifica-

                          tion

The construction of the industry classiﬁcation requires the following tables from the bench-
mark input-output accounts.

     • SIC-IO table: Industry classiﬁcation of the 1987 benchmark input-output accounts.

     • IO table 2: The use of commodities by industries.

     • IO table D: Input-output commodity composition of personal consumption expendi-
       tures in producers’ and purchasers’ prices.

The construction of the industry classiﬁcation proceeds through the following steps.


A.     Link from SIC Code to I-O Code

SIC-IO table is the key table that links each I-O code to related, and potentially multiple,
1987 SIC codes. The link occurs at various levels of detail from the two- to four-digit SIC
code. We exclude the wholesale and retail (SIC code 5000–5999) and the ﬁnancial (SIC code
6000–6999) industries. For wholesale and retail, a detailed breakdown of value added by

personal consumption expenditure category is not available in the public data. Similarly,
the benchmark input-output accounts are not designed to give a precise breakdown of valued
added for the ﬁnancial sector.


B.     Link from I-O Commodity to Final Demand

IO table 2 identiﬁes the I-O commodity composition of each ﬁnal good measured at produc-

ers’ prices. The categories of ﬁnal demand are consumption (I-O code 910000), investment
(I-O code 920000–930000), government expenditures (I-O code 960000–993009), and net




                                              36
exports (I-O code 940000–950000). Each I-O commodity potentially contributes to mul-
tiple categories of ﬁnal demand. However, we create a unique link by assigning each I-O
commodity to the category of ﬁnal demand to which it has the highest value added.
     We merge the link from SIC code to I-O code with this link from I-O commodity (each

identiﬁed by an I-O code) to ﬁnal demand. The merge produces a multiple-to-multiple link
between SIC code and ﬁnal demand. We then aggregate value added over all pairs of SIC
code and ﬁnal demand at the two-, three-, and four-digit level. The aggregation produces a
one-to-one link between SIC code and ﬁnal demand.


C.     Link from I-O Commodity to Personal Consumption Expen-

       ditures

IO table D identiﬁes the I-O commodity composition of each personal consumption expen-
diture good measured at producers’ prices. The Bureau of Economic Analysis classiﬁes per-
sonal consumption expenditures into the following categories of durability: durable goods,

nondurable goods, and services. Each I-O commodity potentially contributes to multiple
categories of personal consumption expenditures. However, we create a unique link by as-
signing each I-O commodity to the category of personal consumption expenditures to which
it has the highest value added.
     We merge the link from SIC code to I-O code with this link from I-O commodity to

personal consumption expenditures. The merge produces a multiple-to-multiple link between
SIC code and personal consumption expenditures. We then aggregate value added over all
pairs of SIC code and personal consumption expenditures at the two-, three-, and four-
digit level. The aggregation produces a one-to-one link between SIC code and personal

consumption expenditures.




                                           37
D.      Industry Classification by Final Demand

We ﬁrst use the link between SIC code and ﬁnal demand to classify each SIC industry into
mutually exclusive categories: consumption, investment, government expenditures, and net

exports. Within the set of industries that are classiﬁed as consumption, we then use the
link between SIC code and personal consumption expenditures to classify each industry into
mutually exclusive categories: durable goods, nondurable goods, and services.



Appendix B.                Macroeconomic Data

We primarily work with annual macroeconomic data for the 1930–2007 sample period. We

also use quarterly data for the 1951:1–2007:4 sample period, only for the purposes of estimat-
ing the household’s Euler equations in section V. We construct our data using the following
tables from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.


     • NIPA table 2.3.3: Real personal consumption expenditures by major type of product,

       quantity indexes.

     • NIPA table 2.3.4: Price indexes for personal consumption expenditures by major type
       of product.

     • NIPA table 2.3.5: Personal consumption expenditures by major type of product.

     • NIPA table 5.3.3: Real private ﬁxed investment by type, quantity indexes.

     • NIPA table 5.3.4: Price indexes for private ﬁxed investment by type.

     • NIPA table 5.3.5: Private ﬁxed investment by type.

     • NIPA table 5.7.5A: Private inventories and domestic ﬁnal sales of business by industry.

     • NIPA table 5.7.5B: Private inventories and domestic ﬁnal sales by industry.



                                              38
    • NIPA table 7.1: Selected per capita product and income series in current and chained
         dollars.

    • Fixed assets table 5.1: Current-cost net stock of residential ﬁxed assets by type of
         owner, legal form of organization, industry, and tenure group.

    • Fixed assets table 8.1: Current-cost net stock of consumer durable goods.


       Departing from the national accounts convention, we account for housing as part of
durable goods, instead of services. Nondurable and service consumption is the properly
chain-weighted sum of real personal consumption expenditures on nondurable goods, plus
services, minus housing services. Durable expenditure is the properly chain-weighted sum of

real personal consumption expenditures on durable goods and real private residential ﬁxed
investment.
       The stock of durables is the sum of the net stock of consumer durable goods and the net
stock of private residential ﬁxed assets.6 The data for the stock of durables are available

only at annual frequency, measured at each year end. We therefore construct a quarterly
series using quarterly data on real durable expenditure. We do so by computing a constant
depreciation rate within each year so that the data satisfy the accumulation equation (1).
The average depreciation rate for durable goods, implied by the construction, is 1.39 percent

per quarter. We deﬁne the durable expenditure-stock ratio as the ratio of net durable
expenditure to the stock of durables, that is (Dt − Dt−1 )/Dt .7
       We use the price index for nondurable goods and services to deﬂate all nominal asset
returns and cash-ﬂow growth. Note that our deﬂation methodology is consistent with our
   6
     Private residential ﬁxed assets do not include the value of residential land, which is an intentional
omission in our construction because durable goods in our model must be reproducible. We have tried
an alternative construction that includes the value of residential land, assuming that the price of land is
perfectly correlated with that of structures (see Piazzesi, Schneider, and Tuzel 2007). The substance of our
ﬁndings are the same under this alternative data construction.
   7
     An alternative deﬁnition is the ratio of gross durable expenditure to the stock of durables, that is Et /Dt .
This series is non-stationary because of a slow decline in the depreciation rate for private residential ﬁxed
assets during the sample period.



                                                       39
modeling convention that the nondurable good is the numeraire in the economy. In comput-
ing growth rates, we ﬁrst divide all quantities by the population. In matching consumption
growth to returns at both annual and quarterly frequency, we use the “beginning-of-period”
timing convention following Campbell (2003). Speciﬁcally, the asset return in period t is

matched to the growth rate in consumption ﬂow from period t to t + 1.



Appendix C.                     Solution of the General Equilibrium Model

A.     Central Planner’s Problem

We ﬁrst restate the general equilibrium model as a central planner’s problem. The central
planner chooses optimal nondurable consumption, durable expenditure, and inventory in-
vestment in order to maximize the household’s objection function. The Bellman equation
for the problem is


               Jt = J(Dt−1 , DI,t−1 , Xt )
                                                                  1−γ 1/κ 1/(1−1/σ)
                     =        max {(1 − β)u(Ct, Dt )1−1/σ + βEt [Jt+1 ] }           .   (C1)
                            Ct ,Et ,EIt



The law of motion for the state variables are given by equations (1), (4), and (10).
     As shown in Yogo (2006, Appendix B), the value of a claim to the household’s consump-
tion expenditures is related to the value function through the equation

                                           1/σ   1−1/σ
                                        C t Jt
                     VM t   =                                 − C t − P t Dt .          (C2)
                              (1 − β)(1 − α)v(Dt /Ct )1/ρ−1/σ


B.     Rescaling the General Equilibrium Model

To make the model stationary, we normalize all policy and state variables by aggregate
productivity raised to the power χ, which is related to the production parameters through
equation (31). Let C              t = Et /Xtχ , E
                   t = Ct /Xtχ , E              It = EIt /Xtχ , D
                                                                   t = Dt /Xtχ , and D
                                                                                       It =


                                                    40
DIt /Xtχ . Let ΔXt+1 = Xt+1 /Xt denote the growth rate of aggregate productivity.
   By homotheticity, we can normalize the value function as

               Jt
         Jt =       D
                   = J(  t−1 , D
                                 I,t−1 , ΔXt )
               Xtχ
             = max {(1 − β)u(C            t )1−1/σ + βEt[(ΔX χ Jt+1 )1−γ ]1/κ }1/(1−1/σ) .
                                    t , D                                                                  (C3)
                                                             t+1
                 t ,E
                 C    t ,E
                           It



The law of motion for the state variables are given by

                                                         
                                          D t = (1 − δ) Dt−1χ + E
                                                                 t ,                                       (C4)
                                                         ΔXt
                                                         
                                           It = (1 − δ) DI,t−1
                                          D                     +EIt ,                                     (C5)
                                                         ΔXtχ
                                        ΔXt = exp{μ + zt + et }.                                            (C6)


   The relative price of the durable good is given by

                                                         t
                                                      θC C
                                                           1−1/χ
                                 Pt =                                         ,                             (C7)
                                         θE YEt
                                              1−1/(ηθE ) 
                                                        (DI,t−1 /ΔXtχ )θI /θE

where the output of the durable-good ﬁrm is

                                           χ                χ 2
                       YEt       It + τ ΔXt (DIt − DI,t−1 /ΔXt ) .
                            t + E
                 YEt = χ = E                                                                               (C8)
                       Xt                       2D I,t−1


The user cost of the durable good is given by equation (20), where equation (C2) allows us
to express the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution as

               χ                 −1/σ                         1/ρ−1/σ          χ                   κ−1
             ΔXt+1 Ct+1                        t+1 /C
                                            v(D       t+1 )               (ΔXt+1  Jt+1 )1−1/σ
 Mt+1 = β                                                                                                  . (C9)
                
                Ct                            v(D t /C
                                                      t )               Et [(ΔX χ Jt+1 )1−γ ]1/κ
                                                                                  t+1




                                                         41
The rental prices for the factors of production are given by


                     t =    Wt         t + θE Pt YEt ),
                     W           = η(θC C                                                    (C10)
                             Xtχ
                   Ct       WCt                           χ 
                   W       =      = η(1 − θC )Et [Mt+1 ΔXt+1 Ct+1 ],                         (C11)
                             Xtχ
                   Et       WEt
                   W       =                                   χ
                                  = η(1 − θE − θI )Et [Mt+1 ΔXt+1  Pt+1 YE,t+1].            (C12)
                             Xtχ

     The ﬁrst-order conditions for nondurable consumption, durable expenditure, and inven-
tory investment are given by


                 t = χC
                 W     t1−1/χ ,                                                             (C13)
                                            −1/ρ
                             α       t
                                     D
                  Qt =                             ,                                         (C14)
                            1−α      t
                                     C
                                            χ
                           ηθI Et [Mt+1 ΔXt+1 Pt+1 YE,t+1]               ΔXtχ D It
                  Qt =                                       − τ Pt                  −1
                                          It
                                         D                                  I,t−1
                                                                           D
                                   ⎡          ⎛                              ⎞⎤
                                                       χ             2
                             τ                   ΔXt+1    DI,t+1
                           + Et ⎣Mt+1 Pt+1 ⎝                              − 1⎠⎦ .            (C15)
                             2                           It
                                                        D


C.     Numerical Algorithm

We discretize the state space and numerically solve the central planner’s problem. Starting
with an initial guess for the policy functions (C    0 , E
                                                0 , E    I0 ), we solve the dynamic program

through the following recursion.

  1. Iterate on equation (C3) to compute the value function Ji corresponding to the current
       policy functions (C    i , E
                         i , E    Ii ).

                                                                 i+1 , E
  2. Using the value function Ji , update the policy functions (C      i+1 , E
                                                                               I,i+1) as a solution

       to the system of equations (C13), (C14), and (C15).

  3. If C      i  + E
         i+1 − C       i+1 − E
                               i  + E
                                       I,i+1 − E
                                                Ii  is less than the convergence criteria, stop.

       Otherwise, return to step 1.

                                                       42
   We use the solution to the central planner’s problem to compute the intertemporal
marginal rate of substitution (C9) and cash ﬂows:


                         Ct = ΠCt
                        Π                      t − W
                                   = (1 − ηθC )C      Ct ,                   (C16)
                               Xtχ
                         Et = ΠEt
                        Π               t − ηθE Pt YEt − W
                                   = Pt E                   Et .             (C17)
                               Xtχ

We then compute ﬁrm value by iterating on the Euler equations:

                               VCt
                        VCt =      = VC (D
                                            t−1 , D
                                                    I,t−1 , ΔXt )
                               Xtχ
                                            χ
                             = Et [Mt+1 ΔXt+1   (VC,t+1 + Π   C,t+1 )],     (C18)
                               VEt
                        VEt =      = VE (D
                                            t−1 , D
                                                    I,t−1 , ΔXt )
                               Xtχ
                             = Et [Mt+1 ΔX χ (VE,t+1 + Π
                                                t+1
                                                               E,t+1 )].     (C19)




                                               43
References

Andrews, Donald W.K. 1991. “Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covari-
  ance Matrix Estimation.” Econometrica 59 (3):817–858.

Bansal, Ravi and Amir Yaron. 2004. “Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of
  Asset Pricing Puzzles.” Journal of Finance 59 (4):1481–1509.

Banz, Rolf W. 1981. “The Relationship between Return and Market Value of Common

  Stocks.” Journal of Financial Economics 9 (1):3–18.

Basu, Sanjoy. 1983. “The Relationship between Earnings Yield, Market Value, and Re-
  turn for NYSE Common Stocks: Further Evidence.” Journal of Financial Economics
  12 (1):129–156.

Basu, Susanto and John G. Fernald. 1997. “Returns to Scale in U.S. Production: Estimates
  and Implications.” Journal of Political Economy 105 (2):249–283.

Baxter, Marianne. 1996. “Are Consumer Durables Important for Business Cycles?” Review
  of Economics and Statistics 78 (1):147–155.

Berk, Jonathan B., Richard C. Green, and Vasant Naik. 1999. “Optimal Investment, Growth
  Options, and Security Returns.” Journal of Finance 54 (5):1553–1607.

Bhandari, Laxmi Chand. 1988. “Debt/Equity Ratio and Expected Common Stock Returns:
  Empirical Evidence.” Journal of Finance 43 (2):507–528.

Bils, Mark and James A. Kahn. 2000. “What Inventory Behavior Tells Us about Business
  Cycles.” American Economic Review 90 (3):458–481.

Bils, Mark and Peter J. Klenow. 1998. “Using Consumer Theory to Test Competing Business
  Cycle Models.” Journal of Political Economy 106 (2):233–261.




                                           44
Black, Fischer, Michael C. Jensen, and Myron Scholes. 1972. “The Capital Asset Pricing
  Model: Some Empirical Tests.” In Studies in the Theory of Capital Markets, edited by
  Michael C. Jensen. New York: Praeger, 79–121.

Boudoukh, Jacob, Roni Michaely, Matthew Richardson, and Michael R. Roberts. 2007. “On

  the Importance of Measuring Payout Yield: Implications for Empirical Asset Pricing.”
  Journal of Finance 62 (2):877–915.

Breeden, Douglas T., Michael R. Gibbons, and Robert H. Litzenberger. 1989. “Empirical
  Test of the Consumption-Oriented CAPM.” Journal of Finance 44 (2):231–262.

Bureau of Economic Analysis. 1994. “Benchmark Input-Output Accounts for the U.S. Econ-
  omy, 1987.” Survey of Current Business 4:73–115.

Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 1995. “Capital Utilization and
  Returns to Scale.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1995, edited by Ben S. Bernanke
  and Julio J. Rotemberg. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 67–110.

Campbell, John Y. 1991. “A Variance Decomposition for Stock Returns.” Economic Journal
  101 (405):157–179.

———. 2003. “Consumption-Based Asset Pricing.” In Handbook of the Economics of Fi-
  nance, vol. 1B, edited by George M. Constantinides, Milton Harris, and René M. Stulz,

  chap. 13. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 801–885.

Carlson, Murray, Adlai Fisher, and Ron Giammarino. 2004. “Corporate Investment and
  Asset Price Dynamics: Implications for the Cross-Section of Returns.” Journal of Finance
  59 (6):2577–2603.

Cochrane, John H. 1991. “Production-Based Asset Pricing and the Link Between Stock
  Returns and Economic Fluctuations.” Journal of Finance 46 (1):209–237.




                                            45
Daniel, Kent and Sheridan Titman. 1997. “Evidence on the Characteristics of Cross Sectional
  Variation in Stock Returns.” Journal of Finance 52 (1):1–33.

Davis, James L., Eugene F. Fama, and Kenneth R. French. 2000. “Characteristics, Covari-
  ances, and Average Returns: 1929 to 1997.” Journal of Finance 55 (1):389–406.

Den Haan, Wouter J. and Andrew T. Levin. 1997. “A Practitioner’s Guide to Robust
  Covariance Matrix Estimation.” In Handbook of Statistics, vol. 15, edited by G.S. Maddala
  and C.R. Rao. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 299–342.

———. 2000. “Robust Covariance Matrix Estimation with Data-Dependent VAR Prewhiten-

  ing Order.” Technical Working Paper no. 255, NBER, Cambridge, MA.

Dunn, Kenneth B. and Kenneth J. Singleton. 1986. “Modeling the Term Structure of In-
  terest Rates under Non-Separable Utility and Durability of Goods.” Journal of Financial
  Economics 17 (1):27–55.

Eichenbaum, Martin and Lars Peter Hansen. 1990. “Estimating Models with Intertemporal
  Substitution Using Aggregate Time Series Data.” Journal of Business and Economic
  Statistics 8 (1):53–69.

Epstein, Larry G. and Stanley E. Zin. 1991. “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal
  Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: An Empirical Analysis.” Journal of Political

  Economy 99 (2):263–286.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French. 1992. “The Cross-Section of Expected Stock
  Returns.” Journal of Finance 47 (2):427–465.

———. 1993. “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and Bonds.” Journal of

  Financial Economics 33 (1):3–56.

———. 1997. “Industry Costs of Equity.” Journal of Financial Economics 43 (2):153–193.



                                            46
Fama, Eugene F. and James D. MacBeth. 1973. “Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical
  Tests.” Journal of Political Economy 81 (3):607–636.

Gomes, João, Leonid Kogan, and Lu Zhang. 2003. “Equilibrium Cross Section of Returns.”
  Journal of Political Economy 111 (4):693–732.

Gourio, Francois. 2005. “Operating Leverage, Stock Market Cyclicality, and the Cross Sec-
  tion of Returns.” Working paper, Boston Univ.

Hansen, Lars Peter. 1982. “Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments
  Estimators.” Econometrica 50 (4):1029–1054.

Hansen, Lars Peter and Kenneth J. Singleton. 1982. “Generalized Instrumental Variables
  Estimation of Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models.” Econometrica 50 (5):1269–1286.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan and Sheridan Titman. 1993. “Returns to Buying Winners and Selling
  Losers: Implications for Stock Market Eﬃciency.” Journal of Finance 48 (1):65–91.

Kogan, Leonid. 2001. “An Equilibrium Model of Irreversible Investment.” Journal of Fi-
  nancial Economics 62 (2):201–245.

———. 2004.      “Asset Prices and Real Investment.”      Journal of Financial Economics
  73 (3):411–431.

Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott. 1982. “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctua-
  tions.” Econometrica 50 (6):1345–1370.

Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 1994. “Contrarian Investment,
  Extrapolation, and Risk.” Journal of Finance 49 (5):1541–1578.

Lamont, Owen A. 2001.       “Economic Tracking Portfolios.”    Journal of Econometrics

  105 (1):161–184.




                                           47
Lo, Andrew W. and A. Craig MacKinlay. 1990. “Data-Snooping Biases in Tests of Financial
  Asset Pricing Models.” Review of Financial Studies 3 (3):431–467.

Newey, Whitney K. and Kenneth D. West. 1987.          “A Simple, Positive Semi-Deﬁnite,
  Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix.” Econometrica

  55 (3):703–708.

Ogaki, Masao and Carmen M. Reinhart. 1998. “Measuring Intertemporal Substitution: The
  Role of Durable Goods.” Journal of Political Economy 106 (5):1078–1098.

Pakoš, Michal. 2004. “Asset Pricing with Durable Goods and Non-Homothetic Preferences.”

  Working paper, Univ. Chicago.

Papanikolaou, Dimitris. 2008. “Investment-Speciﬁc Technological Change and Asset Prices.”
  Working paper, Northwestern Univ.

Petersen, Bruce and Steven Strongin. 1996. “Why Are Some Industries More Cyclical than

  Others?” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 14 (2):189–198.

Piazzesi, Monika, Martin Schneider, and Selale Tuzel. 2007. “Housing, Consumption and
  Asset Pricing.” Journal of Financial Economics 83 (3):531–569.

Rosenberg, Barr, Kenneth Reid, and Ronald Lanstein. 1985. “Persuasive Evidence of Market
  Ineﬃciency.” Journal of Portfolio Management 11 (1):9–17.

Shiller, Robert J. 1993. Macro Markets. Clarendon Lectures in Economics. New York:
  Oxford University Press.

Tuzel, Selale. 2005. “Corporate Real Estate Holdings and the Cross Section of Stock Re-
  turns.” Working paper, Univ. Southern California.

Weil, Philippe. 1990. “Nonexpected Utility in Macroeconomics.” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 105 (1):29–42.


                                           48
Yogo, Motohiro. 2006. “A Consumption-Based Explanation of Expected Stock Returns.”
  Journal of Finance 61 (2):539–580.




                                       49
                    Table 1: Characteristics of the Industry Portfolios

   Variable                     Services   Nondurables Durables Investment Other
                                             A. 1927–2007 Sample Period
   Number of ﬁrms                    410           426       190         633 1273
   Percent of market equity         14.6          35.2      15.5        17.7 17.0
   Dividend yield (%)                5.4           4.6       5.1         4.0  4.1
   Book-to-market equity (%)       112.1          66.4      62.7        76.8 62.8
                                             B. 1951–2007 Sample Period
   Number of ﬁrms                    534           524       233         826 1734
   Percent of market equity         10.1          39.1      15.3        18.2 17.3
   Dividend yield (%)                5.3           4.4       4.8         3.5  3.7
   Book-to-market equity (%)        87.3          53.4      62.4        56.4 60.6
   Market leverage (%)              51.6          30.2      47.5        34.2 63.7

Note.—We deﬁne ﬁve industries based on their primary contribution to ﬁnal demand accord-
ing to the benchmark input-output accounts. We then sort the universe of NYSE, AMEX,
and Nasdaq stocks into ﬁve industry portfolios based on their SIC codes. We compute port-
folio characteristics in December of each year and report the time-series average over the
indicated sample period.




                                            50
                  Table 2: Cash-Flow Growth for the Industry Portfolios

           Statistic                         Services    Nondurables Durables
                                                        A. Sales Growth
           Mean (%)                                5.41           4.46   2.86
           Standard deviation (%)                  5.86           6.26   7.80
           Correlation with growth rate of
             Service consumption                    0.18          0.05     0.52
             Nondurable consumption                 0.07         -0.03     0.59
             Durable expenditure                   -0.05         -0.20     0.72
                                                  B. Operating-Income Growth
           Mean (%)                                 5.46          4.63     2.77
           Standard deviation (%)                   5.59          5.98    12.11
           Correlation with growth rate of
             Service consumption                   0.15          0.30      0.45
             Nondurable consumption                0.18          0.22      0.57
             Durable expenditure                   0.19          0.11      0.75

Note.—The table reports descriptive statistics for the log annual growth rate of sales and
operating income for the industry portfolios. Sales and the cost of goods sold are from
Compustat and are deﬂated by the price index for nondurable goods and services. Operating
income is sales minus the cost of goods sold. Correlation is with the log growth rate of
real service consumption, real nondurable consumption, and real durable expenditure. The
sample period is 1951–2007.




                                             51
                   Table 3: Dividend Growth for the Industry Portfolios

       Statistic                                   Services Nondurables Durables
                                                     A. 1930–2007 Sample Period
       Mean (%)                                        0.18         3.65      2.23
       Standard deviation (%)                         13.51        13.12     25.45
       Correlation with growth rate of
         Service consumption                          -0.12           -0.04       0.15
         Nondurable consumption                       -0.10           -0.04       0.19
         Durable expenditure                          -0.22            0.03       0.23
       Correlation with two-year growth rate of
         Service consumption                           0.09          0.07      0.24
         Nondurable consumption                        0.12          0.06      0.32
         Durable expenditure                           0.00          0.14      0.30
                                                      B. 1951–2007 Sample Period
       Mean (%)                                        1.08          4.05      1.59
       Standard deviation (%)                         12.48         12.61     22.32
       Correlation with growth rate of
         Service consumption                          -0.07            0.01       0.17
         Nondurable consumption                        0.04            0.06       0.21
         Durable expenditure                          -0.17           -0.07       0.23
       Correlation with two-year growth rate of
         Service consumption                           0.11           0.04        0.27
         Nondurable consumption                        0.21           0.19        0.34
         Durable expenditure                           0.04           0.11        0.37

Note.—The table reports descriptive statistics for the log annual growth rate of dividends for
the industry portfolios. Dividends are deﬂated by the price index for nondurable goods and
services. Correlation is with the log growth rate of real service consumption, real nondurable
consumption, and real durable expenditure. The two-year growth rate refers to the growth
rate over the contemporaneous and subsequent year.




                                             52
                                         Table 4: Excess Returns on the Industry Portfolios

                     Sample Period   Services   Nondurables Durables Investment Other Durables−Services
                                                           A. Average Excess Returns (%)
                     1927–2007           6.11          8.81      10.30         8.75   8.43         4.19
                                       (2.05)        (2.06)     (3.15)       (3.14) (2.49)       (2.08)
                     1927–1950           6.34          9.22      14.15        12.38 10.90          7.81
                                       (4.77)        (4.77)     (8.10)       (7.62) (5.88)       (5.50)
                     1951-2007           6.01          8.63       8.67         7.22   7.39         2.66




53
                                       (2.14)        (2.16)     (2.95)       (3.15) (2.56)       (1.84)
                                                    B. Standard Deviation of Excess Returns (%)
                     1927–2007          18.46         18.51      28.38        28.30 22.43         18.69
                     1927–1950          23.38         23.35      39.66        37.33 28.79         26.96
                     1951-2007          16.19         16.29      22.25        23.75 19.36         13.88

     Note.—We deﬁne ﬁve industries based on their primary contribution to ﬁnal demand according to the benchmark input-output
     accounts. We then sort the universe of NYSE, AMEX, and Nasdaq stocks into ﬁve industry portfolios based on their SIC codes.
     The table reports the mean and the standard deviation of annual excess returns over the three-month T-bill. Standard errors
     are reported in parentheses.
                                 Table 5: Predictability of Excess Returns on the Industry Portfolios

            Lagged Forecasting Variable           Services          Nondurables          Durables      Durables−Market
                                                                       A. 1927–2007 Sample Period
            Durable expenditure-stock ratio     -1.71    -1.13     -1.20      -0.59    -3.23   -3.72*    -1.48   -1.70*
                                               (1.04)   (1.07)    (1.14)     (0.92)  (1.97)     (1.93)  (0.98)   (0.98)
            Dividend yield                            3.26***              5.46***             3.84**             1.62*
                                                        (1.20)               (1.32)             (1.65)           (0.87)
            R2 (%)                               3.84    11.30      1.90      16.32     5.82     12.31    6.00    11.99
                                                                  B. 1951–2007 Sample Period
            Durable expenditure-stock ratio -3.52**       -2.87    -0.15       0.30 -5.38** -6.52*** -3.41*** -3.88***




54
                                             (1.72)      (1.73)   (1.94)     (1.71)  (2.67)     (2.43)  (1.24)   (1.17)
            Dividend yield                                 1.93            4.53***             3.52**              1.44
                                                         (1.22)              (1.17)             (1.62)           (0.88)
            R2 (%)                               6.75     10.63     0.01      13.99     8.35     15.09   15.06    20.09

     Note.—The table reports predictive regressions for annual excess returns, over the three-month T-bill, on the industry port-
     folios. The lagged forecasting variables are the durable expenditure-stock ratio and each portfolio’s own dividend yield.
     Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses.
     * Signiﬁcant at the 10 percent level.
     ** Signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level.
     *** Signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level.
                         Table 6: Predictability of the Volatility of Excess Returns on the Industry Portfolios

               Lagged Forecasting Variable          Services        Nondurables          Durables     Durables−Market
                                                                        A. 1927–2007 Sample Period
               Durable expenditure-stock ratio   -1.34* -1.44*      -0.81     -0.56 -3.01** -3.35** -1.23       -1.39*
                                                 (0.70) (0.74)     (0.94) (0.83)     (1.47)    (1.41) (0.77)    (0.75)
               Dividend yield                            -0.34               2.23*            2.70**             1.21*
                                                        (0.84)              (1.15)             (1.20)           (0.67)
               R2 (%)                              5.75   6.22       1.98      7.47   11.60     19.54   7.90     14.43
                                                                        B. 1951–2007 Sample Period
               Durable expenditure-stock ratio     0.39     0.37     1.39      1.55    -1.41    -1.74 -1.09      -1.28




55
                                                 (0.97)   (1.00)   (0.99) (1.00)     (1.51)    (1.58) (0.94)    (1.06)
               Dividend yield                              -0.04            1.56**               1.00             0.57
                                                          (0.85)            (0.78)             (1.15)           (0.64)
               R2 (%)                              0.19     0.19     2.49      6.47     1.50     2.91   3.52      5.32

     Note.—The table reports predictive regressions for the absolute value of annual excess returns, over the three-month T-bill,
     on the industry portfolios. The lagged forecasting variables are the durable expenditure-stock ratio and each portfolio’s own
     dividend yield. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses.
     * Signiﬁcant at the 10 percent level.
     ** Signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level.
     *** Signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level.
                       Table 7: Predictability of the Volatility of Cash-Flow Growth for the Industry Portfolios

                    Lagged Forecasting Variable            Services            Nondurables          Durables
                                                                              A. Sales Growth
                    Durable expenditure-stock ratio 1.16***        0.82** 1.61*** 1.59***       -0.97** -1.10**
                                                      (0.38)        (0.31)    (0.60)    (0.58)   (0.42)     (0.46)
                    Dividend yield                                -1.02**                -0.18                0.39
                                                                    (0.42)              (0.49)              (0.36)
                    R2 (%)                                9.15       22.65     17.54     17.81      5.65      7.32
                                                                       B. Operating-Income Growth
                    Durable expenditure-stock ratio       0.71        0.60 1.81*** 1.79***         -1.17     -1.43
                                                        (0.62)      (0.69)    (0.32)    (0.31)   (0.81)     (0.87)
                    Dividend yield                                   -0.32               -0.19                0.80
                                                                    (0.33)              (0.34)              (0.74)




56
                    R2 (%)                                3.31        4.61     26.77     27.17      3.34      6.23
                                                                       C. Five-Year Dividend Growth
                    Durable expenditure-stock ratio       1.53        0.17 -4.55** -4.47** -10.01*** -9.94***
                                                        (1.61)      (1.38)    (1.71)    (1.68)   (2.36)     (2.46)
                    Dividend yield                               -4.61***                 0.86               -0.18
                                                                    (1.69)              (1.31)              (2.69)
                    R2 (%)                                0.85       15.62     11.17     11.68    21.52      21.53

     Note.—The table reports predictive regressions for the absolute value of log annual sales growth, log annual operating-income
     growth, and log ﬁve-year dividend growth for the industry portfolios. The lagged forecasting variables are the durable
     expenditure-stock ratio and each portfolio’s own dividend yield. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported
     in parentheses. The sample period is 1951–2007.
     * Signiﬁcant at the 10 percent level.
     ** Signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level.
     *** Signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level.
          Table 8: Parameters Used in the Calibrated Model

Parameter                                               Symbol   Value
Depreciation rate of durable good                       δ        4.63%
Preferences:
  Discount factor                                       β         0.98
  Elasticity of intertemporal subsitution               σ            2
  Relative risk aversion                                γ           10
  Elasticity of subsitution between goods               ρ         0.60
  Utility weight on durable good                        α         0.50
Technology:
  Growth rate                                           μ        2.78%
  Standard deviation of i.i.d. component                σe       1.11%
  Standard deviation of shock to persistent component   σv       2.05%
  Autocorrelation of persistent component               φ          0.78
Production:
  Returns to scale                                      η         0.90
  Nondurable ﬁrm’s elasticity for variable input        θC        0.80
  Durable ﬁrm’s elasticity for variable input           θE        0.72
  Durable ﬁrm’s elasticity for inventory                θI        0.11
  Adjustment cost for inventory                         τ            3
Financial leverage                                      b         52%




                                  57
                   Table 9: Comparison of Empirical Moments with Moments in the Simulated Model

     Variable                                 Statistic                               Sample Period      Model
                                                                                  1930–2007 1951–2007
                                                                  A. Macroeconomic Variables
     Nondurable & service consumption growth Mean (%)                                   1.96        2.05   2.00
                                             Standard deviation (%)                     2.65        1.16   2.67
                                             Autocorrelation                            0.50        0.39   0.51
     Durable expenditure growth              Mean (%)                                   2.43        2.26   2.00
                                             Standard deviation (%)                    16.93        8.37 14.79
                                             Autocorrelation                            0.29        0.16  -0.21
     Durable-nondurable expenditure ratio    Mean (%)                                  24.38      27.10 22.06
                                             Standard deviation (%)                     5.97        2.85   6.85
                                             Autocorrelation                            0.89        0.65   0.86




58
                                             Correlation with growth rate of
                                               Nondurable & service consumption         0.08        0.43   0.87
                                               Durable expenditure                      0.24        0.38   0.39
     Durable expenditure-stock ratio         Mean (%)                                   3.42        4.09   1.97
                                             Standard deviation (%)                     2.14        1.19   1.72
                                             Autocorrelation                            0.79        0.51   0.89
                                             Correlation with growth rate of
                                               Nondurable & service consumption         0.21        0.54   0.85
                                               Durable expenditure                      0.49        0.58   0.34
     Durable inventory-sales ratio           Mean (%)                                             71.70 68.49
                                             Standard deviation (%)                               12.69 14.46
                                             Autocorrelation                                        0.83   0.70
                                             Correlation with growth rate of
                                               Nondurable & service consumption                    -0.13  -0.86
                                               Durable expenditure                                 -0.36  -0.52
     Variable                                 Statistic                                Sample Period      Model
                                                                                   1930–2007 1951–2007
                                                         B. Operating-Income Growth / Cash-Flow Growth
     Market portfolio                          Mean (%)                                              4.99  2.00
                                               Standard deviation (%)                                5.47  8.02
                                               Correlation with growth rate of
                                                 Nondurable & service consumption                    0.51  0.76
                                                 Durable expenditure                                 0.49  0.87
     Service portfolio / Nondurable-good ﬁrm   Mean (%)                                              5.46  2.00




59
                                               Standard deviation (%)                                5.59  2.92
                                               Correlation with growth rate of
                                                 Nondurable & service consumption                    0.12  0.95
                                                 Durable expenditure                                 0.19  0.41
     Durable-good portfolio / Durable-good ﬁrm Mean (%)                                              2.77  2.00
                                               Standard deviation (%)                              12.11 31.59
                                               Correlation with growth rate of
                                                 Nondurable & service consumption                    0.38  0.58
                                                 Durable expenditure                                 0.75  0.92
         Variable                                       Statistic                           Sample Period      Model
                                                                                        1930–2007 1951–2007
                                                                            C. Excess Returns
         Market portfolio                          Mean (%)                                    6.87       7.48  5.80
                                                   Standard deviation (%)                     20.16     17.13   9.29
                                                   Correlation with growth rate of
                                                     Nondurable & service consumption          0.61       0.31  0.38
                                                     Durable expenditure                       0.49       0.38  0.77
         Service portfolio / Nondurable-good ﬁrm   Mean (%)                                    5.45       6.13  5.03
                                                   Standard deviation (%)                     18.30     15.62   8.06
                                                   Correlation with growth rate of
                                                     Nondurable & service consumption          0.49       0.22  0.39
                                                     Durable expenditure                       0.46       0.41  0.78
         Durable-good portfolio / Durable-good ﬁrm Mean (%)                                    8.85       9.12 10.26
                                                   Standard deviation (%)                     27.22     21.52 16.55




60
                                                   Correlation with growth rate of
                                                     Nondurable & service consumption          0.60       0.34  0.35
                                                     Durable expenditure                       0.49       0.57  0.77
         T-bill rate / Riskfree rate               Mean (%)                                    1.02       1.64  1.65
                                                   Standard deviation (%)                      3.99       2.47  1.54
                                                   Correlation with growth rate of
                                                     Nondurable & service consumption         -0.67      -0.15  0.82
                                                     Durable expenditure                      -0.22       0.17  0.20

     Note.—Panel A reports the mean, the standard deviation, and the autocorrelation for various macroeconomic variables in the
     data and the simulated model. The variables are the log growth rate of real nondurable and service consumption, the log
     growth rate of real durable expenditure, the ratio of durable expenditure to nondurable and service consumption, the ratio of
     net durable expenditure to the stock of durables, and the ratio of inventory to sales for durable goods. Panel B reports moments
     for the log growth rate of operating income (cash ﬂows in the model). Panel C reports moments for real excess returns over the
     three-month T-bill (the riskfree asset in the model). Table 8 reports the parameters of the calibrated model.
            Table 10: Predictability of Excess Returns in the Simulated Model

       Statistic     Market Porfolio Nondurable-Good Firm Durable-Good Firm
                                           A. Excess Returns
       Coeﬃcient              -1.14                       -0.99        -2.17
                             (1.23)                      (1.06)       (2.21)
       t-statistic            -1.03                       -1.04        -1.12
                             (1.09)                      (1.09)       (1.07)
       R2 (%)                  3.59                        3.63         3.86
                             (4.27)                      (4.30)       (4.45)
                                    B. Volatility of Excess Returns
       Coeﬃcient              -0.72                       -0.65        -1.40
                             (0.84)                      (0.73)       (1.53)
       t-statistic            -0.96                       -1.02        -1.05
                             (1.13)                      (1.13)       (1.12)
       R2 (%)                  3.88                        4.07         4.23
                             (4.83)                      (4.97)       (5.09)
                                   C. Volatility of Cash-Flow Growth
       Coeﬃcient              -0.85                        0.55        -6.96
                             (1.01)                      (0.33)       (4.33)
       t-statistic            -1.08                        3.51        -2.32
                             (1.65)                      (2.37)       (1.47)
       R2 (%)                  6.40                       22.15        13.75
                             (7.68)                    (16.76)        (8.89)

Note.—We use the calibrated model to simulate 10,000 samples, each consisting of 50 annual
observations. We run a regression of excess returns, over the riskfree asset, onto the lagged
durable expenditure-stock ratio in each sample. In panel A, we report the mean and the
standard deviation (in parentheses) of the regression coeﬃcient, the t-statistic, and the R2
across the simulated samples. Panel B repeats the same exercise for the absolute value of
excess returns, and panel C repeats the same exercise for the absolute value of log cash-ﬂow
growth. Table 8 reports the parameters of the calibrated model.




                                             61
     Table 11: Estimation of the Preference Parameters through the Euler Equations

             Parameter                1930–2007 Annual 1951–2007 Quarterly
             β                                     0.91               0.99
                                                 (0.01)             (0.15)
             σ                                     0.66               0.03
                                                 (0.08)             (0.01)
             γ                                    16.34             231.36
                                                 (4.41)            (32.85)
             ρ                                     0.60               0.81
                                                 (0.04)             (0.23)
             α                                     0.49               0.94
                                                 (0.02)             (0.04)
             Wald test of σ = ρ                    1.74              11.65
                                                 (0.19)             (0.00)
             Wald test of σ = 1/γ                102.65               8.76
                                                 (0.00)             (0.00)
             J-test                               27.18               8.94
                                                 (0.25)             (1.00)

Note.—We use the conditional moment restrictions implied by the Euler equations to es-
timate the preference parameters of the model by two-step GMM. The test assets are the
three-month T-bill and ﬁve industry portfolios sorted by their primary contribution to ﬁ-
nal demand according to the benchmark input-output accounts. All nominal returns are
deﬂated by the price index for nondurable goods and services. The instruments are lags of
real nondurable and service consumption growth, durable expenditure-stock ratio, dividend
yield, and a constant. Standard errors (in parentheses) are based on the VARHAC covari-
ance matrix estimator with automatic lag length selection (using a maximum lag length of
one period) by the Akaike information criteria. The p-values for the Wald test for additive
separability (σ = ρ), the Wald test for time separability (σ = 1/γ), and the J-test (i.e., test
of overidentifying restrictions) are reported in parentheses.




                                              62
                              A. Sales growth of service producers                            B. Sales growth of nondurable−good producers




             30
                                                                                30
                            Sales        Durable expenditure




             20
                                                                                20




             10
                                                                                10




             0
                                                                                0




          Percent
                                                                             Percent




             −10
                                                                                −10




             −20
                                                                                −20




             −30
                                                                                −30
                    1950     1960     1970      1980           1990   2000             1950      1960     1970     1980     1990     2000
                                               Year                                                               Year


                           C. Sales growth of durable−good producers                          D. Sales growth of investment−good producers




             30
                                                                                30




63
             20
                                                                                20




             10
                                                                                10




             0
                                                                                0




          Percent
                                                                             Percent




             −10
                                                                                −10




             −20
                                                                                −20




             −30
                                                                                −30




                    1950     1960     1970      1980           1990   2000             1950      1960     1970     1980     1990     2000
                                               Year                                                               Year




     Figure 1: Log annual growth rate of sales for the industry portfolios. Sales are from Compustat and are deﬂated by the price
     index for nondurable goods and services. The dashed line in each panel is the log growth rate of real durable expenditure (i.e.,
     the sum of personal consumption expenditures on durable goods and private residential ﬁxed investment). The sample period
     is 1951–2007.
                   8
                   6
                   4
         Percent
                   2
                   0
                   −2




                        1930   1940   1950   1960     1970   1980   1990   2000
                                                     Year




Figure 2: Ratio of net durable expenditure to the stock of durables. The stock of durables
is the sum of the stock of consumer durable goods and the stock of private residential ﬁxed
assets. The sample period is 1929–2007.




                                                    64
