NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INSIDER PRIVATIZATION AND CAREERS - A STUDY OF A RUSSIAN FIRM
IN TRANSITION
Guido Friebel
Elena Panova
Working Paper 12998
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12998

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2007

We would like to thank for helpful discussions: Erik Berglöf, Anders Björklund, Peter Gottschalk,
Joep Konings, Margaret Meyer, Marc-Andreas Muendler, Åsa Rosén, Kathy Terrell and seminar participants
at the CAFÉ conference in Nuremberg, Boston College, LICOS Leuven, London Business School,
SITE (Stockholm School of Economics), SOFI (Stockholm University), University of Michigan, and
the University of Toulouse. We are grateful for the support of SITE. This paper was presented at the
Conference on Firm and Employees (CAFE) held September 29-30, 2006 in Nuremberg, Germany.
We gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by the Institute for Employment Research
(IAB), the Data Access Center (FDZ-BA/IAB), The Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (German Research
Foundation), their Research Network "Flexibility in Heterogeneous Labour Markets", the Alfred P.Sloan
Foundation and the National Science Foundation. All errors are ours. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2007 by Guido Friebel and Elena Panova. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Insider Privatization and Careers - A Study of a Russian Firm in Transition
Guido Friebel and Elena Panova
NBER Working Paper No. 12998
March 2007
JEL No. M5,P3
ABSTRACT
We study how transition has affected human resource policies of a Russian heavy industry firm. Our
data set contains personnel files of 1538 white-collar workers over 17 years: from 1984 to 2000. We
find career paths before the first year of Gaidar's reforms, 1992, when Russian transition to a market
economy began. After 1992, promotions are blocked, because both (i) more managers are hired from
the outside, and (ii) fewer managers leave the firm. A possible reason is an extremely weak outsider
property rights enforcement in Russia. Keywords: institutional environment and internal labor market,
transition to a market economy.
Guido Friebel
21 Allee de Brienne
31000 Toulouse
France
friebel@cict.fr
Elena Panova
Université du Québec à Montréal
Département des sciences économiques
Case postale 8888, Succursale Centre-Ville
Montréal (Québec), CANADA
H3C 3P8
e_panova@yahoo.com

1

Introduction

How do firms adjust their personnel policies and internal structure to
changes in their economic and institutional environment? Chandler
(1977) has investigated how firms in the last century reacted to challenges posed by new technologies and by market demands by developing
professional management, the line/staff and later the multidivisional organization. Doeringer and Piore (1971) have documented how and why
firms created internal labor markets to protect their workers from market shocks and to provide them with incentives to invest in firm-specific
human capital. Following Carter and Carter (1985), Lazear (1992), and
Baker, Gibbs and Holmström (1994), a large number of studies has investigated the personnel files of single firms over a long period of time
to learn more about their internal labor markets.1 One main finding is
that a firm’s organization structure and career paths remain remarkably
stable, even in turbulent times.
In this paper, we investigate how Russian transition from a centrallyplanned to a market economy has affected human resource policies of a
heavy industry firm. We use personnel data set that covers a total of
1538 white-collar workers over up to 17 years: from 1984 to 2000. We
find that from 1984 to 1991 (hereafter, in Soviet times), the firm featured
stable patterns of upward mobility that look quite similar to the career
paths in western firms. From the year 1992 when Gaidar’s reforms began,
to 2000 (hereafter, during the transition), we do not observe career paths
anymore. The reason is that in all tiers of the firm’s hierarchy except
for the lowest one, both (i) more managers are hired from the outside
market, and (ii) fewer managers leave the firm. As a result, the firm
becomes “toploaded”, and promotions are blocked.
A possible reason is an extremely weak protection of outsider property rights in Russia (see for instance, Woodruff 2004). When the firm
1

Including Ariga et al (1999), Dohmen (2004) and Dohmen et al (2004), Ichino
(1999), Seltzer and Merret (2000), Treble et al (2001).

2

was privatized in 1993 through the so-called option 2 of the Russian
voucher privatization, insiders received privileges for the acquisition of
shares. Effectively, incumbent managers became the owners. They had
an opportunity to hire managers who had a higher human capital than
themselves,2 most probably because skilled employees were leaving less
successful enterprises.3 The manager-owners decided both (i) to take an
advantage of this opportunity, and (ii) to stay in the firm (in order to
enforce their property rights),4 scarifying thereby the incentivising- and
signalling benefits from promotions.5
The paper is organized as follows. The next Section describes the
ownership structure, output performance, and employment policies from
the firm-level perspective. Section 3 uses the personnel data to compare
human resource policies in Soviet times and during the transition. The
last Section discusses the main insights. All Figures are collected in the
Appendix.

2

The firm and its environment

The firm that we investigate is one of the largest enterprises in the machinery industry in Russia. It was established in 1949. Prior to transition, it was one of the leading companies in the industry and was awarded
a number of distinctions. This Section uses firm-level data6 to describe
2

Managers hired after 1992, where both more experienced and better educated
than incumbents working on the same level.
3
Between 1996 and 1999, industrial employment in the region where the firm that
we study is located has decreased by 9%. In the same period, the employment in the
firm has decreased by only 6%.
4
Potentially, the newly hired managers could take over the control. However, an
obstacle, once again, was a weak enforcement of outsider ownership rights: it was
limiting bank credit for acquisition of the firm’s shares.
5
Career prospects are among the most important instruments for encouraging
employees to invest in firm-specific human capital (see Gibbons and Waldman 1999).
Also, promotions signal the quality of employees, helping thereby to better allocate
them among tasks (see Waldman, 1984; Sattinger, 1993).
6
Unfortunately, we have no individual-level information about blue-collar workers,
except for those of them who at some stage in their career moved into white collar or
managerial positions. However, we have firm-level information about the employment
and wages by both blue- and white collars.

3

how the firm was evolving in a changing institutional environment.
Ownership structure In March 1993, the firm was privatized
through the so-called option 2 of the Russian voucher privatization,
which provided privileges to insider workers and managers in acquiring shares. Since then, it has been a joint stock company. The annual
report for 1997 indicates about 92% individual ownership. A total of
53.4% of the firm is owned by insiders. Neither municipality nor the
regional government own shares, and there is no foreign capital. We
have no information about the distribution of shareholdings. However,
according to our interviews with managers in the firm, non-managerial
employees delegate their votes to the manager of their department.
Output performance The firm went through a first output decline
in 1987 when it had to cope with Gorbachev’s “perestroyka” (see Figure
1). Decentralization of decision-making power damaged some of the traditional supply channels and affected demand. There is a steep drop in
output from the beginning of Gaidar’s reforms in 1992 onwards, which
is typical for these years, in particular, for heavy industry. From 1997,
there was a positive tendency, and in 1999, the enterprise won an important tender to supply equipment to India.
At different points in time, the firm experimented with new product
lines, for instance, tailor-made instruments. From late 1980’s until the
late 90’s it has also been producing consumer goods (plastic chairs and
tables). However, Figure 2 shows that there is a high correlation between the firm’s output and its specialization in the core business - the
production of heavy machinery items.
Employment policies from the firm-level perspective Since
1988 and until 1997, industrial employment, that is, a number of workers employed in the core operations of the firm,7 has steadily declined
7

Similar to many other large industrial firms in Russia, the firm that we study had
a large number of employees in non-industrial activities such as restaurants, hospitals,
kindergartens, and housing. These individuals are out of our consideration.

4

(see Figure 1). Indeed, it fell from 4813 in 1998 to 3206 in 1998. Unfortunately, we cannot distinguish between an involuntary dismissal and a
voluntary quit: it is a tradition in Russia to label any separation as a
“quit”, so as to avoid subsequent stigmatization of a worker.
During transition, employment becomes more sensitive to output
changes. However, it reacts with a lag. The most important wave of
separations occurred in 1997, the first year of transition in which the
firm’s real output has grown. Interestingly, that wave of separations
followed the top manager’s dismissal initiated by the employees: an evidence of an active stance by new owners in the firm.
Furthermore, during transition, an increasing share of total wage bill
(including wage arrears and in-kind payments) is allocated to whitecollar workers (see Figure 3), and the ratio between white- and blue
collar workers increases (see Figure 4). Notice, that this implies that
more and more blue collars leave the firm (recall, that industrial employment has steadily declined).8 Hence, the firm’s defensive (costcutting)
restructuring might have mainly affected its blue collar workers.9

3

Personnel policies of the firm
Personnel data In order to better understand how transition has

affected the firm’s hiring and promotion policies,10 we investigate 17
years (1984-2000) of personnel files by 1538 white collar workers of the
8

By the end of nineties, however, blue collars are more and more demanded by
enterprises located in the same region as the firm that we study: the ratio of while
collar- over blue collar vacancies in the region has decreased from 0.59 in 1996 to 0.2
in 2000.
9
Following Grosfeld and Roland (1999), we distinguish between defensive and
strategic restructuring. For a model on defensive and strategic restructuring of
insider-privatized firms see Debande and Friebel (2005).
10
Although we find more downward mobility than in other related work (there were
120 demotions in Soviet times, and 97 during the transition), we have not studied
its determinants. The reason is that results could be difficult to interpret. Indeed,
according to our interviews with human resource department, demotions are typically
used as an employment insurance, in cases when (i) an employee reaches a retirement
age, or (ii) he (she) becomes unable to fulfill his (her) duties for health reasons, or
else, (iii) he (she) receives a primary job outside the firm, for instance, in informal
sector.

5

firm.
We use the raw data from the human resource department. An employee’s personnel file contains: a date of accession, a date of separation,
dates of movements across job titles, an occupational code for each position defined by Goskomstat, the statistical office of Russia. We also know
whether, in a given moment of time, an individual works in production
and engineering, or in administration (sales, planning, accounting).11
Moreover, we know the following personal characteristics: age, work
experience, education (years of schooling), gender, party and trade union
membership, ethnicity, marital status, number of children, place of birth,
place of university education, and field of study. We also know some of
the job history of an individual: military service, date of leaving previous
job, last employer. Unfortunately, we do not dispose of information
about individual wages.
Hierarchy and career paths As in other related work (for instance, Baker, Gibbs and Holmström, 1994), human resources, as measured by “persondays per title”,12 are concentrated on few job titles.13
In our case twelve job titles represent about 90% of core white collar
staff. We hence focus on these job titles.
They are located as follows on five levels of the firm’s hierarchy (see
Figure 5).14 On level 1: technician, planning technician, and an ac11

Recall, that we do not consider employees working in other services than core
production or administration.
12
For any given individual we know (i) the date of accession into the firm, and the
accession job title (ii) duration of stay on a given job title. For each job title, we
can then add up the persondays over individuals. These persondays per title can be
expressed as a ratio of the total human resources in the firm.
13
Of course, each job title contains a variety of specifications, as described by
Goskomstat’s 5 digit code. However, we have pooled down most of that variety,
keeping to make a distinction between employment in production, and in administration.
14
We know the firm’s hierarchy. Instead, Baker, Gibbs and Holmström (1994), had
no information about the hierarchy of the firm that they have studied. They have
built the hierarchy by looking at the flows of human resources between different job
titles. Indeed, they first have established the lowest level of the hierarchy, mostly
filled by workers hired on the outside market. Afterwards, they have determined level

6

countant; on level 2: an economist, a planning engineer, an engineer
working in production unit, and a foremen (a managerial position in
production);15 on level 3: a head of bureau, the responsible of a nonproduction unit, and supervisor of a production unit; on level 4: a head
of production, and a head non-production departments; on level 5: a
top manager.
At comparing two columns of the table on Figure 5, we see that during transition, the firm has shifted employees from production-oriented
job titles (technician, engineer) to job titles that are related to business administration and development (accountant, economist, planning
technician, and planning engineer). Moreover, it has reallocated human
resources towards four managerial jobs (supervisor of production unit,
head of production department, head of non-production department,
and top manager).
To find patterns of internal labour market mobility, we compute a
transition matrix that captures accessions to the firm, separations from
the firm, and movements across job titles for the whole time interval.
We find that in Soviet times, the firm maintained career paths, some of
them leading to the very top of the company (see Figure 7). These paths
are indicted by arrows.16 A number nearby an arrow is the probability of
a person holding job title located at the bottom of the arrow to move to
job title located at which the arrow points. This picture is very similar
to the one that Baker, Gibbs and Holmström (1994) find for a large
western firm.
Although in Soviet times employment and upward mobility were distorted by political influence, there is some evidence that firms used pro2 by looking at “where do employees mostly move from level 1”. Similarly, they have
proceeded until top of the hierarchy (the general manager). We have firstly done
the same exercise. The resulting hierarchy was the same as the one which we have
received later from the human resource department of the firm.
15
Becoming a “foreman” is a typical promotion for a blue collar worker.
16
We here plot links between job titles that have a transition probability of at least
5%.

7

motions as the main instrument to incentivise and, in particular, to
retain their workers (see Kornai, 1992). The main difference between Soviet and western firms is not so much the use of promotions, but rather
the fact that in Soviet firms, promotions provided access to additional
fringe benefit, rather than substantial wage increases.
Transition changes the firm’s promotion policies. Indeed, it becomes
more or less impossible to move upward from level 2 (see Figure 8). The
reason is that the previously existing career paths are be blocked by increased hiring activity from the outside labor market to the upper levels
of the hierarchy (see Figure 9).17 Managers recruited to levels above the
second are better educated and more experiences as compared both to
(i) the incumbents, and to (ii) those managers who where recruited on
the same level in Soviet times (see Figure 6).
Hazards of promotions and exits In order to better understand
how the transition has affected labour mobility inside the firm, we consider separately two time intervals: 1984-1992 and 1992-2000. For each
of them, we carry out a duration analysis on two events: (i) a “promotion”, that is, move from a lower- to a higher level of the hierarchy, and
(ii) a “separation” from the firm.18
We first consider promotions. We put our data in the survival time
form. Indeed, we observe an individual as of the beginning of a time
interval (controlling for the exact date of the recruitment). To adjust
time-varying variables (like age), we make at least one record in three
years. We document the spans of time (the “survival time”) until a
promotion.19 After each promotion, the “survival time” is reset to 0.20
17

These policies may be optimal response from constrained efficiency perspective.
We thank Marc-Andreas Muendler for his discussion of this point.
18
We follow the tradition of labor economics (see Van den Berg, 2001).
19
Because there is always a record at the exact date of a promotion, time interval
between two records can be shorter than three years.
20
Because our data set contains repeated records of the same individuals, the assumption of independence of observations may be not adequate. Therefore, we use
the robust estimate of variance controlling for identity.

8

We use an accelerated failure time model in which the natural logarithm of the survival time is assumed to be linearly dependent on covariates:21
ln(tj ) = xj β + ,
where is a xj covariate vector, β is a vector of regression coefficients,
and  is an error term with density f (·). As covariates, we pick three
basic individual characteristics: age and education (to measure human
capital);22 and gender.23 We assume that the density of the error term
follows a generalized Gamma model24





−2
 |κ|−2 (κ−2 )κ exp κ−2 κ ln(t)−xj β − exp κ ln(t)−xβ
, if κ = 0;
Γ(κ )
σ
σ


f (t) =
2
 √1 exp − (ln(t)−xβ)
, if κ = 0,
2σ2
2π

where κ and σ are ancillary parameters to be estimated from the data
(see Kalbfleish and Prentice, 1980).

We find that in Soviet times, young age, male gender, and better
education were helpful in receiving a promotion. Instead, during the
transition, age and education variables are not statistically significant
anymore (see Figure 10). More importantly, in Soviet times an employee
could increase a probability to receive a promotion by simply staying
in the firm. Unlike, during the transition, only the first few years of
21

A statistical test based on the distribution of Schoenfeld residuals rejected Cox
proportional hazard model.
22
Age is highly correlated with work experience.
23
We have tried to add to the set of covariates the following individual characteristics: number of children, dummy for being born in the region, dummy for employment in production division of the firm at some point of the career, and party
membership. It turned out that none of them is statistically significant, even though
we were adding them to the set of three basic covariates one by one (indeed, party
membership was significant at 15% level in Soviet times, and became insignificant
during transition). At the same time, age, education and gender remained significant
with the same sign in all the regressions. We have not tried to use labour union
membership as a regressor, because there is too little variation in the data: until the
year 2000, the firm remains highly (more than 80%) unionized.
24
We used Akaike Information Criterion to select Generalized gamma form among
Exponential, Weibull, Lognormal, and Log-logistic, and generalized Gamma distributions. Moreover, the Wald likelihood ratio test has rejected the hypothesis of a
Weibull distribution κ = 1. Hence, we have not imposed any restrictions on highly
flexible baseline hazard function of the generalized Gamma distribution.

9

“waiting for a promotion” where increasing the probability of this event:
“waiting for longer” was actually decreasing the probability to move up
the firm’s hierarchy (see Figure 11)!25
We proceed in a similar way, consider separations. Once again, we
use a generalized Gamma model with controlling variables being: age,
education, gender, and level in the hierarchy. The general insight is the
following. Despite worsen career perspectives during transition, people
are less likely to leave the firm (see Figure 13), especially from the upper
levels of the hierarchy (see Figure 12).26

4

Concluding discussion

In this paper we investigate how transition, a particularly drastic process
of institutional and structural change, has affected the personnel policies
of a Russian firm. A sizeable literature in on enterprise restructuring in
transition measures the impact of privatization, the hardening of budget
constraints, increasing competition, and price liberalization on enterprise
performance (see Djankov and Murrell 2001). Insider-privatized firms
usually show little signs of restructuring, while firms that are privatized
to outsiders, in particular to foreigners, are more likely to improve their
performance. In order to learn more about the micro channels through
which transition affect enterprise performance, we “open the black box”
of a heavy industry firm. The main changes after the reforms are as
follows.
(i) employment becomes more responsive to output changes after privatization;
(ii) the wage bill is reallocated from blue- to white collars;
(iii) separations affect blue collars, whereas white collars, especially those
25

Notice also, that the incidence of promotion during the transition is only 64, as
compared to 150 in Soviet times (the number of individuals in the two periods is
more or less the same).
26
There were only 316 separations during transition, as compared to 609 in Soviet
times.

10

working on the upper tiers of the hierarchy, are less likely to leave the
firm than before the reforms;
(iv) the use of white collar human resources is shifted from productionto administrative and management activities;
(v) more white collars are hired from the outside labour market, in particular for higher levels of its hierarchy;
(vi) the firm becomes “toploaded”, and promotions are blocked.
A possible story behind these changes is as follows. After the firm’s
privatization, the incumbent managers became the owners. Weak outsider property right enforcement created strong incentives for them to
stay inside the firm. At the same time, the labor market became thicker,
making it possible to hire new workers and managers with a high human
capital. Manager-owners did not forego these recruitment opportunities
in order to be able to maintain career paths.
This interpretation firstly, points at the limits to a firm’s benefits
from maintaining career paths; secondly, it indicates a new channel
through which corporate governance may affect a firm’s human resource
policies. We hope that these issues will receive better understanding in
the future research.

References
[1] Ariga, Kenn, Yasushi Ohkusa, and Giorgio Brunello (1999), “Fast
Track: Is it in the Genes?

The Promotion Policy of a Large

Japanese Firm,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization
38:385-402.
[2] Baker, G., Gibbs Michael and Bengt Holmström (1994), “The Internal Economics of the Firm: Evidence from Personnel Data”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 109:881-919.
[3] Carter, Michael and Susan Carter (1985), “Internal Labor Markets

11

in Retailing: The Early Years”, Industrial and Labor Relations Review 38:586-98.
[4] Chandler, Alfred D. (1977), The Visible Hand: The Managerial
Revolution in American Business, Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press.
[5] Debande, Olivier and Guido Friebel (2004), “A Positive Theory
of “Give-away” Privatization”, International Journal of Industrial
Organization, 22(8):1309-1325.
[6] Djankov, Simeon and Peter Murrell (2002), “Enterprise Restructuring in Transition: A Quantitative Survey”, Journal of Economic
Literature 40:739-92.
[7] Doeringer, Peter and Michael Piore (1971), Internal Labor Markets
and Manpower Adjustment. Lexington, Mass: D.C. Heath.
[8] Dohmen, Thomas (2004), “Performance, Seniority and Wages: Formal Salary Systems and Individual Earnings Profiles”, Labour Economics 11:741-763.
[9] Dohmen, Thomas, Ben Kriechel and Gerard A. Pfann (2004),
“Monkey Bars and Ladders: The Importance of Lateral and Vertical Job Mobility in Internal Labor Market Careers”, Journal of
Population Economics 17:193-228.
[10] Gibbons, Robert and Michael Waldman (1999), “Careers in Organizations: Theory and Evidence”, in Handbook of Labor Economics,
ed. by Orley C. Ashenfelter, and David Card, vol. 3B:2373-2437,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Elsevier Science.
[11] Grosfeld, Irena and Gerard Roland (1997), “Defensive and Strategic Restructuring in Central and Eastern European Enterprises”,
Journal of Transforming Economies and Societies 3:21-46.
[12] Ichino, Andrea and Giovanni Maggi (1999), “Work Environment
and Individual Background: Explaining Regional Shirking Differentials in a Large Italian Firm”, Quarterly Journal of Economics
115:1057-90.
12

[13] Kalbfleish, J. D. and R. L. Prentice, 1980. The Statistical Analysis
of Failure Time Data, New York: John Wiley&Sons.
[14] Kornai, Janos (1992), The Socialist System - The Political Economy
of Communism, Princeton University Press.
[15] Lazear, Edward (1992), “The Job as a Concept”, in Performance
Measurement, Evaluation, and Incentives, ed. William J. Bruns,
Boston: Harvard Business School Press:183-215.
[16] Lazear, Edward (2000), “Performance Pay and Productivity”,
American Economic Review 90:1346-61.
[17] Sattinger, M. (1993), “Assignment models of the distributional
earnings”, Journal of Economic Literature, 31:831-880.
[18] Seltzer, Andre, and David Merrett (2000): “Personnel Policies at
the Union Bank of Australia: Evidence form the 1888-1900 Entry
Cohorts”, Journal of Labor Economics 18:573-613.
[19] Treble, John, Tim Barmby, Sarah Bridges, and Edwin van Gameren
(2001): “The Internal Economics of The Firm: Further Evidence
From Personnel Data”, Labour Economics 8:531-552.
[20] Van den Berg, Gerard (2001): “Duration Models: Specification,
Identification, and Multiple Durations, in: J.J. Heckman and E.
Leamer, eds. Handbook of Econometrics, Volume V, North-Holland,
Amsterdam.
[21] Waldman, M. (1984): “Worker allocation, hierarchies and the wage
distribution”, Review of Economic Studies, 51:95-109.
[22] Woodruff, Chris (2004): “Property Rights in Context: Privatization’s Legacy for Corporate Legality in Poland and Russia,” Studies
in Comparative International Development 38:82-108.

13

Appendix

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

