NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNAL INCREASING RETURNS TO SCALE AND ECONOMIC GROWTH
John A. List
Haiwen Zhou
Working Paper 12999
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12999

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2007

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by John A. List and Haiwen Zhou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Internal Increasing Returns to Scale and Economic Growth
John A. List and Haiwen Zhou
NBER Working Paper No. 12999
March 2007
JEL No. E10,E22,O41
ABSTRACT
This study develops a model of endogenous growth based on increasing returns due to firms' technology
choices. Particular attention is paid to the implications of these choices, combined with the substitution
of capital for labor, on economic growth in a general equilibrium model in which the R&D sector
produces machines to be used for the sector producing final goods. We show that incorporating oligopolistic
competition in the sector producing finals goods into a general equilibrium model with endogenous
technology choice is tractable, and we explore the equilibrium path analytically. The model illustrates
a novel manner in which sustained per capita growth of consumption can be achieved -- through continuous
adoption of new technologies featuring the substitution between capital and labor. Further insights
of the model are that during the growth process, the size of firms producing final goods increases over
time, the real interest rate is constant, and the real wage rate increases over time.
John A. List
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jlist@arec.umd.edu
Haiwen Zhou
Department of Economics
Old Dominion University
hzhou@odu.edu

Introduction
Economic growth over the past 1000 years can be viewed as sporadic. While
growth rates show signs of both temporal and spatial cycles, over the past 200 years
OECD countries have fared much better than others (see, e.g., Boltho and Toniolo’s
(1999) Table 1). Within OECD countries, productivities also differ. In his celebrated
article, Young (1928) argues the reason that productivity was higher in the US than the
UK lies in differences in production technologies between the two countries:
“It would be wasteful to make a hammer to drive a single nail: it would be
better to use whatever awkward implement lies conveniently at hand. It
would be wasteful to furnish a factory with an elaborate equipment of
specially constructed jigs, gauges, lathes, drills, presses and conveyors to
build a hundred automobiles; it would be better to rely mostly upon tools
and machines of standard types, so as to make a relatively larger use of
directly-applied and a relatively smaller use of indirectly-applied labor.
Mr. Ford’s methods would be absurdly uneconomical if his output were
very small, and would be unprofitable even if his output were what many
other manufacturers of automobiles would call large.” (Young, 1928,
p.530).
Young’s argument contains at least three notable elements. First, the existence of fixed
costs of production (“an elaborate equipment of specially constructed jigs, gauges, lathes,
drills, presses and conveyors”) is highlighted. Second, firms in different countries may
use different technologies—Ford Company in the US used more specialized equipment
than its counterparts in the UK. Finally, a firm’s technology is affected by its level of
output. Since Ford Company had a higher level of output, it chose more specialized
technologies. One might find it difficult to imagine that firms use the same production
technology over an extended time period, however.

2

In addition, mechanization of

production in which capital substitutes for labor in production is an important feature of
modern production.1
This paper explores the implications of firms’ technology choices and the
substitution of capital for labor on economic growth. We analyze two sectors: the R&D
sector combines ideas and final goods to produce machines to be used for the sector
producing final goods. We show that incorporating oligopolistic competition in the
sector producing final goods into a general equilibrium model with endogenous
technology choice is tractable, and we explore the equilibrium path analytically.
In our framework, positive growth is generated by increasing returns to scale
arising from fixed costs of production.2 In each period, a firm chooses the level of output
and production technology optimally. A more advanced technology is modeled as a
technology with a higher fixed cost and a lower marginal cost of production. The amount
of capital accumulates over time and the amount of labor is fixed. Thus, as firms
continually adopt more advanced technologies suitable for larger scale production,
sustained growth is possible. Therefore, on the equilibrium growth path our model also
provides an explanation for the increase of firm size over time. As increasing returns to
scale is viewed as an important source of long-run growth, it is important to study how a
firm’s scale of production changes over time.

1

In an important aspect, modernalization means mechanization as shown vividly in the famous movies of
Charles Chaplin. The daily language “use money to earn money” may be formulated alternatively as “use
capital through machines to earn money and accumulate more money through capital accumulation.”
While countries in the developed world are able to use money to earn money, the developing countries may
have to rely on labor to make money.
2
With the existence of fixed costs, the market structure is imperfect competition, where firms producing
the same product engage in Cournot competition. Our modeling of oligopolistic competition allows us to
study firm-level behavior while maintaining consistency with the structure of many industries. For
example, Pindyck and Rubinfeld (2005, p. 441) note that “oligopoly is a prevalent form of market structure.
Examples of oligopolistic industries include automobiles, steel, aluminum, petrochemicals, electrical
equipment, and computers.”

3

The model highlights the important role played by capital accumulation in the
growth process. An important feature of modern production technologies is the largescale usage of capital goods. Maddison (1982, p54) demonstrates the close relationship
between economic performance and capital over the long run. In his sample of seven
developed countries from 1820-1978, UK had the slowest growth in capital and the
slowest productivity while Japanese capital stock and productivity showed the fastest
growth. Likewise, the productivity leadership of the US since 1890 is reflected in its
superior level of capital.3
In our model, capital accumulation is associated with investment in equipment,
which is a fixed cost of production.4 In neoclassical models, capital is usually modeled
as a marginal cost of production with diminishing marginal return. With diminishing
marginal return to capital, Lucas (1990, 2002) puzzles over why capital does not flow
from capital rich countries to countries with much lower levels of capital. King and
Rebelo (1993) argue that the real interest rate will be implausibly too high at the initial
stage of growth if transitional dynamics in the neoclassical model is used to explain
countries’ different growth performance.
In the case of capital being a fixed cost of production, we show that different
ratios of capital and labor across countries can be absorbed in different technologies
chosen by such countries. As a result, the return to capital can be identical even though

3

The importance of capital accumulation in the growth process is also demonstrated by other studies. For
example, Jorgenson et al. (1987) conclude that growth in capital inputs is the most important source of
growth for the US. Young (1995) argues that growth of capital plays an important role for the growth of
Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan.
4
De Long and Summers (1991) demonstrate that over 1960-1985 each extra percent of GDP invested in
equipment is associated with an increase in GDP growth of one third of a percentage point per year. By
focusing on developing economies, De Long and Summers (1993) find that there is a very strong growthequipment association. Jones (1994) finds that machinery appears to be the most important component of
capital and there is a strong negative relationship between growth and machinery price.

4

countries have very different ratios of capital to labor: there is no incentive for capital to
flow from a country with a high ratio of capital to labor to a country with a low ratio of
capital to labor. Thus, our model captures the important role of capital accumulation in
the growth process, and it also produces key insights.
Emphasizing the role of capital accumulation does not necessarily imply that we
view that technological progress is not important in the growth process. In our model,
development of new technologies leads to capital accumulation. New technologies need
to be embodied in machines. Complementarity between technological progress and
capital accumulation is also discussed in Aghion and Howitt (1998, Chapter 3).
The remainder of our paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we set up the
model, which is a representative firm and consumer framework.

In Section 3, the

maximization conditions and market clearing conditions together define an equilibrium.
Section 4 studies the steady-state growth path, where the growth rate of consumption is
expressed as a function of exogenous parameters. Section 5 discusses why sustained
growth is possible in this model, and summarizes the relationship between the growth
mechanism in this paper to those in the literature. Section 6 studies the growth rate of
consumption in a social optimum, where we emphasize that the growth rate of
consumption in a market equilibrium is lower than the social optimum.

Section 7

discusses possible extensions of the model.
2. Setup of the model
We focus on a closed economy with continuous time and constant population. To
simplify notation, we suppress the time indices of variables when there is no confusion
from doing so.

There are L workers, who are also consumers.

5

A worker lives

indefinitely, has no preference for leisure, and supplies one unit of labor in each period
inelastically. There are two sectors of production: the manufacturing sector producing
final goods for consumption and the R&D sector. There is a continuum of final products
in the economy with a total mass of one, indexed by a number ϖ ∈ [0,1] .

Let ρ denote the subjective discount rate and c(ϖ ) denote a consumer’s quantity
of consumption of product ϖ . A consumer’s discounted utility is specified as

∫

∞
0

U t e − ρ t dt ,

(1)

1−σ
1 ⎛ c (ϖ )
−1⎞
⎟⎟dϖ , σ > 1 .5
U t = ∫ ⎜⎜
0
σ
1
−
⎠
⎝

(2)

A consumer chooses the quantities of consumption of different final goods to maximize
utility. For this type of utility function, the absolute value of a consumer’s elasticity of
demand is equal to 1 / σ .
Each final product is produced by multiple firms and the number of firms
producing the same product is denoted by m . Because there is an infinite number of
final products, an individual firm’s market power in the labor market is zero. In each
period, firms producing final goods take the wage rate and the interest rate as given, and
make decisions on the production technology and the quantity of production. The R&D
sector produces new designs and combines them with final goods to produce machines,
which are utilized by firms producing final goods.
We focus on symmetric equilibria, thus the number of firms producing each final
product is identical. Firms producing final goods have the same level of production

5

The assumption that σ > 1 guarantees that there are at least two firms producing the same product.

6

technology and the same quantity of each good is produced. In addition, all consumers
have the same consumption bundle.
For the production of each final product, we assume an infinite number of
technologies, indexed by n , with a higher level of n denoting a higher level of capital
and a lower level of labor. The level of technology at time zero is normalized to one,
thus n ∈ [1, ∞) . Capital cost arises from machine purchases, therefore it is a fixed cost of
production. The marginal cost of production accrues from hiring workers. Let f (n)
denote the fixed cost of production, and let β (n) denote the marginal cost of production
associated with technology level n . We assume that f ' (n) > 0 , and β ' (n) < 0 . That is,
the capital cost of production increases with n , and the labor cost of production
decreases with n .
The assumption that different combinations of capital and labor may be used to
produce the same level of goods is important in this paper and deserves further
elaboration. Several examples of such substitution exist in modern economies. One such
illustration is the technology for word processing.

Previous to the invention of

typewriters, word processing was a “hands only” chore, with minimal capital used. Then,
typewriters were introduced, and subsequently computers became quite popular for word
processing.

During this process, labor is substituted increasingly with capital.

Greenwood and Seshadri (2005, p.1251) show that various appliances such as washing
and cleaning appliances may save a four-person family 18.5 hours a week in housework
in 1920. Without such time savings, it would be difficult to envision a considerable
number of two earner families in the labor force.

7

The aspect that technologies are embodied in machines is similar to the specification
in the vintage capital models. However, in vintage capital models, the substitution
between capital and labor is usually not the main focus. More importantly, we do not
specify that capital produced at different times have different levels of productivity.
Let x denote a manufacturing firm’s production quantity in period t and p
denote the price of manufactured goods. A firm’s total revenue is p x . Let R denote
the rental price of a unit of capital services in period t and w denote the wage rate. The
firm’s cost of purchasing machines is f (n) R and its labor cost is β (n) x w . Thus, its
total cost is f (n) R + β (n) x w , or f R + β x w . As a result, its profit in period t is

π = p x − f R − β xw.

(3)

A dot over a variable denotes its time derivative and let δ denote a positive
constant. With Ln denoting the amount of labor force employed in the development of
new designs, the evolution of the number of new designs is given by
•

n = δ n Ln .6

(4)

In the R&D sector, a firm with a design has monopoly power over the use of this
design. A design has to be incorporated into a machine to be useful. Let η denote a
positive constant. The cost of incorporating a new design into a unit of machine is η
units of final goods. Let I denote the amount of final goods used in machine production.

6

By changing equation (4) and (5), the “scale effects” that the growth rate increases with the size of
population can be eliminated in this model. Whether the scale effect assumption is consistent with
empirical evidence remains an open debate. Jones (2005) argues that a weak form of scale effect is
consistent with empirical evidence, while a strong form of scale effect is likely not. Barro and Sala-iMartin (2003) and Aghion and Howitt (2005) provide detailed discussion on scale effects. Since the
mechanisms leading to scale effects are well understood in the literature (Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 2003)
and whether the scale effect exists is not the focus of this paper, we suppress further discussion of this
issue.

8

The relationship between the amount of final goods used in the production of machines
and the number of new designs is given by
•

n=

I

η

.

(5)

3. Equilibrium conditions

We derive the equilibrium conditions in five steps. First, we study a consumer’s
utility maximization. Let r denote the interest rate. The following familiar Euler
equation is necessary for a consumer’s utility maximization:
•

c 1
= (r − ρ ) .
c σ

(6)

Second, we study a manufacturing firm’s profit maximization. The solution concept
used here is Nash equilibrium. In each period, a firm producing final goods takes other
firms’ technology and output as given and chooses its own level of technology n and
output x simultaneously to maximize profit. Since the initial technology is normalized
to one and a firm’s output should be positive, for ⊗ denoting the Cartesian product, a
firm chooses n ⊗ x ∈ [1, ∞) ⊗ (0, ∞) . A firm chooses the level of technology optimally by
taking the derivative of the first order condition with respect to n :
− f 'R − β'xw = 0 .

(7)

The intuition of equation (7) is as follows: a firm’s choice of technology depends
on the relative price of capital and labor. By adopting a more advanced technology, a
firm spends more on the fixed cost of production, which is f ' R . The benefit arises from
the marginal cost of production savings, which is equivalent to β ' x w . In equilibrium,
these equate.

9

From equation (7), the second order condition requires that
− f ' ' R − β ' ' x w< 0 .

(8)

We assume that the second order condition is satisfied.
Firms producing the same product engage in Cournot competition.7 Thus, a firm
also chooses the quantity of production optimally. Taking the derivative of the first order
condition with respect to x yields p + x

∂p
−β w=0.
∂x

In equilibrium, a firm producing final goods makes zero profit, a requirement that
leads to
x p − f R − β xw = 0.

(9)

Third, the market for manufactured goods needs to be cleared. Each final product
has m firms responsible for its production, and each firm produces x units of output.
Thus, the total supply of each final product is m x . The total demand for final goods is
the summation of goods used for consumption and goods used in the manufacturing of
machines.

Equilibrium in the goods market requires that quantity supplied equals

quantity demanded:

m x = Lc + I .

(10)

Plugging the value of I from equation (5) into equation (10) leads to
•

mx = Lc + η n .

7

Oligopolistic competition is also studied by Gali and Zilibotti (1995).

10

(11)

From the utility function (2) and equation (10), the elasticity of demand faced by
a manufacturing firm is

σx
mx − I

. Combining this result with a manufacturing firm’s

optimal choice of output leads to

σx ⎞
⎛
p ⎜1 −
⎟ − βw = 0 .
⎝ mx − I ⎠

(12)

Fourth, the labor market needs to be in equilibrium. The return to labor in the
manufacturing sector is w . Let p n denote the price of a new design. From equation (4),
the return for labor in the R&D sector is p nδ n . Since a worker may work in either
sector, the return from the two sectors is equal:
w = p nδ n .

(13)

The total supply of labor is L and the demand for labor is the sum of labor
demand in R&D and manufacturing. The amount of labor in the R&D sector is Ln and
the amount of labor in the manufacturing sector is m β x . Labor market equilibrium
requires that labor demand equal labor supply:
Ln + m β x = L .

(14)

Finally, we study the equilibrium condition in the R&D sector. For simplicity, we
assume that machines do not depreciate. An R&D firm is able to sell m machine units at
a price of R . An R&D firm’s revenue in each period is mR and therefore the firm’s
total revenue is

mR 8
. Its cost is the sum of the cost of producing a design and the cost
r

of incorporating this design into a machine.

8

Thus, the profit of the R&D firm is

Here we treat the interest rate, the price of machines, and the number of manufacturing firms as constant
over time. This point is verified later in the balanced growth path presented in Section 4.

11

πR =

mR
− p n − mη p . With free entry and exit into the R&D sector, a R&D firm
r

makes zero profit:

πR =

mR
− p n − mη p = 0 .
r

(15)

With the equilibrium conditions established, we now study the evolution of the
economy. For the remainder of the paper, the price of final goods in each period is
normalized to one: p ≡ 1 . From equations (11) and (14), the number of R&D workers is
therefore:
•

Ln = (1 − β c) L − β ηL n .

(16)

Plugging this equation into equation (4), the evolution of new designs is given by
•

n δ (1 − βc) L
=
.
n 1 + δηβn

(17)

Since the price of final goods is equal to one, from equation (12), the number of firms
producing each final product can be expressed as
•

σ ( Lc + η n)
.
m=
(1 − β w) Lc

(18)

Plugging the value of R from equation (9), the value of m x from equation (11),
and the value of m from equation (18) into equation (15), the interest rate is given by
•

r=

δnLc ( Lc + η n)
•

f [ wLc (1 − βw) + σδnη ( Lc + η n)]

.

(19)

Likewise, plugging the value of R from equation (7) into equation (9), the wage rate is
given by

12

w=

f'
.
β f '− f β '

(20)

•

Plugging the value of n from equation (17), the value of interest rate from
equation (19), and the wage rate from equation (20) into equation (6), the evolution of the
per capita consumption is given by
•

c
nfLc (c + ηδn)( β ' ) 2
ρ
=
− .
2
c σδηn(c + ηδn)( fβ '− βf ' ) − cff ' β ' (1 + δβηn) σ
•

(21)

•

Equations (17) and (21) define the evolution of n and c as functions of n , c ,
and exogenous variables. In the next section, we place restrictions on the cost functions
in the sector producing final goods to derive the balanced growth rate.
4. Balanced growth path

In this section, we derive the balanced growth rate and study its properties. In a
balanced growth path, the growth rate of per capita consumption is the same as the
growth rate of new designs.
•

For g denoting this common growth rate, we have

•

c n
g= = .
c n

A balanced growth path may not exist for general cost functions. Equations (17)
and (21) provide some hint about the type of cost functions for which a balanced growth
path exists. In a steady state with balanced growth, the right-hand sides of equations (17)
and (21) should be constants. From the evolution of new designs equation (17), the
marginal cost should decrease at the same rate as the rate that new designs increase.
From the evolution of per capita consumption equation (21), the fixed cost should
increase at the same rate as the number of new designs increased. Thus, the relationship

13

between the fixed cost of producing final products and the level of technology is
specified as

f ( n) = n .
Let ψ denote a positive constant.

(22a)

The relationship between the marginal cost of

producing final output and the level of technology is specified as

β ( n) = ψ / n .

(22b)

With this combination of fixed and marginal costs, the unique balanced growth rate will
be derived. As discussed in Section 5, these cost functions are useful in demonstrating
the existence of a balanced growth path. However, they are not necessary for showing
the feasibility of sustained per capita output growth driven by continuous adoption of
new technologies and substitution of capital for labor.
With the specification of costs in equations (22a) and (22b), the profit of a firm
producing final goods is x − n R −

ψ
n

w x . The firm’s optimal choice of technology leads

to

R−

ψ
n2

wx = 0.

(23)

From equation (23),

fR = βxw .

(24)

Combining this with the result that a firm producing final goods has a profit of
zero, the output of a firm producing final goods is given by

x = 2n R .
From equations (9) and (24), βw = 1 / 2 .

(25)
From equation (12), the number of firms

producing each final product is given by

14

m = 2σ +

I
.
x

(26)

From equation (22b), the wage rate is given by

w=

n
.
2ψ

(27)

From equations (13) and (27), the price of a new design is expressed as

pn =

1
2ψδ

.

(28)

From equation (6), the growth rate of per capita consumption is given by

g=

1

σ

(r − ρ ) .

(29)

Plugging equation (28) into equation (15) leads to
1
mR
=
+ mη .
2ψδ
r

(30)

From equation (4), the number of workers employed in the R&D sector is given by

Ln =

g

δ

.

(31)

From equations (14) and (30), the interest rate is given by

r=

δL − g
.
1 + 2ψηδ m

(32)

Plugging equation (32) into equation (29) leads to

g=

δL − ρ (1 + 2ψδηm)
.
1 + σ (1 + 2ψδηm)

(33)

The formula of the growth rate in equation (33) is similar to that in Romer with
1 + 2ψηδm replaced by Λ in Romer (1990, p. S92).

15

Plugging the value of I from equation (5) and the value of x from equation (14)
into equation (26), the number of firms is given by

m=

2σ (δL − g )
.
δ L − g − ηψδg

(34)

Define three constants by

θ1 ≡ (1 + σ )(1 + ηψδ ) + 4ψδησ 2 ,
θ 2 ≡ (1 + σ )δL + (δL − ρ )(1 + ηψδ ) + 4(σδL − ρ )ψδησ ,

θ 3 ≡ (δL − ρ − 4ψδησρ )δL .
The degree of efficiency in the R&D sector as measured by δ should be
sufficiently high for the balanced growth rate to be positive. If there is positive growth,
the following proposition expresses the steady-state growth rate as a function of
exogenous variables.
Proposition 1: The balanced growth rate is given by

g Market

θ 2 − (θ 2 ) 2 − 4θ1θ 3
=
.
2θ1

(35)

Proof: Plugging equation (34) into equation (33) leads to θ1 g 2 − θ 2 g + θ 3 = 0 . This leads
to equation (35).

Q.E.D.

The growth path in equation (35) shows the impact of various factors on the
growth rate. First, the growth rate decreases with the cost of incorporating a design into a
machine. Second, the growth rate decreases with the discount rate. Third, the growth
rate decreases with the elasticity of demand. The intuition behind this result is that a
higher elasticity of demand leads to a larger number of firms producing the same product.
With the existence of fixed costs of production, a larger number of firms increases the

16

average cost. In addition, for a firm producing final goods, its output decreases with σ .
Ceteris paribus, this also increases average cost. Thus, the growth rate decreases with the
elasticity of demand.
We have shown that there exists a steady state in which the per capita
consumption grows at a constant rate. As capital grows, the real interest rate does not
change, and the wage rate increases over time.9 Thus, capital becomes relatively cheaper
than labor, resulting in firms using more capital. It is well recognized that a worker in a
developed country has more capital to work with and her productivity is higher than her
counterparts in developing countries. In their study of the process of how the West grew
rich, Rosenberg and Birdzell (1986, p. 16) write “the main thrust of capitalist
development has been toward capital-intensive production.” Thus, our result shares a
consistency with extant empirical evidence.
The following proposition shows that with internal increasing returns to scale, a
firm’s output increases over time.
Proposition 2: A manufacturing firm’s output increases during the growth
process.
Proof: From equations (14) and (22b), a firm’s output is given by
x=

( L − Ln )n
.
mψ

(36)

Since L , Ln , and m are constants in a steady state, a firm’s level of output increases
over time as it grows at the rate of new designs.

Q.E.D.

There is considerable empirical evidence that suggests firm size increases over
time. One example is the increase of firm size in the agricultural sector. Compared with

17

many manufacturing sectors, the agricultural sector is relatively less concentrated. Even
in this sector, Suits (2005, p.16) shows that average acreage per farm in the United States
has increased significantly over time. Average acreage per farm in 1880 was 133.7 and it
increased to 174.5 in 1940, and 434.0 in 2000. Thus, by replacing perfect competition
with oligopolistic competition in the sector producing goods for final consumption, we
are able to capture a salient feature of the growth process.
A further interesting issue concerns the distribution of income between labor and
capital in the economy. For the value of output p x , β x w goes to labor and the
remainder to capital. Since the price of manufactured goods is normalized to one and

βw equals ½, we have
β xw
px

=

1
.
2

Thus, the share of labor income to total output is constant over time. As a result, the
share of payment to capital is also constant over time.
5. Discussion and relation to the literature

In this section, we provide an alternative specification of the form of fixed and
marginal costs in the sector producing final goods to provide a more thorough
understanding of the growth mechanism. The cost functions are chosen to make the
presentation and intuition perspicuous, sacrificing generality.

We then discuss the

relation between this model and other growth models in the literature.
For a and b denoting positive constants, the fixed and marginal costs of
producing final goods are specified as

9

In Kaldor (1961), a stylized fact about growth is that the interest rate is constant over time.

18

f ( n) = n a ,

(37a)

β ( n) = ψ n − b .

(37b)

Thus, the cost functions in equations (22a) and (22b) in Section 4 are the special case that
a and b are restricted to be one.10

For a firm producing final goods with output x , the amount of labor l used in
production is β x , or l = ψ n − b x . Thus, the relationship between a firm’s output and the
amount of labor it uses is given by
x=

nb

ψ

l.

(38)

For this firm, the amount of capital k used in production is equal to f , or k = f (n) = n a .
Thus, the relationship between the level of technology and capital is given by
1
a

n=k .

(39)

Inserting the value of technology from equation (39) into equation (38), output per
worker is given by
b

x 1 a
= k .
l ψ

(40)

Depending on the relative magnitudes of a and b , when the amount of labor is
constant while capital accumulates, from equation (40), there are three cases. First, for
b > a , output per worker grows at an increasing rate. Second, for b = a , output per

worker grows at a constant rate.

Third, for b < a , output per worker grows at a

10

One must take care to check the specification of costs in equations (37a) and (37b) to ensure that the
second order condition (8) is satisfied. From (7), the unit cost of capital is R = − β ' x w / f ' . Plugging this
into (8), β ' ' f '− f ' ' β ' > 0 is necessary for the second-order condition to be satisfied. For cost functions

19

decreasing rate. Whenever b ≥ a , sustained per capita consumption growth is possible.
Intuitively, if the rate of increase of fixed costs as measured by a is not larger than the
rate of decrease of marginal costs as measured by b , sustained growth is feasible. Thus,
the specification of cost functions in Section 4 is useful for the existence of balanced
growth path, not necessarily for the feasibility of sustained growth.
Barro and Sala-i-Martin (2003) provide a thoughtful synthesis of the literature on
economic growth. In the literature, it has been shown that long-run growth may be a
result of R&D spillovers (Romer 1990), externalities in investment in human capital
(Lucas 1988), or constant returns to scale to capital as in the AK type growth models
(see, e.g., Romer (1986), and Rebelo (1991)).
In Lucas (1988), there are externalities in the accumulation of human capital. In
Romer (1990), a firm’s R&D generates knowledge that is exploited by other firms. The
increasing returns to scale arise from the increased usage of intermediate inputs, which is
external to the firm, but internal to the industry. In this paper, sustained growth is
achieved through substitution of capital for labor. In Romer (1990), the growth rate is
not affected by η , the parameter measuring R&D efficiency. While Romer argues that in
a general setup, the impact of this parameter on the growth rate is ambiguous, the growth
rate increases with this parameter in our model. The direction of the impact of the
discount rate and the elasticity of demand on the growth rate here is the same as in Romer
(1990).
From equation (40), when a and b are equal to unity, per capita output is a linear
function of capital. This aspect is similar to AK type models. As discussed in Barro and
given in equations (37a) and (37b), β ' ' f '− f ' ' β ' > 0 requires that a + b > 0 . Since a and b are positive

20

Sala-i-Martin (2003), for balanced growth to be feasible, the reduced form of the
production function of various growth models has the feature that per capita output is a
linear function of some factors that may accumulate without an upper bound, such as
physical capital, human capital, a combination of human and physical capital, or the
number of varieties to produce final goods. In the AK model, the marginal productivity
of capital A is treated as a constant and unexplained. In this model, the marginal
productivity of capital is measured as the total amount of labor saved, which is the
product of the amount of labor saved for each unit of output and the level of output.
There are two important building blocks in this paper: substitution between
capital and labor, and the choice of technology. First, Arrow et al. (1961) contains a
detailed discussion of the substitution between capital and labor, and includes estimates
of the degree of substitution for various industries. The substitution between capital and
labor has been explored in Zeira (1998) in which firms adopt technologies employing
more capital as the economy grows. There are several significant differences between
our paper and Zeira’s (1998). In this paper, we solve the general equilibrium model
when there is increasing returns to scale at the firm level and firms engage in
oligopolistic competition. Importantly, the interest rate is endogenously determined and
our model is able to generate sustained growth.

Zeira uses a partial equilibrium

framework in which the interest rate is exogenously given, production technology
exhibits constant returns to scale, and firms engage in perfect competition. Accordingly,
Zeira’s model cannot generate sustained growth.
Second, economic growth is associated with the continuous adoption of new
production technologies. Bencivenga et al. (1995), Parente (1994), and Jovanovic and

constants, the second order condition (8) is always satisfied.

21

Nyarko (1996) also study the choice of technologies during the growth process. Their
focuses are very different from our contribution.11 In this paper, the choice of technology
is closely related to a firm’s level of output.
6. Socially optimal choice of technology

In our model we assume that firms in the R&D and final goods sectors make
decisions to maximize profits. In this section, the social optimum growth path is studied.
The properties of the social optimum are interesting in their own right. In addition, the
social optimum serves as a benchmark to compare to the market outcome.
The social planner chooses the number of workers to be employed in the R&D
sector, the level of production technology, and output in the final goods sector optimally
to maximize a representative consumer’s utility function (1).

To make the social

optimum comparable with the market outcome, the fixed and marginal costs of
production are isomorphic to equations (22a) and (22b) in Section 4. Since there are
fixed costs of production, the social planner will not allow more than one firm producing
in a given industry. That is, m = 1 . For σ > 1 , maximization of

c1−σ − 1
is the same as
1−σ

minimization of c1−σ , and the social planner faces the following minimization problem.
Minimize:

∫

∞

0

U t e − ρ t dt ,

(1)

•

subject to

n = δ nLn ,

(4)

f ( n) = n ,

(22a)

11

In Bencivenga et al. (1995), the optimal choice of finance technology is affected by the transaction cost
of financial services. When transactions cost decrease, more illiquid capital investment is pursued. Parente
(1994) and Jovanovic and Nyarko (1996) study the situation that new technologies may be continuously
adopted during the growth process. In their models, there is learning by doing. The potential of learning
by doing decreases as a technology is used, which motivates a firm to adopt new technologies.

22

β ( n) = ψ / n ,

(22b)

Ln + β x = L ,

(41)

•

n=

x − Lc

η

.

(42)

Equation (41) is similar to equation (14) with the additional restriction that there
is only one firm producing each final product. Equation (42) is the equation for the
evolution of new machines. Total output of final goods is x , after deducting the amount
for consumption L c , the amount of final goods available for producing machines is
x − L c . As each unit of machine needs η units of final goods to be produced, the rate of
change of new machines is given by the right-hand side of equation (42).
The following proposition shows the unique optimal growth rate of consumption.
In proving this proposition, the social planner’s minimization problem is solved by the
method of calculus of variations. There are three steps in solving the problem. First, the
minimization problem with constraints is transferred into a minimization problem without
constraints. Second, it is shown that the necessary conditions for minimization lead to a
unique growth path. Third, it is shown that these necessary conditions for optimization
are also sufficient for the social optimum.
Proposition 3: The growth rate of consumption in the social optimum is given by
g Optimum =

⎞
1 ⎛ δL
⎜⎜
− ρ ⎟⎟ .
σ ⎝ 1 + δψη
⎠

(43)

Proof: First, plugging equations (4), (22b), and (41) into equation (42) yields
c=

⎛ 1
η⎞•
− ⎜⎜
+ ⎟⎟ n .
ψ ⎝ ψδL L ⎠
n

To simplify notation, define a constant by

23

(44)

γ≡
For γ

η
1
+ .
ψδL L

(45)

defined in equations (45), the social planner faces the following

minimization problem.
Minimize:

∫

∞

0

•⎞
⎛1
⎜⎜ n − γ n ⎟⎟
⎠
⎝ψ

1−σ

e − ρt dt .

(46)

Two dots over a variable denote its second order time derivative. Second, for the
minimization problem (46), the following Euler equation is necessary,
••

•

σγ 2ψ 2 n + ( ρψ 2γ 2 − γψ − σγψ ) n+ (1 − ργψ )n = 0 .

(47)

There are two characteristic roots for equation (47): one is

1

ψγ

, and the other is

⎞
1
1⎛ 1
, it leads to per capita consumption to zero
⎜⎜
− ρ ⎟⎟ . For the characteristic root
ψγ
σ ⎝ ψγ
⎠
and is discarded. With the initial condition that the level of technology at time zero is
normalized to one, the solution for equation (47) is
n=e

⎞
1⎛ 1
⎜
− ρ ⎟⎟ t
⎠

σ ⎜⎝ ψγ

.

(48)

By inserting equations (45) into equation (48), the social optimal growth rate is identical
to equation (43).
•⎞
⎛1
Third, define the integrand of (46) as H ≡ ⎜⎜ n − γ n ⎟⎟
⎝ψ
⎠

H leads to
•⎞
⎛1
= σ (σ − 1)γ ⎜⎜ n − γ n ⎟⎟
•
⎝ψ
⎠
∂2 n

∂2H

2

24

−1−σ

e − ρt ,

1−σ

e − ρt . Differentiation of

•⎞
∂ 2 H σ (σ − 1) ⎛ 1
=
⎜
−
⎟⎟
n
γ
n
∂ 2n
ψ 2 ⎜⎝ ψ
⎠

σ (σ − 1)γ
=
•
ψ
∂n∂ n
∂2H

Thus,

∂2H
•

> 0 , and

∂2 n

−1−σ

•⎞
⎛1
⎜⎜ n − γ n ⎟⎟
⎝ψ
⎠

e − ρt ,
−1−σ

e − ρt .

•
∂2H ∂2H ∂2H ∂2H
−
=
0
.
As
a
result,
H
is
convex
in
(
n
,
n
),
•
•
•
2
∂
n
2
∂ n ∂n ∂n∂ n
∂ n

which means that the necessary conditions for optimization are also sufficient.
Q.E.D.
This proposition naturally leads to a proposition comparing the growth rate of
consumption in a market equilibrium with the social optimum:
Proposition 4: The growth rate of consumption in a market equilibrium is lower than
the social optimum.

Proof: If the social optimal growth rate is positive, we have δL > ρ (1 + δ ψ η ) . From
equation (33), the growth rate in a market economy decreases with the number of firms.
From equation (34), the number of firms in a market economy is higher than 2σ . Since

σ > 1 , from equations (31) and (43), g market < g Optimum .

Q.E.D.

The intuition behind Proposition 4 is as follows. As firms have market power,
prices charged by firms are higher than the marginal cost of production. Also, there are
multiple firms producing the same final product in a market economy. As a result, the
market level of output is less than the social optimum. As the market level of output is
not optimal, the market level of technology will not be optimal since the choice of
technology depends on the output level. As a result, the growth rate of consumption in a
market equilibrium is lower than the social optimum.

25

7. Concluding remarks

This paper explores the implications of firms’ technology choices and the
substitution of capital for labor on economic growth.

We show that considering

oligopolistic competition in the sector producing finals goods in a general equilibrium
model with the microeconomic feature of firms’ technology choice is tractable and we
explore the equilibrium path analytically. To produce a given level of output, different
combinations of capital and labor may be used. As capital accumulates, technologies
employing more capital are adopted. In this model, increasing returns to scale arises
from the fixed cost of production embodied in machines and it is internal to a firm.
Incorporating fixed costs into the study of economic growth leads to some empirically
plausible implications. First, during the growth process, the real interest rate is constant
and the real wage rate increases. Second, the output of firms producing final output
increases over time. Finally, the reduced form of the production function is similar to
that of the AK type models. Here the marginal productivity of capital is measured by the
amount of labor saved.
There are some interesting generalizations and extensions of our model. First, to
apply this model in analyzing a country’s growth over time, a calibration can be
performed. Second, this paper studies economic growth in a closed economy. Studying
economic growth in an open economy is an interesting avenue for future research. In an
open economy model, the interaction between trade and growth can be addressed
explicitly.

26

References

Aghion, P., and P. Howitt. 1998. Endogenous Growth Theory, Boston, MA: MIT Press.
Aghion, P., and P. Howitt. 2005. Growth with quality-improving innovations: an
integrated framework. in: Aghion P., Durlauf, S., (eds.) Handbook of Economic
Growth, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Arrow, K., Chenery, H. B., Minhas, B., Solow, R., 1961. Capital-labor substitution and
economic efficiency. Review of Economics and Statistics 43, 225-250.
Barro, R., Sala-i-Martin, X., 2003. Economic Growth. Second edition, MIT Press,
Boston, MA.
Bencivenga, V., Smith, B., Starr, R., 1995. Transactions costs, technological choice, and
endogenous growth. Journal of Economic Theory 67, 153-177.
Boltho A. and G. Toniolo, 1999. The Assessment: The 20th Century-Achievements,
Failures, Lessons, Oxford Review of Economic Policy 15(4), 1-17.
De Long J. B. and L. H. Summers. 1991. Equipment investment and economic growth,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, 445-502.
De Long J. B. and L. H. Summers. 1993. How strongly do developing economies benefit
from equipment investment? Journal of Monetary Economics 32, 395-415.
Gali, J., Zilibotti, F., 1995. Endogenous growth and poverty traps in a Cournotian model.
Annals d’Economoie et de Statistique 37/38, 197-214.
Greenwood, J., Seshadri, A., 2005. Technological progress and economic transformation.
in: Aghion P., Durlauf, S., (eds.) Handbook of Economic Growth, Amsterdam: NorthHolland.
Jones, C., 1994. Economic growth and the relative price of capital. Journal of Monetary
Economics 34, 359-382.
Jones, C., 2005. Growth and ideas. in: Aghion P., Durlauf, S., (eds.) Handbook of
Economic Growth, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Jorgenson, D., Gollop, F., Fraumeni, B., 1987. Productivity and U. S. Economic Growth.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Jovanovic, B., Nyarko, Y., 1996. Learning by doing and the choice of technology.
Econometrica 64, 1299-1310.
Kaldor, N., 1961. Capital accumulation and economic growth, in: Lutz, F., Hague, D.,
(eds.), The Theory of Capital, St. Martin’s Press, New York.
King, R., Rebelo, R., 1993. Transitional dynamics and economic growth in the
neoclassical model. American Economic Review 83, 908-931.
Lucas, R., 1988. On the mechanics of economic development. Journal of Monetary
Economics 22, 3-42.
Lucas, R., 1990. Why does not capital flow from rich to poor countries? American
Economic Review 80, 92-96.
Lucas, R., 2002. Lectures on Economic Growth. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
MA.
Maddison, A., 1982. Phases of Capitalist Development. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
UK.
Parente, S., 1994. Technology adoption, learning-by-doing, and economic growth.
Journal of Economic Theory 63, 346-369.

27

Pindyck, R., Rubinfeld, D., 2005. Microeconomics, sixth edition, Upper Saddle River,
New Jersey: Pearson Education.
Rebelo, S., 1991. Long-run policy analysis and long-run growth. Journal of Political
Economy 99, 500-521.
Romer, P., 1986. Increasing returns and long run growth. Journal of Political Economy
94, 1002-1037.
Romer, P., 1990. Endogenous technological change. Journal of Political Economy 98,
S71-S102.
Rosenberg, N., Birdzell, L. Jr., 1986. How the West Grew Rich, Basic Books, New York.
Suits, D., 2005. Agriculture. in: Adams, W., Brock, J., (eds.), The Structure of American
Industry, 11th edition, Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Young, Allyn, 1928. Increasing returns and economic progress. Economic Journal 38,
527-542.
Young, Alwyn, 1995. The tyranny of numbers: confronting the statistical realities of the
East Asian growth experience. Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 641-680.
Zeira, J., 1998. Workers, machines, and economic growth. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 113, 1091-1117.

28

