                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   INCENTIVES AND WAGE RIGIDITY


                         Edward P. Lazear



                      Working Paper No. 1299




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, M 02138
                            March 19814




Financial support was provided by the National Science Foundation.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #1299
                                                March 1984



                     Incentives and Wage Rigidity


                                 ABSTRACT



     With the growth of the literature on incentive compensation has come the

belief by some that incentive pay may be less rigid than pay that is not

designed to effect incentives. Some have gone so far as to argue that this may

explain differences in unemployment rates across countries. it is shown that

there is no direct link between incentives and wage rigidity. Many compensation

schemes that provide incentives have the reverse effect: That is, they tend to

make wages more rigid than would be the case were incentives not an issue at

all. This paper explores the relationship between wage rigidity and the

provision of incentives in a variety of circumstances.




                                                   Edward P. Lazear
                                                   Graduate School of Business
                                                   University of Chicago
                                                   1101 East 58th Street
                                                   Chicago, IL 60637

                                                   312—962—7464
     The notion that compensation may be structured to affect worker productiv-

ity is not new. Traditionally, piece rates have been the most common form of

incentive pay. Recently, more elaborate bonus systems have begun to creep into

the Pmerican labor scene. Concurrent with the growth of creative compensation

practices has been the development of a literature that describes the incentive

effects which are associated with existing or hypothetical payment schemes.1

     A similar, but distinct literature has considered wage rigidity that

results when labor contracts are used as an alternative to a spot market. Most

of the work in this literature centers around the idea that workers want to

insure themselves against a variable wage stream. Others concentrate on the

nature of contracts when information is asymmetric——either the worker or firm

(or both) has information to which the other party is not privy.2

     This essay examines incentive arrangements to determine whether they

contribute wage rigidity to an economy. Specifically, the attempt by employers

to induce workers to produce efficiently may change the variability of wages

over the business cycle, life cycle and across individuals. International

comparisons have revealed differences in wage flexibility across countries .      Can

these differences be explained by the extent to which the countries use

incentive compensation? c,   turning   it around, are measured "business cycle"

variations in wages mere reflections of worker incentive schemes?



      The literature is extensive. me of the more frequently cited papers
 are Ross (1983), Becker and Stigler (1984), Stiglitz (1975), Lazear (1979),
 Fama (1980), and Holmstrom (1982).

            literature has mushroomed over the past five years • Sme of the
 more important or more recent papers are Baily (1974), Azariadis (1975), Green
 and Honkapohja (1981), Green and Yahn (1981), Grossman and Hart (1981), Hall
 and Lilien (1979), and Hall and Lazear (1984).

      3Gordon (1982) found that the variability of wages in Japan exceeds that
 in the United States. Although little evidence exists, much has been made of
 the widespread nature of the Japanese bonus system.
                                       —2—



      The conclusion is that there is no simple relation of incentives to wage

flexibility. me incentive contracts add wage variance and reduce inflexi-

bility. Others have the opposite effect. After rigidity is defined, the

approach is to "prove by counterexample,'t discussing a number of incentive

schemes. Although the list is by no means exhaustive, it covers most of the

important ones and provides enough variety to demonstrate that there exists no

clear link between incentive provision and wage rigidity.


I. Definition of Rigid Wages

      In order to obtain a concise definition of rigid wages, it is useful to

start with a simple model. Consider the simplest technology zhere output,

is the sum of effort, u, and luck, e:

(1)                               q=u+e
Assume initially that the variance of e is zero so that luck is not a

factor. This is relaxed below.

      c*tput sells at price V so that the firm's profit function is

                                  Profit = Vq — Y

where Y is the compensation of labor, the only factor of production. In a

world of competitive factor and product markets, the zero profit constraint must

hold so that

(2)                                 Y=Vq
      Wage rigidity is defined relative to what would occur in a spot market.

There are two variables that are of interest. thanges in V may occur over

business cycles or may reflect secular effects on the value of output. anges

in u can be thought of as differences across individuals with respect to work

efficiency or distaste for effort exertion.

      In a spot market with full information, equations (1) and (2) imply that

(3)                         a.        = u +   V(u/3V)
                            b.   aY/u = V
                                             —3—



Equation (3a,b) serves as the criterion against which results are compared to

determine wage rigidity.


II. Fixed Effort and Variable Effort

       Before considering any specific incentive scheme, it is useful to point out

that the ability to vary effort contributes income variation to an economy, even

if workers are homogeneous. To see this, examine (3a). There are two terms on

the right—hand side. When the price of output changes, income changes because

each unit of effort is now more valuable (captured by the u term), but also

because the optimal level of effort changes (reflected in the Vu/aV term).

Appropriately, wages are more variable in a world where effort is not supplied

perfectly elastically.

       Let us not take as given that workers adjust effort appropriately. After

all, if no restrictions were placed on workers, and if income Y were totally

independent of the level of effort, workers would choose to perform at the

lowest possible level •   The worker wants to choose u so as to maximize

utility, assumed to be given as

(4)                          Max    Y(u) - C(u)
                              U
where Y(u) is the income function that he faces (it may depend directly on

q and only indirectly on u) and where C(u) is the cost of effort

function. The first—order condition for an optimum is the standard

(4a)                               Y'(u) =   C'(u)
       If q can be observed perfectly, then the first best solution can be

achieved by paying a "piece rate," i.e., letting y = Vq =          Vu.     The pure piece

rate is virtually synonymous with a spot market in this context, so it is not

surprising that differentiation of the piece rate income function duplicates

equations (3a,b).
                                           —4—




III. Imperfect Observability of citput

       Few production environments lend themselves to costless and perfect

measurement. Although the output of a salesman is measured easily, that of a

vice president of finance is not. Firms often adapt to these difficulties by

using some kind of sampling mechanism that requires only a periodic check of

part of the worker's output. Without attempting to write down the optimal

sampling rule, let us merely state that one possible incentive device is to

sample the worker's output with some (optimally chosen) probability p. If the

worker's output is not audited, then he receives one wage, W(V), specified in

advance and potentially a function of V. If the worker is audited, then he is

paid    S(q, V) .
       It   is trivial to show that a first best wage scheme is to   have W(V) =   0

and    S(V, q) = Vq/p    so that Y(u) = p Vq/p = Vq = Vu.   M incentive scheme of

this sort introduces cross—sectional wage variability where none would exist

were output observed costlessly or were effort levels given exogenously. Sup-

pose that all individuals have the same C(u) function. Huation (4a) ensures

that they all select the same level of u. But incomes will vary: 1 — p         of the

individuals receive W(V) = 0       in income and p of the individuals receive

Vu/p. If a piece rate with 100% sampling were employed, then all workers would

receive Vu. 9 additional wage variation is a result. (W(V) = 0 should be

interpreted as the amount produced at the minimum observable effort level.)

       Over the business cycle, changes in the price of the product are reflected

perfectly in the average wage across workers. But (1 — p)        of the workers

receive W(V) = 0        find that their wages are independent of the changes in

product price whereas p of the workers find that their wage is especially

sensitive to changes in product price. cmpare aY/V =           (1/p)(u + V u/v)


       4Becker (1968) and Becker and Stigler (1974) were among the first to
  consider these probabilistic incentive schemes.
                                         —5—



with equation (3a) •   If   p is small, most workers find that their wages are

much more rigid than they would be in a world of exogenous effort with perfect

information.

     The additional variance that is associated with this particular incentive

scheme is not a necessary consequence of either imperfect observability or of

the desire to use an incentive compensation structure. For example, in this

simple case, there is another first best compensation scheme that mimics a

perfect information spot market exactly. Suppose that the worker is told that

he will receive Vu if u >      u*,   but will be penalized some amount X if it is

detected that u has fallen below u. For any given p, there is a suffic-

iently large X such that workers always choose to product at u =     u.     Under

these circumstances, each worker's wage is always Vu, no cross—sectional vari-

ation in wages is introduced by this incentive plan, and (3a) and (3b) hold

exactly for all workers so no additional rigidity is imposed. The point is that

ensuring that appropriate incentive mechanisms are present does not imply that

additional wage variation is introduced. Below, it will be shown that incentive

wage schemes can actually reduce the amount of variation in an economy. First,

it is useful to consider incentive schemes that employ the fact that workers are

generally with the firm for more than one period.


IV. Life—Cycle Thcentive rvices

     A number of authors have considered how age—earnings profiles can be

altered in order to provide incentive effects.6 The nature of the imperfect

observability of output usually takes a somewhat different form here. Suppose




      5This is the solution in Becker [1968] and Becker and Sigler [1974) •      It
 is best understood in the life cycle context and is spelled out in more detail
 below.

      6See tazear (1979, 1981), rmichael (1981), apiro and Stiglitz (1982),
 and Kuhn (1982).
                                                   —6—



that work takes place in two periods, but that output is not observed until the

end of the period, and then only imperfectly, characterized for current purposes

by occurring with probability p. All that is necessary, it turns out, is that

one can observe that u <       u     (or that q < q*) the exact magnitude of the

deviation being irrelevant.

       cie possible scheme that achieves a first best solution is to pay a wage

W0 in period zero and w1 in period 1 if output in period zero was not

observed to have fallen below q*• If output in period zero is observed to have

fallen below q*, then the worker is terminated and is not permitted to work

during period 1. For simplicity, assume that the discount rate is zero and that

the alternative use of time in period 1 is zero. Then

                            W1 =   c(u*)/p     +   x
(5)
                                                       *      *
                                     *
                            W0Ji, -W1=Vu                   -C(u)/p-x
will ensure that a first best equilibrium is attained for any x > 0.

       To see this, note that the worker always works at zero effort in period 1

because there is no benefit from doing otherwise. His choice for period zero is

either to work at zero effort or at effort equal to u because no intermediate

value affects his income. He chooses to work at u =                       u*   if f


                        W1 -       c(u*)   +   W0 >    (1 — p)W1 +   W0

This condition and zero profits imply equation (5).

       What are the implications of such a scheme for wage rigidity? First, this

scheme causes the age—earnings profile to deviate from the age—productivity

profile. cutput in period zero is Vu*, but W0 falls short of that. Qitput

in period 1 is zero, and q1 is necessarily positive. This does not imply,

however, that wages vary more over the life cycle as a result of such a

scheme. For example, if Vtl*          > 2C(u*)/p,          then it is possible to find an x >

0     such that W0 = w1 .     If   workers were paid their exact output in each period,

the wage in period one would fall short of that in period zero •                      The incentive.
                                                —7—




scheme would actually smooth earnings over the life cycle in an absolute sense.

      How do the wages respond to business cycle fluctuations? The wage received

over the entire life cycle is Vu* so any permanent change in V is reflected

one—to—one in the lifetime wage. But this does not imply the same correspond-

ence in each of the two periods.

      First, differentiation of W0 with respect to V yields

                     aw0/av =    + V u/aV -           (C'(u)/p)(3u/V)
                                u:
                              =u +Vau/Bv- (V/p)(au/v)
which is smaller than the right—hand side of (3a) because u*/V > 0. The

conclusion is that the wage in period zero does not move with the business cycle

by as much as it would if output were geared directly to productivity.

      For period 1, there is no change in productivity, but there is a change in

the wage W1. Differentiation with respect to V yields
                                   =   (C1 (U

                                   = (V/p)(3u lay) > 0

Although W1         more sensitive to changes in value of output than would be

warranted by productivity considerations, it is still true that in neither

period does the wage move as rapidly as the product price. This might give the

appearance of wage rigidity since no one worker's wage at any point in the life

cycle moves as rapidly as product price.


V.   Relative   comparisons

     More recent literature has discussed the role of relative comparisons in

providing incentives. Tournament—type labor contracts, where one worker com-

petes with another for a particular job that has a high wage, can induce workers

to behave appropriately and to select first best levels of effort.7



      7See tazear and Rosen (1981), Holmstrom (1982), carmichael (1983), Green
 and Stokey (1983), and Nalebuff and Stiglitz (1983) for analyses of relative
 compensation schemes.
                                         —8—



      At this point, the variance of e in equation (1) can no longer be assumed

to be zero. The essence of contest—like labor contracts requires that there be

some random noise in the world. Without going into the details of the

tournament labor contract, the basic idea is this: Workers compete against one

another for a particular job that carries a specified wage. The individual who

has the highest level of output is given the job and is entitled to the wage

that goes along with it, irrespective of the output level. It turns out that in

competition, the equilibrium wage structure generates a first best solution,

with each worker putting out the efficient amount of effort. The spread between

the winner's wage and the loser's wage is the motivating factor.

      If each individual draws an e in equation 1, then e -          defined as
                                                                ej
z is distributed with density function g(z). If W1 is the wage that goes to

the winner and w2 is the wage that goes to the loser, then the equilibrium is8

                            a. W1 = (V)(u* + 1/g(O))
(7)
                            b. W2 = (V)(u*     —    1/g(O))
      First consider the wage variation relative to output variation. The

expected wage across the two individuals is Vu* and expected output from (1)

is also Vu*. However, no individual is paid the expected output. Individuals

are ex ante identical, yet with certainty they receive different wages. In an

ex post sense, output may have more or less variance across individuals than the

wages. Since q is a random variable, whereas W1 and W2 are fixed in

advance, whether actual q is more or less disperse than wages depends upon the

realization of the random variable z. Even the expectation of Vqj, given

that j is the winner, may be closer or further from Vu* than is the winner's

wage .    The conclusion is that the contest—type incentive structure adds variance



         8See tazear and Rosen (1981).

     9A simple example makes this clear. Suppose that e can take the
 values a and —a only. Then z = aj —       has g(O) = 1/2 independent of
                                                   aj
                                           —9—



in wages relative to the ex ante expected output, but may add or reduce variance

relative to ex post output.

      Additionally, the winner's wage is more sensitive, while the loser's wage

is less sensitive, to changes in V than indicated by (3a). Differentiation of

(7) yields

                       w1/aV =   U       + V j/T ÷   1/g(O)
and                                  *       *
                              = u + V u /V - 1/g(O)
The last term on the right—hand side distinguishes these expressions from (3a),

adding and subtracting wage flexibility, respectively. The reason is that

when V increases, a higher u is appropriate. That can only be motivated by

increasing the spread between W1 and w2. The first two terms on the right—

hand side reflect the value of increased average productivity. The last term is

the effect of increasing the spread.

      "Winners" are the individuals who have advanced further up the hierarchy.

This implies that salaries should be more volatile with output at higher job

levels than at lower job levels. It is surely true that executives' compensa-

tion is more likely to be contingent on the performance of the firm than middle

management's. Whether this relationship holds over the business cycle as well

can be discovered.


VI. Qnclusion
      There exists no obvious link between wage rigidity and the provision of

incentives. &Dme incentive devices introduce additional wage variation into an

economy, but others, such as relative compensation schemes, can actually reduce

it, even when risk aversion is not an issue. The more specific conclusions are:



 the value of a so W1 = Vu* + 2V and W2 =                - 2V.   What is the expected
 level of output, given that j has drawn e1 > ej?             It is Vu + Va/2 which
 can exceed or fall short of W1, depending on the value of a.
                                        —10--




     1 •   Piece rates increase cross sectional wage variation relative to a

straight salary, but piece rate compensation is not necessarily more flexible

over a business cycle than is a salary.

     2. If output is not perfectly observed at zero cost, then some type of

sampling scheme may be used. One reasonable scheme adds cross—sectional

variation in wages. That same scheme makes some worker's wage rigid with

respect to the business cycle, and others overly sensitive to the business

cycle. But this is not a necessary consequence of imperfect observability.

Another efficient scheme adds no variation that would not be present were piece

rates and perfectly observed output to prevail.

     3. Life cycle incentive devices steepen the age—earnings profile relative

to the age—productivity profile. However, this does not imply that wages are

more variable than productivity over the life cycle because the relative

steepening could actually flatten the wage path. What is true, however, is that

the annual wage is never as flexible with respect to the business cycle as are

product prices.

     4. Incentive schemes that involve relative comparisons, and in particular,

tournament—style labor contracts, add wage variation relative to expected

output. &ich schemes do not unambiguously increase wage variation relative to

realized output. n implication of this incentive scheme is that wages at the

top of the hierarchy are more sensitive to changes in the value of output than

wages at the bottom of the hierarchy.

     Researchers who have conjectured that the provision of incentives can

change the amount of wage flexibility in an economy are quite correct.

Unfortunately, the direction of the change is not unambiguous. Those seeking to

explain international or intertemporal differences in wage rigidity are not

likely to find the answer in the incentive structure.
                                             —1 1—




                                          REFERENCES



Azariadis, Costas. "Ittplicit contracts and Underemployment Fkuilibria," Journal
       of Political Economy 83 (December 1975): 1183—1202.

Baily, Martin Neil. "Wages and Employment tinder Uncertain remand," Review of
       Economic Studies 41 (January 1974) : 37—50.

Becker, Cary. "Crime and Punishment: An Enonomic Approach," Journal of
       t-'oaiticai conomy ,r (Marcn—Aprii 1b) : 1o'—1I

Becker, Cary S., and Stigler, George J. "law Ehforcemerit, Malfeasance, and
          compensation of Enforcers," Journal of Legal Studies 3 (January 1974)       1—
          18.

Carmichael, H. lorne. "Firm ecific Human             Capital   and niority Rules," NBER
          Working Paper #101, February 1981.

Carmichael, H. lorne. "The Agent-Agents Problem: Payment by Relative C*itput,"
       Journal of labor Economics 1 (January 1983): 50—65.

Fama, Eugene. "Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm," Journal of
       Political Economy (April 1980).

Gordon,    Robert. "Why U.S.    Wage   and Employment Behavior Differs from That in
          Britian   and Japan," Economic Journal (March 1982)

Green, Jerry, and Honkapohja, ppo, "Bilateral contracts," Harvard University,
          1981.

Green, Jerry, and Kahn, tharles. "Wage—Employment contracts: Global Results,"
       NBER Working Paper No. 675, May 1981.

Green, Jerry R., and Stokey, Nancy L. "A comparison of Tournaments and
       Contracts," Journal of Political Economy 91 (June 1983): 349—64.

Grossman, Sunford, and Hart, Oliver. "Implicit Contracts, £'bral Hazard and
       Unemployment," American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 71 (May
       1981): 301—07.

Hall, Robert, and lazear, Blward. "The Fcess nsitivity of layoffs and cuits
          to Demand," Journal of Labor Economics 2 (April 1984): forthcoming.

Hall, Robert B., and Lilien, Eavid. "Efficient Wage Bargains Under Uncertain
       Supply and Demand," American Economic Review 69 (December 1979): 868—79.

Holmstrom, Bengt.       "Moral Hazard in Teams," Bell Journal of Euonomics (Autumn
          1982) : 324—40.

Kahn,   Peter • "Malfeasance in long Term Employment Contracts: A New General
          Model with an Application to Unionism," NBER Working Paper No. 1045
          December 1982.
                                      —12—



Lazear, Edward P. "q}y Is There Mandatory Retirement?" Journal of Political
       Economy 87 (December 1979): 1261—64.

Lazear, Edward P. "Agency, Earnings Profiles, Productivity and Hours
       Restrictions," merican Economic Review 71 (September 1981) : 606—20.

Lazear, Edward P., and Rosen, Sherwin. "Rank—Order Tournaments as Ctimum Labor
       cYntracts," Journal of Political Economy 89 (1981) : 841—64.
Nalebuff, Barry 3., and Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Prizes and Incentives: Toward a
       General Theory of Cbmpensation and Cbmpetition," Bell Journal of
       Economics 14 (Spring 1983): 21—43.

Ross, Stephen A. "The Economic Theory of Agency: The Principal's Problem,"
       American Economic Review 63 (May 1973): 134—39.

Shapiro, carl, and Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Fjuilibrium Unemployment as a Worker
       Discipline Device," Discussion Paper #28, Woodrow Wilson School,
       Princeton University, April 1982.
