                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




OWNERSHIP AND WAGES: ESTIMATING PUBLIC-PRIVATE AND FOREIGN-DOMESTIC
          DIFFERENTIALS USING LEED FROM HUNGARY, 1986-2003

                                            John S. Earle
                                           Álmos Telegdy

                                        Working Paper 12997
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12997


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2007




The research on this paper was supported by a grant from the National Council for East European
and Eurasian Research. The paper was presented at the Conference on Firms and Employees (CAFE)
in September 2006 in Nuremberg, Germany, supported by the Institute for Employment Research
(IAB), the Data Access Center (FDZ-BA/IAB), the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, the Research
Network "Flexibility in Heterogeneous Labour Markets," the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, and the
National Science Foundation. For helpful comments, we thank Alan de Brauw, Susan Helper, Joanne
Lowery, John Pencavel, and participants in the 2006 AEA, CAFE, and SOLE meetings and in seminars
at the Upjohn and Ente Einaudi Institutes. We are also grateful to Gábor Antal for outstanding research
assistance, to Mónika Bálint, Judit Máthé, Anna Lovász, and Mariann Rigó for conscientious help
with data preparation, to János Köllo for advice on the Wage Survey data, to Gábor Békés for helping
to improve the longitudinal linkages, and to Philipp Jonas for programming some of the specification
tests. We thank the Hungarian National Bank for cooperation and data support. All errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by John S. Earle and Álmos Telegdy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Ownership and Wages: Estimating Public-Private and Foreign-Domestic Differentials Using
LEED from Hungary, 1986-2003
John S. Earle and Álmos Telegdy
NBER Working Paper No. 12997
March 2007
JEL No. F23,J23,J31,J45,P23

                                              ABSTRACT

Studies of public-private and foreign-domestic wage differentials face difficulties distinguishing ownership
effects from correlated characteristics of workers and firms. This paper estimates these ownership
differentials using linked employer-employee data (LEED) from Hungary containing 1.35mln worker-year
observations for 21,238 firms from 1986 to 2003. We find that ownership type is highly correlated
with characteristics of both workers (education, experience, gender, and occupation) and firms (size,
industry, and productivity), suggesting ownership type is systematically selected along these dimensions.
The large unconditional wage gaps (0.24 for public-private and 0.40 for foreign-domestic) in the data
are little affected by conditioning on worker characteristics, but controlling for industry reduces the
public and foreign premia (to 0.16 and 0.34, respectively), and controlling for employment size further
reduces them (to 0.07 and 0.28). We also exploit the presence of 3,700 switches of ownership type
in the data to estimate firm fixed-effects and random trend models, accounting for unobserved firm
characteristics affecting the average level and trend growth of wages. These controls have little effect
on the conditional public-private gap, but they reduce the estimated foreign premium (to 0.07). The
results imply that the substantial unconditional wage differentials are mostly, but not entirely, a function
of differences in worker and firm characteristics, and that linked panel data are necessary to take these
correlated factors into account.

John S. Earle
Upjohn Institute for Employment Research
300 S. Westnedge Ave.
Kalamazoo, MI 49007
earle@upjohn.org

Álmos Telegdy
Central European University
Dept. of Economics
Nador Utca 9
H-1051 Budapest
Hungary
and Institute of Economics
of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences
telegdya@ceu.hu
1. Introduction

      Wages in the transition economies of Eastern Europe have changed dramatically in the 15

years since the collapse of central planning. Real wages tended to decline rapidly in the first few

years of transition and to rise strongly more recently.1 At the same time, the economies of the

region have experienced massive organizational changes, most prominently large-scale

privatization and opening to the global economy, including foreign direct investment.

      These rapid changes provide a useful context for investigating the relationship between

firm ownership and the level of wages. The transfers from the state to new domestic and foreign

owners took place not only quickly but broadly across nearly all sectors. The tightly controlled

wages of the centrally planned systems were abruptly liberalized, permitting organizations to set

their own wages and to increase skill differentials, which had tended to be compressed under

socialism (e.g., Kornai, 1992). But how these changes might be related is unclear a priori. If

firms maximize profits, labor markets are perfectly competitive, there are no differences in fixed

costs of employment, and the wage equals the full value of the job to workers, then wages should

be correlated with ownership only through compositional differences in types of employees.

Shifts in labor demand may lead to temporary wage differentials for the same type of worker, but

these should disappear as workers move from lower to higher return activities. However, if

ownership is associated with different objectives, fixed costs, fringe benefits, or other work

conditions, then differences in wages across these types may persist even beyond the time

required for workers to overcome mobility frictions.

      In this paper, we estimate the relationship between the level of wages and ownership using

linked employer-employee panel data for Hungary.             Hungary is a particularly appropriate


1
  Commander and Coricelli (1995) and World Bank (2005) document average real wage changes in a number of
transition economies.


                                                   1
country for the analysis, not only because it underwent sweeping ownership changes, similar to

some of its neighbors, but also because its privatization policies tended to result in ownership

structures more akin to those in market economies, with more outside investor control and with

much more foreign involvement than other transition economies. Moreover, the available data

for Hungary are exceptional in size and quality. The data include observations on some 1.35 mln

worker-years at 21,238 employers that we follow over a long time period, from 1986 to 2003.

The worker characteristics in the data are useful for controlling for the composition of

employment at each firm, and the firm-side information permits us to measure ownership

changes, control for firm characteristics, and control for some types of selection bias into

ownership type. However, the data allow us to distinguish only three types of ownership: state

(public), domestic private, and foreign. They also do not enable us to follow individual workers

over time, nor do they include information on working hours, nonmonetary benefits, and other

work conditions. We thus cannot control for unobserved differences across workers, nor can we

rule out the possibility that observed wages reflect compensating variations with respect to

differences along other dimensions of the employer-employee relationship.

      Nevertheless, these data help overcome a number of drawbacks in previous research.

Studies relying on firm-level data usually have small samples, very short time series, and no

worker characteristics, and they sometimes lack a comparison group. Identification may depend

on observing ownership changes, but few studies analyze the effects of privatization on wages.2

Haskel and Szymanski (1993) is the earliest systematic study, and it analyzed 14 British publicly

owned companies, of which only 4 were actually privatized. Martin and Parker (1997) study 14

large British privatizations, while Kikeri (1998) and Birdsall and Nellis (2003) summarize a


2
 The lack of research on the wage impact of privatization contrasts with the large literature on firm performance,
already the subject of multiple survey articles (e.g., Megginson and Netter, 2001; Djankov and Murrell, 2002).


                                                        2
number of case studies and small sample surveys of privatization effects on labor in several

developing economies. La Porta and Lopez-de-Silanes (1999) analyze 170 privatized firms in

Mexico, although the post-privatization information is limited to a single year. The small sample

size problem is overcome in Brown et al. (2005), who study nearly comprehensive panels of

manufacturing firms in Hungary, Romania, Russia, and Ukraine, finding a zero or very small

negative effect of privatization.3 But a fundamental problem with all of this work using firm-

level data is the inability to measure worker characteristics and thus to control for composition of

the workforce, particularly if changes in composition are correlated with changes in ownership.

       A similar problem is evident with most studies of relative wages at foreign-owned firms.

For example, Feliciano and Lipsey (1999) study wage differentials between foreign and

domestically owned establishments in the United States. Aitken et al. (1996) analyze the same

topic but extend the analysis with wage spillovers between foreign and domestic firms. Conyon

et al. (2002) study wage changes following foreign acquisitions in manufacturing firms in the

United Kingdom. Lipsey and Sjöholm (2004) study these wage differentials in Indonesian

manufacturing, although in this case they do control for the composition of workforce at the firm

level. Brown et al. (2005) analyze the wage effects of privatization to foreign intervention. All

these studies tend to find a wage premium in foreign firms.

       However, a second, equally serious problem is that most studies do not account for

ownership selection effects.         If firms experiencing an ownership change are not randomly

selected with respect to their wage behavior and the researcher does not take this into account,




3
 A related line of research analyzes effects of all types of ownership change on wages: e.g., Lichtenberg and Siegel
(1990) on leveraged buyouts, Gokhale et al. (1995) on hostile takeovers, and McGuckin and Nguyen (2001) on
mergers and acquisitions. Our data do not contain information on all ownership changes, but only on transitions
between state, domestic private, and foreign ownership types, which are thus our focus in this paper.


                                                         3
the estimated effect of ownership change will generally be biased. Indeed, some recent studies

demonstrate this possibility.4

      Instead of using firm-level data, another category of research has employed individual data

that include information on employer ownership as well as wages. The sizable literature on

public-private wage differentials is surveyed by Gregory and Borland (1999), but in the Western

context this amounts to an analysis of interindustry differentials with little possibility of taking

into account unobserved differences in ownership types that are correlated with wages.

Concerning foreign wage differentials, Peoples and Hekmat (1998) carry out an analysis for the

United States, but they use only industry-level ownership information. In the transition context,

Brainerd (2002) estimates wage effects of Russian mass privatization using worker-level data. A

problem with these studies is possibly inaccurate measures of ownership, which are reported by

workers who may not be fully informed about the progress of the privatization process. More

importantly, worker-level data do not permit controls for firm selection into ownership type.5

      The advantages of both firm- and worker-level data can be exploited only if one combines

the two data types into linked employer-employee data. But only two previous studies, both of

them recent working papers, use linked data for a similar purpose, and both focus on the effects

of foreign acquisitions on wages in Portugal: Almeida (2003) estimates the effect of 103 foreign

acquisitions and finds higher wages in foreign firms, but Martins (2004), using a dataset with

231 acquisitions, reports a negative effect. These studies share the problem, common to most

Western datasets, of relatively few ownership changes, so that the ownership effect is identified

only on a small sample of firms. In our Hungarian data, by contrast, we observe thousands of


4
  Conyon et al. (2002) employ firm fixed effects to study foreign acquisitions in Britain. Almeida (2003) discusses
selection of foreign acquisitions, and Brown et al. (2005, 2006) discuss selection in privatization programs.
5
  An identification approach in analyzing wage differentials across sectors examines wage changes of workers who
switch sectors (Krueger and Summers, 1988). Our firm fixed effects and firm-specific trends methods below relies
on firms switching sectors.


                                                        4
ownership changes, including 3550 involving domestic private ownership and 926 involving

foreign ownership (some of which overlap).           The Hungarian data also contain substantial

numbers of observations of each ownership type for each industry, so we can avoid the usual

pitfall, particularly common in the public-private wage literature, of attempting to infer

ownership differentials from industry differentials. Unlike other transition economies, moreover,

the Hungarian ownership structure emerging from the transition process is more similar to

developed market economies than elsewhere in Eastern Europe. By contrast with other transition

economies of the region, Hungary emerged with very little worker ownership and frequently

with strong outside blockholders, particularly foreign investors.

      While we believe that our data, context, and methods provide the possibility for significant

progress in identifying ownership effects, it is of course still possible that the differentials we

estimate may not equal the causal effects of ownership. First, it is likely that selection of firms

and workers into ownership types is nonrandom with respect to unobserved factors, such as

quality of the firm or the worker. We exploit the longitudinal structure of the firm side of the

data to control for fixed and trending differences across firms, but because we do not know the

form taken by the heterogeneity we cannot be sure that these methods fully account for selection

bias. Moreover, we cannot control for unobserved heterogeneity at the worker-level. A second

issue in interpreting our estimates on domestic private and foreign ownership is that we do not

observe wage outcomes in state firms under a counterfactual of no privatization and no

liberalization of foreign entry into the Hungarian economy. Indeed, wage behavior of each

ownership type may well be influenced by each of the others through labor market interactions.

Analyzing such spillover effects could be interesting, but we leave it for future research.




                                                 5
      The next section describes the construction of the employer and employee components of

our data, and how we link them into a single database. In Section 3, we briefly explain the

changes in the ownership structure during the period studied and summary statistics for all

variables. We also provide some initial analysis of the evolution of wage levels. Section 4

describes regression estimates of the impact of ownership on the level and structure of wages,

including specifications that control for selection bias into ownership type based on firm-specific

time-invariant and time-trending heterogeneity. An important issue in estimating such impacts is

the appropriate unit of analysis, and we provide some comparisons of results where the

observation is a worker-year with others where the observation is a firm-year. Our data measure

wages at both levels, but the worker-year observations permit us to analyze worker heterogeneity

in wages and to control for worker characteristics, while the firm-year approach is more closely

aligned with our variable of interest, firm ownership. Section 5 concludes with a summary and

suggestions for further research.


2. Data Sources and Sample Construction

      We study a linked employer-employee dataset from two sources.              The first is the

Hungarian Wage Survey, which gathers information on individual worker characteristics and

wages. The Wage Survey was carried out in 1986, 1989, and annually since 1992, with the last

available round in 2003. Our analysis thus uses information on workers from 1986, well before

the transition started (in 1990), until 2003, the year just prior to European Union accession.

Until 1995, the sampling frame for firms each year includes every tax-paying legal entity using

double-sided balance sheets with at least 20 employees; after 1995, the size threshold for

inclusion is 10 employees and a random sample of smaller firms is also included. To maintain




                                                6
consistency across years, we restrict attention to firms with at least 20 employees in at least one

year.

        From this sampling frame, employers are included in the Wage Survey according to

whether their employees are selected by a second-level procedure. In 1986 and 1989, workers

were selected by using a systematic random design with a fixed interval of selection: in 1986,

every 7th production worker and every 5th non-production worker, while in 1989 every 10th

worker, regardless of skill; in addition, each manager of the company was included. In these two

years, therefore, every Hungarian firm using double-sided accounting should be included, except

for nonresponses. From 1992 the worker sampling design changed: production workers were

selected if born on the 5th or 15th of any month, while non-production workers were chosen if

born on the 5th, 15th, or 25th of any month. In these years, firms are included only if they have

employees born on these dates; they are excluded if they do not have such employees, or if they

do not respond to the survey. Leaving aside nonresponse, this selection procedure provides a

random sample of workers within firms and includes, on average, about 6.5 percent of

production workers and 10 percent of non-production workers.                        Assuming birthdates and

nonresponses are randomly distributed across firms, the sample of firms is related to size (the

probability of having employees with the given birthdates), but otherwise random.6

        We constructed two types of weights to reproduce the universe of workers of Hungarian

firms with more than 20 employees.                  The first type of weight adjusts for within-firm

oversampling of nonproduction workers and worker nonresponse using separately available

information on the number of production and nonproduction workers in each sampled firm,


6
  For example, a firm with 20 production workers has a probability of about 0.11 to be excluded from the sample,
while for a similar firm with 100 employees this probability is only 0.012. In addition to weighting to account for
the size-probability relationship, we have also estimated all equations restricting the sample to employees of firms
with more than 100 workers, with results qualitatively similar to what we report for the larger sample.



                                                         7
available for May of each year. The second set of weights corrects for undersampling of smaller

firms and firm nonresponse to the Wage Survey. These weights are constructed using a second

database, drawn from the Hungarian Tax Authority, which consists of annual firm-level

information between 1992 and 2003 on every firm that used double-entry bookkeeping. The

weights are computed for various size classes as the ratio between total employment in this

universal data to total employment in the sampled firms in the Wage Survey.7

       We also use the Tax Authority data to generate some of the firm characteristics in our

analysis. The Wage Survey and Tax Authority data are linked using some common variables.8

The information includes the balance sheet and income statement, the proportion of share capital

held by different types of owners, and some basic variables, such as average yearly employment,

location, and industrial branch of the firm. We use the share capital variables to construct the

ownership structure. For the two early years—1986 and 1989—the Tax Authority data are not

available, and for these years we use the firm information from the Wage Survey; ownership in

these years is always state, so the share capital variables are not necessary.

       We cleaned firm ownership data extensively, checking for miscoding and dubious changes

(e.g., firms that switch back and forth between ownership types). Our procedures also paid a

great deal of attention to longitudinal links, for which we used a dataset from the Central

Statistical Office of Hungary providing information on re-registration and boundary changes. As

this dataset is not comprehensive, we also tried to find spurious entries and exits by looking for

matches of exits among the entries on the basis of headquarter settlement, county, industry, and




7
  The size categories are groups of 10 from 20-100 employees, 101-250, 251-500, 501-1000, and larger than 1,000.
The few cases where the sum of sample employment exceeded universal employment were assigned weights of one.
8
  Neither dataset contains firm names, exact addresses, or identification codes, and we constructed the links using an
exact one-to-one matching procedure for the following variables: county, detailed industry, employment, and
financial indicators such as sales and profits.


                                                          8
employment. Unfortunately, the Wage Survey data do not provide identification codes for

workers, so it is not possible to track them across years.

        Table 1 shows the number of workers with full information on characteristics, the number

of firms with information on ownership, and the total number of employees in these firms.9 The

dataset we work with is a panel of 21,238 firms linked with a within-firm random sample of

1.35 million workers.


3. Evolution of Ownership, Variable Definitions, and Summary Statistics

          Compared with its neighbors in Eastern Europe, Hungary began corporate control

changes relatively early. Starting with a more relaxed planning regime in 1968, the socialist

government gradually permitted state-owned enterprises to operate with increased autonomy,

and the decentralization process accelerated during the 1980s (e.g., Szakadat, 1993). Movement

of assets out of state ownership began at the very end of the 1980s in the form of so-called

“spontaneous privatization,” which usually involved spin-offs initiated by managers, who were

also usually the beneficiaries, sometimes in combination with foreign or other investors (see, e.g.,

Voszka, 1993). After the first free elections in May 1990, procedures became more regularized,

involved sales of entire going concerns, and generally relied upon competitive tenders open to

foreign participation. Unlike the programs in many other countries, the Hungarian policies did

not grant workers significantly preferential prices at which they could acquire shares in their

companies, with the exception of about 350 management-employee buyouts. Nor did Hungary

carry out a mass distribution of shares aided by vouchers, as was common in most other

countries of the region. On the other hand, Hungary was much more open to foreign investors

than elsewhere.        As a consequence, Hungarian privatization resulted in very little worker

9
    Firm-year observations with no information on sales and employment are dropped from the sample.


                                                        9
ownership, very little dispersed ownership, and high levels of blockholdings by managers and

both domestic and foreign investors.10

       Our database provides the ownership shares of the state, domestic, and foreign owners at

the end of each year (the reporting date). We define a firm as domestic private if it is majority

private and the domestic ownership share is higher than that of foreign ownership. If the foreign

share is larger than the domestic, the firm is foreign-owned for the purposes of this paper.11 The

evolution of the ownership structure among the firms in our sample is presented in Figure 1,

clearly reflecting the early start and the heavy presence of foreign ownership in Hungarian

privatization. Although there was only negligible privatization and new private entry by 1989,

already in 1992 about 40 percent of the workers in our sample worked in private enterprises.

The share of domestically privatized firms grew steadily until 1998, when 54 percent of the

employees worked for domestic owners. Thereafter, it ceased growing and even shrank slightly

(because of attrition from the sample). The proportion of employees in foreign-owned firms

grows steadily in our sample, reaching 29 percent by 2003. At the same time, about 20 percent

of the employees worked for the state. The firm-level figures are different from the worker-level

figures, as about three-quarters and one-fifth of the firms are controlled by domestic and foreign

owners, respectively, but even by this measure the state has a controlling stake in at least 5

percent of the firms, thus providing a comparison group for the effects of privatization.

       Table 2 shows the incidence of various types of changes in ownership type. The transition

process resulted in many more changes from state to private than could ever be observed in a

nontransition economy, and the number of changes involving foreign ownership in Hungary are


10
   Frydman et al. (1993) and Hanley et al. (2002) contain descriptions of the Hungarian privatization process. Earle
et al. (2005) study ownership of firms listed on the Budapest Stock Exchange.
11
   This definition has the advantage over definitions that would involve majority ownership that all privatized firms
can be categorized as domestic- or foreign-owned.



                                                        10
probably the largest that could be found in Eastern Europe. In our data, 3,115 ownership

changes involve domestic private ownership, and about 600 involve foreign ownership. We will

exploit these ownership changes when we control for unobserved heterogeneity in estimating

wage differentials, as described below.

       The wage variable in our data is gross monthly cash earnings in May plus one-twelfth of

previous year’s bonuses, which we have deflated by the annual CPI. 12 Figure 1 shows the

evolution of real wages from 1986 to 2003: an initial decline of around 10 percent and

subsequent rise of about 25 percent.13 The steady, substantial growth in the Hungarian real wage

since the mid-1990s is unusual among the transition economies, and an interesting question is

whether Hungary’s relatively rapid privatization and large foreign component may have

contributed to this performance. The reliability of the real wage measure is of course strongly

influenced by the quality of the deflator (in this case, the CPI), and the large changes in quality

and availability of goods suggest caution should be exercised when interpreting these figures.

When we estimate wage differences by ownership, however, we include year effects, so our

comparisons are not influenced by these measurement problems.

       Table 3 provides calculations of differences in mean wages by type of owner, presenting

information for 1992 and 2003—the first and the last year in our panel when each ownership

type is present. In both years, the unconditional mean wage is smallest in domestic private firms,

largest in foreign-owned firms, and intermediate under state-ownership.                        Average worker

characteristics also vary, however, with higher rates of female and university employment in


12
   Most studies of wages in Eastern Europe (and many in Western Europe) analyze monthly rather than hourly or
weekly earnings; this is because of institutional differences such as the custom of reporting wages on a monthly
basis, the lower incidence of part-time employment and greater standardization of full-time hours, and the frequent
unavailability of hours information (even for production workers). In our data, hours of work are available only for
the most recent years, so we cannot analyze changes using them.
13
   To maintain comparability over time, the evolution of the average real wage is estimated as the year effects in a
ln(real wage) equation that controls for firm fixed effects.



                                                        11
foreign-owned firms, higher rates of vocational employment in domestic private firms, and

higher rates of high school employment under state ownership. 14 Potential experience tends to

be lower in foreign-owned firms, a difference that becomes much more pronounced by 2003.

The composition of the workforce by occupation also varies considerably, with a much higher

rate of employment of professionals under foreign ownership, and a high rate of skilled manual

employment in domestic private firms. Such factors likely influence average wage differentials

by ownership type and can be taken into account by multivariate analysis.

       Firm characteristics also vary by ownership, as Table 4 documents.                            Measured by

employment size, state-controlled firms are the largest, with an average size of 284 employees in

1992 and 400 in 2003. Foreign-owned firms are also quite large, on average over 150 employees

in 1992 and 220 in 2003, while domestic firms are much smaller, with an average size under 100

in both years. Labor productivity (measured as the value of real sales over the average number

of employees) varies dramatically by ownership type:                       the least productive firms were

domestically owned in 1992, followed by state-owned firms.                        The productivity difference

between these two ownership types is quite small, at least compared to the productivity of

foreign-owned firms, which were about twice as productive as state-owned firms, and three

times as productive as the domestically owned ones. The productivity of both types of private

firms increased greatly by 2003, and remained practically unchanged for state-owned firms.15

Finally, the industrial composition of firms in the sample also varies by ownership. In both years

presented in the table, foreign firms had a high presence in manufacturing, while the share of


14
   Wages and educational composition for the categories never privatized and eventually domestic and foreign
privatized firms are much more similar in 1986 than in Table 2, indicating that the different composition and wages
in 1992 are probably due at least partly to privatization.
15
   These results should be treated with caution, as the sample within each ownership type varies considerably. For a
multivariate analysis of the productivity effects of domestic and foreign privatization in four transitional countries
(among them Hungary) see Brown et al. (2006).



                                                         12
state-owned firms in this sector dropped dramatically. Energy and water supply was mostly

controlled by the state, and domestic firms had a large proportion of firms in agriculture. The

presence of state ownership in all sectors of the economy helps in identifying the wage effect of

state ownership, which is often confused with interindustrial wage differentials when data from

developed countries are analyzed.

     To summarize the discussion of selection of workers into different ownership types, we ran

multinomial logit regressions, where we test how individual characteristics influence the

ownership type of the employer. As shown in Table 5, longer potential experience and only

basic education (8 years or less) make it more likely that the worker is employed in a firm

controlled by the state; vocational education increases the probability that the employer is a

domestic private owner; females and more-educated workers are more likely to work for foreign

owners.

     In the next step toward the analysis of wages and ownership, Table 6 contains calculations

of mean wages by ownership type and educational attainment in 1992 and 2003. For both years

and all four educational categories, the ownership types are clearly ranked in wage levels, with

foreign highest, state second, and domestic private lowest. At this level of analysis, there are

clearly large differences among the three ownership types in both the level and the structure of

wages they pay. It is interesting that the mean wages of the two types of private ownership—

domestic and foreign—are much more different from each other than from state ownership.


4. Regression Estimates

     To estimate the systematic impact of ownership on wages, we turn to regressions. We are

interested not only in controlling for worker characteristics in various combinations—and in

assessing the robustness of our results to such controls—but also in attempting to remove some


                                               13
types of selection bias in the determination of ownership type. For example, if state-owned

enterprises that already pay higher wages are more likely to be purchased by foreigners (perhaps

because of higher unobserved skill, better technology, or indeed for any reason), then the foreign

wage premium we have documented may be due to the systematic selection of high-wage firms

into foreign ownership. The privatization process involving domestic owners may also have

biases, as politicians, frequently together with employees, choose whether a firm is privatized.

Politicians may prefer to retain firms with the worst prospects in state ownership in order to

protect workers from layoffs and wage cuts, and the employees themselves may work to prevent

privatization in such cases. If the privatization process is corrupt, then exactly the opposite may

be true: politicians may prefer to sell the best firms quickly in order to collect bribes.

       Of course, we cannot entirely eliminate all possibility of such biases, but the large number

of ownership changes together with the longitudinal dimension of our data permit us to at least

check whether the differentials implied by our analysis so far are robust to some simple attempts

to account for selection bias. For this purpose, we employ methods developed for the evaluation

of training programs in the United States. The first method is the standard correlated effects

model that controls for time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity at the firm level. A second is

the random growth model, which includes a firm-specific linear time trend.16 Such a model may

be appropriate if, for example, foreign investors are more likely to acquire firms that for some

intrinsic reason (unobservable to the researcher but not caused by ownership) are raising their

wages or increasing the premia paid to more highly educated workers.                                  Higher-order

parameterizations of heterogeneity are of course possible, but we do not take them into account,


16
   Ashenfelter and Card (1985) and Heckman and Hotz (1989) use random trend models to evaluate training, while
Jacobson et al. (1993, 2005) apply it to the wage effects of job displacement and community colleges. Brown et al.
(2005, 2006) use the model to estimate the impact of privatization on employment, wages, and productivity at the
firm level. Our paper is the first to our knowledge that uses firm-level trends in any analysis of worker-level wages,
and it is the first that uses firm fixed effects in a study of ownership and worker-level wages.


                                                         14
and identification of the effect of ownership in our analysis assumes that any other heterogeneity

is uncorrelated with either ownership or wages. Both of these estimators rely on ownership

changes to identify the coefficients of interest; indeed, the random growth model measures

changes in the growth rate before and after an ownership change. A resulting disadvantage is

that the results pertain to firms that experience such changes, not to the broader sample. 17

Finally, we use some specification tests to evaluate the performance of the estimators.

       All equations control for year of observation and region of the establishment. We report

standard errors in all cases permitting general within-firm correlation of residuals using

Arellano’s (1987) clustering method, so that our test statistics are robust to both serial correlation

and heteroskedasticity.18 Standard errors are also adjusted for loss of degrees of freedom in

specifications when the data are demeaned and detrended.

       Table 7 displays estimates by pooled OLS, firm fixed effects estimations (FE), and firm

fixed effects and trends (FE&FT). The first OLS column includes no controls beyond year and

region, and the estimates demonstrate that the raw ownership differences are large (0.24 for state

and 0.40 for foreign), and they are precisely estimated. The next column adds standard worker

characteristics—education, experience, and gender—to construct a Mincer earnings function, but

with little qualitative change in the results: a slight decline in the estimated foreign coefficient

and somewhat larger decline for state ownership (to 0.39 and 0.20, respectively). The small

difference between the unconditional estimates and those controlling for worker characteristics is



17
   Another potential disadvantage is that these estimators may raise the noise-to-signal ratio, eliminating relevant
between-firm variation while exacerbating the effects of measurement error in ownership. On the other hand,
misclassification error is unlikely to be a problem in our case of official firm reports to the Tax Authority on the
firm’s ownership—a clear, measurable concept reported by professional accountants. This contrasts with the
standard cases studied by economists of changes in industry of employment, union membership, or labor force status.
In these cases, switching is usually measured in a household survey context by differing answers over time from
(potentially different) family members who happen to be home and who are asked questions about one family
member’s job search, availability, union status, and other employment-related activities.
18
   Kézdi (2003) contains a detailed analysis of autocorrelation and the robust cluster estimator in panel data models.


                                                         15
somewhat surprising given that worker characteristics are highly correlated with both wages and

ownership, as we documented in the previous section.19

       Adding firm-specific intercepts, however, greatly diminishes the magnitude of both

coefficients, while hardly affecting the estimated wage structure by worker characteristics. The

state coefficient estimate is 0.07 and the foreign is 0.14. Further adding firm-specific trends

increases slightly the state effect, but halves the foreign coefficient. Both coefficients in the

FE&FT specification have similar standard errors to those in the other specifications, so the issue

is not one of precision. Evidently, the estimates are not at all robust to these controls for

selection bias into ownership type. The hypothesis that the state and foreign effects are equal is

rejected in OLS and FE specifications, but not in the FE&FT, where the point estimates (0.078

for state and 0.073 for foreign) are strikingly similar.

       Table 8 provides additional estimates that include controls for occupational group of the

worker. The estimated coefficients on worker characteristics are somewhat affected by these

variables, but they matter little for the estimated impacts of state and foreign ownership. At the

same time, the ownership coefficients are highly sensitive to the controls for selection bias, but

the worker characteristic coefficients are not. The wage structure by worker characteristics that

we described in the previous section appears not to result from systematic sorting of workers

across firms that pay different wage levels, because any time-invariant firm heterogeneity in

wage levels is controlled for in the FE specification, while any time-trending heterogeneity

across firms is controlled for in the FE&FT.

       In Table 9 we further exploit the nature of our data and control for firm characteristics

(industry, size, and productivity) in addition to worker characteristics. The coefficient on log


19
  These results are little changed by adding interactions between education categories and experience, by estimating
separately by gender, or by employing a number of other alternative approaches to estimating earnings functions.


                                                        16
employment is highly significant and positive in OLS and FE, showing that wages increase by

0.5 percent for each 10 percent increase in the size of the OLS. This effect is only 0.2 percent in

FE, and negative and insignificant when firm-specific trends are controlled for. The wage effect

of average labor productivity is always highly significant and positive, with a magnitude of 0.11

in OLS, 0.07 in FE, and 0.035 in FE&FT.

         Concerning the ownership type coefficients in Table 9, including industry controls in the

OLS specification decreases the state coefficient to 0.16 and the foreign coefficient to 0.34.

Further addition of labor productivity slightly increases the estimated state effect and further

diminishes the estimated foreign effect. Controlling for employment size (but not productivity)

has a large effect on the state coefficient (decreasing it to 0.07) a smaller effect on the foreign

coefficient (decreasing it to 0.28). These observable characteristics of firms thus account for

more of the raw state-private gap than of the foreign differentials. By contrast, the FE and

FE&FT estimates are unaffected by the addition of firm size or productivity.20 Once we control

for selection into ownership, these estimations show that inclusion of firm characteristics do not

change the main results.

         An important and somewhat neglected issue in analyzing the relationship between worker

wages and firm characteristics such as ownership is the question of the appropriate unit of

observation: the worker or the firm. Analyzing workers exploits the variation in wages among

workers and allows their characteristics to be controlled for, so that the composition of

employment is held constant. Analyzing firms is appropriate because ownership is an attribute

of the firm, and it may be advantageous if the firm-level wage is better measured than wages at

the individual level. Table 10 presents a comparison of some alternative approaches along a


20
     As firms rarely change industry in our data, we do not control for industry in the FE and FE&FT specifications.



                                                           17
number of dimensions: unit of observation (firm or worker), source of dependent variable (firm

reports to the Tax Authority, average firm wage constructed from worker data, and individual

worker data), and weights on workers when constructing firm-level average wages. The last row

in Table 10 reproduces our results from Table 7 for comparison purposes. The other rows show

the results of various changes in the specification and sample. Regardless of the choice of

specification, the coefficients on state and foreign are always positive and statistically significant

(except in one case), and the estimates are highly sensitive to the selection control method

applied, similar to our previous results. The magnitude of the estimated effects, however, varies

relatively little by the choice of unit of observation, wage measurement, controls for composition

of workforce, and weighting.21

      Because the FE and FE&FT specifications produce such different results from the OLS, it

is useful to carry out some specification tests. First, we assess the joint statistical significance of

the fixed effects, and then, conditional on including the fixed effects, of the firm-specific trends.

The F tests in each case reject the exclusion of the FE and the FT at significance levels of 0.0001.

Next, we carry out Hausman tests of the vector of coefficients of the FE model relative to the

OLS, and of the FE&FT relative to the FE. Again, these χ2 tests reject the restricted model in

each case.


5. Conclusion

     Do foreign-owned and state-owned organizations pay higher wages than domestic private

firms? Economists have devoted considerable attention to estimating these wage differentials,


21
   A similar issue about the appropriate level of observation arises in research on union wage differentials, as
discussed by Pencavel (1991), who notes that the few establishment-level studies tend to find lower differentials
than those based on individual data. See also DiNardo and Lee (2004), who find no union wage differential using
firm-level data on union elections. Although there has been much more research on union than ownership wage
differentials, apparently no study of unions uses linked employer-employee data to investigate such differences.



                                                       18
usually finding positive foreign and state (public) premia. But the existing research suffers from

profound difficulties. In the foreign-ownership literature, estimates are usually identified from

cross-sectional variation across firms of different types. Few studies use worker-level data on

wages and characteristics, so they cannot control for observable worker heterogeneity, and still

fewer analyze firms that change ownership type, so they cannot control for unobserved firm-

level heterogeneity. In research on state-private differentials, usually referred to as the literature

on the public sector wage premium, estimation is typically at the worker level, and sometimes

identification uses worker switching across organizations.             But the state and private

organizations in these studies typically operate in very different industries, so that the estimation

essentially concerns interindustry differentials, which may be conflated with differences in work

conditions and other unobservables. In both cases, there is reason to doubt that the causal effect

of ownership has been identified.

    In this paper, we have analyzed linked employer-employee data available for a long panel of

firms during the unusual context of economic transition in Hungary, and we have applied new

econometric methods that exploit the context and data to try to make progress on estimating

foreign and state ownership wage differentials. The data cover nearly every tax-paying entity of

at least 20 employees in Hungary from 1986 to 2003, and they include many more switches of

ownership type than in previous research: nearly 1000 involving foreign firms and nearly 3500

involving state-owned organizations. The employee side of the data enables us to measure

individual worker wages (rather than rely on a firm-level average as in some previous research)

and to control for individual worker characteristics and changes in the composition of

employment that may be correlated with ownership. The employer side of the data allows us to




                                                 19
measure ownership reliably and to control for firm characteristics, and the longitudinal linking of

employers facilitates some controls for selection bias into ownership type.

    We find that simple OLS models imply substantial ownership effects in our data: an

approximately 0.39 premium for working in a foreign-owned firm compared to a domestic

private company, and a 0.20 premium for state enterprise employees versus those under domestic

private ownership. These results control for other worker characteristics, including gender and

experience, and for region and year fixed effects, but they assume no biased selection into

ownership types, consistent with much of the literature.

    We also estimate models that control for selection based on unobserved heterogeneity

through firm-fixed effects and firm-specific trend growth in wages. The latter specifications

(usually referred to as “random trend models”) permit not only idiosyncratic wages at each firm

(as in the fixed-effects model) but also allow wages to evolve independently at each firm in a

way that is correlated with ownership and with worker characteristics. For example, they permit

compensating differentials due to fringe benefits or other work conditions not only to vary across

firms as a fixed fraction of total compensation, but also to evolve over time according to an

idiosyncratic trend for each firm.

    Our results imply statistically significant wage premia under both state and foreign

ownership, relative to domestic private. The estimated magnitudes of the differentials vary little

with controls for observable worker and firm characteristics, and there is relatively little variation

with the unit of observation (firm or worker). But the magnitudes vary considerably with the

controls for unobserved firm heterogeneity. We find that inclusion of firm fixed effects more

than halves the state-domestic and foreign-domestic wage differential implied by the OLS

estimates and that inclusion of firm-specific trends further reduces the estimates. While we find




                                                 20
significant differences of both state and foreign wages relative to domestic private, it is striking

that these differentials are quite similar in magnitude, particularly when we add firm fixed effects,

and even more so with firm-specific trends. Taken at face value, this last specification implies

there may be no difference in the wage behavior of foreign-owned and state-owned firms.

    The large variation in estimated coefficients across specifications with different controls for

unobserved firm heterogeneity motivates us to carry out specification tests. F tests on the firm

fixed effects and firm-specific trends are always highly significant, and Hausman tests reject the

more parsimonious models in each case. These results imply that the fixed-effects specification

is strongly preferred to the OLS, and the specification with trends to the one without trends.

    The results also carry implications for the nature of systematic selection of organizations

into ownership types. The finding that the OLS estimate of the foreign premium is reduced

substantially when firm fixed effects and trends are added suggests that foreign investors may

systematically acquire firms already paying relatively high and more quickly growing wages.

The estimated state-private premium also falls with these controls, but it is smaller under OLS,

implying a similar direction of selection bias but one that is smaller in magnitude compared to

foreign ownership. For domestic private firms, on the other hand, the estimates imply selection

of firms with relatively low and more slowly growing wages.             More broadly, the results

demonstrate that taking into account possible selection biases of firms into different ownership

types can be essential for estimating differences in their behavior.




                                                 21
References

Aitken, Brian, Ann Harrison, and Robert E. Lipsey, “Wages and Foreign Ownership. A
Comparative Study of Mexico, Venezuela and the United States.” Journal of International
Economics, Vol. 40(3-4), 345–371, 1996.
Almeida, Rita, “The Effects of Foreign Owned Firms on the Labor Market.” IZA Discussion
Paper No. 785, May 2003.
Arellano, Manuel, “Computing Robust Standard Errors for Within-Groups Estimators.” Oxford
Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 49(4), 431–434, November 1987.
Ashenfelter, Orley, and David Card, “Using the Longitudinal Structure of Earnings to Estimate
the Effect of Training Programs.” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 67(4), 648–660,
November 1985.
Birdsall, Nancy, and John Nellis, “Winners and Losers: Assessing the Distributional Impact of
Privatization.” World Development, Vol. 31(1), 1617–1633, 2003.
Brainerd, Elizabeth, “Five Years After: The Impact of Mass Privatization on Wages in Russia,
1993-1998.” Journal of Comparative Economics, Vol. 30(1), 160–190, March 2002.
Brown, J. David, John S. Earle, and Álmos Telegdy, “Does Privatization Hurt Workers?
Evidence from Comprehensive Manufacturing Firm Panel Data in Hungary, Romania, Russia,
and Ukraine.” Upjohn Institute Working Paper, 2005.
Brown, J. David, John S. Earle, and Álmos Telegdy, “The Productivity Effects of Privatization:
Longitudinal Estimates from Hungary, Romania, Russia, and Ukraine.” Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 114(1), 61–99, February 2006.
Commander, Simon, and Fabrizio Coricelli, eds., Unemployment, Restructuring, and the Labor
Market in Eastern Europe and Russia. Washington, DC: World Bank, 1995.
Conyon, Martin J., Sourafel Girma, Steve Thompson, and Peter W. Wright, “The Productivity
and Wage Effects of Foreign Acquisitions in the United Kingdom.” Journal of Industrial
Economics, Vol. 50(1), 85–102, 2002.
DiNardo, John, and David Lee, “Economic Impacts of New Unionization on U.S. Private Sector
Employers: 1984–2001.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 119(4), 1383–1442, 2004.
Djankov, Simeon, and Peter Murrell, “Enterprise Restructuring in Transition: A Quantitative
Survey.” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 40(3), 739–792, September, 2002.
Earle, John S., Csaba Kucsera, and Álmos Telegdy, “Ownership Concentration and Corporate
Performance on the Budapest Stock Exchange: Do Too Many Cooks Spoil the Goulash?”
Corporate Governance, Vol. 13(2), 254–264, March 2005.
Feliciano, Zadia, and Robert E. Lipsey, “Foreign Ownership and Wages in the United States.”
NBER Working Paper No. 6923, February 1999.
Frydman, Roman, Andrzej Rapaczynski, and John S. Earle, et al., The Privatization Process in
Central Europe. Budapest: Central European University Press, 1993.




                                             22
Gokhale, Jagadeesh, Erica L. Groshen, and David Neumark, “Do Hostile Takeovers Reduce
Extramarginal Wage Payments?” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 77(3), 470–485,
August 1995.
Gregory, Robert G., and Jeff Borland, “Recent Developments in Public Sector Labor Markets.”
In Handbook of Labor Economics, Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, (eds.), Vol. 3C. Elsevier,
1999.
Hanley, Eric, Lawrence King, and Istvan Janos Toth, “The State, International Agencies and
Property Transformation in Post-Communist Hungary.” American Journal of Sociology, Vol.
108(1), 129–167, July 2002.
Haskel, Jonathan, and Stefan Szymanski, “Privatization, Liberalization, Wages and Employment:
Theory and Evidence for the UK.” Economica, Vol. 60(238), 161–182, 1993.
Heckman, James J., and V. Joseph Hotz, “Choosing Among Alternative Nonexperimental
Methods for Estimating the Impact of Social Programs: The Case of Manpower Training.”
Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 84(408), 862–874, December 1989.
Jacobson, Louis, Robert LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan, “Earnings Losses of Displaced
Workers.” American Economic Review, Vol. 83(4), 685–709, September 1993.
Jacobson, Louis, Robert LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan, “Estimating the Returns to
Community College Schooling for Displaced Workers.” Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 125(1-2),
271–304, March-April 2005.
Kézdi, Gabor, “Robust Standard Error Estimation in Fixed-Effects Panel Models.” Mimeo,
October 13, 2003.
Kikeri, Sunita, “Privatization and Labor: What Happens to Workers When Governments Divest.”
World Bank Technical Paper No. 396, 1998.
Kornai, Janos, The Socialist System:    The Political Economy of Communism.        Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1992.
Krueger, Alan B., and Lawrence Summers, “Efficiency Wages and the Inter-Industry Wage
Structure.” Econometrica, Vol. 56(2), 259–293, 1988.
La Porta, Rafael, and Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, “The Benefits of Privatization: Evidence
from Mexico.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. CXIV(4), 1193–1242, November 1999.
Lichtenberg, Frank R., and Donald Siegel, “The Effect of Ownership Changes on the
Employment and Wages of Central Office and Other Personnel.” Journal of Law and
Economics, Vol. 33(2), 383–408, 1990.
Lipsey, Robert E., and Fredrik Sjöholm, “Foreign Direct Investment, Education and Wages in
Indonesian Manufacturing.” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 73(1), 415–422, 2004.
Martin, Stephen, and David Parker, The Impact of Privatization. Ownership and the Corporate
Performance in the UK. London and New York: Routledge, 1997.
Martins, Pedro, “Do Foreign Firms Really Pay Higher Wages?          Evidence from Different
Estimators.” IZA Discussion Paper No. 1388, November 2004.
McGuckin, Robert H., and Sang V. Nguyen, “The Impact of Ownership Changes: A View from
Labor Markets.” International Journal of Industrial Organization, Vol. 19(5), 739–762, 2001.


                                             23
Megginson, William L., and Jeffry M. Netter, “From State to Market: A Survey of Empirical
Studies on Privatization.” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 39(2), 321–389, June 2001.
Pencavel, John, Labor Markets under Trade Unionism: Employment, Wages, and Hours.
Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell, 1991.
Peoples, James, and Hekmat, Ali, “The Effect of Foreign Acquisition Activity on U.S. Union
Wage Premiums.” International Journal of Manpower, Vol. 19(8), 603–618, 1998.
Szakadat, Laszlo, “Property Rights in a Socialist Economy: The Case of Hungary.” In
Privatization in the Transition to a Market Economy: Studies of Preconditions and Policies in
Eastern Europe, John S. Earle, Roman Frydman, and Andrzej Rapaczynski (eds.). London:
Pinter Publishers, 1993.
Voszka, Eva, “Spontaneous Privatization in Hungary.” In Privatization in the Transition to a
Market Economy: Studies of Preconditions and Policies in Eastern Europe, John S. Earle,
Roman Frydman, and Andrzej Rapaczynski (eds.). London: Pinter Publishers, 1993.
World Bank, Enhancing Job Opportunities in Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union.
Washington, DC: World Bank, November 2005.




                                             24
                             Figure 1:
      Evolution of the Ownership Structure and Average Wages
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
   86

   89

   92

   93

   94

   95

   96

   97

   98

   99

   00

   01

   02

   03
19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

20

20

20

20
                      State %        Domestic %          Foreign %         Wage



Notes: Number of observations = 1,342,158. State % = percent of employees of firms
majority state owned. Domestic % = percent of employees of firms majority private where
domestic is the largest private employer type. Foreign % = percent of firms majority private
where foreign is the largest private owner type. The evolution of the average real wage is
presented as estimated year effects from a regression including firm fixed effects to control
for sample changes (dependent variable = log real wage, normalized at 100 in 1986). Data
are weighted by the numbers of blue-collar and white-collar workers within each firm, and
each firm is weighted using total employment by firm size category.




                                             25
                          Table 1: Sample Size by Year

 Year        Number of Workers           Number of Firms          Total Employment
 1986                 100.5                     3,236                   2,633.5
 1989                 106.3                     3,946                   2,268.2
 1992                  64.8                     4,393                   1,198.4
 1993                  67.8                     5,158                   1,096.9
 1994                  95.7                     7,128                   1,351.4
 1995                  99.2                     7,428                   1,369.6
 1996                  97.6                     7,421                   1,292.1
 1997                  88.0                     7,476                   1,258.0
 1998                  99.0                     7,459                   1,282.2
 1999                  99.4                     8,020                   1,220.8
 2000                 109.5                     9,149                   1,257.6
 2001                 107.7                     9,138                   1,222.0
 2002                 102.8                     5,630                   1,049.2
 2003                 103.8                     5,106                     997.0
Notes: Number of workers = thousands of workers in the sample with information on
education, experience, and gender. Number of firms = number of firms with information
on ownership and with at least one worker in the given year with information on education,
experience, and gender. Total employment = total employment of firms in the sample in
thousands (i.e., including nonsampled workers).




                                           26
     Table 2: Firms by Ownership Type and Switches

                                                Number of Firms
 Non-Switchers                                       17,295
 of which: Always State                               3,167
           Always Domestic                           11,844
           Always Foreign                             2,284
 Ownership Switchers                                   3,694
 of which: State – Domestic                            2,768
           State – Foreign                               144
           Domestic – Foreign                            435
           Foreign – Domestic                            347
Notes: Total number of firms = 21,238. State = 1 if the firm is at least
50 percent owned by the state in t-1. Domestic = 1 if the firm is majority
private and domestic owner shareholding is larger than foreign in t-1.
Foreign = 1 if the firm is majority private and foreign owner
shareholding is larger than domestic in t-1. The numbers of switchers
and non-switchers do not sum to the number of firms as 201 firms have
multiple changes in ownership type.




                                   27
                Table 3: Characteristics of Workers in the Sample, 1992 and 2003

                                             State                    Domestic                     Foreign

                                     1992            2003         1992          2003          1992           2003
 Real Wage                          102.6            130.9         79.2        111.2          122.3         189.6
                                    (64.5)           (99.0)       (54.9)      (109.8)         (96.3)       (210.4)
 Female (%)                           37.9            33.7         36.3          38.7          44.4           47.1
 Education (%)
      Elementary or less              31.8            19.9         35.7          22.2          30.3           17.0
      Vocational                      30.3            30.9         38.3          39.6          36.3           30.9
      High school                     30.2            40.9         20.3          28.6          24.5           33.6
      University                       7.8             8.2          5.7           9.6           8.9           18.5

 Potential experience (yrs.)          22.2            26.1         22.5          25.4          20.5          21.8
                                     (10.6)          (10.6)       (10.5)        (11.5)        (10.7)        (11.3)
 Occupation (%)
    Managers                           5.2           9.3             6.9          8.8           4.5           7.9
    Professionals                      7.0           3.2             5.0          3.5           7.5           8.9
    Assoc. professionals             14.9          18.1              7.8        11.1            9.4         18.2
    Skilled non-manual                 6.9           6.5             6.9          5.9           6.1           5.9
    Service                          10.5          16.1              7.9          9.2           8.3           5.4
    Skilled manual                   44.5          39.1            53.9         50.5           53.4         47.8
    Unskilled                        11.0            7.7           11.6         11.1           10.8           5.9
 Observations                       42,089        17,119          17,773       60,134         4,093        26,544
Notes: Real wage measured in thousands of 2003 HUF, deflated by CPI. State = 1 if the firm is at least 50 percent
owned by the state in t-1. Domestic = 1 if the firm is majority private and domestic owner shareholding is larger
than foreign in t-1. Foreign = 1 if the firm is majority private and foreign owner shareholding is larger than domestic
in t-1. Standard deviations are shown in parentheses for continuous variables. Data are weighted by the numbers of
blue collar and white collar workers within each firm, and each firm is weighted using total employment by firm size
category.




                                                             28
                  Table 4: Characteristics of Firms in the Sample, 1992 and 2003

                                               State                    Domestic                    Foreign

                                        1992          2003          1992         2003          1992          2003
 Employment                             284.0         401.4          85.9         61.8         155.8         224.2
                                      (2076.5)      (2899.9)       (101.7)      (152.6)       (301.0)       (904.0)
 Labor Productivity                       9.8          10.0           7.8         20.7          18.8          39.4
                                        (21.7)        (42.1)        (17.4)      (172.7)        (53.6)        (86.3)
 Industry (%)
    Agriculture                            6.1           9.4         25.1         13.1            2.0           2.6
    Mining                                 0.7           0.2           0.2          0.5           0.6           1.2
    Manufacturing                        32.5            7.2         33.7         34.5           64.5         55.2
    Energy and water supply                1.4          24.7           0.0          0.6           0.0           1.1
    Construction                           8.8           8.9         16.2         10.4            5.3           2.3
    Trade                                22.1            1.9         16.4         18.2           18.8         17.4
    Hotels and restaurants                 5.1           0.4           3.0          3.4           4.0           2.7
    Transportation                         5.6           7.7           1.2          3.6           0.2           3.3
    Telecom                                0.1           0.4           0.0          0.4           0.0           0.8
    FIRE                                 13.1           20.6           3.7        13.3            4.6         11.4
    Other services                         4.5          18.4           0.4          2.1           0.0           2.1
 Observations                           1,538           346         2,572        3,701           276         1,057
Notes: Labor productivity is measured as the value of sales (in millions of 2003 HUF) over average number of
employees. State = 1 if the firm is at least 50 percent owned by the state in t-1. Domestic = 1 if the firm is majority
private and domestic owner shareholding is larger than foreign in t-1. Foreign = 1 if the firm is majority private and
foreign owner shareholding is larger than domestic in t-1. FIRE = Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate. Standard
deviations are shown in parentheses for continuous variables. Data are weighted by the numbers of blue-collar and
white-collar workers within each firm, and each firm is weighted using total employment by firm size category.




                                                         29
                 Table 5: Selection into Forms of Ownership

                                       State            Domestic             Foreign
 Vocational                           -0.168**            0.125**             0.043**
                                      (0.008)            (0.007)             (0.007)
 High school                          -0.070**            0.012               0.058**
                                      (0.016)            (0.012)             (0.013)
 University                           -0.157**            0.009               0.148**
                                      (0.014)            (0.018)             (0.017)
 Experience                           -0.000              0.003**            -0.002**
                                      (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
 Female                               -0.046*             0.004               0.042**
                                      (0.020)            (0.015)             (0.008)
 Predicted probability                 0.455              0.380               0.165
Notes: N = 1,342,158. Multinomial logit estimates, marginal effects reported. The
dependent variable is ownership type: State if the firm is majority state in t-1; Domestic if
the firm is majority private and domestic shareholding is larger than foreign in t-1;
Foreign if the firm is majority private and foreign shareholding is larger than domestic in
t-1. Standard errors (corrected for firm clustering) are shown in parentheses. ** =
significant at 0.01; * = significant at 0.05. The regressions are weighted by the numbers
of blue-collar and white-collar workers within each firm, and each firm is weighted using
total employment by firm size category.




                                            30
                Table 6: Average Real Wages by Ownership Type and Education

                                           State                     Domestic                     Foreign

                                    1992           2003         1992           2003          1992          2003
 Elementary or less                 78.7            92.4         63.4          76.9           86.4          96.4
                                   (34.2)          (43.9)       (32.7)        (33.7)         (37.3)        (41.4)
 Vocational                         91.2           112.0         72.0          88.2         103.2         122.1
                                   (41.8)          (43.3)       (34.8)        (43.4)        (48.7)        (61.1)
 High school                       114.3           132.6         95.6         121.3         137.8         174.1
                                   (57.2)          (70.5)       (66.7)        (91.8)        (79.3)       (130.0)
 University                        199.6         286.6          167.2         256.0         280.0         416.3
                                  (128.8)       (231.6)        (107.1)       (253.4)       (203.2)       (365.1)
 Observations                      42,089        17,119        17,773        60,134         4,093         26,544
Notes: Real wage (deflated by CPI) measured in thousands of 2003 HUF. Standard deviations in parentheses.
State = 1 if a majority of the firm’s shares are owned by the state. Domestic = 1 if the firm is majority private and
domestic owner shareholding is larger than foreign in t-1. Foreign = 1 if the firm is majority private and foreign
owner shareholding is larger than domestic in t-1. Data are weighted by the numbers of blue-collar and white-
collar workers within each firm, and each firm is weighted using total employment by firm size category.




                                                          31
               Table 7: Estimated Impacts of State and Foreign Ownership

                                         OLS               OLS                FE            FE & FT
 State                                   0.238**           0.197**           0.065**          0.078**
                                        (0.024)           (0.017)           (0.015)          (0.016)
 Foreign                                 0.398**           0.386**           0.137**          0.073**
                                        (0.020)           (0.014)           (0.015)          (0.013)
 Vocational                                -               0.127**           0.132**          0.137**
                                                          (0.005)           (0.003)          (0.004)
 High school                                -              0.373**           0.314**          0.330**
                                                          (0.009)           (0.006)          (0.006)
 University                                 -              0.950**           0.840**          0.872**
                                                          (0.016)           (0.010)          (0.011)
 Experience                                 -              0.027**           0.027**          0.026**
                                                          (0.001)           (0.000)          (0.000)
 Experience2*100                            -             -0.040**          -0.039**         -0.037**
                                                          (0.001)           (0.001)          (0.001)
 Female                                     -             -0.222**          -0.203**         -0.194**
                                                          (0.006)           (0.005)          (0.005)
 Firm-specific intercepts (FE)            no                no                yes              yes
 Firm-specific trends (FT)                no                no                no               yes
 R2                                      0.139             0.413             0.630            0.354
Notes: Observations = 1,342,158. Dependent variable = ln(real gross wage). State = 1 if the firm is
majority state in t-1. Foreign = 1 if the firm is majority private and foreign shareholding are larger than
domestic in t-1. The regressions are weighted by the numbers of blue-collar and white-collar workers
within firm and the total employment by firm-size categories. Elementary is the omitted educational
category. FE = specification including firm fixed effects; FT = all variables have been detrended using
individual firm trends. All equations include year and region fixed effects. The regressions are weighted
by the numbers of blue-collar and white-collar workers within each firm, and each firm is weighted using
total employment by firm size category. Standard errors (corrected for firm clustering and for loss of
degrees of freedom when detrending) are shown in parentheses. R2: overall for OLS, within for FE and
FE&FT. The difference between the foreign and state effect is statistically significant in OLS and FE, and
insignificant in FE&FT. ** = significant at 0.01; * = significant at 0.05.




                                                    32
         Table 8: Estimated Impacts of State and Foreign Ownership,
                        with Controls for Occupation

                                            OLS                FE             FE & FT
 State                                      0.208**           0.068**           0.079**
                                           (0.016)           (0.013)           (0.016)
 Foreign                                    0.384**           0.139**           0.072**
                                           (0.014)           (0.015)           (0.013)
 Skilled manual                             0.219**           0.203**           0.203**
                                           (0.007)           (0.006)           (0.008)
 Service                                    0.072**           0.111**           0.115**
                                           (0.022)           (0.019)           (0.023)
 Skilled non-manual                         0.234**           0.212**           0.220**
                                           (0.012)           (0.009)           (0.011)
 Assoc. professional                        0.334**           0.307**           0.321**
                                           (0.017)           (0.013)           (0.015)
 Professional                               0.425**           0.393**           0.403**
                                           (0.011)           (0.008)           (0.009)
 Manager                                    0.650**           0.685**           0.705**
                                           (0.010)           (0.010)           (0.012)
 Firm-specific intercepts (FE)                no               yes               yes
 Firm-specific trends (FT)                    no                no               yes
 R2                                         0.462             0.676             0.442
Notes: Observations = 1,342,158. The specifications are the same as in Table 7 except for
the addition of occupational categories. Unskilled manual is the omitted occupation. All
equations include year and region fixed effects. The regressions are weighted by the
numbers of blue-collar and white-collar workers within each firm, and each firm is weighted
using total employment by firm size category. Standard errors (corrected for firm clustering
and for loss of degrees of freedom when detrending) are shown in parentheses. R2: overall
for OLS, within for FE and FE&FT. The difference between the foreign and state effect is
statistically significant in OLS and FE, and insignificant in FE&FT. ** = significant at 0.01;
* = significant at 0.05.




                                             33
         Table 9: Estimated Impacts of State and Foreign Ownership, with Firm-Level Controls

                                                  OLS                                  FE                         FE & FT

                                      1             2              3             1             2              1             2
 State                             0.156**       0.162**       0.069**        0.067**        0.063**      0.081**        0.079**
                                  (0.019)       (0.013)       (0.017)        (0.011)        (0.012)      (0.015)        (0.016)
 Foreign                           0.341**       0.269**       0.283**        0.126**        0.137**      0.071**        0.072**
                                  (0.014)       (0.013)       (0.015)        (0.014)        (0.015)      (0.013)        (0.013)
 Labor productivity                   -          0.108**           -          0.067**           -         0.035**           -
                                                (0.009)                      (0.004)                     (0.007)
 Employment                           -              -         0.050**           -           0.021**          -         -0.009
                                                              (0.005)                       (0.005)                     (0.007)
 Industry intercepts                 yes           yes           yes            no            no            no             no
 Firm-specific intercepts            no            no            no             yes           yes           yes            yes
 Firm-specific trends                no            no            no             no            no            yes            yes
 R2                                0.479         0.511         0.495          0.677         0.676         0.442          0.442
Notes: Observations = 1,342,158. The specifications are the same as in Table 8 except for the addition of firm-level controls.
The regressions are weighted by the numbers of blue-collar and white-collar workers within each firm, and each firm is weighted
using total employment by firm size category. Standard errors (corrected for firm clustering and for loss of degrees of freedom
when detrending) are shown in parentheses. R2: overall for OLS, within for FE and FE&FT. The difference between the foreign
and state effect is statistically significant in OLS and FE, and insignificant in FE&FT. ** = significant at 0.01; * = significant at
0.05.




                                                                34
                               Table 10: Firm-Level versus Worker-Level Estimates

                                                                      State                                   Foreign
Dependent Composition Employment
 Variable  Controls    Weights                         OLS             FE        FE & FT          OLS            FE         FE & FT
  AWF        no           no                          0.237**       0.040**       0.030**        0.550**       0.093**       0.046**
  AWF                no                 yes           0.222**       0.031         0.033          0.486**       0.186**       0.050
  AWF                yes                no            0.194**       0.039**       0.029**        0.486**       0.091**       0.045**
  AWF                yes                yes           0.136**       0.029         0.032          0.399**       0.176**       0.048
  AWI                no                 no            0.233**       0.073**       0.159**        0.527**       0.091**       0.082**
  AWI                no                 yes           0.278**       0.065**       0.102**        0.471**       0.168**       0.085**
  AWI                yes                no            0.182**       0.069**       0.149**        0.468**       0.082**       0.070**
  AWI                yes               yes            0.198**       0.063**       0.101**        0.396**       0.141**       0.078**
    WI               NA                NA             0.197**       0.065**       0.078**        0.386**       0.137**       0.073**
 Notes: These are regression coefficients (standard errors clustered on firms) for alternative specifications in which the unit of
 observation is the firm in the first 8 and the worker in the last row (which is the reproduction of the coefficients in Table 7), the
 log wage dependent variable is taken from firm financial reports or the worker survey, region and year controls are added, the
 methods of estimation are OLS, FE (firm fixed effects), and FE&FT (firm-specific intercepts and trends). AWF = Average wage
 constructed from firm-level data (wage bill/number of employees); AWI = Average wage constructed from individual wages,
 weighted by production and nonproduction worker weights; WI = Individual wages. Composition controls are the proportion of
 females, proportion of workers in different educational groups, average potential experience and its square, weighted by the
 number of blue- and white-collar workers. All regressions are weighted by firm weights, those where “employment weights” are
 indicated are in addition weighted by the number of workers. The last row reproduces the results from Table 7, for comparison
 purposes. NA = not applicable.




                                                                 35
