                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  BANK SIZE AND LENDING RELATIONSHIPS IN JAPAN

                                           Hirofumi Uchida
                                           Gregory F.Udell
                                           Wako Watanabe

                                        Working Paper 13005
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13005


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2007




This study was conducted as one of the projects of the Regional Finance Workshop of the Research
Institute of Economy, Trade, and Industry (RIETI). The authors would like to thank the RIETI for
financial support, Shuichi Uemura for administrative help and useful comments, and Masaji Kano
for his help in constructing the base data set. The authors would also like to thank Allen Berger, Masaru
Yoshitomi, Takashi Hatakeda, and the seminar participants at the RIETI and the Monetary Economics
Workshop for their comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Hirofumi Uchida, Gregory F.Udell, and Wako Watanabe. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Bank Size and Lending Relationships in Japan
Hirofumi Uchida, Gregory F.Udell, and Wako Watanabe
NBER Working Paper No. 13005
April 2007
JEL No. D82,D83,G21,G32,L22

                                            ABSTRACT

Current theoretical and empirical research suggests that small banks have a comparative advantage
in processing soft information and delivering relationship lending. The most comprehensive analysis
of this view found using U.S. data that smaller SMEs borrow from smaller banks and smaller banks
have stronger relationships with their borrowers (Berger, Miller, Petersen, Rajan, and Stein 2005)
(BMPRS). We employ essentially the same methodology as BMPRS on a unique Japanese data set
and obtained findings that are quite interesting from an international comparison point of view. We
found like BMPRS that larger firms tend to borrow from larger banks. However, unlike BMPRS we
did not find that this was because larger firms are more transparent. Together these results imply that
large banks do not necessarily have a comparative advantage in extending transactions-based lending.
We also found like BMPRS that smaller banks have strong relationships with their borrowers. However,
we find that banking relationships in the U.S. and Japan are strong in somewhat different dimensions.
Our paper clarifies these and other interesting similarities and differences between the U.S. and Japan.

Hirofumi Uchida                                    Wako Watanabe
Wakayama University                                Graduate School of Economics and Management
Faculty of Economics                               Tohoku University
930 Sakaedani                                      27-1 Kawauchi, Sencai
Wakayama, JAPAN                                    Miyagi, 980-8576 JAPAN
uchida@eco.wakayama-u.ac.jp                        watanabe@econ.tohoku.ac.jp

Gregory F.Udell
Kelley School of Business
Indiana University
1309 East Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN 47405-1701
USA
gudell@indiana.edu
1. Introduction

       There is a general perception in Japan that competition across different types of banks has

    intensified in the past two decades.   It has been reported in the financial press that large banks

    have encroached on the markets that were once the domain of small banks such as Shinkin banks

    and credit cooperatives.1   Large banks have created and introduced new loan products, such as

    loans collateralized by inventory, non-tangible assets, and accounts receivable, that have been

    specifically targeted to small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).2       At the same time the

    number of small banks in market has been contracting due to bank failures and consolidation.3

    As in other developed economies, these trends raise significant policy questions: Will small banks

    survive in the future in Japan?   If they do not, will some markets become underserved?

       Recent academic research suggests that small banks may have an advantage over large banks

in providing credit to SMEs.      Specifically, this research suggests that large banks and small banks

may have different comparative advantages in utilizing different lending technologies.      On the one

hand, large banks are viewed as having a comparative advantage in underwriting SME loans using

transactions-based lending technologies that rely on quantitative and transferable information

referred to as hard information, since they can enjoy scale economies in evaluating such

information.     On the other hand, small banks are considered to have a comparative advantage in

1
  A recent article for example reports that the uncollateralized and non-guaranteed “bargain-sale loans”
of large bank which aim to capture blue-chip SMEs are threatening regional financial institutions
(“Ootegin Kousei de Shuueki Kibishiku (Large banks threaten small banks’ profits),” the Nikkei
Newspaper, January 20, 2004). Another article reports that in response to this, regional financial
institutions are increasing uncollateralized loans to SMEs (“Chigin, Shinkin, Mutanpo Yuushi wo
Kakudai (Regional banks and Shinkin banks are expanding uncollateralized loans),” the Nikkei
Newspaper, August 2, 2005).
2
  See, for example, “Ginko yu-shi ni kawaridane tanpo: chu-sho torihikisaki kaitaku ni chie (unusual
collateral for bank loans: beat brains to develop new SME customers),” (Nikkei Newspaper, January 23,
2006).
3
  Yamori (2005) reports the drastic decrease in the number of two types of cooperative banks in Japan:
The number of Shinkin banks decreased from 462 in 1980 to 301 in 2005 and that of credit cooperatives
decreased from 483 in 1980s to 179 in 2005.



                                                    3
underwriting SME loans utilizing the relationship lending technology, which relies primarily on

qualitative non-transferable information referred to as soft information.4   Stein (2002) shows that

small banks with simple organizational structures have comparative advantages in producing soft

information and thereby excel at providing relationship lending.    A number of papers have found

empirical evidence consistent with this theory particularly in the U.S. context (e.g., Cole, Goldberg

and White 2004, Scott 2004, Berger, Miller, Petersen, Rajan and Stein 2005).

     The primary aim of this paper is to investigate whether banks have these size-dependent

advantages in Japan and, more broadly, what this implies for the future of small banks in the

Japanese context.     Our methodological approach borrows extensively from Berger, Miller,

Petersen, Rajan, and Stein (2005) (hereafter BMPRS), who found that bank-SME relationships are

stronger for smaller banks than for larger banks.     Specifically, we apply the BMPRS’s empirical

methodology to investigate (1) whether smaller firms borrow from smaller banks and (2) whether

strength of the bank-SME relationship differs by bank size, using a unique data set of Japanese

SMEs.    We are thus able to examine whether the findings of BMPRS and other U.S.-focused

studies translate across country borders.

     Our analysis, however, is not just a replication of BMPRS using a data set in Japan.   Our data

allow us to pursue the issue of bank size and bank-borrower relationships in more depth on one

important dimension: information verifiability.   Specifically, unlike data used in U.S. studies such

as BMPRS, our data allow us to identify whether an SME has audited financial statements.      Using

this information, we decompose the effect of financial statement transparency from that of firm size

in general.    This decomposition is important, because the availability of audited financial

statements determines whether an SME can receive loans based on financial statement lending,

4
  After the seminal works by Petersen and Rajan (1994) and Berger and Udell (1995), enormous effort
has been exerted to investigate whether a strong relationship between a bank and an SME brings about
benefits, such as a lower interest rate and greater credit availability. See Boot (2000), Ongena and
Smith (2000), and Elyasiani and Goldberg (2004), for survey.



                                                  4
which is one of the most important transactions-based lending technologies.            Our data on

information verifiability allows us to extend the BMPRS analysis by investigating whether the

importance of bank size and relationship strength depends on the availability of audited financial

statements.   That is, unlike BMPRS we can investigate whether bank size and relationship strength

matter to potential financial statement borrowers and other borrowers.

     By way of preview, we find interesting similarities and differences in SME lending practices in

Japan compared with those in the U.S.        As for the size correspondence between banks and

borrowers, we find like BMPRS that larger firms are more likely to borrow from larger banks.

Unlike BMPRS, however, our methodology allows us to analyze whether this is because large

banks have comparative advantages in delivering financial statement lending.      We find that they

do not.    Larger firms borrow from larger banks even when their financial statements are not

audited.   Thus, other size-related factors are likely to contribute to this size matching between

banks and borrowers.

     As for the strength of bank-borrower relationships, we find like BMPRS that small banks have

stronger relationships with their SMEs.   However, our analysis enables us to identify differences in

small banks’ “relationship building” between the U.S. and Japan.           BMPRS found that the

bank-firm relationships for small banks in the U.S. tend to i) have a longer duration, ii) reflect a

shorter distance between borrower and lender, iii) be more personal (more face-to-face interaction),

and be more exclusive (more likely to be associate with a sole lender).     Our analysis in contrast

shows that smaller banks in Japan do not have longer-term relationships with their borrowers --

although like in the U.S. we also find that smaller banks in Japan have wider business relationships

with, have a shorter distance to, have more frequent contact with, and have a smaller number of

co-lenders to, their borrowers than larger banks do.    Thus, our findings on relationship building

tend to reflect more similarity than difference, although on at least one dimension of relationship




                                                 5
building (relationship duration) the countries appear to differ significantly.

     Overall, research findings (ours and the extant literature) on commercial lending in each of

these two countries seem to fit into the broad framework that predicts a linkage between bank size

and the deployment of different lending technologies.          Our analysis, however, reveals some

interesting similarities and differences across the two countries with respect to the nature and

relevance of specific links, which suggests that SME lending practices may further differ in

interesting ways across other countries.      Our findings also have some practical implications.

Specifically, they suggest that small banks in Japan may have a unique qualitative advantage over

large banks – their ability to deliver soft information based relationship lending – even though in

aggregate size their lending has been replaced quantitatively by larger banks.

     Our paper makes two main contributions.       First, by conducting a cross-country comparison of

the largest and the second largest economies, we examine whether SME loan underwriting differs

across these two countries.     Our findings show some interesting differences, and they seem to

indicate the possibility that important differences in the financial institutions structures and lending

infrastructures across countries may affect the way in which banks lend to SMEs as suggested by

Berger and Udell (2006).

     Second, we offer a significant methodological improvement over other studies of SME credit

including BMPRS in that we specifically consider the importance of the availability of verifiable

information in the form of audited financial statements.         As discussed above, this innovation

permits a more penetrating interpretation of our results and also suggests the avenues for further

research.

     There are three companion papers that are closely related to this study.         In this paper we

investigate whether the complexity of banking organizations matter in determining the strength of

bank-firm relationships.    According to the theory of relationship lending, the strength of the




                                                   6
relationship ultimately determines the availability and price of credit, i.e., the benefits of the

relationship.   Here we do not focus on the benefits of relationship lending.     We address this issue

using the same data set in a companion paper, Kano, Uchida, Udell, and Watanabe (2006).

     Uchida, Udell, and Yamori (2006a), another companion paper, investigates the use of different

lending technologies in Japan.     Using a detailed data set obtained from an SME survey in three

prefectures in Japan, they find that Japanese banks do not use different lending technologies, e.g.

financial statement lending and relationship lending, as distinctively as banks in other countries as

Berger and Udell (2006) suggested.      Rather, their findings imply that Japanese banks seem to take

a synthetic approach in screening borrowers.        That is, irrespective of their size, Japanese banks

almost always focus on the information contained in borrower’s financial statements, and they also

put (less) emphasis on the strong relationship with the borrower and the value of borrower’s

tangible assets that are pledged as collateral.   Our results obtained in this paper are quite consistent

with these findings.

     Uchida, Udell, and Yamori (2006b) is also closely related to the present study.          Using the

same data set as that of Uchida, Udell, and Yamori (2006a), they focus on the information

production/accumulation process by loan officers.       Their analysis is more detailed in the sense that

they focus on the role of loan officers, but is similar to the second stage of our analysis here.    They

find results that are consistent with those in the present study, e.g. the irrelevance of relationship

length.

     The remainder of this paper is composed as follows.        In the next section, we briefly explain

some institutional background and dynamics of the banking industry in Japan.           In Section 3, we

introduce the data and methodology.      Section 4 presents the results and their interpretations.   The

final section concludes the paper with policy implications.




                                                    7
2. Institutional background

     The financial services industry in Japan has been segregated since World War II.      Within the

commercial banking industry, one form of segregation has affected the delivery of large business

loans and loans to SMEs.    On the one hand, Shinkin banks and credit cooperatives, which are both

cooperative banks, are mandated by law to confine their commercial lending to SMEs.           On the

other hand, regional banks and city banks, which are larger and operate under a different set of

regulations (the Banking Act), have historically focused on larger businesses, although they had not

been prohibited from conducting business with SMEs.5

     The primary motivation for this segregation appears to have been to promote expertise from

specialization and to limit competition in order to guarantee profits and to secure the safety and

soundness of the financial sector as a whole.     Due to this segregation, practitioners sometimes

refer to the existence of a “banking ladder” from a firms’ point of view, which begins with a small

credit cooperative, progresses to a Shinkin bank, then to a second-tier regional bank, to a regional

bank, and finally reaches one of the largest city banks.   As firms grow, they step up this banking

ladder and gain in reputation.    Practitioners sometimes use the term “sotsugyo (graduate)” in

describing when a firm transfers from a lower-ladder bank to an upper-ladder bank.6

     This once clear segregation appears to be collapsing today, however.    As we mentioned in the

introduction, there is an abundance of anecdotal evidence that indicates that the customer base of

different types of banks began to overlap.     In the 1980s, well-performing large and established



5
  Until 1989, another type of bank, the Sogo banks (mutual banks), also existed and operated SME
lending. In 1989, all but one Sogo banks transformed their types and became banks under the Banking
Act. These banks, which are called second-tier regional banks, are included in our analysis in the
category of regional banks.
6
  In principle, Shinkin banks and credit cooperatives are allowed to lend to their members only, which
also contributes for SMEs to sotsugyo. To become a member of a Shinkin bank, a firm has to have
employees smaller than 300 persons or has capitalization smaller than 900 million yen. Credit
cooperatives have tighter restrictions so that further small firms can only qualify them.



                                                  8
firms stopped relying on commercial banks for fund-raising and turned to the capital markets.7

Large banks who lost their large business customers turned their focus in response to “blue-chip”

SMEs and individuals.       As a result, commercial banks (especially large banks) dramatically

increased their loans to SMEs and individuals during this period (see Hoshi and Kashyap 2001,

Chapter 8).   There are a lot of recent newspaper articles that report that larger banks have targeted

and attracted smaller borrowers that used to be the customers of small credit cooperatives or

Shinkin banks.8    The introduction of new loan products appears to have been part of this large

bank strategy of targeting SMEs.

     Despite these reports of large bank entry into the SME market, recent data show that the

duration of the relationship between SMEs and banks in Japan is still so long that firms rarely

experience a change in main banks.9 One possible reconciliation of these seemingly inconsistent

pieces of evidence is that the role of small banks as the main bank is still irreplaceable and large

banks have not become primary lenders to SMEs.          Instead, large banks have become secondary

lenders – or what practitioners call “jun-mein (quasi-main)” or “hi-mein (non-main)” banks.        Thus,

although large banks have quantitatively increased their SME lending, this does not necessarily

mean that they have qualitatively superseded small banks and deprived of their role as “true” main

banks.

     In summary, anecdotal evidence gives us a mixed view about the future of small banks in

Japan.   To shed some light on these issues, we now turn to our formal empirical analysis of the

role of small banks.




7
  Financial liberalization and the development of the capital market also contributed to this flight from
bank loans. See Hoshi and Kashyap (2001, chapter 7).
8
  Interviews with bankers from small banks support this view.
9
  As shown below, the average duration is 32.2 years in our data set. See SME Agency (2002, 2003,
2004) as well for a long relationship in Japan.



                                                   9
3. Data and Methodology

3.1 Data

     The SME data used in this paper comes from the 2002 Survey of the Financial Environment

(SFE) which was conducted by the SME Agency of the Government of Japan in November 2002.

It contains detailed information about the SMEs’ qualitative characteristics, their financial

statements, and their relationships with the main bank.     The main bank is identified by a question

in the survey which directly asks the firm to identify its main bank.      Since the responding firms

included large corporations, we confined our sample to SMEs only.10

     We link the SFE survey data to data on the SMEs’ main banks using two different sources.

For SMEs whose main banks are city and regional banks, we obtain data on their banks from the

Nikkei NEEDS Company (Bank) Data File (Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Inc.).             For SMEs whose main

banks are Shinkin banks we obtain data on their banks from the Financial Statement of Shinkin

Banks (Kin-yu Tosho Consultant Corporation). Due to the small number of observations, we

excluded sample firms for which the main bank is neither a city, regional, nor Shinkin bank.



3.2 Variables and methodology

3.2.1 Determinants of bank size

Hypothesis and main variables

     Our methodology here borrows extensively from BMPRS.             In our first set of tests we ask:

“What size of bank do SMEs choose to borrow from?”          This is an analysis on the determinants of

bank size.   If, as Stein (2002) predicts, small banks have comparative advantages in producing soft

10
   In accordance with the Small and Medium Enterprise Basic Law in Japan, SMEs are defined here as
enterprises with 300 or fewer regular employees (100 or fewer in Wholesale and Services, 50 or fewer in
Retail and Food) or a capital stock of 300 million yen or less (100 million yen or less in Wholesale, 50
million yen or less in Retail, Food and Services).



                                                  10
information and large banks have comparative advantages in lending based on hard information,

opaque firms would borrow from small banks and transparent firms would go to large banks.11

We will thus test the following hypothesis: Transparent firms borrow from large banks and opaque

firms borrow from small banks.

     The dependent variable in our regressions is bank size as measured by the natural logarithm of

bank assets, log(BTASSET).         The main independent variable is the dummy variable AUDIT,

which equals one if an SME has audited financial statements.         This variable indicates whether

there is hard information about the firm’s performance and condition.

     Hard information contained in audited financial statements would make the firm transparent

and enable the bank to underwrite loans utilizing the financial statement lending technology (Berger

and Udell 2006).      Thus, our first hypothesis predicts that AUDIT should have a significantly

positive effect on log(BTASSET).        That is, SMEs that have audited financial statements should

choose larger banks that have a comparative advantage in providing financial statement lending

because these loans are based on hard information.

     There is, however, empirical evidence that is inconsistent with this prediction. Uchida, Udell,

and Yamori (2006a) report that Japanese banks do not distinctively use different lending

technologies, and rather take a synthesized approach in screening borrowers by taking into account

different factors all together.   Judging from this finding, information from auditing may or may not

be used irrespective of bank size, and thus AUDIT makes no difference in the determination of

bank size.   Our data set, through the use of AUDIT, allows us to directly test which story is more

plausible.

11
   Subsequent research has suggested that the mapping implicit in Stein (2002) and other theoretical
work between hard information and large firm lending may be overly simplistic. Some
transactions-based (i.e., hard information-based) technologies may be well-suited for opaque borrowers
such as factoring, leasing and small business credit scoring (Berger and Udell 2006). For a discussion
of this in the Japanese context see Uchida, Udell and Yamori (2006a). In our analysis we focus on one
type of hard information: audited financial statements.



                                                   11
     It is worthwhile noting that BMPRS do not have information on whether the firm’s financial

statements are audited.    One of their proxies for hard information is firm asset size.          Their

justification for this proxy is based on a presumption that large firms are more likely to have

verifiable information than small firms are.   We do not have to rely on this assumption because our

variable AUDIT directly and precisely captures the availability of the hard information associated

with financial statement lending.      For comparability with BMPRS and to control for hard

information which is unrelated to financial statement lending, we include as an independent variable

log(ASSET), the natural logarithm of the firm’s asset, together with AUDIT.

     In addition to firm size, BMPRS also uses a dummy variable called Records, which represents

the existence of any sources of financial information, to proxy hard information.     This is, however,

not a very good proxy for the quality (informativeness) of financial information: it does not contain

information about whether this information is in the form of financial statements, whether the

financial statements (if they exist) were constructed by the entrepreneur, whether they were

constructed based on GAAP, or whether they were constructed by an independent CPA without

verification (i.e., without audit) – much less whether it was verified by the third party in the form of

an audit.   Information about the existence of verifiable information with respect to the firm’s

condition and performance in the form of an audit (represented by AUDIT) is critical.          Without

this information, BMPRS cannot distinguish between relationship lending and financial statement

lending.



Control variables

     We also use a variety of different control variables.    From the firm’s financial statements we

use the current ratio, CURRENT, the capital asset ratio, CAPRATIO, and the pretax profit margin,

PPMARGIN.       FAGE is the age of the firm; EMPLOYEE is the number of employees; LISTED is




                                                  12
a dummy variable which takes a value of one if the firm is listed; and a dummy variable OWNER

takes a value of one if the entrepreneur of the firm owns more than half shares of the firm.

     We also use PROPERTY, BUILDING, MACHINERY, VEHICLE, TOOL, and LAND, which

represent the fraction of these tangible assets to total assets.       These variables represent the

potential to pledge fixed assets as collateral.   Opaque or not, small firms with a high fraction of

these assets may not have to rely on small banks, since large banks may be able to easily lend based

on hard information about the values of these assets as collateral.    Within the paradigm of lending

technologies a la Berger and Udell (2006), banks could use alternative transactions-based lending

technologies that are associated with these types of assets, i.e., leasing, equipment lending and real

estate-based lending.    As indicated above, however, Japanese banks that take a synthesized

approach in screening may not put much emphasis on collateral value (Uchida, Udell, and Yamori

2006a).   By use of these variables, we can test which hypothesis is more plausible, which is also

our contribution over BMPRS.

     Entrepreneur characteristics are captured by a dummy variable GENDER, which takes a value

of one if the entrepreneur is male, a dummy variable HOUSING, which takes a value of one if the

entrepreneur has his/her own house, a dummy variable EDUCATION, which takes a value of one if

the entrepreneur graduated from a college, university, or graduate school, and AGE, which

represents the entrepreneur’s age.       We also use seven industry dummies, CONSTRUCT,

TRANSPORT, WHOLESALE, RETAIL, REALESTATE, SERVICE, and OTHER, and eight

regional dummies, HOKKAIDO, KITAKANTO, CHUBU, KANSAI, CHUGOKU, SHIKOKU,

and KYUSHU.       The default is a manufacturing firm in Tokyo area.

     Finally, three variables are used to control for the market structure of banks.   First, BRANCH

is the number of branch offices of city, regional, and Shinkin banks in each prefecture.       We also

use REGBRATIO and SHINBRATIO, which are the ratios of the number of branch offices of




                                                  13
regional banks and Shinkin banks, respectively, to BRANCH.        These two variables are to control

for the difference in size distribution of banks by prefecture.     A larger REGBRATIO implies

greater access to middle-sized banks, while a larger SHINBRATIO means greater availability of

small banks.    These variables take the same value for those SMEs in the same prefecture.12



3.2.2 Strength of bank relationships

Hypothesis and dependent variables

     We then investigate whether bank size matters in determining the strength of the bank-SME

relationship.   Following BMPRS, we regress bank size as well as our control variables on proxies

for strength.     The fundamental hypothesis we test is: smaller banks establish stronger

relationships with SMEs than large banks do.

     As proxies for the strength of the bank-SME relationships, we take the following five

alternative variables which are available from the SFE survey: (1) LENGTH, the length of the

relationship between the firm and its main bank; (2) SCOPE, the variable representing the scope of

relationships which is constructed by the principal component analysis using the information about

the existence or non-existence of five particular transactions between the firm and the main bank;

(3) DISTANCE, a variable representing the physical distance between the firm and the bank

branch; (4) CONTACT, a variable representing the frequency of contact between the firm and a

loan officer of the main bank; and (5) NOBK, the number of banks that the firm is borrowing

from.13   The data appendix contains detailed description of how we constructed these variables.14

12
   The data of these variables are taken from Fainansu Ja-naru (Finance Journal).
13
   Alternative to NOBK, we also tried a dummy variable, EXCLUSIVE, which takes a value of one if
the main bank is the sole lender to the firm. It produced very poor results with few significant
independent variables, and is thus not reported.
14
   We do not use Trade Credit Paid Late as a dependent variable in our analysis as BMPRS did for two
reasons. First, a comparable variable is not available from the survey data. Second, because our focus
in this paper is on the determinants of the strength of banking relationships, we do not examine the



                                                 14
    Using these five variables, we test our second hypothesis in five different ways.      That is, we

test whether smaller banks are likely to (1) have longer SME relationships (a higher value of

LENTGH), (2) have relationships with more scope (a higher value of SCOPE), (3) be located closer

to their SMEs (a smaller value of DISTANCE),      (4) contact their SMEs more frequently (a larger

value of CONTACT), (5) lend more exclusively (a smaller value of NOBK).           The five regressions

are run by OLS.

    It is interesting to note that CONTACT is not available in BMPRS.                This variable is

particularly important because soft information may be obtained through direct contact between

loan officers and entrepreneurs and frequent contact likely increases the chance of obtaining

important soft information.   LENGTH and SCOPE also represent the strength of relationships but

they are more indirect measures compared with CONTACT.         NOBK can also be considered as an

indirect measure of the relationship strength.   As explained above, however, the main bank is

rarely changed in spite of the drastic changes in loan shares to SMEs by bank type. It may

therefore be the case that only the main bank matters in relationship building.     If that is the case,

NOBK is a poor proxy.

    Finally, our ability to use CONTACT makes DISTANCE less important, because frequent

visits from afar would imply a strong relationship, while infrequent visits from a nearby bank would

imply a weak relationship.    However, these two variables may move in tandem.        For purposes of

comparison with BMPRS, we use DISTANCE as well.



Main independent variables

    The main independent variable in this analysis is bank size.      As before, we take a natural

logarithm of the variable and use log(BTASSET).          A finding of a negative coefficient on

benefits of strong relationships, which is the focus of a companion paper (Kano, Uchida, Udell, and
Watanabe 2006).



                                                 15
log(BTASSET) in the LENGTH, SCOPE, or CONTACT regressions, or a positive coefficient in the

DISTANCE or NOBK regressions would be consistent with the theoretical argument that small

banks have an advantage in relationship lending.

      In addition, we use AUDIT as an independent variable.          As noted above this variable is used

to isolate firms that may not have to rely on strong relationships with banks, i.e., financial statement

borrowers.    That is, if banks use alternatives to the relationship lending technology that do not rely

on soft information, one of the most important would likely be financial statement lending.         This

suggests that relationships would be stronger for borrowers other than financial statement borrowers,

which implies a negative coefficient on AUDIT.



IV estimation and control variables

      In addition to the estimation by OLS, following BMPRS, we also estimate the five strength

regressions using instrumental variables (IV).     As BMPRS indicate, there may be variables which

affect both the strength variables (the dependent variables) and bank size (the main independent

variable).   To control for such effects, we estimate the strength regressions with the bank-size

determination regression (Section 3.2.1) taken as its first stage.

      Among the first-stage independent variables, we consider REGBRATIO and SHINBRATIO as

instruments, i.e. REGBRATIO and SHINRATIO do not appear in the right-hand side of the

strength (the second stage) regressions.     This is because these variables represent differences in

geographical distribution of branch offices of banks of different sizes.          They should influence

BTASSET, but would not seem to directly affect the strength variables.              The other independent

variables of the first stage regression are used as controls in the second stage.



3.3    Summary statistics



                                                   16
     Descriptive statistics are shown in Table 1.       Firms in our sample are on average 59.1 years

old, have assets of 2,696 million yen, and employ 75 people.           An average firm is therefore a

medium-sized firm.       For comparison, BMPRS report that in their U.S. data set, an average firm is

14.8 years old, and has assets of 3.003 million dollars (368 million yen).         This implies that our

sample firms are much older and almost seven times larger in size than those in BMPRS.

     Another size difference between our data set and that of BMPRS can be found with respect to

bank size.   In our data set of Japan, the smallest bank has assets of 42.8 billion yen, and the

average asset size of all the banks is 19.6 trillion yen.   These numbers are much larger than those

of the U.S. banks in the data set of BMPRS.      The mean asset size of their smallest quintile banks is

0.163 billion dollars (20.0 billion yen), and that of the whole sample is 8.883 billion (1.1 trillion

yen).

     Turning to the relationship strength variables, an average relationship between a sample firm

and its main bank is 32.2 years.    This is far longer than that in the U.S.   U.S. firms in the data set

of BMPRS have on average relationship of 8.7 years with their banks.            The average firm in our

data set borrows from 3 banks, is located 6 kilometers (about 3.75 miles) from its main bank’s

branch office, and meets with its main bank’s contact person every 46 days.        In the BMPRS’s U.S.

data set, an average firm is located 26.05 miles (42 kilometers) from its bank branch.        This large

difference likely reflects the geographic difference between the two countries.      This should be kept

in mind when we compare the results of DISTANCE across countries.

     Table 2 presents means of some important variables by subsamples decomposed by bank size.

We can first note that the larger the bank size, the larger the firm size.   This is consistent with what

BMPRS report for the U.S. SMEs in their Table 1.

     We can also observe several interesting characteristics of the strength of the bank-firm

relationship in Japan.    First, as bank size increases, the length of the relationship between the firm




                                                   17
and the bank becomes longer.     This is exactly the opposite to what BMPRS report for U.S. SMEs

(their Table 1).   Existing studies would interpret this as a stronger bank-firm relationship for a

larger firm.   However, Kano, Uchida, Udell, and Watanabe (2006) find that a longer relationship

may not necessarily be beneficial in Japan.   Table 2 also shows no systematic relationship between

the level of SCOPE and bank size, which is also inconsistent with the implication of existing studies

but is consistent with the finding in Kano, Uchida, Udell, and Watanabe (2006).

     Second, the number of lending banks increases as the firm’s main bank becomes larger.        This

seems to be consistent with the implication of existing theory.   BMPRS report that in the U.S. the

larger the bank size, the less likely the bank is an exclusive lender.   This may imply that both in

Japan and in the U.S. firms try to increase the number of lending banks to avoid the hold-up

problem which they would otherwise suffer from a large single lender.

     Third, as the lending bank becomes larger, the bank tends to be located farther from and tends

to have less frequent contact with its borrowers.    These statistics may imply that large banks have

weaker relationships with their borrowers than small banks, as existing theory predicts.       Similar

pattern (only with respect to distance) is also observed in BMPRS.

     Finally, we see no systematic relationship between bank size and AUDIT.       That is, likelihood

of having audited financial statements does not appear to be associated with bank size.       This may

imply that the financial statement transparency does not matter in the choice of bank size.

     In summary, consistent with existing theories and BMPRS, we have observed (1) a

correspondence between an SME’s size and the size of its main bank, and (2) a negative

relationship between bank size and relationship strength in terms of NOBK, DISTANCE, and

CONTACT.       On the other hand, we have also observed (3) a discrepancy between the prediction

of existing theories and our summary statistics when we focus on LENGTH and SCOPE.

However, the observations thus far are based solely on univariate analysis.     We thus move on to




                                                    18
the regression analysis in the next section.



4. Regression results

4.1      Determinants of Bank Size

        The results for the bank size determination regression are shown in Table 3. With respect to

the key dependent variable, AUDIT is not significantly different from zero.         This insignificance

indicates that having audited financial statements does not matter in determining the size of a bank

from which a firm borrows.        This implies that banks do not have any size-related comparative

advantages or disadvantages in extending financial statement lending.        This finding is important

because it refutes the conventional prediction that large banks are better at financial statement

lending.

        We do not know, however, the mechanism working behind this size-irrelevance.         It may be

because there are no scale economies associated with extending financial statement lending.         The

findings in Uchida, Udell, and Yamori (2006a), however, imply that the finding just reflects

non-specialization of banks in distinct lending technologies in Japan depending on their size or

type.

        In spite of the irrelevance of AUDIT, we obtain a positive and statistically significant

coefficient for log(ASSET).       Even after controlling for financial statement transparency, larger

firms are more likely to borrow from larger banks.      The result is consistent with that of BMPRS in

the U.S. context.     However, the interpretation is different, since we have AUDIT as an independent

variable which BMPRS did not have.         Even after controlling for transparency in terms of auditing,

we find an independent size effect.

        This may reflect size-related firm transparency (transparency from sources other than auditing).

However, it also seems likely to be driven by many factors that are unrelated to firm transparency



                                                   19
such as legal lending limit/portfolio diversification considerations and large firm product

considerations.      Because BMPRS cannot disentangle the firm size effect from the

transparency/audit effect, they could not draw this inference.    We can also observe in Table 3 that

listed firms are also more likely to borrow from large banks.     This could also be interpreted as an

indication that more transparency is associated with firms who borrow from larger banks, although

this may be capturing some nontransparency-driven factors related to listing.

       Finally, firms with a higher proportion of fixed assets (MACHINERY, VEHICLE and LAND)

tend to choose smaller banks.     The results on these fixed asset coefficients are slightly surprising.

Some research has argued that fixed asset lending (e.g., real-estate based lending and equipment

based lending) should be viewed as separate lending technologies when these loans are primarily

underwritten based on the appraised value of the assets (Berger and Udell 2006).       Given that these

are transactions-based lending technologies, we would have expected them to be more frequently

associated with larger banks a la Stein (2002).

       However, it is difficult to draw strong conclusions here because these assets might not be used

in the underwriting process or they were used only as a secondary source of repayment (back-up

collateral) in a loan that was primarily underwritten using the relationship lending technology.     To

support this view, Uchida, Udell, and Yamori (2006a) demonstrate that pledging collateral is of

secondary importance in the screening process in Japan, although SMEs are required to pledge

collateral quite frequently.15



4.2 Strength of bank relationships

       The results on the strength of the bank-SME relationship are shown in Table 4 through Table 8.

These tables reflect regressions with differing dependent variables used as a proxy for the

15
     See Ono and Uesugi (2006) as well.



                                                  20
relationship strength.



LENGTH regression

     Table 4 shows the regression with the length of the bank-borrower relationship, LENGTH, as

the dependent variable.     Both in the OLS and in the IV regressions, we can see that LENGTH is

not associated with bank asset size (BTASSET), or AUDIT.            This result on bank asset size is

strikingly different from that in BMPRS and can be interpreted as inconsistent with theoretical

predictions and empirical evidence that smaller banks have a comparative advantage in processing

soft information and delivering relationship lending (e.g., Stein 2002, Carter, McNulty and

Verbrugge 2004, Scott 2004, Liberti and Mian 2006).

     Taking into account some existing evidence in Japan, however, this interpretation may not be

appropriate.     This result might just reflect some idiosyncratic differences between Japan and the

U.S. that may dilute LENGTH as a proxy for relationship strength in the Japanese context.             As

shown in Section 3.3, banking relationships in Japan for example appear to be dramatically longer

than in the U.S. and, as we have noted in Table 2, LENGTH seems to increase with bank size if we

focus on their simple correlation.   This suggests the possibility that frictions or other factors in the

Japanese context might discourage switching banks that are unrelated to the production of soft

information.16    Thus, LENGTH may not simply be a good proxy for the strength of the banking

relationship in Japan.17.



SCOPE regression

     Table 5 shows the regression with the scope of the bank-borrower relationship, SCOPE, as the


16
   These differences or frictions could fall under the broad rubric of differences in the social
environment. For a brief summary of the literature in this area see Berger and Udell (2006).
17
   Uchida, Udell, and Yamori (2006b) also obtain evidence that supports this view.



                                                  21
dependent variable.   In contrast to the case of the LENGTH regression, both the OLS and the IV

results show that bank size is negatively associated with the strength of the banking relationship in

terms of its scope.    Smaller banks have a wider scope of relationships with their borrowers.

Although we cannot compare this result across countries since BMPRS do not have a corresponding

dependent variable, the results are consistent with predictions from existing theories.

     In the IV regression, we also find that AUDIT is significant in determining SCOPE.            This

result might imply that financial statement transparency contributes to strengthening bank-firm

relationships.   However, the Durbin-Wu-Hausman test reveals that log(BTASSET) is not

endogenous in this specification.   Also, the IV estimation may not be reliable, since the Hansen’s J

test (the bottom of the table) implies that the instruments are not exogenous (only in this regression).

Given the inconsistency of this result with our other findings that consistently and robustly show the

insignificance of AUDIT, it may not be appropriate to place much weight on this finding.



DISTANCE and CONTACT regressions

     When distance is used as our measure of strength we find evidence that bank size matters.        It

matters in a way that is consistent with BMPRS and theoretical and empirical findings that small

banks have a comparative advantage in relationship lending.     Specifically, the OLS results in Table

6 show that a smaller bank tends to be located closer to its SMEs (the coefficient of log(BTASSET)).

As in the other regressions, however, AUDIT has no impact on DISTANCE.

     The coefficient of log(BTASSET) is insignificant in the IV estimation.        This is in contrast

with the results in BMPRS in which IV estimations consistently produced stronger significance

(with the same signs) for bank size than the OLS did in all the strength regressions.     Here, however,

the Durbin-Wu-Hausman test result indicates that log(BTASSET) is not endogenous and the OLS

estimates are consistent.   Therefore we focus on the OLS results.




                                                  22
     Table 7 reports the results of our regression that uses frequency of contact as our measure of

strength.   The results show that a smaller bank has more frequent contact with its borrowers, which

is consistent with the U.S. result.18    Arguably the frequency of contact is the better proxy for

relationship strength than distance to the extent that the production of soft information comes from

personal interaction with the borrower.      However, both the DISTANCE results and CONTACT

results are consistent with each other.      Small banks try to establish stronger relationships with

nearby borrowers by having frequent contact.

     We should note here that DISTANCE and CONTACT do not depend on firms’ transparency in

terms of audited financial statements.    Whether a firm has its financial statements audited or not

makes its relationship with the main bank neither stronger nor weaker in terms of location and

frequency of contact.   This implies that at least in Japan, having audited financial statements does

not discourage the use of relationship lending, so that financial statement lending and relationship

lending are not substitutes to each other.    This confirms the finding of Uchida, Udell, and Yamori

(2006a).



NOBK regression

     Finally, in our last regression we use the number of banks (NOBK) as our measure of strength.

In this regression (Table 8), log(BTASSET) is significant while AUDIT is insignificant.19      Turning

first to the log(BTASSET) variable, the positive and significant coefficient is consistent with the

findings in BMPRS and, again, more generally supports theoretical and empirical work that

indicates that small banks should have stronger relationships with their borrowers given their ability


18
   As in the case of DISTANCE, although log(BTASSET) is insignificant in the IV result, the
Durbin-Wu-Hausman test reveals that the variable is not likely to be endogenous, so that the OLS results
are reliable.
19
   Again, the IV estimation produced insignificant coefficient, but the Durbin-Wu-Hausman test
indicates that log(BTASSET) is not endogenous.



                                                   23
to process soft information.    However, we can go further by investigating whether this result is

independent of the firms’ transparency.       Here the coefficient on AUDIT indicates that it is

independent because having audited financial statements does not affect the number of banks used

by borrowers.



4.3    Discussion

      Recent theoretical and empirical work has drawn some clear distinctions between relationship

lending and transactions-based lending.        A key distinction in the literature focuses on the

comparative advantages and disadvantages of large and small banks.           On balance this literature

argues that larger banks because of their scale have an advantage in delivering transactions-based

lending to SMEs because this type of lending involves processing hard information.                 This

literature also argues that small banks have an advantage in processing soft information because soft

information depreciates as it is passed through the hierarchical structure of large banks.

      In the only comprehensive test of the link between bank size and SME banking relationships,

BMPRS found evidence that seems to be consistent with this view in the U.S. context.

Specifically, they found evidence that (1) larger firms, which they consider to be relatively more

transparent, are more likely to borrow from larger banks and (2) smaller banks are more likely to

have stronger relationships with their borrowers.      Moreover, their findings on the latter issue were

quite robust to different specifications.   BMPRS interpret the former result as evidence that more

transparent firms migrate to larger banks, which have comparative advantages in transactions-based

lending, while they interpret the latter result as evidence that small banks have comparative

advantages in extending relationship lending.

      We address these same issues in our analysis using a unique Japanese data set.     We make two

important points.   First, we demonstrate that the size correspondence between banks and SMEs




                                                  24
may not imply large banks having comparative advantages in extending transactions-based lending.

Second, we demonstrate that small banks tend to have stronger relationships with their borrowers,

but the nature of relationship building is likely to be somewhat different in Japan and in the U.S.

     As for the first point, we find, as BMPRS, that larger firms were more likely to borrow from

larger banks.    However, our interpretation is different since we have other key independent

variables that can distinguish between two forms of transactions-based lending.                We have a

dummy variable for whether the SME has audited financial statements, which makes the SME both

more transparent and enables it to obtain financial statement lending.         We also have variables that

measure the firms’ ability to pledge tangible assets as collateral, which should facilitate another

form of transactions-based lending: fixed-asset lending.

     Our results indicate that these variables do not have an effect on the borrower’s choice of bank

size – inconsistent with predictions from the theoretical literature.       Therefore, it is not likely that

larger firms borrow from larger banks because their banks are better at extending transactions-based

lending. 20   Rather, it may be that bank size matters for other reasons, e.g. bank portfolio

diversification (small banks avoid large commercial loans because they lead to undiversified loan

portfolios) or a legal lending limit considerations.21

     Our analysis thus makes an important point that the BMPRS size-match result may not

necessarily imply that transparent firms tend to borrow from large banks. Nevertheless, their

interpretation (that it does) is still consistent with their results.   That is, it may be the case that in

the U.S., firm size does reflect firm transparency, and that large banks use their comparative

advantage in transactions-based lending to finance these firms.         Under this latter interpretation, we


20
   Evidence that is supportive of this interpretation is that Japanese banks may not use lending
technologies as distinctively as banks in the U.S. in a manner Berger and Udell (2006) described (Uchida,
Udell, and Yamori (2006a)). Insignificant impact of auditing on the strength of bank-borrower
relationships, a finding from our analysis of the second stage, also supports this interpretation.
21
   See footnote 6 as well.



                                                     25
would conclude that the observed differences between Japan and the U.S. may be the consequence

of differences in financial institutions structure and lending infrastructure between the two countries.

However, without information on audited financial statements BMPRS cannot distinguish between

these two interpretations, i.e., they cannot distinguish whether the large firms’ preference for large

banks stems from transparency (the demand side) or other factors (the supply side).         Our analysis,

however, enables us to make such a distinction.

     The second point that our analysis makes is a confirmation of the finding in other studies that

small banks have a comparative advantage in extending relationship lending. However, our results

suggest that the nature of relationship building may differ across countries.     Although the length of

the bank-borrower relationship has generally been considered the most powerful proxy for

relationship strength, it does not seem to offer such a proxy in Japan where the duration of

relationships is quite long for all types of banks.    On the other hand, our results for other proxies of

relationship strength work in a manner consistent with the results found elsewhere.          That is, our

results indicate that small banks tend to have stronger relationships with their borrowers in terms of

the scope of relationship, the distance from the borrower, the frequency of contact, and the

exclusivity of lenders.   Our results, together with results from other studies, imply that the small

banks’ advantage in extending relationship lending is likely to be universal, although the nature of

relationship building may differ across countries.

     On balance, the findings in this paper and in BMPRS on SME lending in the two largest

economies in the world suggest that lending patterns in both countries seem to fit into the broad

framework found in the literature that predicts a linkage between bank size and the deployment of

different lending technologies.    However, in addition to similarities in SME lending in Japan and

the U.S., our results also revealed some interesting differences with respect to specific linkages.    In

general our results suggest that in Japan as well as in the U.S. small banks have a comparative




                                                      26
advantage in relationship lending (although the mode of relationship building may be somewhat

different).    However, our results suggest the possibility that large banks do not have an advantage

in deploying transactions-based lending to transparent borrowers.       Whether this is an idiosyncratic

feature of Japanese SME lending, or whether this result is universal, is beyond the scope of our

analysis.     However, data limitations in the extant literature on the U.S. and elsewhere (e.g.,

BMPRS) do not rule out the possibility that this result is universal.

     The determinants of these observed and potential differences across countries likely stem from

differences in the financial institutions structures and lending infrastructures across countries which

in turn affect the relative efficacies of different lending technologies.            Thus, the relative

deployment of different lending technologies across Japan and the U.S., and the nature of the

lending technologies themselves, may be quite different, as suggested by Berger and Udell (2006)

and Uchida, Udell, and Yamori (2006a).

     The social environment could also be substantially different in Japan and the U.S.22               In

particular, if the level of social capital and trust is higher in Japan than in the U.S., this may affect

the writing and enforcement of financial contracts.      The importance of social capital in explaining

regional or cross-country differences in financial contracting has been demonstrated in related

contexts (Stulz and Williamson 2003, Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales 2004).                   Geographic

conditions could also make it less costly in Japan to conduct relationship lending, which in turn

would lead to less emphasis on relationship length.          This is clearly speculation on our part,

however.      More research on this topic, both in Japan and in other countries, is certainly needed.




5.   Conclusion


22
    Berger and Udell (2006) consider the social environment to be part of the overall lending
infrastructure.



                                                    27
     In this paper we investigated the link between bank size and banking relationships in the

Japanese SME commercial loan market.         Our methodological approach is very similar to Berger,

Miller, Petersen, Rajan, and Stein (2005) (BMPRS).         This allows us to shed light on potential

similarities and differences between commercial lending practices in the two largest commercial

markets in the world.   Our unique Japanese data set also allowed us to investigate some issues that

BMPRS were unable to address because of limitations in their data.

     Our results reveal both similarities and differences in SME lending practice across the two

countries.   We found like BMPRS that larger firms tend to borrow from larger banks, but unlike

BMPRS for the U.S., we do not find that it is because larger firms are more transparent.        This

implies that large banks do not necessarily have a comparative advantage in extending

transactions-based lending, at least in Japan.   We also found like BMPRS that smaller banks have

stronger relationships with their borrowers.     But there were some interesting differences in the

nature of relationship building across these two countries.     Our findings of both similarities and

differences in SME lending between the U.S. and Japan clarifies the nature of the linkages between

size and lending technologies in these two countries, and suggests the need for further studies in

other countries.

     Our results also suggest some policy implications.     The blurring wall between different types

of banks now facilitates inter-type competition among Japanese banks in a manner that seems to be

unfavorable to small banks.    The results obtained in this paper imply, however, that small banks

have a comparative advantage in relationship lending and in establishing strong relationships with

their borrowers.   We also found an association between bank size and firm size although this

association is not likely due to the transparency of large firms, but rather other factors that may

drive customer differentiation between large banks and small banks.      These suggest that it may be

important that the small bank sector of the industry survive in the future.




                                                  28
     However, we cannot conclude that the future is necessarily bright for small banks in Japan.

Large banks in Japan have been increasing their lending to small firms.            This may imply that

although the comparative advantage of small banks in providing relationship lending to small

borrowers may not change, large banks may nevertheless displace small banks quantitatively.

Further research is clearly needed to identify the trade-offs associated with this potential shift.




Data Appendix: Construction of proxies for the strength of bank-SME
relationships

1. LENGTH

     This variable represents how many years the firm and its main bank have transactional

relationships.   The relevant question in the SFE survey considers the existence of not lending

relationship only but broader relationships.

2. SCOPE

     This variable is the first principal component of the principal component analysis over five

dummy variables representing the existence or non-existence of a particular transaction between the

firm and the main bank. The five dummy variables are created based on the following five questions:

(i) whether the SME has a checking account at the main bank, (ii) whether the SME settles notes

payables at the main bank, (iii) whether the SME has recently purchased stock in its main bank, (iv)

whether the SME has obtained some information services from the main bank, and (v) whether the SME

has time deposits at the main bank.

3. DISTANCE

     Since the original question in the SFE survey only gives us multi-nominal information, we

constructed DISTANCE as follows: It takes a value of 0.25 if the firm answered that the distance is no




                                                   29
greater than 500m, 0.75 if the distance is greater than 500m and no greater than 1km, 5.5 if it is greater

than 1km and no greater than 10km, 20 if it is greater than 10km and no greater than 30km, 40 if it is

greater than 30km and no greater than 50km, and 75 if it is greater than 50km.

4. CONTACT

     The original question in the SFE survey only asks firms to choose from nine categorical options.

We thus constructed CONTACT as follows: It takes a value of 365 if the frequency of contact between

the firm and the loan officer of the main bank is answered once a day, 52 if the frequency is once a week,

26 if it is once in two weeks, 12 if it is once a month, 6 if it is once in two months, 4 if it is once in three

months, 2 if it is once in a half year, 1 if it is once a year, and 0 if no contact has been made in the past

one year.

5. NOBK

     NOBK is the number of lender institutions including non-banks that a respondent firm borrows

from.




                                                References

A.N. Berger, N.H. Miller, M.A. Petersen, R.G. Rajan, and J.C. Stein. Does function follow

     organizational form? Evidence from the lending practices of large and small banks. Journal of

     Financial Economics, Vol. 76, pp. 237–269, 2005.

A.N. Berger and G.F. Udell. Relationship lending and lines of credit in small firm finance. Journal

     of Business, Vol. 68, pp. 351–381, 1995.

A.N. Berger and G.F. Udell. A more complete conceptual framework for SME finance. Journal of

     Banking and Finance, Vol. 30, pp. 2945–2966, 2006.

A.W.A. Boot. Relationship Banking: What Do We Know? Journal of Financial Intermediation, Vol.




                                                      30
     9, pp. 7-25, 2000.

D.A. Carter,, J.E. McNulty, and J.A. Verbrugge. Do Small Banks Have an Advantage in Lending?

     An Examination of Risk-Adjusted Yields on Business Loans at Large and Small Banks.

     Journal of Financial Services Research, Vol. 25, pp. 233-52, 2004.

R.A. Cole, L.G. Goldberg, and L.J. White. Cookie-Cutter Versus Character: The Micro Structure of

     Small-Business Lending by Large and Small Banks. Journal of Financial and Quantitative

     Analysis, Vol.39, pp. 227-52, 2004.

E. Elyasiani and L.G. Goldberg. Relationship lending: A survey of the literature. Journal of

     Economics and Business, Vol. 56, pp. 315-330, 2004.

L. Guiso, Sapienza, P., Zingales, L.   Does local financial development matter? Quarterly Journal of

     Economics, Vol. 119, pp. 929-969, 2004.

T. Hoshi and A. Kashyap. Corporate Financing and Governance in Japan. MIT Press, 2001.

M. Kano, H. Uchida, G.F. Udell, and W. Watanabe. Information Verifiability, Bank Organization,

     Bank Competition and Bank-Borrower Relationships. RIETI discussion paper 06-E-003, the

     Research Institute of Economy, Trade, and Industry, 2006.

J. Liberti and A. Mian. Estimating the Effect of Hierarchies on Information Use. London Business

     School working paper, 2006.

S. Ongena and D.C. Smith. Bank relationships: A review. In P.T. Harker and S.A. Zenios, editors,

     Performance of Financial Institutions. Cambridge University Press, 2000.

A. Ono and I. Uesugi. The Role of Collateral and Personal Guarantees in Relationship Lending:

     Evidence from Japan’s Small Business Loan Market. RIETI Discussion Paper Series 05-E-027,

     the Research Institute of Economy, Trade, and Industry, 2006.

M.A. Petersen and R.G. Rajan. The benefits of lending relationships: evidence from small business

     data. Journal of Finance, Vol. 49, pp. 3–37, 1994.




                                                 31
The Small and Medium Enterprise Agency of the Government of Japan. 2002 White Paper on Small

    and Medium Enterprises in Japan. 2002.

The Small and Medium Enterprise Agency of the Government of Japan. 2003 White Paper on Small

    and Medium Enterprises in Japan. 2003.

The Small and Medium Enterprise Agency of the Government of Japan. 2004 White Paper on Small

    and Medium Enterprises in Japan. 2004.

J.A. Scott. Small business and value of community financial institutions. Journal of Financial

    Services Research, Vol. 25, pp. 207-230, 2004.

J.C. Stein. Information production and capital allocation: decentralized versus hierarchical firms.

    Journal of Finance, Vol. LVII, pp. 1891–1921, 2002.

R.M. Stulz and R. Williamson.     Culture, openness and finance. Journal of Financial Economics,

    Vol. 70, pp. 313-349, 2003.

H. Uchida, G. Udell and N. Yamori. SME financing and the choice of lending technology, RIETI

    Discussion Paper Series 06-E-025, the Research Institute of Economy, Trade, and Industry,

    2006a.

H. Uchida, G. Udell and N. Yamori. Loan officers and relationship lending, RIETI Discussion Paper

    Series 06-E-031, the Research Institute of Economy, Trade, and Industry, 2006b.

N. Yamori. Shinyou Kinko wa Saihen ni Dou Torikumu Bekika (How should Shinkin banks tackle

    consolidations?). Shinkin Central Bank Monthly, Vol.4, pp. 2-20, 2005.




                                                32
                      Table 1: Descriptive statistics
                        N     Mean       Std. Dev.      Min        Max
BTASSET (million yen) 1863  19,600,000 32,100,000        42,824 102,000,000
ASSET (thousand yen) 1863     2,696,387   5,356,132        2,337 74,900,000
LENGTH䇭(year)         1863       31.953      15.668           1          99
SCOPE                 1863        0.005       1.269      -4.450      1.625
NOBK                  1863        3.055       3.792           0          99
DISTANCE              1794        6.077       9.336       0.250          75
CONTACT               1813       46.458      84.674           0        365
AUDIT                 1863        0.580       0.494           0           1
CURRENT               1863        1.744       6.936       0.078    290.959
CAPRATIO              1863        0.253       0.293      -4.761      0.969
PPMARGIN              1863        0.009       0.089      -1.513      1.452
BUILDING              1863        0.106       0.118      -0.025      0.892
MACHINERY             1863        0.050       0.098      -0.046      0.775
VEHICLE               1863        0.009       0.034      -0.004      0.545
TOOL                  1863        0.009       0.021       0.000      0.504
LAND                  1863        0.135       0.128       0.000      0.842
FAGE (year)           1863       46.953      25.742           3        378
EMPLOYEE (person)     1863       75.149    180.641            2       4709
LISTED                1863        0.018       0.134           0           1
OWNER                 1863        0.449       0.498           0           1
GENDER                1863        0.982       0.132           0           1
HOUSING               1863        0.893       0.310           0           1
EDUCATION             1863        0.609       0.488           0           1
AGE (year)            1863       59.110       9.441          29          95
CONSTRUCT             1863        0.224       0.417           0           1
TRANSPORT             1863        0.026       0.160           0           1
WHOLESALE             1863        0.158       0.365           0           1
RETAIL                1863        0.059       0.235           0           1
REALESTATE            1863        0.028       0.166           0           1
SERVICE               1863        0.074       0.261           0           1
OTHER                 1863        0.060       0.238           0           1
HOKKAIDO              1863        0.084       0.277           0           1
TOHOKU                1863        0.131       0.337           0           1
KITAKANTO             1863        0.034       0.181           0           1
CHUBU                 1863        0.229       0.420           0           1
KANSAI                1863        0.144       0.351           0           1
CHUGOKU               1863        0.079       0.270           0           1
SHIKOKU               1863        0.052       0.222           0           1
KYUSHU                1863        0.077       0.266           0           1
                        Table 2: Mean of important variables by bank size
Bank asset-size class
(in Japanese yen)          < 1 trillion yen   1 - 5 trillion yen   5-10 trillion yen      10 trllion +

                                      # of                  # of                # of               # of
                            mean                mean                 mean                 mean
Variables                             obs.                  obs.                obs.               obs.
LENGTH䇭(year)                 28.459 283         32.059     759       32.644    340        33.351 481
SCOPE                          -0.042 283         0.106     759        0.008    340         -0.130 481
NOBK                            2.007 283         2.747     759        3.053    340          4.160 481
DISTANCE (kilometer)            4.880 274         5.666     733        5.294    317          7.942 470
CONTACT (days/year)           60.477 277         50.056     738       45.485    324        33.331 474
BTASSET (million yen)        491,945 283      2,780,385     759    5,970,119    340    66,900,000 481
ASSET (thousand yen)       1,259,390 283      2,328,040     759    2,689,793    340     4,127,756 481
FAGE (year)                   40.290 283         45.382     759       50.103    340        51.127 481
EMPLOYEE (person)             33.498 283         57.312     759       69.391    340       131.869 481
LISTED                          0.000 283         0.001     759        0.009    340          0.062 481
OWNER                           0.587 283         0.491     759        0.459    340          0.295 481
GENDER                          0.975 283         0.975     759        0.991    340          0.992 481
HOUSING                         0.922 283         0.900     759        0.876    340          0.875 481
EDUCATION                       0.417 283         0.559     759        0.629    340          0.788 481
AGE (year)                    57.982 283         58.895     759       59.059    340        60.150 481
AUDIT                           0.534 283         0.581     759        0.615    340          0.580 481
                          Table 3. Bank choice
                   (Dependent variable = log(BTASSET))

                                                                 Robust
                                            Coefficient         standard     P-value
                                                                  error
Intercept          Intercept                  15.6011 ***          1.3002       0.000
Main independent AUDIT                         0.1001              0.0614       0.103
variables          log(ASSET)                  0.1288 ***          0.0257       0.000
                   BRANCH                      0.0004 *            0.0002       0.083
Market structure REGBRATIO                    -3.1309 **           1.4026       0.026
                   SHINBRATIO                 -1.0949              1.4180       0.440
                   CURRENT                    -0.0008              0.0016       0.639
Firm's financial
                   CAPRATIO                    0.3475 ***          0.1252       0.006
numbers
                   PPMARGIN                    0.0742              0.3868       0.848
                   BUILDING                   -0.2441              0.2650       0.357
                   MACHINERY                  -0.7149 **           0.3249       0.028
                   VEHICLE                    -1.7938 *            1.0870       0.099
                   TOOL                       -1.5940              1.3283       0.230
Firm's             LAND                       -0.7270 ***          0.2572       0.005
characteristics    FAGE                        0.0006              0.0022       0.784
                   FAGE2                       0.0000              0.0000       0.398
                   EMPLOYEE                    0.0003              0.0002       0.145
                   LISTED                      0.5046 **           0.1950       0.010
                   OWNER                      -0.2187 ***          0.0654       0.001
                   GENDER                      0.2630              0.2277       0.248
Entrepreneur's     HOUSING                    -0.0872              0.0959       0.363
characteristics    EDUCATION                   0.3452 ***          0.0680       0.000
                   AGE                         0.0060 *            0.0033       0.069
                   CONSTRUCT                  -0.0980              0.0843       0.245
                   TRANSPORT                   0.3750 *            0.2061       0.069
                   WHOLESALE                   0.0540              0.0959       0.574
Industry dummies RETAIL                        0.1164              0.1299       0.370
                   REALESTATE                 -0.3353 *            0.1964       0.088
                   SERVICE                    -0.0010              0.1254       0.993
                   OTHER                       0.2115 *            0.1235       0.087
                   HOKKAIDO                   -1.0413 ***          0.3659       0.004
                   TOHOKU                     -0.4336              0.2815       0.124
                   KITAKANTO                   0.5002 *            0.2948       0.090
                   CHUBU                      -0.1333              0.2694       0.621
Regional dummies
                   KANSAI                      0.6717 ***          0.1516       0.000
                   CHUGOKU                    -0.0466              0.2835       0.870
                   SHIKOKU                     0.4227              0.2757       0.125
                   KYUSYU                     -0.0393              0.2938       0.894
Number of observation                             1863
F-value                                       42.8100
Prob (F value)                                 0.0000
R-squared                                      0.4513
Note: ***, **, or * means that the coefficient is statistically significant at 1%, 5%,
or 10% level.
                               Table 4. Determinants of relationship closeness
                                       (Dependent variable = LENGTH)


                                                        OLS                                            IV

                                      Coefficient            Robust      P-value       Coefficient       Robust P-value
Intercept            Intercept           -5.6140               4.6762       0.230           2.7754       25.3636      0.913
Main independent     AUDIT                0.0199               0.5604       0.972           0.0780        0.5801      0.893
variables            log(BTASSET)        -0.1867               0.2120       0.379          -0.8089        1.8441      0.661
Market structure     BRANCH              -0.0010               0.0008       0.174          -0.0005        0.0017      0.773
                     log(ASSET)           0.9750 ***           0.2344       0.000           1.0569 *** 0.3253         0.001
Firm's financial     CURRENT             -0.0977 ***           0.0182       0.000          -0.0982 *** 0.0185         0.000
numbers              CAPRATIO             2.8799 ***           0.8157       0.000           3.0999 *** 1.0640         0.004
                     PPMARGIN            -8.0105 ***           2.6824       0.003          -7.9330 *** 2.7932         0.005
                     BUILDING             0.1189               2.3963       0.960          -0.0143        2.4232      0.995
                     MACHINERY           -1.9411               2.4693       0.432          -2.3659        2.6990      0.381
                     VEHICLE             -1.4188               8.0359       0.860          -2.4269        8.4516      0.774
                     TOOL                -5.2261              13.7440       0.704          -6.1197       13.5276      0.651
Firm's               LAND                 1.2202               2.1090       0.563           0.7806        2.4260      0.748
characteristics      FAGE                 0.5762 ***           0.0604       0.000           0.5767 *** 0.0594         0.000
                     FAGE2               -0.0017 ***           0.0005       0.000          -0.0017 *** 0.0005         0.000
                     EMPLOYEE             0.0050 *             0.0026       0.052           0.0052 *      0.0027      0.051
                     LISTED               3.2659               2.6847       0.224           3.5841        2.9124      0.218
                     OWNER               -0.7182               0.5791       0.215          -0.8597        0.7127      0.228
                     GENDER               1.3820               1.7493       0.430           1.5392        1.8170      0.397
Entrepreneur's       HOUSING              1.4786               0.9138       0.106           1.4187        0.9329      0.128
characteristics      EDUCATION            0.6644               0.6093       0.276           0.8764        0.9021      0.331
                     AGE                  0.1242 ***           0.0307       0.000           0.1280 *** 0.0325         0.000
                     CONSTRUCT           -1.1519               0.7445       0.122          -1.2095        0.7723      0.117
                     TRANSPORT           -0.8839               1.8032       0.624          -0.6385        1.9140      0.739
                     WHOLESALE            0.7777               0.9029       0.389           0.8098        0.8944      0.365
Industry dummies RETAIL                  -0.5468               1.3592       0.688          -0.4513        1.3517      0.738
                     REALESTATE          -1.3791               1.4359       0.337          -1.5978        1.5821      0.313
                     SERVICE             -1.7058 *             1.0226       0.095          -1.7060 *      1.0167      0.093
                     OTHER               -0.6322               1.0678       0.554          -0.4990        1.1050      0.652
                     HOKKAIDO            -0.9252               1.3872       0.505          -1.7847        2.9673      0.548
                     TOHOKU               2.6092 *             1.4221       0.067           1.9733        2.4519      0.421
                     KITAKANTO            3.1204 *             1.6659       0.061           3.1978 **     1.6296      0.050
Regional dummies CHUBU                    2.3249 *             1.2387       0.061           2.0412        1.5779      0.196
                     KANSAI               1.0493               1.1802       0.374           1.3613        1.4431      0.345
                     CHUGOKU              2.3465               1.5218       0.123           2.0253        1.8683      0.278
                     SHIKOKU              2.8812 *             1.6686       0.084           2.7552        1.7349      0.112
                     KYUSYU               2.2801               1.5360       0.138           1.8290        2.1047      0.385
Number of observation                       1863                                              1863
R-squared                                 0.4599                                                NA
Durbin-Wu-Hausman test P value                                                              0.7350
Hansen's J test statistic (P value)                                                         0.0030 (0.95918)
Note: ***, **, or * means that the coefficient is statistically significant at 1%, 5%, or 10% level. P value for the Durbin-
Wu-Hausman test is that of the coefficient of the first stage residual.
                               Table 5. Determinants of relationship closeness
                                        (Dependent variable = SCOPE)


                                                        OLS                                            IV

                                      Coefficient            Robust      P-value       Coefficient       Robust P-value
Intercept            Intercept           -0.3745               0.4717       0.427           4.8461 *      2.8642      0.091
Main independent     AUDIT                0.0708               0.0566       0.211           0.1070 *      0.0633      0.091
variables            log(BTASSET)        -0.0715 ***           0.0215       0.001          -0.4587 **     0.2107      0.029
Market structure     BRANCH               0.0000               0.0001       0.588           0.0003        0.0002      0.123
                     log(ASSET)           0.1579 ***           0.0240       0.000           0.2089 *** 0.0396         0.000
Firm's financial     CURRENT             -0.0033               0.0054       0.539          -0.0037        0.0058      0.528
numbers              CAPRATIO            -0.0762               0.1755       0.664           0.0607        0.1611      0.706
                     PPMARGIN             0.5125 *             0.2846       0.072           0.5607        0.3563      0.116
                     BUILDING            -0.6354 **            0.2727       0.020          -0.7183 **     0.2923      0.014
                     MACHINERY            0.5042               0.3332       0.130           0.2399        0.3857      0.534
                     VEHICLE             -0.0008               1.0153       0.999          -0.6280        1.0390      0.546
                     TOOL                -1.7383               1.0732       0.105          -2.2943 **     1.1466      0.045
Firm's               LAND                 0.5684 **            0.2432       0.020           0.2949        0.2944      0.317
characteristics      FAGE                 0.0208 ***           0.0028       0.000           0.0211 *** 0.0027         0.000
                     FAGE2               -0.0001 ***           0.0000       0.000          -0.0001 *** 0.0000         0.000
                     EMPLOYEE             0.0003 **            0.0001       0.026           0.0004 **     0.0002      0.019
                     LISTED              -0.5865 ***           0.2093       0.005          -0.3885        0.2443      0.112
                     OWNER                0.0900               0.0583       0.123           0.0020        0.0777      0.980
                     GENDER              -0.0684               0.2022       0.735           0.0294        0.2201      0.894
Entrepreneur's       HOUSING              0.0216               0.0848       0.799          -0.0157        0.0961      0.871
characteristics      EDUCATION           -0.1192 *             0.0633       0.060           0.0128        0.0986      0.897
                     AGE                 -0.0042               0.0030       0.163          -0.0019        0.0035      0.587
                     CONSTRUCT           -0.0804               0.0773       0.299          -0.1162        0.0864      0.179
                     TRANSPORT           -0.5685 **            0.2489       0.022          -0.4158        0.2849      0.144
                     WHOLESALE           -0.0424               0.0823       0.607          -0.0224        0.0870      0.797
Industry dummies RETAIL                  -0.3471 ***           0.1082       0.001          -0.2877 **     0.1208      0.017
                     REALESTATE          -0.7989 ***           0.1850       0.000          -0.9350 *** 0.2064         0.000
                     SERVICE             -0.5978 ***           0.1393       0.000          -0.5979 *** 0.1426         0.000
                     OTHER               -0.5347 ***           0.1493       0.000          -0.4518 *** 0.1597         0.005
                     HOKKAIDO             0.1337               0.1432       0.351          -0.4013        0.3347      0.231
                     TOHOKU              -0.0295               0.1479       0.842          -0.4252        0.2716      0.117
                     KITAKANTO           -0.1772               0.2013       0.379          -0.1290        0.2059      0.531
Regional dummies     CHUBU                0.1290               0.1177       0.273          -0.0476        0.1657      0.774
                     KANSAI               0.0918               0.1052       0.383           0.2860 *      0.1532      0.062
                     CHUGOKU              0.0644               0.1479       0.663          -0.1355        0.1974      0.493
                     SHIKOKU              0.0635               0.1581       0.688          -0.0149        0.1739      0.932
                     KYUSYU               0.0936               0.1565       0.550          -0.1871        0.2338      0.423
Number of observation                       1863                                              1863
R-squared                                 0.1800                                                NA
Durbin-Wu-Hausman test P value                                                              0.0430
Hansen's J test statistic (P value)                                                         4.7780 (0.02883)
Note: ***, **, or * means that the coefficient is statistically significant at 1%, 5%, or 10% level. P value for the Durbin-
Wu-Hausman test is that of the coefficient of the first stage residual.
                               Table 6. Determinants of relationship closeness
                                      (Dependent variable = DISTANCE)


                                                        OLS                                            IV

                                      Coefficient            Robust      P-value       Coefficient       Robust P-value
Intercept            Intercept            1.2122               4.0077       0.762          -1.1111       26.0017      0.966
Main independent     AUDIT                0.4561               0.4207       0.278           0.4393        0.4882      0.368
variables            log(BTASSET)         0.6840 ***           0.2149       0.001           0.8567        1.8588      0.645
Market structure     BRANCH              -0.0021 ***           0.0007       0.004          -0.0023        0.0016      0.147
                     log(ASSET)           0.3682               0.2289       0.108           0.3454        0.2820      0.221
Firm's financial     CURRENT              0.1074 ***           0.0151       0.000           0.1075 *** 0.0147         0.000
numbers              CAPRATIO            -0.7546               0.7202       0.295          -0.8157        0.9948      0.412
                     PPMARGIN            -2.8857               3.2912       0.381          -2.9066        3.3030      0.379
                     BUILDING             4.7390 *             2.8409       0.095           4.7774 *      2.8505      0.094
                     MACHINERY           -0.5398               2.0651       0.794          -0.4175        2.3720      0.860
                     VEHICLE             -0.7834               4.8910       0.873          -0.5058        5.9398      0.932
                     TOOL                50.2665 ***          19.1553       0.009          50.5518 ** 19.9403         0.011
Firm's               LAND                 1.0389               1.5428       0.501           1.1563        2.0002      0.563
characteristics      FAGE                -0.0262 *             0.0157       0.094          -0.0264 *      0.0153      0.084
                     FAGE2                0.0000               0.0001       0.680           0.0000        0.0001      0.718
                     EMPLOYEE             0.0002               0.0012       0.859           0.0002        0.0014      0.912
                     LISTED               4.1554               3.0909       0.179           4.0720        3.0136      0.177
                     OWNER               -0.6829 *             0.3971       0.086          -0.6405        0.6495      0.324
                     GENDER              -0.8929               1.2759       0.484          -0.9494        1.4335      0.508
Entrepreneur's       HOUSING              0.5785               0.6923       0.403           0.5952        0.7625      0.435
characteristics      EDUCATION            0.5726               0.4211       0.174           0.5134        0.8120      0.527
                     AGE                 -0.0602 ***           0.0204       0.003          -0.0613 **     0.0249      0.014
                     CONSTRUCT           -2.4526 ***           0.5502       0.000          -2.4374 *** 0.6074         0.000
                     TRANSPORT           -2.2203 *             1.1915       0.063          -2.2861 *      1.3003      0.079
                     WHOLESALE           -3.0570 ***           0.5402       0.000          -3.0637 *** 0.5230         0.000
Industry dummies RETAIL                  -4.4501 ***           0.7809       0.000          -4.4774 *** 0.7823         0.000
                     REALESTATE          -1.7299               1.9028       0.363          -1.6699        2.0598      0.418
                     SERVICE             -3.0827 ***           0.7512       0.000          -3.0859 *** 0.7390         0.000
                     OTHER               -2.5979 **            1.2221       0.034          -2.6326 **     1.2052      0.029
                     HOKKAIDO            -0.8019               1.0456       0.443          -0.5564        2.9805      0.852
                     TOHOKU              -2.1698               1.3459       0.107          -1.9879        2.5859      0.442
                     KITAKANTO            0.1199               2.3284       0.959           0.1019        2.3020      0.965
Regional dummies     CHUBU               -1.4722               1.2545       0.241          -1.3863        1.6911      0.412
                     KANSAI              -1.0205               1.0782       0.344          -1.0973        1.2654      0.386
                     CHUGOKU              0.0458               1.5668       0.977           0.1416        2.0029      0.944
                     SHIKOKU             -1.6182               1.7601       0.358          -1.5769        1.8928      0.405
                     KYUSYU              -1.8107               1.3658       0.185          -1.6780        2.1473      0.435
Number of observation                       1794                                              1794
R-squared                                 0.0998                                                NA
Durbin-Wu-Hausman test P value                                                              0.9320
Hansen's J test statistic (P value)                                                         0.3800 (0.53757)
Note: ***, **, or * means that the coefficient is statistically significant at 1%, 5%, or 10% level. P value for the Durbin-
Wu-Hausman test is that of the coefficient of the first stage residual.
                               Table 7. Determinants of relationship closeness
                                      (Dependent variable = CONTACT)


                                                        OLS                                           IV

                                      Coefficient           Robust       P-value       Coefficient       Robust P-value
Intercept            Intercept         101.2450 ***           31.2730       0.001         55.1605       169.3204      0.745
Main independent     AUDIT                3.4950               3.9531       0.377           3.1955        4.0042      0.425
variables            log(BTASSET)        -8.0881 ***           1.5157       0.000          -4.6568       12.3465      0.706
Market structure     BRANCH               0.0084 *             0.0046       0.066           0.0055        0.0113      0.627
                     log(ASSET)           6.2805 ***           1.5770       0.000           5.8277 **     2.3528      0.013
Firm's financial     CURRENT             -0.0658               0.1504       0.662          -0.0637        0.1515      0.674
numbers              CAPRATIO            -9.8301               6.3965       0.125        -10.9884         7.7113      0.154
                     PPMARGIN            50.4672 *            26.3383       0.056         50.1115 **     25.6191      0.050
                     BUILDING           -13.4065              14.3122       0.349        -12.7660        14.4279      0.376
                     MACHINERY          -21.6190              18.3335       0.238        -19.3000        19.7803      0.329
                     VEHICLE             47.5427              46.2228       0.304         53.2851        51.6870      0.303
                     TOOL                99.9686            112.1123        0.373        105.5325       112.8596      0.350
Firm's               LAND                -2.2487              15.1290       0.882           0.1172       16.4911      0.994
characteristics      FAGE                 0.3721 ***           0.1370       0.007           0.3684 ***    0.1353      0.006
                     FAGE2               -0.0012 **            0.0006       0.033          -0.0012 **     0.0006      0.032
                     EMPLOYEE             0.0172               0.0114       0.132           0.0161        0.0116      0.166
                     LISTED              21.3597              17.7275       0.228         19.6061        18.8559      0.298
                     OWNER                8.5670 **            4.2916       0.046           9.4011 *      5.6757      0.098
                     GENDER              16.4178              11.1425       0.141         15.2585        11.8324      0.197
Entrepreneur's       HOUSING              6.3065               5.9344       0.288           6.5941        5.9430      0.267
characteristics      EDUCATION           -6.8592               4.3801       0.118          -8.0034        5.5715      0.151
                     AGE                 -0.3263               0.2124       0.125          -0.3461        0.2134      0.105
                     CONSTRUCT          -10.0033 *             5.5466       0.071          -9.7248 *      5.6603      0.086
                     TRANSPORT          -14.4045              11.7475       0.220        -15.7326        12.4527      0.206
                     WHOLESALE            0.5879               6.8589       0.932           0.4294        6.8181      0.950
Industry dummies RETAIL                  -9.7874               9.0388       0.279        -10.3492         9.1694      0.259
                     REALESTATE          -4.6120              13.3060       0.729          -3.4173       13.7317      0.803
                     SERVICE            -17.7236 ***           6.2115       0.004        -17.8836 ***     6.0859      0.003
                     OTHER              -17.3111 **            7.3062       0.018        -18.0192 **      7.6467      0.018
                     HOKKAIDO             3.0288               8.2892       0.715           7.8654       19.4408      0.686
                     TOHOKU               5.2207               8.4897       0.539           8.8295       15.2957      0.564
                     KITAKANTO           -0.6916              10.0375       0.945          -1.0510        9.9919      0.916
Regional dummies CHUBU                   10.0815               6.9480       0.147         11.7247         9.5868      0.221
                     KANSAI               1.5790               6.2673       0.801          -0.0341        7.8027      0.997
                     CHUGOKU             32.0424 ***          11.4755       0.005         33.8975 **     13.5414      0.012
                     SHIKOKU             30.7395 **           12.9926       0.018         31.5005 **     13.2709      0.018
                     KYUSYU               8.7448               9.4954       0.357         11.3320        14.0741      0.421
Number of observation                       1813                                              1813
R-squared                                 0.0621                                                NA
Durbin-Wu-Hausman test P value                                                              0.7740
Hansen's J test statistic (P value)                                                         1.3120 (0.25207)
Note: ***, **, or * means that the coefficient is statistically significant at 1%, 5%, or 10% level. P value for the Durbin-
Wu-Hausman test is that of the coefficient of the first stage residual.
                               Table 8. Determinants of relationship closeness
                                        (Dependent variable = NOBK)


                                                        OLS                                            IV

                                      Coefficient            Robust      P-value       Coefficient       Robust P-value
Intercept            Intercept           -2.2091 *             1.3186       0.094          -3.1603        6.0354      0.601
Main independent     AUDIT               -0.0228               0.1798       0.899          -0.0293        0.1690      0.862
variables            log(BTASSET)         0.1852 ***           0.0641       0.004           0.2558        0.4725      0.588
Market structure     BRANCH               0.0001               0.0002       0.782           0.0000        0.0005      0.996
                     log(ASSET)           0.2296 ***           0.0705       0.001           0.2203 **     0.0927      0.017
Firm's financial     CURRENT             -0.0039               0.0041       0.340          -0.0038        0.0040      0.335
numbers              CAPRATIO            -1.1734 ***           0.3400       0.001          -1.1983 *** 0.3716         0.001
                     PPMARGIN            -0.1791               1.1457       0.876          -0.1879        1.1556      0.871
                     BUILDING            -0.4686               0.7130       0.511          -0.4535        0.7178      0.527
                     MACHINERY            1.0620               0.7302       0.146           1.1102        0.7869      0.158
                     VEHICLE             -3.3090 **            1.4608       0.024          -3.1947 **     1.5911      0.045
                     TOOL                 5.8695               7.4711       0.432           5.9708        7.6834      0.437
Firm's               LAND                 1.0279               0.8887       0.248           1.0778        0.8427      0.201
characteristics      FAGE                -0.0094 *             0.0055       0.088          -0.0094 *      0.0054      0.082
                     FAGE2                0.0000 **            0.0000       0.014           0.0000 **     0.0000      0.015
                     EMPLOYEE             0.0073 ***           0.0021       0.000           0.0073 *** 0.0021         0.000
                     LISTED               0.6755               0.5774       0.242           0.6394        0.6358      0.315
                     OWNER               -0.3521               0.2185       0.107          -0.3361        0.2508      0.180
                     GENDER              -0.0450               0.3744       0.904          -0.0628        0.3827      0.870
Entrepreneur's       HOUSING              0.3100               0.2540       0.222           0.3168        0.2325      0.173
characteristics      EDUCATION           -0.1044               0.1769       0.555          -0.1284        0.2495      0.607
                     AGE                  0.0086               0.0079       0.279           0.0082        0.0089      0.362
                     CONSTRUCT            0.1404               0.1602       0.381           0.1470        0.1724      0.394
                     TRANSPORT           -1.0422 **            0.5010       0.038          -1.0700 **     0.4942      0.030
                     WHOLESALE            0.6226 **            0.2436       0.011           0.6189 *** 0.2321         0.008
Industry dummies RETAIL                   1.4271               0.8921       0.110           1.4162        0.9043      0.117
                     REALESTATE           1.7346 ***           0.4460       0.000           1.7594 *** 0.4739         0.000
                     SERVICE              0.2291               0.2636       0.385           0.2291        0.2626      0.383
                     OTHER                0.9710 **            0.3894       0.013           0.9559 **     0.3871      0.014
                     HOKKAIDO             0.1149               0.8121       0.887           0.2124        0.8132      0.794
                     TOHOKU              -0.3911               0.4062       0.336          -0.3190        0.4285      0.457
                     KITAKANTO           -0.7983 *             0.4734       0.092          -0.8071        0.4977      0.105
Regional dummies     CHUBU               -0.5786    *          0.3455       0.094          -0.5464 *      0.2886      0.058
                     KANSAI               0.0082               0.3207       0.980          -0.0272        0.4671      0.954
                     CHUGOKU              0.0100               0.4157       0.981           0.0464        0.3600      0.897
                     SHIKOKU              0.2377               0.5031       0.637           0.2519        0.4651      0.588
                     KYUSYU               0.1066               0.4464       0.811           0.1577        0.4251      0.711
Number of observation                       1863                                              1863
R-squared                                 0.2064                                                NA
Durbin-Wu-Hausman test P value                                                              0.8820
Hansen's J test statistic (P value)                                                         0.5100 (0.47535)
Note: ***, **, or * means that the coefficient is statistically significant at 1%, 5%, or 10% level. P value for the Durbin-
Wu-Hausman test is that of the coefficient of the first stage residual.
