NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RATIONAL BUBBLES IN THE
PRICE OF GOLD

Behzad T. Diba
Herschel I. Grossman

Working Paper No. 1300

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, P4k 02138

March 1981

Financial support was provided by the National Science Foundation.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1300
March 1984

Rational Bubbles in the Price of Gold
ABSTRACT

This paper describes a theoretical and empirical study of
the possibility of rational bubbles in the relative price of
gold. The critical implication of the theoretical analysis is
that, if rational bubbles exist, the time series of the relative
price of gold, as well as any time series obtained by
differencing a finite number of times, is nonstationary. The
empirical evidence relating to this nonstationarity property
involves diagnostic checks for stationarity carried out in both
the time domain and the frequency domain. This evidence strongly
suggests that the process generating the first difference of the
log of the relative price of gold is stationary, a finding that
is inconsistent with the existence of rational bubbles. More
broadly, the empirical analysis finds a •close correspondence
between the time series properties of the relative price of gold
and the time series properties of real interest rates, which the
theory relates to the time series properties of the fundamental
component of the relative price of gold. In sum, the evidence is
consistent with the combined conclusion that the relative price
of gold corresponds to market fundamentals, that the process
generating first differences of market fundamentals is
stationary, and that actual price movements do not involve
rational bubbles.

Behzad T. Diba
Department of Economics
Tulane Univeristy

New Orleans, Louisiana 70118

Herschel I. Grossman
Department of Economics
Brown University
Providence, Rhode Island 02912

In recent years the price of gold has fluctuated widely
relative to the prices of other goods and services and the
realized return from holding gold for short periods has
fluctuated widely relative to realized real interest rates on
short—term assets. For example, from January 1975 through March
1983, the monthly inflation rate, measured by the U.S. CPI for
Ml Items Less Mortgage Interest Costs, averaged .61%, with a
standard deviation of .29%, a minimum of .04% and a maximum of
1.25%, while the monthly rate of change of the price of gold,
measured by the average of daily values of the London P.M. price
fix, averaged 1.19%, with a standard deviation of 8.22%, a

minimum of —16.80%, and a maximum of 48.39%. Moreover, during
the same period, the real monthly return from holding commercial
paper averaged .17%, with a standard deviation of •3q%, a minimum
of —.66%, and a maximum of 1.18%, while the real monthly return
from holding gold averaged .58%, with a standard deviation of

8.13%, a minimum of —17.77%, and a maximum of 46.68%.
Do these relatively wide fluctuations in gold's price and
real return reflect rational behavior? If so, are they
attributable solely to changes in market fundamentals, or do they
involve the existence of rational bubbles?

This paper describes a theoretical and empirical study of
the possibility of rational bubbles in the relative price of
gold. The critical implication of the theoretical analysis is
that, if rational bubbles exist, the time series of the relative
price of gold, as well as any time series obtained by
differencing a finite number of times, is nonstationary. This
implication suggests a strategy for obtaining evidence against
the existence of rational bubbles that, in contrast to other
empirical strategies1 does not depend on accepting untested
hypotheses about market fundamentals or about the factors
generating bubbles.

The empirical analysis involves diagnostic checks for
stationarity using data for the relative price of gold from
January 1975 through March 1983. The diagnostic checks are

—2—
carried out in both the time domain and the frequency domain.
The results strongly suggest that the fluctuations in the
relative price of gold during this period did not involve
rational bubbles.

1. A Model of the Relative Price of Gold
The theoretical model consists of a single equation that
specifies that the relative price of gold satisfies a condition
of equality between the value of the existing stock of gold and
the portfolio demand for gold.
(1)

St + Pt =

Etpt+i

—

p

—

YFr+i

+ u

where S is the logarithm of the stock of gold at date t,
is the logarithm of the price of gold at date t
relative to a general index of prices of goods and
services,

is an index of real rates of return on other assets
(the real interest rate) from date t to date t+l,
is an operater that denotes a rational expectation, i.e.

an expectation consistent with the true model, conditional
on information available at date t,
u represents the effects of all factors other than
expected rates of return on the demand for gold at date t,
and y are positive constants.
and
Equation (1) says that the value in terms of goods and
services of the portfolio demand for gold depends positively on
the expected real rate of return from holding gold, which is
simply the expected rate of change in the relative price of gold,
depends negatively on expected real rates of return on other

asets, and depends on other factors incorporated in Ut. This
model is a simplified version of the model of the market for a
storable commodity developed in Diha and Grossman (l9R3) and is
similar to the model of inflation that is discussed extensively
together with related literature in that paper.

—3—
The analysis assumes that S,, r, and u are exogenously
determined random variables and that the sequences {ESt+}
and (Etu+} do not grow exponentially with j, for
any t. The assumed exogeneity of St means that the model
abstracts from the distinction between different states of gold,
such as unmined ore, bullion, or jewelry. The theoretical
analysis in Diha and Grossman (l9R3) considers the market for
refined gold separately and explicitly allows for the effect of
the expected relative price of gold on the rate of extraction and
refining of ore. These complications , however, do not change
the qualitative implications of the existence of rational bubbles

on which the present analysis focuses. In any event, because no
reliable data exist for the stock of gold, these alternative
formulations are not distinguishable empirically, and the

econometric analysis must treat S, like u, as an unobserved
variable.

The assumed exogeneity of r means that the model
abstracts from any dependence of the real interest rate on events

in the gold market. Specifically, the analysis presumes that,
even if the relative price of gold exhibited rational bubbles,
these hubbies would not he reflected in real interest rates. A
possible interpretation of this assumption of exogeneity is that
the real interest rate is determined by close correspondence with
either the physical rate of return on capital or the rate of time
preference.

An implicit assumption that is critical for the possible
existence of rational bubbles in the price of gold is that the
cumulative flow of services generated by the stock of gold,
aggregated over an infinite time horizon, is not finite. To see
this point, contrast the case of a truly exhaustible resource
with given finite initial reserves, of which oil might he an
example, with the case of an inexhaustible resource, ot which

some types of land might he an example. We can analyze the time
path of the price of oil as follows: First, profit maximization
by owners of the resource and/or portfolio balance determines the

— 4.—

time path of the rate of price increase relative to the rate of
interest. Second, substituting for price in the consumers'
demand functions and aggregating over time gives cumulative
consumption as a function of the initial price alone. Finally,
equating cumulative consumption to the initial reserves
determines the initial price, and hence the entire price path,
uniquely.

In the contrasting case of land, the fundamental component
of the price equals the present value of the flow of rental
income. However, because the cumulative value of the flow of
services from land is not finite, we cannot determine uniquely
the time path of the price of land in the same way as the price

of oil. The present analysis treats the stock of gold to he
inexhaustible like the stock of land. The rationale is that,
even if gold is refined into bullion or manufactured into
jewelry, it continues to generate an unending flow of services in
the form of security, visual satisfaction, or whatever.

2. Solution of the Model
A solution for equation (1) requires a solution for a
partial difference equation that governs the formation of
expectations at date t. To obtain this equation, lead (1)

j

1, rearrange terms, operate on both sides with
Et, and apply the law of iterated expectations,
periods,

j

=

(2) EtPt+j+l =

to get,

(l-i-—l )EPt+

—

—l

E(u

—

Yr÷1÷

—

S+).

Equation (2) is a partial, rather than ordinary, difference

equation because Etp+. depends on both t and j. To solve
for F.p •, fix t and treat (2) as an ordinary difference
is greater than
equation in j. Because the eigenvalue i+
+ Yr+1+i) does not grow
unity and Et(S+ —
exponentially, the forward—looking particular solution involves a

—5—
convergent sum. This solution——see Sargent (1979, pp. 171—177)——
is

=

(3)

(l+)_1Z(l+_l)_k

Et(ut+j+k_ Yr+l+.+k St+j+k)

1.

j

To obtain a forward—looking particular solution for
set j = 1 in (3) and substitute for
in (1), to get

(4) p =

(l+)

Et(ut+_ Yr+1+.— 5t+i•

i=O

We refer to the particular solution, p, as the fundamental
component of the relative price of gold (FC).

To obtain the general solution for
—

p.

Then, by (1) and (4),

define

must satisfy the

homogeneous equation
—

(5)

(1+4)

=

0.

The solutions to equation (5) depend crucially on assumptions
about formation of expectations. For example, under perfect

foresight, t+l is known at date t and the general solution to
equation (5) would he
=

c(l+4)t,

where c is a constant to be determined by an initial condition.
More generally, under rational expectations, we can also
satisfy equation (5) with solutions to the stochastic difference
equation
(6)

—

(1+i —l )c = z41,

—6—
where z is a random variable, representing new information
available at date i, that satisfies

(Z.

(7)

1

E.z. =
J

1

for

i

for

i > j.

j

The key to the relevance of equation (6) for the general solution
is that equation (5) relates
to Etct+i, rather than to
itself.

The solution to equation (6) is

c(l+)t

=

+

il

(l+l)t_1z1.

Equation (8) involves the sum of two elements.

Vie refer to

c(l+)t as the deterministic bubble component of price (PRC)
t

and to

(l+ l)t l as the stochastic bubble component of
1=1

price (SEC). Adding together the expressions in equations (4)
and (8) gives the general solution for the time path of the
relative price of gold,

()

Pt

=

(1+)

+ c(l÷)t

J0(l') Et(ut÷r Yr+1+— st+1)
+

(1÷_l)t_i z..

3. Components of the Solution
The solution for the relative price of gold given by equation (9) contains three components——FC, DBC, and SPC. The
fundamental component (FC) involves the current values of the

—7
expected real interest rate, the other demand variables, and the
stock of gold together with a sum, with exponentially declining
weights, of expected future values of these variables.
The deterministic bubble component (PBC) equals the product
of the eigenvalue raised to the power t and a constant that

depends on an initial condition. In some cases, the history of an
asset price might include an initial condition that precludes the

existence of DBC. Referring to the solution given by equa-

tion (9), note that, given an initial price p0 the constant
Thus, if at date t = 0 the price equals its
c equals p0 —

p.

FC, p, then the constant, c, equals zero, and, hence, without
an unanticipated change in the structure of the model, PBC equals

zero for all dates t > 0.
A reasonable interpretation of the history of the market for
gold, however, would he that, because of changes in the policy of
official intervention, its current structure has existed only

since about 1975——see Kettell (1982). This period seems too short
to presume that it has recorded a price of gold equal to its FC.
Thus, in the present case, it does not seem relevant to appeal to
initial conditions to rule out PBC a priori.
The final element in the solution, the stochastic bubble
component (SRC), involves an average of new information,
represented by the random variable z1, that became available

from date 1 through date t, weighted by powers of the
eigenvalue that decrease as i approaches t. The restrictions
on z, given by equation (7) , imply that market participants know
current and past values of z and that z is serially
independent with zero mean. Moreover, z is not correlated with
any variable in the information set of date t—1.
Any information on a new or newly observed phenomenon that
satisfies, either itself or through its innovations, the

restrictions on z given by equation (7) can affect t in the
way prescribed by SRC as long as, beginning at date 1,
individuals held expectations consistent with the existence of

SBC. Specifically, the existence of SPC can involve a reaction by

—8—
market participants to new information about an intrinsically
irrelevant variable, i.e., a variable that is not a member ot the
set of exogenous variables present in FC, or it can involve overreaction to new information about a truly relevant variable.

Moreover, the random variable zt need not have a stationary
distribution. For example, Blanchard and Watson (1982) specify a
model in which, although the variable driving SRC satisfies
equation (7), its distribution changes over time in such a way as
to create a constant probability that the stochastic bubble will
burst.

The fact that market participants observe z does not imply
that the identity of z is inferable from any economic theory or
that there exist readily available data that provide a history
of z. The econometric analysis must treat z as a potential set
of unobservable random variables that satisfy equation (7) and
enter the solution for the relative price of gold in the way given
by equations (8) and (9)
The intuitive distinction between FC and the bubble
components is that, if the market collectively misunderstands FC,
individuals can gain by contradicting the market, whereas if the
market does not expect a price bubble, individuals who act on the
basis of price forecasts incorporating a bubble will lose. The
bubble components are rational in the sense that, as long as the
market collectively uses them in forecasting prices, individuals
(with small market shares) also have an incentive to do so, even
if they understand that price incorporates bubble components.

4. Evidence of Rational Bubbles
The objective of the present study is to determine whether
actual movements in the relative price of gold are to any extent
attributable to rational bubbles. The existence of rational
bubbles would imply both that expectations are rational and that
price does not conform to the fundamental component (FC) of its

solution. The main problem for empirical analysis of rational
bubbles is that we cannot directly observe then' separately from

—9—
FC. As a result, conclusions about the existence of rational
bubbles typically depend on accepting untested hypotheses either
about the form of FC——for example, by specifying a distribution
for the unobserved variables in FC——or about the nature of
rational hubbies——for example, by focusing on either DBC or SBC or
by specifying a distribution for the stochastic variable driving

SRC. These objections apply, in particular, to the conclusions
drawn by Flood and Garher (l9Rfl) and Flood, Garber, and Scott
(1982), who attempt direct estimation of rational deterministic
bubbles in the value of money, and by Blanchard and Watson (1982)
who attempt indirect tests for rational stochastic bubbles in
stock prices and the price of gold. Diha and Grossman (1983)
contains a fuller critique of these studies.
In general, evidence in favor of rational bubbles is
difficult to interpret, because, in the absence of independent
knowledge about the form of FC and the nature of the possible
rational bubbles, observations that are attributable to rational

bubbles can also be attributed to FC. Examination of the
theoretical solution obtained above for the relative price of
gold, however, reveals a promising possibility for obtaining
evidence against the existence of rational bubbles that is
unambiguous in the sense that it is not conditional on accepting
untested hypotheses about the processes generating FC or about the
factors responsible for bubbles.

The theoretical model implies that rational bubble components
can enter the solution for the relative price of gold only in the
self—confirming way prescribed by equations (8) and (9)
Specifically, the existence of rational bubbles at date t,
according to the form of the bubble terms in equation (8) ,

implies

that the relative price of gold at any date t+j, j > 0, and its
rational expectation formed at date t include these same terms
raised to the power j.
multiplied by the eigenvalue,
Because this eigenvalue is greater than unity, rational bubbles

describe a divergent price path. More precisely, equation (9)
implies that, if the time series of the relative price of gold

— 10 —

contains a rational bubble, a nonstationary stochastic process
generates its nth difference, for any finite n. (

related

implication of equation (9) is that, if the rational bubble is
stochastic, a nonstationary process also generates the deviations
of price from any deterministic trend.)
These implications of rational hubbies for the stochastic
process that generates the relative price of gold reflect an
essential aspect of the structure of the model. The property that
the eigenvalue is greater than unity results from the positive
relation between the portfolio demand for gold and the expected

This property
real rate of return from holding gold ( > 0) .
also ensures a meaningful specification of the fundamental
component relating current price to the future values of the
exogenous variables. Specifically, because the eigenvalue is
greater than unity, the forward—looking solution p in
equation (4) converges for all

and {Eu÷}o sequences that do not grow exponentially at a
rate of

or faster.

The present empirical analysis of the existence of rational
bubbles, based on these theoretical results, investigates the
stationarity properties of the processes generating time series of
appropriately differenced observations of the relative price of

gold. In practice, drawing conclusions about stationarity from
finite samples is difficult. Most basically, there is no sampling
theory that provides statistical tests at specific levels of
significance for the stationarity of the process generating a time
series.

The present analysis follows the standard practice of using
diagnostic checks based on sample autocorrelation functions and

estimated spectra to make judgments about stationarity. one
problem with these procedures is that a finite sample drawn from a
time series generated by a stationary stochastic process can
exhibit signs of nonstationarity. Another problem, which is
especially relevant in the present context, is that sufficient

— 11 —

differencing

of any finite sample from a time series can create

the appearance of stationarity.

This last problem suggests the need for an objective
criterion for limiting the number of times that we difference the
observations of the relative price of gold before drawing

conclusions about stationarity. The conservative strategy adopted
here is to difference the observations of prices as many times as
it is necessary to difference any observable stochastic variables
in FC to obtain time series that appear to be generated by
stationary processes. The basis for this criterion is that the
model implies that nonstationarity of the stochastic variables in
FC would make FC nonstationary. Consequently, differencing fewer
times than necessary to make the processes generating the
variables in FC stationary would not make the process generating
prices stationary even in the absence of rational bubbles.
If, as turns out to be the case, this procedure involves only
low—order differencing and the resulting differenced time series
of prices seems to he generated by a stationary process, we can
reasonably conclude that price fluctuations during the sample
period did not involve rational hubbies. More generally,
equivalence between the number of times necessary to difference to
achieve the appearance of stationarity in the observable variables
in FC and in the price of gold would suggest that price
corresponds to FC and that the processes generating the unobserved
variables in FC, at least after differencing the same number of

times, are stationary. (If, alternatively, after differencing
this number of times, the process generating the price of gold
does not seem to be stationary, the situation is ambiguous.
Possible explanations would include either the presence of
rational bubbles, or the nonstationarity of the unobserved
stochastic variables in FC, or the failure of a small sample to
reveal the true stationarity of the generating process, or
irrational behavior by market participants.)
A complication in the present case is that none of the

stochastic variables in FC__ut÷i Er1+. and S+__are

— 12 —

directly

observable. Rational expectations, however, relates the
process generating the time series of Er+1+. to the process

generating the time series of rt. Consequently, it seems
reasonable to set the number of times to difference prices equal
to the number of differences of rt necessary to obtain a time
series that appears stationary.
The following example illustrates this strategy and its
rationale: Suppose that the process generating rt is
rionstationary, but that the process generating first differences

of r is stationary. Specifically, assume that Er+i+ is
based on a univariate autoregressive process of order k for
rt that has one eigenvalue equal to unity and k—i eigenvalues
inside the unit circle. In this case, the term

(1+—1--i
)
i=O

Er+i.,

-

which is part ot FC, is equal to a

distributed lag function of the last k observations of the real
interest rate. Thus, a nonstationary process generates EC, but,
if a stationary process generates first differences of the other
stochastic variables in FC, a stationary process generates first
differences of FC. Pccordingly, evidence that a nonstationary

process generates t and that a stationary process generates
first differences of
would support the combined conclusions
that no rational bubbles are present, that price corresponds to
FC, and that a stationary process generates first differences of
Ut and S.
5. Diagnostic Checks in the Time Domain
The empirical analysis uses monthly data from January 1975
through March 1983 (99 observations). The relative price of gold
is the average of daily values of the London P.M. price fix
divided by the CPI covering. All Items Less Mortgage Interest
Costs for the United States. The real interest rate is the
nominal interest rate on one—month U.S. commercial paper minus the
percentage change in the same price index.

— 13 —

P.lthough the pattern exhibited by a sample autocorrelation
depends on various properties of the process generating a time
series, as well as on sample size, two characteristics of sample
autocorrelations, considered together, provide a good basis for

judgments about stationarity. First, sample autocorrelations of
nonstationary time series typically die out slowly as lag length
increases——see, for example, ichern (1973). This property, of
course, can also be associated with a stationary process with
strong positive serial correlation. Second, the sample
autocorrelation at one lag of a first difference of a stationary
time series is typically negative. In fact, a rule of thumb in
deciding how many times to difference a time series to achieve
stationarity is to stop one step before negative autocorrelation
at one lag is obtained.
The table reports sample autocorrelations for one through ten
lags of the real interest rate and its first and second
differences and of the logarithm of the relative price of gold and
its first and second differences.

Table of Sample Autocorrelations

of lags

Variabl

rt

Lr
Pt

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

.96

.89

.82

.78

.75

.72

.71

.71

.70

.29 —
— .21 —

.12
.24

.18
— .06

—.17

—.03

.29

.21

.16
— .24

.20

.09

.17
— .12

.18

.24

.98

.95

.92

.90

.87

.83

.80

.76

.72

.68

.02

.18

.19

—

.03

.03

.09

.06

.02

— 06

.11

.15

—

.14

— .03

.07

.00

—.17

.26 —

2Pt

10

1

.13
—.21 — .34

—

—

—

—

—

.06
—

.03

— 14 —

The sample autocorrelations for rt are all positive and

drop off slowly. This pattern corresponds closely to the
theoretical patterns implied by Wichern's formula for integrated
moving average time series.

Such an autocorrelation pattern could also result from a

stationary process——for example, the AP(1) process
+
is white noise, if the coefficient
r =

, where

Ar1

is close to unity. If rt is stationarity, however, the
autocorrelation of Ar at one lag, given by (X—1)/2 for the
A

PR(1) case, is negative. Thus, a critical piece of evidence in
favor of nonstationarity of r is that the sample
autocorrelation of Ar at one lag, p1, is significantly greater
than zero at the five percent level. (Under the null hypothesis
that p1 = 0, the statistic

-ln
1

____
1— p1

is approximately normally distributed with mean zero and variance

(N—3), for moderately large sample size, N.)
The table also indicates that the properties of the sample
at one lag are
autocorrelatioris for Pt at all lags and for

the same as for rt and Are. This finding accords with the
theoretical model. Nonstationarity of the process generating
rt implies that the processes generating FC and Pt are also
nonstationary.

The analytical strategy requires next consideration of the

process generating Are. Although initially positive, the sample
autocorrelations for Ar drop off rapidly. 1oreover, the sample
autocorrelation for A2r at one lag is significantly less than
zero at the five percent level. Using the converse of the
arguments above, both of these findings suggest that the process

generating Ar is stationary.

— 15 —

Given that

seen's to he generated by a stationary

stochastic process, the critical step, in investigating the
existence of rational bubbles is to form a judgment about the
stationarity of the process generating L• The relevant

evidence, as it turns out, is strikingly clear. The properties of
at all lags and for
the sample autocorrelations for

at one lag are the same as for Ar and L2r. Thus, the process
seems to be stationary. This finding is not
generating
consistent with the existence of rational bubbles. Overall, the
diagnostic checks in the time domain suggest that price
corresponds to FC and that the process generating first
differences of FC is stationary.

6. Diagnostic Checks in the Frequency Pomain
Although stationarity is a necessary property for describing
a stochastic process by its spectrum, in practice estimated
spectra are useful for identifying nonstationarity——see, for

example, Jenkins and Watts (19E8, pp. 7—8). orking with
estimated spectra rather than sample autocorrelations avoids the
potential problem that high correlations among neighboring values
can distort the sample autocorrelation. In contrast, the
estimated spectrum isolates the effects of nonstationarity at the
low frequencies.

Although estimated spectra of most economic time series show
highest densities for the lowest frequency, the concentration of
spectral power at the lowest frequencies should he especially
pronounced if the process generating the time series is

nonstationary. Specifically, the estimated spectra of
nonstationarity time series usually suggest the presence of a
"spike" at the zero frequency. In other words, the estimated
spectrum rises sharply as it approaches the low frequencies and
stays flat over a band near the zero frequency.
The figures depict the logarithms of estimated spectra for
In these estimates, each series is
and
r, Are,
transformed to deviations from its mean and is "padded" by adding

— 16 —

46 zeros. In other words, the reported estimates use 144

ordinates for 98 observations. To obtain consistent estimates,
the periodograms are smoothed by applying a "tent window" of width
11.

The reported estimates do not use a "taper". Tapers are
often used in spectral estimation to scale the ends of the
unpadded part of the series and to smooth the transition to the
zeros in the padded part. Although advantageous for many
applications, using a taper can make a spectral peak at some low
frequency appear to be a spike at the zero frequency by smoothing
out a fall in the spectrum as it goes from a low frequency to
zero. In general, tapers cause loss of "resolution", i.e., the
ability of the estimators to distinguish fine structure in the
spectrum——see Koopmans (1974, pp. 303—308).

The results from analysis in the frequency domain are in
every respect consistent with the results from analysis in the

time domain. The estimated spectra of rt and Pt both strongly
suggest the presence of spikes at the zero frequency. These
findings confirm the conclusion that the processes generating

rt and Pt seem to he nonstationary.
In contrast, the estimated spectra of

and

do not

suggest the presence of spikes at the zero frequency. For both of
these time series, spectral power increases from the zero
frequency to a peak at a frequency between i/9 and ii/7. These
findings confirm the conclusion that the processes generating
seem to be stationary.
Lr and
Other experiments involved estimating spectra using several
combinations and variations of the number of ordinates and
windows. Trials included 108 and 288, in addition to 144,
ordinates, and flat and tent windows of widths 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13.
The properties of the spectra estimated in these trials were much
the same as those depicted in the figures.

— 17 —

7.

Conclusions

The recent literature includes many examples that show that
rational bubbles in the prices of infinitely lived assets are
theoretically possible. Given that asset markets seem to be
efficient in the sense of rational expectations, the wide
fluctuations in the prices of certain assets, such as gold,
suggest, moreover, the possibility that rational bubbles actually

exist. The assumption of rational expectations, however, places
strong restrictions not only on the relation between asset prices
and market fundamentals, but also on the form that rational
bubbles can take. Specifically, in the present analysis, if the
time series of the relative price of gold contains a rational
bubble, a nonstationary stochastic process generates its nth
difference, for any finite n. This implication follows from the
positive dependence of the demand for gold on the expected rate of
return from holding gold and the requirement that a rational
bubble involves expectations that are on average self confirming.
The empirical evidence relating to this nonstationarity
property involves diagnostic checks for stationarity carried out

in both the time domain and the frequency domain. This evidence
strongly suggests that the process generating the first difference
of the log of the relative price of gold is stationary, a finding
that seems inconsistent with the existence of rational bubbles.
More broadly, the empirical analysis finds a close correspondence
between the time series properties of the relative price of gold
and the time series properties of real interest rates, which the
theory relates to the time series properties of the fundamental

component of the relative price of gold. In sum, the evidence is
consistent with the combined conclusion that the relative price of
gold corresponds to market fundamentals, that the process
generating first differences of market fundamentals is stationary,
and that actual price movements are not attributable to rational
bubbles.

— 18 —

References
O.J. Blanchard and M.W. Watson, "Bubbles, Rational Expectations,
and Financial Markets," in Crises in the Economic and
Financial Structure, P. Wachtel, ed. (Lexington, Mass.:
Lexington Books, 1982).
B.T. Nba and H.I. Grossman, "Rational Asset Price Bubbles," NBFP

Working Paper No. 1059, January 1983.
R. Flood and P. Garber, "Market Fundamentals Versus Price Level

Bubbles: The First Tests," Journal of Political Economy, 88,
August 1980, 745—770.
R. Flood, P. Garher, and L. Scott, "Further Evidence on Price
Level Bubbles," NBER Working Paper No. 84lB, January 1982.
G.M. Jenkins and D.W. Watts, Spectral Analysis and Its

Applications (San Francisco: Holden—Day, 1968).
B. Kettell, Gold (Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger, 1982).
L.H. Koopmans, The Spectral Analysis of Time Series (New York:
Academic Press, 1974).
T. Sargent, Macroeconomic Theory (New York: Academic Press,
1979).

D.W. Wichern, "The Behavior of the Sample Autocorrelation Function
for an Integrated Moving Average Process," Biometrika, 60(2),
1973, 235—239.

</ref_section>

L

'I
'I'

0

Log of Estimated Spectrum for rt

*
•1L

'I.

I

I

0

Log of Estimated Spectrum for Pt

I'

w

0

Log of Estimated Spectrum for

0

'rr/2

Log of Estimated Spectrum for

