                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 CREATIVE DESTRUCTION AND FIRM-SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE HETEROGENEITY

                                            Hyunbae Chun
                                           Jung-Wook Kim
                                            Randall Morck
                                            Bernard Yeung

                                         Working Paper 13011
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13011


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2007

An earlier version of this paper circulated as "Patterns of Comovement: The Role of Information Technology
in the U.S. Economy" and as NBER Working Paper No. 10937. This research was in progress when
Randall Morck was a visiting professor at Harvard. Chun, Kim, and Morck acknowledge partial funding
from PSC-CUNY, University of Alberta SAS and Nova fellowships, and the SSHRC, respectively.
We thank Philippe Aghion, Cliff Ball, Nick Bollen, Aida Charoenrook, Wonseok Choi, Bill Christie,
Art Durnev, Mara Faccio, Daniel Ferreira, Akiko Fujimoto, David Gabel, Amar Gande, Bruno Gerard,
Luca Grilli, Campbell Harvey, Peter Howitt, Mark Huson, Boyan Jovanovic, Aditya Kaul, Chansog
Kim, Jason Lee, Ross Levine, Ron Masulis, Vikas Mehrotra, Robert Shiller, Hans Stoll, and seminar
participants at the University of Alberta, Boston College, Boston University, Brown University, the
Canadian Economic Association, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Copenhagen Business School,
CUNY Graduate Center, the Corporate Governance and Capital Markets Conference in Lisbon, Duke
University, the European Finance Association, Georgetown University, Harvard University, Hong
Kong Polytechnic, the International Industrial Organization Conference, University of Miami, New
York University, Queens College, Sogang University, the Stockholm School of Economics, the University
of Toronto, Vanderbilt University, and the Western Economic Association. We are also most grateful
to an anonymous referee for particularly helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Hyunbae Chun, Jung-Wook Kim, Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Creative Destruction and Firm-Specific Performance Heterogeneity
Hyunbae Chun, Jung-Wook Kim, Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung
NBER Working Paper No. 13011
April 2007
JEL No. E32,G3,O3,O4,O51

                                              ABSTRACT

Traditional U.S. industries with higher firm-specific stock return and fundamentals performance heterogeneity
use information technology (IT) more intensively and post faster productivity growth in the late 20th
century. We argue that elevated firm performance heterogeneity mechanically reflects a wave of Schumpeter's
(1912) creative destruction disrupting a wide swath of U.S. industries, with newly successful IT adopters
unpredictably undermining established firms. This evidence validates endogenous growth theory models
of creative destruction, such as Aghion and Howitt (1992); and suggests that recent findings of more
elevated firm-specific performance variation in richer, faster growing countries with more transparent
accounting, better financial systems, and more secure property rights might partly reflect more intensive
creative destruction in those economies.

Hyunbae Chun                                          Randall Morck
Department of Economics                               Faculty of Business
Queens College, CUNY                                  University of Alberta
65-30 Kissena Blvd.                                   Edmonton, CANADA T6G 2R6
Flushing, NY 11367                                    and NBER
hyunbae_chun@qc.edu                                   randall.morck@ualberta.ca

Jung-Wook Kim                                         Bernard Yeung
Assistant Professor of Finance                        Stern School of Business
University of Alberta                                 New York University
Edmonton, Alberta                                     44 West 4th Street, Room 7-65
Canada                                                New York, NY 10012
T6G 2R6                                               byeung@stern.nyu.edu
jkim@nber.org
A wave of innovation across a broad range of technologies, combined with considerable
deregulation and a further lowering of barriers to trade, fostered a pronounced expansion of
competition and creative destruction. The result through the 1990s of all this seeming-
heightened instability for individual businesses, somewhat surprisingly, was an apparent
reduction in the volatility of output and in the frequency and amplitude of business cycles for the
macroeconomy.
                                            Alan Greenspan, Speech on Economic Volatility, 2002.

1.      Introduction

Elevated heterogeneity in firm-specific stock return and fundamentals performance is significantly

correlated with more intensive use of information technology (IT) and faster productivity growth across a

panel of traditional U.S. industries from 1971 to 2000. We argue that this suggests IT, at least in the early

decades of its absorption into the economy in the late 20th century, induced a tremor of Schumpeter’s

(1912) creative destruction across a wide swath of U.S. industries. New innovators, with abnormally

good performance, unpredictably and continually rose to dislodge established firms, abnormally

depressing their performance. This suggests intensified creative destruction as a new explanation for the

rising firm performance heterogeneity observed among publicly traded firms in recent decades in the U.S.

and other developed economies by Morck et al. (2000), Campbell et al. (2001), Irvine and Pontiff (2004),

Wei and Zhang (2006), and others.

        We study publicly trade firms in traditional U.S. manufacturing and non-manufacturing industries

– like lumber and wood products, retail trade, and motion pictures – first because this avoids possible

noise in dot.com stock returns; but more importantly because Bresnahan and Trajtenberg (1995),

Helpman and Trajtenberg (1998), Jovanovic and Rousseau (2005), and others argue that IT is a general

purpose technology (GPT) which, like electrification in the early 20th century or steam power early in the

industrial revolution, induces process and product innovation across most industries. Bresnahan and

Trajtenberg (1995) and Helpman and Trajtenberg (1998) model GPTs driving economic growth, and cite

IT as an example. Oliner and Sichel (2000), Jorgenson (2001), Stiroh (2002), and Brynjolfsson and Hitt

(2003) also link IT to economy-wide enhanced productivity.

        Our findings thus buttress approaches to economic growth theory, such as Pastor and Veronesi



                                                     1
(2005), which models an economy absorbing a new technology and consequently exhibiting sustained

elevated firm performance heterogeneity; and, more generally, Aghion and Howitt (1992, 1998), Aghion

et al. (2004, 2005), Acemoglu et al. (2005, 2006), and other formalizations of Schumpeter’s (1912)

concept of creative destruction.

         Other research into rising firm-specific performance variation can readily be reinterpreted in light

of our findings. Pastor and Veronesi (2003), Fama and French (2004), Bennett and Sias (2005), Brown

and Kapadia (2005), and Fink et al. (2005) link heterogeneity to small or young firms. Philippon (2003),

Gaspar and Massa (2004), and Irvine and Pontiff (2004) stress intensified competition and deregulation.

Morck et al. (2000), Fox et al. (2003), Bris et al. (2004), Durnev et al. (2004a), Huang (2004), Ozoguz

(2004), Biddle and Hilary (2006), Jin and Myers (2006), link elevated firm performance heterogeneity to

financial system development and transparency. Neatly tying all these findings together, Schumpeter

(1912) links creative destruction to intensified competition from new, initially small, upstart firms that

need external financing to grow rapidly, 1 Murphy et al. (1991) model regulation repressing creative

destruction; and Schumpeter’s (1939) theory of business cycles posits that intensified competition trails

waves of creative destruction. The link we find between IT and elevated firm performance heterogeneity

nonetheless survives controls for all these factors, and for other relevant industry characteristics,

suggesting a robust overarching role for IT.

         Our results thus comfort financial economists, like Roll (1988), who lament the low R2 statistics

of standard asset pricing models caused by high firm-specific stock return variation in the U.S. and other

developed countries. If this reflects faster creative destruction in countries with better institutions, there is

no cause for lamentation. Asset pricing models not only retain their basic validity, but may also find a

new following among growth theorists as gauges of the intensity of creative destruction and related

phenomena. Creative destruction is usually envisioned as creative innovators destroying laggards utterly;

however the laggards, in practice, may only be beaten back for a while. Firm-specific performance


1
  King and Levine (1993) provide empirical validation for the dependence of these firms on external financing. Fogel et al.
(2005) empirically link creative destruction to countries’ financial development.


                                                            2
heterogeneity may thus be a finer and more nuanced metric of the intensity of creative destruction than

firm exit rates.

        The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes our IT intensity, firm performance

heterogeneity, and TFP measures. Section 3 covers regressions and Section 4 discusses interpretation and

statistical robustness issues. Section 5 concludes with a brief discussion of the implications of our results.




2.      Variables Construction

This section describes our main variables and the data used to construct them. Our results are robust to

various alternative constructions, described in detail in section 4.



2.1     Information Technology Intensity

Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) Fixed Reproducible Tangible Wealth (FRTW) data track investment

in 61 asset classes from 1971 to 2000, by two-digit industry.2 Because we are interested in IT as a GPT in

traditional sectors, we drop industries whose primary products are IT goods or services: industrial

machinery (SIC 35), which includes computer manufacturing, and business services (SIC 73), which

includes computer related services and software. We also drop five financial industries (SIC codes in the

60s), whose accounting data are incomparable, and five agriculture and mining industries, whose IT

investment is missing for part of the sample period. This leaves a 1,290 industry-year panel of IT

investment spanning 30 years and 43 industries, 19 in manufacturing.

        Stiroh (2002) and Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2003) link IT to total factor productivity (TFP) growth

after the late 1980s, but Loveman (1994) and Stiroh (1998) find no link in earlier periods. Helpman and

Trajtenberg (1998) explain this so-called IT productivity paradox – scant evidence of an IT impact on

TFP in early studies – by showing that gains in productivity growth appear only after IT use intensifies. In

this spirit, we use each industry’s IT capital stock, not its IT investment rate, to capture creative




                                                       3
destruction.

         We convert flows into stocks with perpetual inventory models (Hall, 1990). Thus, industry i’s

stock of asset k at time t is

[1]      Ki,k,t = (1 – δk)Ki,k,t - 1 + Ii,k,t,

with δk an asset-specific depreciation rate and Ii,k,t the industry’s spending on type k assets that year. We

set δk for IT to 0.31, as in the BEA FRTW data – see Fraumeni (1997).

         We define IT capital as seven classes of computer hardware (mainframe computers, personal

computers, direct access storage devices, computer printers, computer terminals, computer tape drives,

and computer storage devices) and three classes of software (pre-packaged, custom, and own-account

software).

         Industry i’s IT intensity in year t is then its stock of IT capital relative to other capital,



[2]      ITi ,t ≡
                    ∑      k ∈IT
                                   K i , k ,t
                                                .
                    ∑      k ∉IT
                                 K i , k ,t


We aggregate heterogeneous assets in [2] using Törnqvist indexes, as recommended by Jorgenson and

Griliches (1967).



2.2      Firm Performance Heterogeneity

We now describe our firm performance metrics: real sales growth and stock returns. The quarterly real

sales growth rate of firm j in industry i is


                           Pi ,−τ1S j ,i ,τ − Pi ,−τ1− 4 S j ,i ,τ − 4
[3]      g j ,i ,τ ≡
                       1
                       2   (P   −1
                              i ,τ   S j ,i ,τ + Pi ,−τ1− 4 S j ,i ,τ − 4 )


where S j ,i ,τ is nominal net sales by firm j (Compustat quarterly item 2) during quarter τ. Firm j is



2
  Herman (2000) describes FRTW. Our industries resemble Hobijn and Jovanovic (2001) and Stiroh (2002). Fama and French
(1997) partition manufacturing more finely and non-manufacturing more coarsely, with 28 and 20 categories, respectively.


                                                                              4
assigned to industry i based on Compustat industry codes. The price deflator Pi,τ is a BEA Gross Product

Originating (GPO) two-digit industry gross output price index from 1977 on; or a Bureau of Labor

Statistics (BLS) Multifactor Productivity Measures’ gross output prices index for earlier years when GPO

data are unavailable. We drop observations with Compustat footnotes, which flag unusual events – like

mergers, accounting changes, and discontinued operations – that can render sales growth estimates

problematic.

         Firm j’s stock return during month τ is rj,i,τ, its monthly total return from CRSP, which includes

dividends and is adjusted for stock dividends, splits, and reverse splits.

         To gauge the heterogeneity of each firm performance metrics in each industry, we remove

common effects shared by all firms in an industry or the economy. To do this, we follow Roll (1988) in

distinguishing firm-specific variation from the sum of market- and industry-related variations. For

simplicity, we call the latter sum systematic variation. To obtain this decomposition, we follow Durnev et

al. (2004b) and regress


[4]      r j ,i ,τ = α j ,t + β jm,i ,t rm ,τ + β ij ,i ,t ri ,τ + ε j ,i ,τ ,


with τ indexing the twelve monthly returns in year t. The value-weighted market and industry returns, rm,τ

and ri,τ, exclude firm j to prevent spurious correlations with industry performance in industries with few

firms.

         Sales growth regressions are identical to [4], but τ indexes quarterly performance over the twelve

quarters up to and including those in year t. The analogs in these to rm,τ and ri,τ are sales-weighted market

and industry-level sales growth rates.

         The sum of squared residuals, SSEj,i,t, and model variation, SSMj,i,t, from running [4] on the nj,t

observations for firm j and year t aggregate to the mean firm-specific variation,



[5]      σ ε2,i ,t ≡
                       ∑ SSEj∈i           j ,i ,t

                        ∑ n       j∈i   j ,t




                                                                                 5
and mean systematic variation,



[6]     σ m2 ,i ,t ≡
                       ∑ SSM
                        j∈i                j ,i ,t

                        ∑ n   j∈i   j ,t



of industry i for year t. Except in the robustness tests in section 4.2.1, nj,t = 12 for all firms. Firms with

missing data are dropped. We require at least 5 firms in an industry.

        An analog to the R2 of [4] measures mean systematic over total variation, σε2,i,t + σ m2 ,i,t , as


                σ m2 ,i ,t
[7]      R ≡ 2
           2
          i ,t                   .
            σ m,i ,t + σ ε2,i ,t

        Since IT intensity data exist for t ∈ [1971, 2000], intersecting these data with those for IT

intensity yield panels of 1,180 industry-years for stock return heterogeneity regressions on IT intensity

and 1,010 for sales growth heterogeneity regressions. This final sample spans 41 industries, as we drop

four (local and interurban passenger transit, pipelines except natural gas, miscellaneous repair services,

and legal services) because of insufficient data to estimate firm-specific variation.



2.3     Total Factor Productivity

Schumpeter (1912) argues that creative destruction enhances economic efficiency, which we capture

using total factor productivity (TFP) growth. We measures industry TFP growth in two ways. The first is

TFP growth constructed from industry-level BEA data; the second is constructed to reflect the

productivity of our sample of firms. The BEA’s TFP figures better reflect overall productivity growth in

the industry, for they are based on government data covering all firms in the industry, including small and

unlisted firms that do not appear in our sample. However, Davis et al. (2006) report markedly different

patterns of firm-level volatility in listed and unlisted firms. We therefore construct a second measure of

TFP growth based on accounting data reported by the sample of listed firms used in constructing our

other variables. The BEA measure is thus a more complete reflection of overall industry productivity,



                                                         6
while our TFP growth estimate is a more precise reflection of the productivity of the firms used to

construct our other variables.

         We estimate each industry’s total factor productivity (TFP) as value-added less labor and capital

costs. Industry TFP growth is the change in log industry TFP levels. We use annual, rather than quarterly

data, because the estimation technique requires data only disclosed annually. BEA industry-level TFP

measures are calculated using value-added, labor cost, and labor force variables from BEA’s GPO data

and capital related variables from the BEA’s FRTW data. Compustat based industry TFP measures are

weighted averages of firm-level TFPs defined as


[8]      ln(TFPi ,t ) ≡ ∑ j∈i μ j ,i ,t ⎡⎣ln(Y j ,i ,t ) − γ L , j ,i ,t ln( L j ,i ,t ) − γ K , j ,i ,t ln( K j ,i ,t ) ⎤⎦ ,


where Yj,i,t is the real value-added by firm j in industry i, γL,j,i,t and γK,j,i,t are the firm’s labor and capital

cost shares, and Lj,i,t and Kj,i,t are its labor force and capital. The weight μj,i,t is firm j’s nominal value-

added (Vj,i,t) over total industry nominal value-added in year t, V j ,i ,t                                 ∑    j∈i
                                                                                                                       V j ,i.t .

         Value-added, Vj,i,t, is operating income before depreciation (Compustat item 13) plus labor and

related expenses (item 42) as in Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2003). To obtain real value-added, nominal value-

added is deflated by industry i’s two-digit GPO value-added deflator. Prior to 1977, these deflators are

unavailable, so we use gross output and intermediate input prices from BLS Multifactor Productivity data

to construct our own. If labor and related expenses are unreported, we estimate them as industry average

wage, from GPO data, times the firm’s workforce (item 29). If employees’ benefits are excluded from

labor and related expenses (Compustat footnote 22), we estimate them as the industry average ratio of

benefits to total compensation using GPO data.

         Labor force, Lj,i,t, is employees (item 29) and labor cost share, γL,j,i,t , is the average in years t and

t-1 of labor and related expenses (item 42 or the estimate described above) divided by this plus capital

services costs.

         Capital services costs are capital assets, defined below, times industry annual rental price of




                                                                                 7
capital. As in Hall and Jorgenson (1967) and BLS (1997), the rental price of capital for asset k in industry

i at time t is

                       1 − ζ k ,t − ut zk ,t
[9]       Wk ,i ,t ≡
                             1 − ut
                                               (r
                                                i ,t   + δ k − Gk ,t ) qk ,t ,


with ζk,t the effective rate of investment tax credit, ut the corporate income tax rate, zk,t the present value

of capital consumption allowances, ri,t the nominal internal rate of return, δk the depreciation rate, Gk,t

the asset-specific capital gain, and qk,t an investment deflator. Tax variables are from the BLS. Using

FRTW data on the asset composition of each industry each year, we aggregate asset rental prices using

the Törnqvist method to obtain industry rental prices of capital.

          Real capital stock, Kj,i,t, is its net property, plant and equipment (PP&E) (item 8) deflated, as in

Hall (1990), to reflect the average age of these assets. Asset age is approximated as balance sheet

depreciation (items 7 minus 8) over income statement depreciation and amortization (item 14). Outliers

are removed by taking a five-year moving average and defining the age of firm j’s assets at time t, aj,t, as

is or 20 years, whichever is less. Taking all firm j’s assets as aj,t years old, we deflate their PP&E with the

FRTW industry deflator to estimate its real capital stock, Kj,i,t. Firm j’s capital cost share, γK,j,i,t , is one

minus γL,j,i,t.



2.4       General Patterns in the Data

Figure 1 shows IT intensity broadly distributed and steadily rising across U.S. industries, consistent with a

GPT. 3 By the 1990s, IT is intensively used in such traditional manufacturing and non-manufacturing

industries as printing, apparel, wholesales, retails, motion pictures, and health services. In contrast, R&D

(not shown) is highly concentrated in the largest firms in a few technology industries.4 The introductory


3
  Corroborating this, managers of about 2,000 firms spanning a broad cross-section of U.S. industries (National Science
Foundation (NSF), 2004) report IT both lowering costs and raising quality. A 1997 survey of Fortune 500 IT managers links IT
to improved and differentiated products (by improving customer service, targeting new customers, improving quality, and
improving timeliness) and innovation (reducing total costs). Mukhopadhyay et al. (1997) report that IT in the U.S. Post Office
mainly speeds up mail processing; and Athey and Stern (2002) report that IT also speeds up emergency response systems.
4
  See footnote 9 in section 3.2.2 below.


                                                                                 8
quote describing “A wave of innovation across a broad range of technologies” seems an apt portrayal of

IT as a GPT.



                                             [Figures 1, 2, 3, and 4 about here]



            Figure 2 graphs the variance decomposition, with column heights representing average total

variation across all industries for a given year and their coloring breaking this into industry average firm-

specific variation (white) and systematic variation (black), from [5] and [6] respectively. The R 2

measure is the black section as a fraction of the total height of the column, and is graphed separately

against time in Figure 3. Firm-specific variation in both performance metrics (stock returns and sales

growth) rises substantially both in absolute magnitude and relative to systematic variation. Figures 2 and

3 use industry equal-weight, but industry value-weight figures also show similar patterns. Figure 4 shows

that this surge affects a broad swath of industries.

            This across-the-board upsurge in the firm-specific performance variation measures seconds the

conclusion of Wei and Zhang (2006) – any explanation of rising firm-specific variation in stock returns

must also permit a contemporaneous rise in firm-specific fundamentals variation. Xu and Malkiel’s

(2003) thesis of noise trading by increasingly important institutional investors cannot thus be a complete

explanation. 5 Nor can the Morck et al.’s (2000) suggestion of increasingly efficient firm-specific

information capitalization because this does not necessitate rise in firm-specific fundamentals variation.

However, Fox et al. (2003), Bris et al. (2004), Durnev et al. (2004a, 2004b), Huang (2004), Li et al.

(2004), Ozoguz (2004), Jin and Myers (2006), Veldkamp and Wolfers (2007), and others present

evidence and theoretical arguments consistent with information capitalization and transparency being an

important partial explanation.

            These seemingly discordant findings are reconciled if rising firm-specific performance variation


5
    See also Dennis and Strickland (2004).


                                                             9
reflects intensified creative destruction, which is further invigorated by financial system development and

enhanced transparency (Schumpeter, 1912; King and Levine, 1993; Durnev et al. 2004a). That is, a new

GPT, as explained in Jovanovic and Rousseau (2005), creates potentially value-increasing innovation and

asset recombination opportunities. As firms compete to explore and exploit these opportunities, a

functionally efficient stock market (Tobin, 1982) prices firms’ individual probabilities of success, and

allocates capital in an ex-ante microeconomically efficient way. Ex-post, as the process of creative

destruction unfolds, upstarts and agile old firms unpredictably displace previous leaders and are in turn

displaced by other upstarts or resurgent former leaders. This mechanically induces high firm-specific

performance heterogeneity in fundamentals and stock returns, as winner and loser firms gradually emerge

and are revealed. During this process, firm-level performance necessarily deviates from industry- and

economy-level performance.

        This reconciliation seems promising, for the IT intensity industry ranks from Figure 1 correlate

significantly with each of the firm performance heterogeneity industry rank from Figure 4. Figure 5 plots

the log of industry IT intensity against the logs of firm-specific variation in stock returns and real sales

growth in the 1990s. A clear positive correlation is apparent in both panel, and is statistically significant

at conventional levels.



                                           [Figure 5 about here]




3.      Regressions

Using U.S industry panel data from 1971 to 2000, we regress firm performance heterogeneity on IT

intensity and other relevant control variables. This section describes the regressions used to generate the

tables. Their basic patterns of signs and significance are robust to a wide range of alternative variable

constructions and econometric approaches, whose discussion is deferred to Section 4.




                                                     10
3.1       Firm Performance Heterogeneity Dependent Variables

To obtain near normal dependent variables, we take logs of [5] and [6]. Industry i’s year t absolute firm-

specific variation is ln(σ ε ,i ,t ) and its absolute systematic variation is ln(σ m ,i ,t ) . Since [7] is bounded by
                           2                                                       2



the unit interval and highly skewed, we apply a negative logistic transformation, as in Durnev et al.

(2004b), to obtain relative firm-specific variation,


                       ⎛ 1 − Ri2,t   ⎞
[10]      ψ i ,t   ≡ ln⎜             ⎟ = ln (σ ε2,i ,t ) − ln (σ m2 ,i ,t ).
                       ⎜ R2          ⎟
                       ⎝ i ,t        ⎠

Table 1 displays summary statistics and correlations for our dependent variables.



                                                              [Table 1 about here]



3.2       Performance Heterogeneity Regressions

3.2.1      Basic Setup

Using U.S. industry panel data, we estimate weighted least squares (WLS) regressions with time and

industry fixed effects and estimate t-statistics allowing for heteroskedasticity and serial correlation

clustered by industry.6 Specifically, we run


[11]      ln(σ ε2,i ,t ) = b0 + b1 ln( ITi ,t −1 ) + CX i ,t −1 + ∑t δ t + ∑i λi +ui ,t


and


[12]      ψ i ,t = b0 + b1 ln( ITi ,t −1 ) + CX i ,t −1 + ∑t δ t + ∑i λi + ui ,t

where the dependent variable is firm performance heterogeneity, absolute or relative firm-specific

variation in stock returns and sales growth. Since sales variation reflects three-year windows, IT intensity


6
  Obviously, clustering the standard errors of the industry fixed effect dummies’ coefficients renders the covariance matrix
singular. However, Arellano (1987) shows that invertiblity is restored if industry clustering is restricted to variables other than
the industry fixed effects. See also Wooldridge (2002).


                                                                               11
is averaged across the prior three-year period in those regressions; it is intended to capture investment in

the new GPT that leads to creative destruction. Stock returns heterogeneity is measured across annual

windows, so those regressions use lagged annual IT intensity. X is a vector of controls, which we shall

discuss in section 3.2.2.

        Using ψi,t in [12] is equivalent to putting absolute systematic variation on the right-hand side and

constraining its coefficient to unity. This suggests a more general specification


[13]    ln(σ ε2,i ,t ) = b0 + b1 ln( ITi ,t −1 ) + b2 ln(σ m2 ,i ,t −1 ) + CX i ,t −1 + ∑ t δ t + ∑ i λi +ui ,t .


        For all regressions, the WLS weights are total assets in dollars – as of the prior year-end for stock

returns heterogeneity regressions and averaged over the prior three years for sales growth heterogeneity

regressions. Assets are econometrically desirable as weights because prior period sales or market

capitalization might be correlated with current sales growth or stock returns, and so with heterogeneity

measures constructed from these variables. Alternative weights are discussed in the robustness section

below. WLS deprives small industries of undue influence. In our data, equal weights would give

industries with less than 5% of the assets a 30% weight in the regressions, and industries with less than

10% of the assets a 50% weight.

        Time fixed effects, the δt, remove common time trends and economy-wide effects, such as

macroeconomic shocks and institutional development. This is motivated by the findings of Bushman and

Smith (2003), Fox et al. (2003), Jin and Myers (2006), and others, linking improved accounting and

financial transparency to increased firm-specific stock return variation; which might also correlate with

more precisely targeted external funding of innovative firms.

        We also include industry fixed effects, the λi, because time invariant effects correlated with

industry IT intensity might affect performance heterogeneity. Their inclusion removes all purely cross-

sectional variation from the analysis, possibly inappropriately diminishing the t-statistics of persistent

independent variables genuinely related to performance heterogeneity. This conservative approach thus

induces a bias against finding significant results.


                                                                   12
            We use industry clustering in estimating the standard errors of coefficients because some of our

variables may be serially correlated within industries. For example, industries with elevated stock return

heterogeneity one year may well have elevated stock return heterogeneity the next year too. The

overlapping three-year windows used in constructing our sales growth heterogeneity measure further

augment any pre-existing autocorrelation in those variables. Our construction of IT intensity using a

perpetual inventory model may induce autocorrelation in that variable as well. Time series autocorrelation

in panel data leaves regression point estimates unbiased, but biases standard or Newey-West t-statistics

upwards, even if fixed effects are included for both panel dimensions. Monte Carlo simulations by

Petersen (2005) indicate that industry clustering produces unbiased standard errors in such cases. This

technique for augmenting fixed effects with clustering is discussed in Arellano (1987) and Wooldridge

(2002).



3.2.2       Control Variables

We now turn to the main control variables we use in our multiple regressions. These variables, which are

argued or shown elsewhere to explain heterogeneity in one or another firm performance metric, are:



Corporate Demography

Rising firm performance heterogeneity is linked to a rising proportion of small or young firms (Campbell

et al., 2001; Pastor and Veronesi, 2003; Fama and French, 2004; Bennett and Sias, 2005; Brown and

Kapadia, 2005; Fink et al., 2005; Davis et al., 2006). We therefore control for average firm age and size

in each industry. Average firm age is years since first appearance in CRSP. Average firm size is the log of

average market cap or sales in regressions explaining firm-specific variation in returns or sales growth,

respectively.7

            The economics of why small or new firms should elevate performance heterogeneity are not fully



7
    Replacing the averages with medians produces qualitatively similar results.


                                                                 13
understood. On the one hand, investors are possibly less informed about smaller and younger firms.

Mechanically, news has a greater impact on investors’ valuation of these firms than of older and more

mature firms; therefore smaller and younger firms’ stock return could be more volatile. Likewise, because

of their newness and their smaller base, these firms’ sales changes could be more volatile too.

        However, creative destruction may well underlie the linkage. Schumpeter (1912) and others argue

that new, initially small, firms are better able to explore and exploit the opportunities brought about by

new technology because innovators can better protect their property rights over their innovations by

organizing their own firms. King and Levine (1993), Fogel et al. (2005), and others provide empirical

support for this view. Obviously, this does not imply that smaller firms are more efficient – indeed Fama

and French (2004) report a lower survival rate for smaller firms in the 1990s. This might reflect a greater

sensitivity to economic shocks, as they suggest. But newly listed firms may also be the most enthusiastic

early explorers and exploiters of a new GPT. Their ranks are therefore disproportionately likely to include

both extreme winners and extreme losers.

        To the extent that sensitivity to shocks differs systematically by firm size or age, controlling for

corporate demography is warranted. However, if firm size and age are proxies for propensity to undertake

innovations, controlling for corporate demography might induce undesirable collinearity. Yet, if IT

intensity remains significant despite the inclusion of firm demography controls, or in regressions based on

samples partitioned by firm age, its significance is unlikely to be an artefact of purely demographic

explanations.



Competitive Pressure

Intense competition is linked to elevated firm performance variation. We therefore control for each

industry’s Herfindahl-Hirschman index, based on annual firm sales from Compustat. For example,

cutthroat price competition might magnify firm-specific shocks – turning minor setbacks into

catastrophes and minor edges into lasting dominance (Philippon, 2003; Gaspar and Massa, 2004; Irvine




                                                    14
and Pontiff, 2004; Comin and Mulani, 2006). Consistent with this, low market power (Gaspar and Massa,

2004), recent deregulation (Irvine and Pontiff, 2004), and trade liberalization (Irvine and Pontiff, 2004; Li

et al. 2004) are associated with more heterogeneous firm performance.8

         A pure competition story justifies controls, but creative destruction and competition are

interrelated. Schumpeter (1939) argues that creative destruction induces subsequent competition, as a new

technology is standardized. Thus, Brown and Goolsbee (2002) find internet sales reducing insurance

premiums. Or, competition might induce managers, desperate for any edge, to invest in innovation. Caves

(1982) argues that foreign trade and investment often bring foreign ideas too; and Li et al. (2004) find

elevated firm performance heterogeneity in countries open to the global economy. In spite of all of these

interactions, if IT remains significant nonetheless, it is unlikely to be proxying for pure competition effect.



Research and Development

IT is not the only investment that can lead to a technological edge. Schumpeter (1942), Romer (1986),

and others stress innovation due to R&D spending by large established firms. Kothari et al. (2002) link

R&D to future earnings variability; Chan et al. (2001) find similar results using stock returns; and Barron

et al. (2002) link high R&D to the lack of consensus in analysts’ forecasts. We therefore control for R&D

intensity. R&D capital is constructed from R&D spending (Compustat item 46) using a precise analog to

[1], substituting a 20% depreciation rate and the GDP deflator, as in Chan et al. (2001). R&D intensity is

then an industry’s capitalized R&D over its PP&E (item 8).

         We control for R&D because it might be both correlated to IT intensity and an alternative font of

creative destruction. However, inspection of our variable shows R&D capital is highly concentrated in a




8
  Acemoglu (2005) notes that deregulation is a sectoral phenomenon affecting e.g. transportation and utilities, but not already
lightly regulated industries, and so argues that it cannot fully explain rising economy-wide firm-level volatility.


                                                             15
few industries and, within those, in the largest firms.9 R&D thus seems an unlikely cause of an economy-

wide firm performance heterogeneity upsurge.



Corporate Finance

A firm’s leverage and liquidity might affect its firm-specific performance variation. Higher leverage,

ceteris paribus, mechanically raises stock returns volatility, though not necessarily that of sales growth.

Cash reserves let firms weather ill times without sacrificing key assets (Myers and Majluf, 1984). Failing

to control for these effects might induce noise – additional firm heterogeneity unrelated to IT intensity.

We therefore include leverage – industry short and long term debt over assets (annual items 9 plus 34

over 6) – and liquidity – industry current assets over current liabilities (Compustat annual items 4 over 5).

         All of this takes liquidity and leverage decisions as independent of investment decisions, but this

may not be so. High debt capacity permits more externally financed IT, and liquidity implies access to

internal funds, and perhaps external funds too. These interactions suggest possible collinearity between

our financial variables and IT intensity. However, if they are unaffected, a role for creative destruction is

more plausible.

         In Section 4, where we discuss various interpretation and statistical robustness, we describe

variants of the above controls as well as a substantial list of other controls variables – firm size

distribution, advertising expenses, book to market ratios, capital investment, and others. Our findings are

robust to all these alternatives.



                                                       [Table 2 about here]




9
  Others find a similar concentration. In 2000, R&D spending by the industrial machinery, transportation equipment, and
chemical products industries accounted for almost 80% of total R&D spending in the manufacturing sector (NSF, 2003). An NSF
survey (1999) reports 19 of the 20 firms with R&D spending above one billion dollars reside in four manufacturing industries –
IBM and Hewlett-Packard are in industrial machinery; GE, Lucent, and Intel in electric and electronic equipment; GM and Ford
in transportation equipment, and Johnson & Johnson and Pfizer in chemical products. Currently, Compustat classifies IBM as a
business services firm because its sales of software and computer related services exceed its sales of computers.


                                                             16
3.2.3 Results

Table 2 correlates firm performance heterogeneity with IT intensity and other controls (Panel A) and

correlations among our main control variables (Panel B). Both firm performance heterogeneity in stock

return and sales growth are positively and statistically significantly correlated with IT intensity. The

correlation between the performance heterogeneity measures and the controls have signs mostly

correspond to the interpretations above, but significance levels are sporadic – and these are pooled panel

p-levels, which are biased upwards and so overstate the significance of the correlations.



                                                    [Table 3 about here]



            Table 3 reports results of regression analyses. It shows IT intensity significantly correlated with

absolute and relative firm-specific performance heterogeneity in stock returns and sales growth,

regardless of the controls included. 10 The IT intensity coefficients are highly significant across

specifications. In contrast, other controls’ coefficients, except for average firm size, are quite

temperamental, with inconsistent signs and significance levels. This suggests that IT is the underlying

factor most consistently associated with elevated firm-specific performance heterogeneity, and that the

explanations associated with the various controls reflect aspects of this deeper explanation.

            Table 3 reveals that firm age is negative and significant if the dependent variables are absolute or

relative firm-specific stock return heterogeneity. In regressions explaining sales growth heterogeneity,

firm age is negative - but only significantly so in regressions including lagged systematic variation,

ln(σ m2 ,i ,t −1 ) .

            The Herfindahl index, which proxy for competition, is insignificant in explaining absolute stock

return heterogeneity and has the wrong, albeit significant, sign in explaining relative stock return


10
  The only exception is the last column where relative firm-specific variation of sales growth rates is used as dependent variables
in multiple regressions. However, no other variables has significant coefficient either except for Herfindahl index which has a
wrong sign. We also examine regressions on IT with the control variables used one-at-a-time. Results are qualitatively similar to
the case of all controls.


                                                               17
heterogeneity. It is significant and has the expected sign in explaining absolute firm-specific performance

heterogeneity in sales growth, but has the wrong sign in explaining relative firm-specific heterogeneity.

         R&D intensity is only sporadically significant and attracts economically inconsistent signs in

explaining firm-specific performance heterogeneity. Overall, R&D intensity does not detract from IT in

explaining elevated firm performance heterogeneity in the U.S. in recent decades.

         These results are encouraging: they suggest that firm-specific performance heterogeneity is

related to more intensive use of information technology (IT), a recently developed “general purpose

technology” that stimulates creative destruction.



3.3      Productivity Regressions

We suggest that the relationship between firm performance heterogeneity and IT intensity reflects a

creative destruction process that stems from the advent of IT, a general purpose technology. As such,

firm-specific performance heterogeneity should presage TFP growth.11 Moreover, if IT accelerates TFP

growth by fuelling creative destruction, including firm performance heterogeneity should diminish the

coefficient and significance of IT in regressions explaining TFP growth.

         The time horizon over which TFP growth is measured is important because Schumpeter (1912)

explicitly links creative destruction to medium and long-run growth, and explicitly disallows a link with

short-run growth. Annual windows are thus certainly too short; but, a very long window, such as 1971

through 2000, allows only a single cross-section regression on a somewhat reduced sample of industry

observations. Unobserved industry factors also become more treacherous in the latter exercise because

industry fixed effects obviously cannot be included. We therefore follow the common practice in the

productivity literature – see Beck et al. (2000) and, Aghion et al. (2004), and others – of defining the

medium-run as five years and estimating productivity growth across windows of that length. We revisit

longer window lengths as robustness checks. The five-year windows give us a 235 observation industry-


11
  Consistent with this, Durnev et al. (2004a) use country-level data to show that higher firm-specific stock return variation
correlates with higher national TFP growth.


                                                            18
time panel of TFP growth rates defined as                  TFP   g i ,t = ln(TFPi ,t ) − ln(TFPi ,t −4 ) , where TFPi ,t is industry i's TFP

level in year t, from [8].

            Our WLS regressions of productivity growth are of the form


[14]        TFP   g i ,t = c 0 + c1 ln(σ ε2,i ,t −5 ) + c 2 ln(σ m2 ,i ,t −5 ) + c3 ln(TFPi ,t − 4 ) + ∑t δ t + ∑iλi + ω i ,t


and


[15]        TFP   gi ,t = c0 + c1ψ i ,t − 5 + c3 ln(TFPi ,t − 4 ) + ∑t δ t + ∑i λi + ωi ,t


where ln(σ ε2,i ,t −5 ) , ln(σ m2 ,i ,t −5 ) and ψ i ,t −5 are industry absolute firm-specific, absolute systematic, and

relative firm-specific stock return variation averaged over the five-year window (t-9 to t-5) 12 prior to that

used to estimate         TFP   g i ,t . The inclusion of absolute systematic variation in [14] is motivated by Ramey

and Ramey (1995)’s cross-country study which shows that aggregate volatility has negative impact on

economic growth.

            We focus on firm-specific stock return heterogeneity as gauging the pace of creative destruction

because stock returns are forward looking than sales growth rates, and therefore arguably more prescient

of subsequent longer term outcomes. Stock return heterogeneity is also constructed from highest

frequency data, and therefore may be estimated more precisely.

            We control for the log of the industry’s TFP level at the beginning of each TFP growth estimation

window, ln(TFPi ,t − 4 ) , because “catching up” across industries might raise TFP growth in industries with

lower initial TFP levels. However, if industry TFP growth converges to economy average rates – see e.g.

Bernard and Jones (1996) regarding this debate - the error terms in our panel regressions might be

correlated with TFP levels. Our panel, with only 41 industries, is too small for the GMM solutions to this

quandary proposed by Arellano and Bond (1991) and applied by Beck et al. (2000). We therefore run [14]


12
     Section 4.3 confirms robustness to alternative windows.


                                                                       19
and [15] both with and without ln(TFPi , t − 4 ) to check the sensitivity of our results. The two sets of results

are very similar. To save space, we report only the set in which ln(TFPi , t − 4 ) is included.

        As before, time fixed effects mitigate the influence of macroeconomic shocks and common time

trends. Since latent industry characteristics also may affect TFP growth, we also include industry fixed

effects and use industry clustering to obtain serial correlation and heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics,

as in Arellano (1987) and Wooldridge (2002). Also as in the regressions in Table 3, we weight

observations by industry size. The weights are industry total dollars of assets averaged over the prior five-

year window, from t-9 to t-5.



                                                  [Table 4 about here]



        These regressions, presented in Panels A and B of Table 4, clearly show that industries with

higher firm performance heterogeneity in stock return post economically and statistically significantly

faster subsequent TFP growth. In Panel A, the TFP growth rates are BEA industry-level figures; while the

Panel B growth rates are calculated from our sample firms, as described in Section 2.3. The coefficients

are smaller in the BEA measure regressions, but exhibit the same pattern of signs and statistical

significance.

        Note how controlling for IT intensity leaves firm-specific performance heterogeneity qualitatively

unaffected. In contrast, IT intensity fades when performance heterogeneity is present. Regressions of

TFP growth on initial TFP levels and IT intensity only (third columns in Panels A and B) assign the latter

significant coefficients of 0.073 forBEA-based TFP growth, or 0.224 for Compustat-based TFP growth.

But Table 4 shows IT intensity entirely insignificant in otherwise identical regressions of BEA-based TFP

growth that also contain performance heterogeneity. In regressions explaining Compustat-based TFP

growth, the IT intensity coefficient is cut in half and its significance level is also substantially reduced.




                                                       20
4.      Robustness Checks

A range of alternative approaches produce qualitatively similar results, by which we mean patterns of

signs and significance for variables of interest identical to those in the tables.



4.1     The Robustness of Our Interpretation

We subject our interpretation to a series of robustness checks: both in terms of economics and statistics.

We also examine robustness in terms of variable constructs and regression specifications.



4.1.1   Sample Composition

One issue is that our data are based on listed firms – those in Compustat. Recently, Davis et al. (2006)

report that increased firm volatility appears restricted to publicly traded firms. Our sample’s total sales

represents, on average, about half of US GDP through the period of 1971 to 2000, rising from about 40%

in early years to about 60% in later years.13

        Thus, our results need not carry to unlisted firms. However, Schumpeter (1912) explicitly notes

that entrepreneurs often require external equity financing; and recent empirical work, surveyed in Levine

(1997, 2005), confirms this. Because of this, effects associated with creative destruction might well be

more evident in listed firms, consistent with the findings reported by Davis et al. (2006). However, we

relegate attempts to understand the difference between private and publicly traded firms to future research

effort, and caution that our results are based only on publicly traded firms.

        A second issue is firm age, for other recent work links high firm volatility to a rising proportion

of relatively recently listed firms (e.g., Campbell et al., 2001; Pastor and Veronesi, 2003; Fama and

French, 2004; Bennett and Sias, 2005; Brown and Kapadia, 2005; Fink et al., 2005; Davis et al., 2006).

As noted above, young listed firms might tend to include more energetic innovators, so these findings are




                                                       21
not inconsistent with our thesis. But creative destruction should affect old firms too. To explore this, we

rerun Table 3, partitioning the sample into young and old firms.

         Our median firm has been listed for eight years, so we partition the sample at age = 8 years,

where age is the difference between year t and the firm’s listing year. The young firm subsample has a

mean age of 3.64, a maximum age of 7, a median of 3, and a minimum 1. The old firm sample has a mean

age of 19.03, a maximum of 54, a median of 16, and a minimum of 8 years.



                                                       [Table 5 about here]



         Panels A and B of Table 5 report regressions results for young and old firms, respectively. The

findings are broadly comparable across subsamples. IT intensity is significantly related to absolute

heterogeneity in stock returns and sales growth rates in both the young and old subsamples. Relative

stock return heterogeneity is significant only for young firms, but relative sales growth heterogeneity is

significant only for old firms. Our result is thus clearly not driven by younger firms in general.

         To confirm explicitly that our finding is not an artefact of 1990s listings, we partition our sample

at age = ten years; that is, into firms listed before versus in or after 1990. This expands the young firm

subsample to 56% of the total, but shrinks the old firm subsample to only 44%. The results for stock

return heterogeneity are qualitatively unaffected. However, our sales growth heterogeneity results are

now weaker in the old firm subsample, with only 3 significant coefficients in 6 cases, and stronger in the

young firms subsample, with significance in all six specifications. The weaker old firm results are, in part

at least, likely due to the smaller sample size because splitting at five years generates the opposite effect:

weaker sales growth results for young firms (significance in 4 of 6 cases) and stronger findings for old

firms (significance in 5 of 6 cases). Again, the stock returns findings are preserved in both subsamples.

          Our result is thus clearly driven by neither 1990s listings; nor young firms in general. Thus,


13
  Since Compustat sales include intermediate goods as well as value-added, these are not directly comparable to the US GDP. To
adjust for this problem in making these comparisons, we multiply average sales by the average share of value-added in sales.


                                                             22
while our finding would have been perfectly consistent with elevated firm-specific volatility primarily in

newly listed firms, it is more general.14



4.1.2    Reverse Causality and Endogeneity?

Reverse causality of at least two genres might arise. One genre is not necessarily connected with creative

destruction. For example, exogenous productivity shocks might well induce performance heterogeneity

and IT investment might help firms cope with increased uncertainty.15                       If the productivity shocks are

positive on average, we might also observe accelerated productivity.

         A second genre of reverse causality arguments stem directly from our main hypothesis relating

enhanced firm-specific performance heterogeneity to an intensification of the process of                                creative

destruction. Schumpeter (2002), in a recently discovered “lost” seventh chapter of Schumpeter (1912),

stresses that creative destruction is a process, “not with a causal chain of explanation” (p. 98), and goes on

to describe a circular flow, what would now be called a positive feedback loop, with explicitly

bidirectional causality. Innovation raises productivity, but the successes of past innovators in raising

productivity also inspire the next generation of innovators. Thus, reverse causality is consistent with our

hypothesis. Our task is to confirm direct causality, rather than to reject reverse causality.

         To do this, we must ensure that our independent variables capture only expected growth, and that

the residuals are uncorrelated with the independent variables, lest well known endogeneity problems arise.

To preclude such problems, we employ instrumental variables for IT intensity. These must be highly

correlated with IT intensity, but uncorrelated with the true regression residuals.

         Since our sample excludes industries which produce IT assets, we select instruments associated

with the supply of IT assets. As with capital investment in general, IT intensity should be related past IT

intensity and the cost of new IT assets. We proxy for the latter using estimated marginal cost of IT


14
   Schumpeter (1952) posits that older firms may be participate in races to innovate, and may even have an advantage over
younger firms if huge capital outlays are required and public equity is expensive.
15
   Note that IT intensity is defined as IT capital over non-IT capital, and that this ratio could still be exogenous if TFP shocks
have equal effects on IT and non-IT investment. However, different effects permit endogeneity, and seem not implausible a
priori.


                                                               23
(quality) production and IT tax rates, and use these proxies as our instruments.16

         Since marginal IT production costs are unobservable, we estimate approximations. In doing this,

we take special care to eliminate any possible effects on marginal cost from demand side factors.

Following Chun and Nadiri (2002), we construct the marginal cost of computer quality since this mainly

depends on the efficiency of R&D expenditures in the IT-producing sector; rather than demand-side

factors. We measure the quality of computers as the ratio of list (unit) prices to hedonic prices, and

calculate the marginal cost of quality by estimating a flexible cost function.17 Finally, we multiply this

marginal cost by each industry’s beginning-of-year IT intensity to estimate marginal cost of IT (quality)

production costs for each sector.

         We estimate IT tax rates using asset-specific tax parameters. These are tax-related components of

the rental price of capital, defined as Taxk ,t ≡ (1 − ζ k ,t − ut zk ,t ) /(1 − ut ) for asset k at time t, with ζk,t the

effective rate of the investment tax credit, ut the corporate income tax rate, and zk,t the present value of a

dollar of tax depreciation allowances. These variables, in turn, are all from the BLS. Using the IT asset

composition of each industry each year, we aggregate our IT tax parameters using the Törnqvist method.

         Well-known weak instruments problems can seriously bias instrumental variables techniques of

the sort we undertake, even in large samples. Our tax rate and marginal cost pass standard weak

instruments test criteria, and thus are acceptable as instrumental variables.18



                                                         [Table 6 about here]




16
   We are most grateful to an anonymous referee for suggesting this procedure.
17
   Hedonic and list prices are from the BEA’s FRTW data and the Census Bureau’s Current Industrial Reports, respectively.
Assuming a translog cost function including both the quality and quantity of computers, the marginal costs of quality and
quantity are estimated separately. See Chun and Nadiri (2002) for the details.
18
   First, our first stage F-statistics are on average larger than 350 which is much greater than the approximate cut off of 10 for
weak instruments suggested by Stock and Yogo (2005). Second, we perform Anderson Rubin confidence test to check the
significance of the second stage regression. This test is valid whether instruments are strong, weak or even irrelevant. Third, we
estimate the second stage coefficient using Limited Information Maximum Likelihood (LIML) method suggested by Stock et al.
(2002) and implemented by Moreira and Poi (2003). Anderson Rubin tests show that LIML coefficients are not statistically
different from Two-Stage Least Squares (2SLS) coefficients. We are grateful for Prof. James Stock for many helpful comments
and suggestions on the issue of weak instruments.


                                                               24
        Table 6 reports our results, replicating those in Table 3 but now using instrumental variables

estimation techniques. In eleven of the twelve alternative specifications, IT intensity remains positively

significantly related to firm performance heterogeneity. Overall, these results are consistent with direct

causality – industry IT intensity ‘causing’ firm-specific performance heterogeneity.



                                                 [Table 7 about here]



        Table 7 partitions the sample into young and old firms, as in Table 5, but now runs instrumental

variable regressions, as in Table 6. The Table 5 results hold up well in regressions of firm-specific stock

return heterogeneity, with IT intensity attracting positive significant coefficients in five of the six

alternative specifications for both young and old firms. The sales growth heterogeneity regressions are

weaker, with IT intensity retaining significance in four of six specifications for young firms and three of

six for old firms. Note however, that the rough magnitudes of the point estimates are broadly similar

across comparable specifications in Tables 5 and 6. As with the Table 5 regressions, an alternative

partition at age = ten years generates qualitatively similar results for stock return heterogeneity in both

subsamples, but generates stronger results for sales growth heterogeneity using young firms. In contrast,

partitioning at age = five years renders IT intensity significant in only two IV sales growth heterogeneity

specifications for young firms, but in three for old firms; and in only four of six IV stock return

heterogeneity specifications for young firms, but in all six for old firms.

        We conclude that causality runs from stepped up IT intensity to magnified firm-specific

performance heterogeneity in both young and old firms, but this is more certain if heterogeneity is

measured using stock returns than using sales growth.

        Table 8 re-examines the impact of firm performance heterogeneity on TFP growth using our tax

rate and marginal cost estimates as instruments for the component of the former associated with

exogenous changes in IT. Note that, to avoid collinearity, we cannot include instrumented IT intensity in

these regressions. As in the previous round of estimates, firm-performance heterogeneity remains


                                                      25
significantly positively related to both measures of TFP growth.



                                                 [Table 8 about here]



4.2     The Robustness of Our Performance Heterogeneity Regressions

4.2.1   Alternative Variables

Previously Used Proxies for Creative Destruction

To confirm that our results reflect creative destruction, we consider alternative dependent variables

previously used to gauge that process. Fogel et al. (2005), using country-level data, show that faster

turnover in a country’s list of leading firms, which they use to proxy for creative destruction, correlates

with faster per capita GDP and productivity growth. Comin and Philippon (2005) use conceptually

analogous measures of leading firm turnover rates for US industries from Compustat data. We follow

their approach, defining the turnover rate in industry i in year t as the probability of a leading firm leaving

the industry’s top quintile over a five-year period. Further following Comin and Philippon (2005), we

estimate turnover ranking leading firm by market value, operating income and sales. We then generate an

analog to Table 3, but with these turnover measures, rather than firm-specific performance heterogeneity,

as dependent variables. The results, shown in Table 9, are qualitatively similar to those in Table 3 – IT

intensity remains positive and significant across all specifications, while the other controls (except size)

have insignificant and inconsistent signs.



                                                 [Table 9 about here]



Alternative Ways of Estimating Firm Performance Heterogeneity Measure

As further robustness checks, we consider alternative constructions of sales firm-specific performance

heterogeneity measures constructed with five-year, rather than three-year, windows; and using non-




                                                      26
overlapping, rather than overlapping, three-year windows (i.e. dropping two of every three years). All

generate qualitatively similar results, except for reduced significance levels if the dependent variable is

relative firm-specific sales growth heterogeneity constructed using five-year windows.

        We require complete data for a firm to be included in estimating the firm-specific performance

heterogeneity of its industry. Repeating our tests including firms with one, two, or three missing

observations generates qualitatively similar results to those shown. We drop firm-quarter observations

with Compustat footnotes. Retaining them generates qualitatively similar results. In estimating sales

growth heterogeneity, we scale by the average of current and lagged sales in [3]. Using the earlier

period’s sales as the denominator yields qualitatively similar results.

        Extreme values may affect our heterogeneity estimates. Rerunning [4] using data winsorized at

1% does not qualitatively change our results. Neither does winsorizing the firm performance

heterogeneity measures directly.

        Table 3 uses variables constructed using value weighted industry and market indexes in

regression [4]. Equal weighted indexes generate qualitatively similar results in regressions with absolute

firm performance heterogeneity as dependent variables. When relative firm performance heterogeneity

measures are used as dependent variables, results are weaker, perhaps again reflecting an overly

restrictive specification of [12] when compared with [13], rather than genuine economic insignificance.



Alternative Estimates of IT Intensity

Furthermore, we check the robustness of the construction of IT intensity. We use Törnqvist indexes to

aggregate IT assets deflated by BEA hedonic prices (BEA, 1998). Alternative indexes without

adjustments for inflation generate qualitatively similar results.



Alternative Constructions of Other Variables

We gauge firm age by the number of years of CRSP data. This underestimates the ages of firms with

early NASDAQ listings, listings on regional or foreign exchanges, and prior histories as unlisted firms.


                                                      27
An alternative estimate of firm age (Hall, 1990) divides balance sheet depreciation by income statement

depreciation (Compustat annual items 7 less 8 all over 14) to obtain a rough estimate of the age of the

firm’s depreciable assets. This measure is highly positively correlated with years in CRSP (ρ = 0.49, p

<< .01) and substituting it into our regressions leaves our results qualitatively unchanged.

           Our Herfindahl indexes are based on sales. Asset-based Herfindahls generate qualitatively similar

results.

           We capitalize R&D spending in our R&D control variable. Although this has solid economic

justification, R&D spending is nonetheless often used as a proxy for R&D capital stock – see e.g. Morck

et al. (1988). Using simple current or lagged R&D spending over assets generates qualitatively similar

results to those shown.



4.2.2      Alternative Econometric Approaches

The regressions in Table 3 weight observations by industry total asset. Weighting instead by industry

market capitalization or industry sales generates qualitatively similar results. So do equally weighted

regressions for stock return heterogeneity; and for sales growth heterogeneity if we drop industries with

weights below 0.5% of the sample total. Using fixed weights, average assets for 1966 through 1970, also

generates qualitatively similar results.

           Figure 5 presents scatter plots of ln( σ ε2 ) for stock returns and sales growth against IT intensity.

These show broad-based positive correlations, clearly not driven by outliers. More formally, winsorizing

all variables at 1% generates qualitatively similar results.

           An alternative to clustered standard errors, devised by Pontiff (1996), modifies Fama-MacBeth

regressions by appending the method of Newey and West (1987). Petersen (2005) shows that serial

correlations can generate inflated t-statistics even with this correction. Still, the method is widely used

and may have other advantages. In fact, modified Fama-MacBeth regressions yield stronger results than

those shown in regression tables of the paper.




                                                        28
4.2.3   Additional Control Variables

We repeat our performance heterogeneity multiple regressions, supplemented with various additional

controls. None changes the results qualitatively.

        We control for average size of firm in each industry. As a robustness check, we also consider the

distribution of firm size for each industry. Using the standard deviation of the logarithms of firm market

capitalization, sales, or total assets to control for firm-size dispersion yields qualitatively similar results to

those shown.

        IT and R&D are clearly not the only sources of innovation or creative destruction. Creative

innovations might also arise from unique marketing strategies and any number of other sources. We

therefore include industry advertising expenses over property, plant, and equipment (PP&E) (Compustat

item 45 over item 8) as an additional control. As a more general measure of intangible assets, we also

include book to market ratios, industry total book value of equity over its corresponding market value (the

industry total of annual item 60 over the sum of the products of 25 and 199). Including either or both of

these variables does not qualitatively change our results.

        Investment in conventional capital assets might conceivably increase firm performance

heterogeneity by increasing uncertainty about a firm’s future cash flows. We therefore control for non-IT

capital investment (industry aggregate non-IT investment over industry aggregate non-IT capital, as

defined in section 2.1). Qualitatively similar results ensue.

        Irvine and Pontiff (2004) consider import penetration, which is only available for manufacturing

industries. If we include import penetration as an added control, the IT variable remains significant,

except for regressions of relative firm-specific performance heterogeneity. However, in these regressions,

both IT and import penetration become insignificant, perhaps reflecting the smaller sample (n = 19).

Import penetration exhibits little time variation, and so may be collinear with industry fixed effects.

        Firms with operations in more industries, all else equal, track the market more closely and their

primary industry indexes less closely. Depending on which effect is greater, this might systematically


                                                       29
raise or lower their firm-specific performance variation relative to that of pure-play firms. Also, Agarwal

et al. (2004) argue that diversification raises investor uncertainty and increases stock return variation; and

Morck et al. (1989) argue that investors view diversification per se as evidence of firm-specific

governance problems. We gauge average firm diversification by the number of two-digit industries in

which it reports positive sales, and average this for each industry each year. Compustat’s Industry

Segment files are available from 1985 on, but change format drastically in December 1998, when SFAS

131 superseded FASB 14. We thus have comparable data for this variable only from 1985 through 1998.

Controlling for diversification leaves IT intensity with significant coefficients similar to those in Table 3

in regressions of absolute firm-specific variation measure of sales growth, but insignificant in the other

specifications. The less robust significance could reflect the shorter panel, rather than genuine economic

insignificance. There is little variation in industry average diversification over time, and dropping

industry fixed effects again restores the full pattern of signs and significance for IT intensity in the tables.

        Multinational firms are subject to shocks, like currency fluctuations and foreign demand

fluctuations, which barely affect purely domestic firms. But foreign sales can also dampen domestic

shocks. We control for foreign exposure using industry foreign sales over total sales from Compustat.

These data yield the same pattern of results as industry diversification and are subject to the same

limitations.



4.3     The Robustness of Our Productivity Regressions

Recall that BEA industry TFP growth and TFP growth estimated from Compustat generate largely

qualitatively similar results, described in section 3.3. Including unlisted firms, as in the BEA figures, does

not affect our results.

        Our TFP growth results survive several additional robustness checks.

        To avoid any possible correlation between our regression weights and error terms, we re-estimate

our results using out-of-sample weights, 1966 to 1970 average assets, in all time periods and observe

qualitatively similar results. In equally weighted regressions, firm performance heterogeneity is


                                                      30
significant only if initial TFP levels are also included – even in regressions excluding industries with

weights below 0.5% of the sample total. This might indicate noisier TFP growth or performance

heterogeneity estimates for smaller industries, or perhaps more vigorous creative destruction in larger

industries. Since growth in larger industries is ostensibly most economically important, even the latter

preserves the economic significance of our results.

        Five-year periods might be too short to capture the full impact on TFP of creative destruction

associated with IT capital. To examine the effect of creative destruction in a longer horizon, we run a

cross-section regression of thirty-year industry TFP growth on firm performance heterogeneity, averaged

across the same years, and controls. This yields the same pattern of signs and significance as Table 4.

        Another issue is the window length used for the regressor variable – firm performance

heterogeneity. Table 4 uses the average across the five years prior to the beginning of the five-year

window over which the regressand, TFP growth, is estimated. Repeating the exercise using stock return

heterogeneity measured instead over a one or three-year period prior to the TFP growth estimation

window attracts coefficients roughly one fifth and three-fifths, respectively, as large as those in Table 4,

though p-levels fall short of statistical significance in specifications without initial TFP.



5.      Conclusions

Elevated firm performance heterogeneity – cross-sectional firm-specific variation in individual firms’

stock returns and real sales growth – is associated with intensive investment in information technology

(IT). These findings are robust to a wide range of specifications, control variables, and econometric

approaches.

        Our results support IT serving as a general purpose technology (GPT), inducing a wave of

innovation across many industries. Some firms make good use of these opportunities, while others do not,

widening a chasm between winner and loser firms. This firm performance heterogeneity is a readily

observable measure of ongoing creative destruction, the process which Schumpeter (1912) argues




                                                      31
sustains economic growth. Consistent with this, industries with elevated firm performance heterogeneity

exhibit faster total factor productivity (TFP) growth.

        This interpretation of firm-specific performance heterogeneity permits reinterpretation of several

recent findings regarding firm-specific stock returns and fundamentals variation, viz.



1.      Creative destruction is more intense in higher income countries

        Stocks in countries with higher incomes (Morck et al., 2000) or faster economic growth (Durnev

        et al. 2004a) exhibit higher firm-specific return variation. If this reflects more intense creative

        destruction, these findings support Aghion et al.’s (2005) theoretical prediction of more creative

        destruction in higher income countries, and factor accumulation in lower income countries. They

        also more generally support the theories of Schumpeter (1912), and their formalizations by

        Aghion and Howitt (1992, 1998), Aghion et al. (2004, 2005), and Acemoglu et al. (2005, 2006),

        which link economic growth to the rise of innovative firms and the decline of stagnant ones.



2.      Creative destruction is more intense if private property rights are stronger

        Morck et al. (2000) link greater firm-specific performance heterogeneity to the quality of

        government, by which they mean an absence of corruption, an efficiency judiciary, and a general

        respect for the rule of law. La Porta et al. (1999) argue that governments that provide these

        institutional public goods are protecting private property rights. La Porta et al. (2006) show

        effective private property rights protection to be a necessary condition for financial development.

        These support Baumol (1990), Murphy et al. (1991), Gans et al. (2002), and others who argue

        that sound private property rights are a precondition for creative destruction.



3.      Creative destruction is more intense if corporations are more transparent

        La Porta et al. (2006) argue that corporate transparency is critical to making investors’ de jure




                                                     32
     protection effective. Morck et al. (2000), Bris et al. (2004), Durnev et al. (2004a), Fox (2003),

     Huang (2004), Ozoguz (2004), and Jin and Myers (2006) all link corporate transparency to firm-

     specific variation. Our findings suggest one possible underlying economic explanation: better

     accounting disclosure and more generally transparent stock markets permit entrepreneurs to raise

     external funds to invest in new technologies, like IT, by making capital more secure and cheaper.



4.   Creative destruction is more intense if financial systems are more developed

     Schumpeter (1912) argues that entrepreneurs are often penurious, and so need financing to

     develop their innovations. He therefore argues that a well developed financial system is a

     prerequisite for growth through creative destruction. Consistent with this, King and Levine (1993)

     show financial development to be of first order importance to economic growth. Wurgler (2000)

     links greater firm-specific performance heterogeneity to financial development. Bris et al. (2004)

     and Durnev et al. (2004a) show higher firm-specific stock return variation in more financially

     developed countries. Durnev et al. (2004a) also report higher TFP growth in countries with

     elevated firm-specific stock return variation. Davis et al. (2006) report that the increase in firm-

     level volatility found by Morck et al. (2000), Campbell et al. (2001), and others in U.S. stocks is

     evident only in listed firms. This accords with Schumpeter’s (1912) argument that creative

     destruction requires external financing, and suggests that public equity financing might be

     especially important.

             Given these linkages, the findings of Morck et al. (2000) and Jin and Myers (2006) can

     be reinterpreted as indirectly supporting the importance of financial development to creative

     destruction.



5.   Creative destruction is more intense in more financially open economies

     Li et al. (2004) show that firm-specific stock return variation rises in emerging economies after




                                                 33
          they open to international portfolio investment. Caves (1982) and other argue that openness

          encourages technology transfer, so the effect Li et al. (2004) observe could partially reflect

          creative destruction associated with the new technology.



6.        Creative destruction need not destabilize the macroeconomy

          Durnev et al. (2004a) find faster growth in countries whose stock returns display greater firm-

          specific variation, while Ramey and Ramey (1995) find countries with elevated macroeconomic

          variation growing slower. 19 The two results are not mutually exclusive because firm-specific

          variation cancels out in aggregate measures. This fallacy of composition in variation means that

          the elevated firm-specific variation associated with creative destruction can aggregate into low

          volatility in macroeconomic growth.20



          Our thesis that elevated firm performance heterogeneity signals intensified creative destruction in

no way excludes other explanations of firm-specific performance variation. Philippon (2003), Gaspar and

Massa (2004), and Irvine and Pontiff (2004) emphasize increased competition, and Schumpeter (1939)

posits that waves of creative destruction induce subsequent waves of price competition. Pastor and

Veronesi (2003), Fama and French (2004), Bennett and Sias (2005), Brown and Kapadia (2005), Fink et

al. (2005) and Davis et al. (2006) link rising firm-specific stock returns variation to the growing

importance of smaller, younger firms. This also dovetails with our thesis, for Schumpeter (1912) argues

that new, initially small firms are the carriers of new technology and the harbingers of creative destruction.

We believe that our thesis underscores the importance of these findings and other findings regarding firm-

specific performance heterogeneity by providing a unifying framework for this emerging literature. This

need not, of course, preclude other partial explanations, and we welcome further work in this area.


19
  Ramey and Ramey interpret their finding as decreased uncertainty spurring investment, as in Pindyck (1991).
20
  Comin and Mulani (2005) model firm-specific risk rising and systematic risk falling as firms shift their R&D towards inimitable
innovations and away from inimitable ones, and argue that such a shift occurred in the U.S. in recent decades. This is consistent with
GPT applications being hard to imitate initially, when their contribution to TFP growth is greatest, as in Schumpeter (1939).



                                                               34
REFERENCES

Acemoglu, D., 2005. Comment: Comin D., Philippon, T., The rise in firm-level volatility: Causes and

        consequences. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 20, 203-215.

Acemoglu, D., Aghion, P., Zilibotti, F., 2006. Distance to frontier, selection and economic growth.

        Journal of the European Economic Association 4, 37-74.

Agarwal, D., Bharath, S.T., Viswanathan, S., 2004. Technological change and stock return volatility:

        Evidence from eCommerce adoptions. Available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=387543.

Aghion, P., Howitt, P., 1992. A model of growth through creative destruction. Econometrica 60, 323-351.

Aghion, P., Howitt, P., 1998. Endogenous Growth Theory. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Aghion, P., Angeletos, G-M., Banerjee, A., Manova, K., 2004. Volatility and growth: Financial

        development and the cyclical composition of investment. Unpublished working paper, Harvard

        University.

Aghion, P., Howitt, P.W., Mayer-Foulkes, D., 2005. The effects of financial development on

        convergence: Theory and evidence. Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 173-222.

Arellano, M., 1987. Computing robust standard errors for within-groups estimators. Oxford Bulletin of

        Economics and Statistics 49, 431-434.

Arellano, M., Bond, S., 1991. Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte carlo evidence and an

        application to employment equations. Review of Economic Studies 58, 277-297.

Athey, S., Stern, S., 2002. The impact of information technology on emergency health care outcomes.

        Rand Journal of Economics 33, 399-432.

Barron, O.E., Byard, D., Kile, C., Riedl, E.J., 2002. High-technology intangibles and analysts forecasts.

        Journal of Accounting Research 40, 289-312.

Baumol, W.J., 1990. Entrepreneurship: Productive, unproductive, and destructive. Journal of Political

        Economy 98, 893-921.

Beck, T., Levine, R., Loayza, N., 2000. Finance and the source of growth. Journal of Financial

        Economics 58, 261-300.


                                                   35
Bennett, J., Sias, R., 2005. Why does firm-specific risk change over time? Unpublished working paper,

       Washington State University.

Bernard, A.B., Jones, C.I., 1996. Comparing apples to oranges: Productivity convergence and

       measurement across industries and countries. American Economic Review 86, 1216-1238.

Biddle, G., Hilary, G., 2006. How does accounting quality improve investment efficiency? Unpublished

       working paper, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.

Bresnahan, T.F., Trajtenberg, M., 1995. General purpose technologies: Engines of growth? Journal of

       Econometrics 64, 83-108.

Bris, A., Goetzmann, W.N., Zhu, N., 2004. Efficiency and the bear: Short sales and markets around the

       world. Unpublished working paper, Yale School of Management.

Brown, G., Kapadia, N., 2005. Firm-specific risk and equity market development. Unpublished working

       paper, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

Brown, J.R., Goolsbee, A., 2002. Does the internet make markets more competitive? Evidence from the

       life insurance industry. Journal of Political Economy 110, 481-507.

Brynjolfsson, E., Hitt, L., 2003. Computing productivity: Firm-level evidence. Review of Economics and

       Statistics 85, 793-808.

Bureau of Economic Analysis, 1998. Computer prices in the national accounts: An update from the

       comprehensive revision. Unpublished working paper, Bureau of Economic Analysis.

Bushman, R., Smith, A., 2003. Transparency, financial accounting information, and corporate governance.

       Economic Policy Review of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 9, 65-87.

Campbell, J.Y., Lettau, M., Malkiel, B.G., Xu, Y., 2001. Have individual stocks become more volatile?

       An empirical exploration of idiosyncratic risk. Journal of Finance 56, 1-43.

Caves, R.,1982. Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis. Cambridge University Press,

       Cambridge, England.

Chan, K., Chan, L.K.C., Jegadeesh, N., Lakonishok, J., 2001. Earnings quality and stock returns: The

       evidence from accruals. Unpublished working paper, University of Illinois.


                                                   36
Chan, L.K.C., Lakonishok, J., Sougiannis, T., 2001. The stock market valuation of research and

        development expenditures. Journal of Finance 56, 2431-2456.

Chun, H., Nadiri, M.I., 2002. Decomposing productivity growth in the U.S. computer industry. NBER

        Working Paper No. 9267.

Comin, D., Mulani, S., 2005. A theory of growth and volatility at the aggregate and firm level. NBER

        Working Paper No. 11503.

Comin, D., Mulani, S., 2006. Diverging trends in aggregate and firm volatility. Review of Economics and

        Statistics 88, 374-383.

Comin D., Philippon, T., 2005. The rise in firm-level volatility: Causes and consequences. NBER

        Macroeconomics Annual 20, 167-201.

Davis, S.J., Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R., Miranda, J., 2006. Volatility and dispersion in business growth

        rates: Publicly traded versus privately held firms. NBER Working Paper No. 12354.

Dennis, P., Strickland, D., 2004. The determinants of idiosyncratic volatility. Unpublished working paper,

        University of Virginia.

Durnev, A., Li, K., Morck, R., Yeung, B., 2004a. Capital markets and capital allocation: Implications for

        economies in transition. Economics of Transition 12, 593-634.

Durnev, A., Morck, R., Yeung, B., 2004b. Value-enhancing capital budgeting and firm-specific stock

        return variation. Journal of Finance 59, 65-105.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 1997. Industry cost of equity. Journal of Financial Economics 43, 607-636.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 2004. New lists: Fundamentals and survival rates. Journal of Financial

        Economics 72, 229-269.

Fink, J., Fink, K., Grullon, G., Weston, J., 2005. IPO vintage and the rise of idiosyncratic risk. 7th Annual

        Texas Finance Festival Paper.

Fogel, K., Morck, R., Yeung, B., 2005. Big business stability and economic growth: Is what’s good for

        general motors good for America? American Finance Association 2005 Meeting Paper.

Fox, M.B., Morck, R., Yeung, B., Durnev, A., 2003. Law, share price accuracy and economic


                                                     37
        performance: The new evidence. Michigan Law Review, 102, 331-386.

Fraumeni, B.M., 1997. The measurement of depreciation in the U.S. National Income and Product

        Accounts. Survey of Current Business 77, 7-23.

Gans, J.S., Hsu, D.H., Stern, S., 2002. When does start-up innovation spur the gale of creative

        destruction? Rand Journal of Economics 33, 571-587.

Gaspar, J-M., Massa, M., 2004. Idiosyncratic volatility and product market competition. CEPR Working

        Paper No. 4812.

Greenspan, A., 2002. Speech on economic volatility at a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve

        Bank       of     Kansas       City,      Jackson       Hole,      Wyoming.        Available       at

        http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2002/20020830/default.htm.

Hall, B.H., 1990. The manufacturing sector master file: 1959-1987. NBER Working Paper No. 3366.

Helpman, E., Trajtenberg, M., 1998. A time to sow and a time to reap: Growth based on general purpose

        technologies. In: Helpman, E. (Eds.), General Purpose Technologies and Economic Growth. MIT

        Press, Cambridge, MA.

Herman, S.W., 2000. Fixed assets and consumer durable goods: Estimates for 1925-98 and new NIPA

        table-Changes in net stock of produced assets. Survey of Current Business 80, 17-30.

Hobijn, B., Jovanovic, B., 2001. The information-technology revolution and the stock market: Evidence.

        American Economic Review 91, 1203-1220.

Huang, R.R., 2004. Tolerance of uncertainty and the growth of ambiguous industries. Tinbergen Institute

        Working Paper, University of Amsterdam.

Irvine, P.J., Pontiff, J., 2004. Idiosyncratic return volatility, cash flows, and product market competition.

        Unpublished working paper, Boston College.

Jin, L., Myers, S.C., 2006. R2 around the world: New theory and new tests. Journal of Financial

        Economics 79, 257-292.

Jorgenson, D.W., 2001. Information technology and the U.S. economy. American Economic Review 91,

        1-32.


                                                     38
Jovanovic, B., Rousseau, P.L., 2005. General purpose technologies. In: Aghion, P., Durlauf, S.N. (Eds.),

        Handbook of Economic Growth. Elsevier, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

King, R.G., Levine, R., 1993. Finance and growth: Schumpeter might be right. Quarterly Journal of

        Economics 108, 717-737.

Kothari, S.P., Laguerre, T.E., Leone, A.J., 2002. Capitalization versus expensing: Evidence on the

        uncertainty of future earnings from capital expenditures versus R&D outlays. Review of

        Accounting Studies 7, 355-382.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F. Shleifer, A., 1999. Corporate ownership around the world. Journal of

        Finance, 54, 471–517.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 2006. What works in securities laws, Journal of Finance

        61, 1-32.

Levine, Ross, 1997. Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda. Journal of

        Economic Literature. 35, 688-726.

Levine, Ross, 2005. Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence. In: Aghion, P., Durlauf,, S.N. (Eds),

        Handbook of Economic Growth. Elsevier, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Li, K., Morck, R., Yang, F., Yeung, B., 2004. Firm-specific variation and openness in emerging markets.

        Review of Economics and Statistics 86, 658-669.

Loveman, G.W., 1994. An assessment of the productivity impact of information technologies. In: Allen.

        T.J., Morton, M.S.S. (Eds.), Information Technology and the Corporation of the 1990s: Research

        Studies. Oxford University Press, New York, NY.

Morck, R., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1988. Management ownership and market valuation: An empirical

        analysis. Journal of Financial Economics 20, 293-315.

Morck, R., Shleifer A., Vishny, R., 1989. Alternative mechanisms for corporate control. American

        Economic Review 79, 842-852.

Morck, R., Yeung, B., Yu, W., 2000. The information content of stock markets: Why do emerging

        markets have synchronous stock price movement? Journal of Financial Economics 58, 215-260.


                                                   39
Moreira, M., Poi. B., 2003. Implementing tests with correct size in the simultaneous equations model.

        Stata Journal 3, 57–70.

Mukhopadhyay, T., Rajiv, S., Srinivasan, K., 1997. Information technology impact on process output and

        quality. Management Science 43, 1645-1659.

Murphy, K.M., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1991. The allocation of talent: Implications for growth. Quarterly

        Journal of Economics 106, 503-530.

Myers, S.C., Majluf, N.S., 1984. Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms have

        information that investors do not have. Journal of Financial Economics 13, 187-222.

National Science Foundation, 1999. U.S. Corporate R&D. National Science Foundation, Washington, DC.

National Science Foundation, 2003. Research and Development in Industry: 2000. National Science

        Foundation, Washington, DC.

National Science Foundation, 2004. Information Technology Innovation Survey: Fall 2001. National

        Science Foundation, Washington, DC.

Newey, W.K., West, K.D., 1987. A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation

        consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica 55, 703-708.

Oliner, S.D., Sichel, D.E., 2000. The resurgence of growth in the late 1990s: Is information technology

        the story? Journal of Economic Perspectives 14, 3-22.

Ozoguz, A., 2004. Heterogeneous information, return synchronicity, and equilibrium asset pricing. PhD

        dissertation, INSEAD.

Pastor, L., Veronesi, P., 2003. Stock valuation and learning about profitability. Journal of Finance 58,

        1749-1790.

Pastor, L., Veronesi, P., 2005. Technological revolutions and stock prices. Unpublished working paper,

        University of Chicago.

Petersen, M.A., 2005. Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets: Comparing approaches.

        Unpublished working paper, Northwestern University.

Philippon, T., 2003. An explanation for the joint evolution of firm and aggregate volatility. Unpublished


                                                   40
        working paper, New York University.

Pindyck, R.S., 1991. Irreversibility, uncertainty, and investment. Journal of Economic Literature 29,

        1110-1148.

Pontiff, J., 1996. Costly arbitrage: Evidence from closed-end funds. Quarterly Journal of Economics 111,

        1135-1151.

Ramey, G., Ramey, V.A., 1995. Cross-country evidence on the link between volatility and growth.

        American Economic Review 85, 1138-1151.

Roll, R., 1988. R2. Journal of Finance 43, 541-566.

Romer, P.M., 1986. Increasing returns and long-run growth. Journal of Political Economy 94, 1002-1038.

Schumpeter, Joseph A. 1912. Theorie der Wirtschaftlichen Entwichlung, Leipzig, Dunker und Humbolt.

        Translated by R. Opie, The Theory of Economic Development: An Inquiry into Profits, Capital,

        Credit, Interest, and the Business Cycle. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Schumpeter, Joseph A. 1939. Business Cycles. McGraw Hill, New York, NY.

Schumpeter, Joseph A. 1942. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy (Harper & Brothers, New York,

        NY).

Schumpeter, Joseph A. 2002. The economy as a whole: Seventh chapter of The Theory of Economic

        Development. Industry and Innovation 9(1/2) 93-146.

Stiroh, K.J., 1998. Computers, productivity, and input substitution. Economic Inquiry 36, 175-91.

Stiroh, K.J., 2002. Information technology and the U.S. productivity revival: What do the industry data

        say? American Economic Review 92, 1559-1576.

Stock, J.H., Yogo, M., 2005. Testing for weak instruments in linear IV regression. Chapter 5 in

        Identification and Inference in Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas J. Rothenberg,

        edited by D.W.K. Andrews and J.H. Stock, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Stock, J.H., Wright, J., Yogo, M., 2002. A survey of weak instruments and weak identification in

        generalized method of moments. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 20, 518–529.

Tobin, J., 1982. On the efficiency of the financial system. Lloyd’s Banking Review 153, 1-15.


                                                      41
Veldkamp, L., Wolfers, J., 2007. Aggregate shocks or aggregate information? Costly information and

        business cycle comovement. Unpublished working paper, Stern School of Business, New York

        University.

Wei, S.X., Zhang, C., 2006. Why did individual stocks become more volatile? Journal of Business 79,

        259-292.

Wooldridge, J., 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. MIT Press, Cambridge,

        MA.

Wurgler, J., 2000. Financial markets and the allocation of capital. Journal of Financial Economics 58,

        187-214.

Xu, Y., Malkiel, B.G., 2003. Investigating the behavior of idiosyncratic volatility. Journal of Business 76,

        613-644.




                                                    42
Figure 1. Cross-Industry Distributions of IT Intensities in the 1970s, 1980s, and
1990s in U.S. Industries.
Information technology (IT) intensity is computer hardware and software assets divided by other assets. Data are
sorted by the average IT intensity of the 1990s.

                                                    0.00   0.05    0.10    0.15          0.20         0.25   0.30

                                    Wholesale trade
     Engineering, accounting, and research services
                             Printing and publishing
                   Instruments and related products
             Electronic and other electric equipment
                            Transportation services
                                     Motion pictures
                                     Health services
                  Apparel and other textile products
            Miscellaneous manufacturing industries
                                         Retail trade
                         Fabricated metal products
                               Furniture and fixtures
                               Educational services
                                  Personal services
                          Transportation equipment
                                       Construction
                       Leather and leather products
                                Textile mill products
                     Chemicals and allied products
        Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products
                                  Tobacco products
                    Stone, clay, and glass products
                           Telephone and telegraph
                         Food and kindred products
                        Lumber and wood products
                         Trucking and warehousing
                Amusement and recreation services
                                Radio and television
                          Paper and allied products
                  Auto repair, services, and parking
                           Primary metal industries
                    Hotels and other lodging places
                 Electric, gas, and sanitary services
                              Oil and gas extraction
                               Water transportation                       IT intesnity in the 1970s
                                                                          IT intesnity in the 1980s
                       Petroleum and coal products
                                                                          IT intesnity in the 1990s
                               Transportation by air
                             Railroad transportation




                                                              43
Figure 2. Firm Performance Total Variation and Decomposition by Year
Mean (industry equal-weight) total variation in firm-level performance decomposed into mean systematic (related to
industry and economy factors) and mean firm-specific variation. Stock return variation is based on 12 monthly
observations per year. Real sales growth variation is based on 12 quarterly observations from three-year rolling
windows ending in the year indicated on the horizontal axis.

Panel A. Stock returns

 0.05
 0.05            Firm-specific Variation
 0.04            Systematic Variation
 0.04
 0.03
 0.03
 0.02
 0.02
 0.01
 0.01
 0.00
        71     73     75     77      79    81     83      85     87     89     91     93      95     97     99


Panel B. Sales growth

 0.09
 0.08           Firm-specific Variation
 0.07           Systematic Variation
 0.06
 0.05
 0.04
 0.03
 0.02
 0.01
 0.00
        71     73     75     77      79    81     83     85      87     89     91     93     95     97     99




                                                       44
Figure 3. Systematic Variation in Firm Performance as Fraction of Total Variation
The figure shows the fraction of variation in stock returns and in real sales growth explained by market and industry
factors, averaged across all industries for each year,
60%




55%




50%




45%




40%




35%




30%




25%




20%
                  Stock Returns
                  Sales Growth
15%
      71     73      75          77   79    81     83      85     87      89     91      93     95      97     99




                                                          45
Figure 4. Cross-Industry Distributions of Firm-Specific Stock Return Variation in
the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s.
Industries are sorted by the 1990s’ firm-specific variation. H indicates industries with IT intensity in the top tertile of
the sample for that decade. M and L indicate industries in the middle and lower tertiles, respectively.

                                                        0.00   0.01         0.02           0.03            0.04           0.05

     Engineering, accounting, and research services (H)
                          Telephone and telegraph (M)
                Amusement and recreation services (L)
                                       Construction (M)
                                    Health services (H)
             Electronic and other electric equipment (H)
                                     Motion pictures (H)
                     Chemicals and allied products (M)
                   Instruments and related products (H)
            Miscellaneous manufacturing industries (H)
                                   Wholesale trade (H)
                  Apparel and other textile products (H)
                                         Retail trade (H)
                               Educational services (M)
                                Water transportation (L)
                          Fabricated metal products (H)
       Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products (M)
                              Oil and gas extraction (L)
                            Transportation services (H)
                    Hotels and other lodging places (L)
                                Radio and television (L)
                               Transportation by air (L)
                  Auto repair, services, and parking (L)
                          Paper and allied products (L)
                        Lumber and wood products (M)
                       Leather and leather products (M)
                             Printing and publishing (H)
                               Textile mill products (M)
                         Food and kindred products (M)
                                  Personal services (M)
                          Transportation equipment (M)
                              Furniture and fixtures (H)
                       Petroleum and coal products (L)
                            Primary metal industries (L)
                          Trucking and warehousing(L)
                    Stone, clay, and glass products (M)
                                                                                   Firm-specific variation in the 1970s
                 Electric, gas, and sanitary services (L)                          Firm-specific variation in the 1980s
                                  Tobacco products (M)                             Firm-specific variation in the 1990s
                             Railroad transportation (L)




                                                               46
Figure 5. Firm-Specific Performance Variation and IT Intensity
These graphs plot the log of average IT intensity in the 1990s (x-axis) against the log of average firm-specific
variation in the 1990s (y-axis). The size of each bubble indicates the industry’s total assets.

Panel A. Stock returns
                                                                                                                -3.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Engineering services

                                                                                                                                                                                               Telephone
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Health
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Electronics
                                                    ln(Firm-specific variation of stock returns in the 1990s)




                                                                                                                                                                                                      Construction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Motion pictures
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Chemicals              Instruments
                                                                                                                -3.5                                                                                                                    Wholesales
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Apparel
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Retails

                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fabricated metal
                                                                                                                                                                         Oil extraction                            Transportation services

                                                                                                                                                                                           Radio and television
                                                                                                                                                           Air transportation
                                                                                                                -4.0
                                                                                                                                                                                      Paper                                        Printing and publishing

                                                                                                                                                                                              Food
                                                                                                                                                                    Petroleum                               Transportation equipment
                                                                                                                                                                                         Trucking
                                                                                                                                                                                Primary metal


                                                                                                                -4.5                                                          Electric and gas services
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Tobacco products



                                                                                                                                                  Railroad transportation



                                                                                                                -5.0
                                                                                                                       -7            -6                    -5                    -4                   -3                    -2                 -1                   0   1
                                                                                                                                                                                      ln(IT intensity in the 1990s)


Panel B. Sales growth
                                                                                                -1
         ln(Firm-specific variation of real sales growth in the 1990s)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Motion pictures
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Chemicals
                                                                                                -2
                                                                                                                                                        Oil extraction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Engineering services
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Construction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Instruments
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Electronics
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Wholesales
                                                                                                -3                                                                                         Telephone
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Transportation equipment
                                                                                                                                                    Petroleum
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Health
                                                                                                                                          Air transportation         Primary metal                         Apparel
                                                                                                                                                                          Paper     Food           Fabricated metal
                                                                                                                                                                                     Radio and television       Transportation services
                                                                                                                                                               Electric and gas services                                          Printing and publishing
                                                                                                -4                                                                                                          Retails

                                                                                                                                                                                  Trucking     Tobacco products




                                                                                                                            Railroad transportation
                                                                                                -5




                                                                                                -6
                                                                                                                -6                        -5                           -4                            -3                          -2                          -1         0
                                                                                                                                                                                      ln(IT intensity in the 1990s)




                                                                                                                                                                                              47
Table 1. Industry Summary Statistics: Firm-Specific Performance Heterogeneity
and Information Technology Intensity
Firm-specific performance variation by year is residual variation in firm-level regressions of total stock return and real
sales growth on market and industry averages (weighted) of those variables. Industry averages exclude the firm in
question to avoid spurious correlation problems in small industries where one firm is a substantial part of the industry.
Absolute firm-specific variation, ln( σ ε ), and relative firm-specific variation, ln( σ ε ) – ln( σ m ), are estimated using 12
                                        2                                               2            2


monthly observations of stock return for each year. Real sales growth variation measures are constructed using 12
quarterly observations over three-year rolling windows. We only include firms with 12 month observations in case of
stock and 12 quarterly observations in case of real sales growth. The sample period is 1971 to 2000. Sample is all
firms in CRSP and Compustat in the 50 manufacturing and non-manufacturing (approximately two-digit) industries
excluding the finance sector (SIC 6000 to 6999). We exclude industries with fewer than 5 firms, or whose IT capital is
not defined for each year. Two IT-producing industries are also excluded. IT capital is defined as the sum of
computers and software. IT intensity is defined as the ratio of IT capital over non-IT capital.

Panel A. Summary statistics
     Firm Performance Heterogeneity                                                                      Standard      Sample
                                                   Mean       Median         Min.           Max.
                Measure                                                                                  Deviation      Size
 Absolute Firm-Specific Variation
  Stock returns                                   -4.279       -4.298       -6.520          -2.404        0.597         1180
  Sales growth                                    -3.801       -3.824       -6.676          -1.232        0.986         1010
 Relative Firm-Specific Variation
  Stock returns                                    0.859       0.886        -1.025          3.122         0.528         1180
  Sales growth                                     0.697       0.707        -2.828          2.884         0.690         1010
 ln(Information Technology Intensity)             -5.135       -5.010      -10.587          -0.590        1.829         1290

Panel B. Correlations coefficients

                                                           Stock Returns                                 Sales Growth
                                               Absolute                    Relative                         Absolute
 Stock Returns
              Relative                           0.406
                                                (0.000)

 Sales Growth
              Absolute                           0.544                      0.283
                                                (0.000)                    (0.000)

              Relative                           0.250                      0.192                            0.412
                                                (0.000)                    (0.000)                          (0.000)
Numbers in parentheses are probability levels. Coefficients significant at 10% or better are in boldface.




                                                              48
Table 2. Correlation Coefficients
Age is the average age of firms in an industry based on years listed in CRSP. Size is average market capitalization or
sales of a firm in an industry, respectively. Herfindahl index is sales-based. R&D is estimated R&D capital stock over
PP&E. Leverage is short-term plus long-term debt over total assets. Liquidity is current assets over current liabilities.
Numbers in parentheses are probability levels at which the null hypothesis of zero correlation can be rejected.
Coefficients significant at 10% or better are in boldface.

Panel A. Correlations of firm performance heterogeneity and IT intensity with control variables
                                    Stock Returns                          Sales Growth                     ln(IT)
                               Absolute        Relative              Absolute        Relative
 Information Tech.
         ln(IT)                  0.536              0.451              0.511              0.382
                                (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)
 Demography
      ln(Age)                   -0.369             -0.021             -0.220              0.006            -0.001
                                (0.000)            (0.472)            (0.000)            (0.857)           (0.974)
         ln(Size)                -0.017             0.183              0.005              0.115             0.265
                                (0.566)            (0.000)            (0.867)            (0.000)           (0.000)
 Competition
     Herfindahl                  -0.007             0.048             -0.040              0.023             -0.085
                                (0.823)            (0.103)            (0.205)            (0.461)           (0.003)
 Technology
      ln(1+R&D)                  0.249              0.066              0.266              0.060             0.238
                                (0.000)            (0.023)            (0.000)            (0.056)           (0.000)
 Financing
       Leverage                   0.030             0.031              0.102              0.092            -0.124
                                (0.305)            (0.285)            (0.001)            (0.004)           (0.000)
         Liquidity               -0.058            -0.073             -0.102             -0.106             -0.004
                                (0.046)            (0.013)            (0.001)            (0.001)           (0.896)

Panel B. Correlations of control variables with each other
                                      Demography                   Competition      Technology           Financing
                                ln(Age)            ln(Size)         Herfindahl         ln(1+R&D)          Leverage
 Demography
      ln(Size)                   0.506
                                (0.000)
 Competition
     Herfindahl                  -0.428             -0.225
                                (0.000)            (0.000)
 Technology
      ln(1+ R&D)                 -0.074             -0.038            -0.042
                                (0.009)            (0.176)            (0.138)
 Financing
       Leverage                  -0.194            -0.118              0.227            -0.209
                                (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)
         Liquidity               -0.037             -0.349             0.061             0.108             -0.440
                                (0.192)            (0.000)            (0.029)           (0.000)            (0.000)




                                                              49
Table 3. Panel Regressions of Firm-Specific Performance Heterogeneity on IT Intensity and Controls, with Time
and Industry Fixed Effects
Dependent variables are industry-level measures of firm-specific heterogeneity in stock returns or sales growth rates. Within each set, the first four columns have
absolute firm-specific variation ln( σ ε2 ), as their dependent variables; while the last two columns use relative firm-specific variation, ln( σ ε2 ) – ln( σ m2 ), where ln( σ m2 ) is
absolute systematic variation. IT intensity, IT, is the ratio of IT capital (computers and software) to other capital. Age is the average age of firms in an industry,
defined as years listed in CRSP. Size is the average market capitalization or sales of the firms in each industry in the returns and sales growth heterogeneity
regressions, respectively. The Herfindahl index is sales-based. R&D is estimated R&D capital stock over PP&E. Leverage is short plus long-term debt over total
assets. Liquidity is current assets over current liabilities. Stock return variation is estimated using 12 monthly observations each year. Real sales growth variation is
constructed using 12 quarterly observations over three-year rolling windows. In constructing variation measures, firms with fewer than 12 observations are
excluded. IT intensity and controls are lagged by one year for returns variation regressions, and averaged over lagged three-year windows for sales growth
variation regressions. All regressions include time and industry fixed effects. Observations are weighted by lagged total assets in the returns variation regressions
and average industry total assets over lagged three year-windows for sales growth variation regressions. The sample period is 1971 to 2000. The sample excludes
IT-producing industries, finance industries (SIC 6000 to 6999), industries with fewer than 5 firms, and industries whose IT capital is ill defined. Numbers in
parentheses are probability levels for rejecting the null hypothesis of a zero coefficient, based on t-statistics adjusted for industry clustering to eliminate bias due to
serial dependence within industries. Coefficients significant at 10% or better are in boldface.




                                                                                          50
                                                      Stock Returns                                                                 Sales Growth
                         Abs. Firm-   Abs. Firm-   Abs. Firm-   Abs. Firm-   Rel. Firm-   Rel. Firm-   Abs. Firm-   Abs. Firm-   Abs. Firm-   Abs. Firm-   Rel. Firm-   Rel. Firm-
                          Specific     Specific     Specific     Specific     Specific     Specific     Specific     Specific     Specific     Specific     Specific     Specific
Information Technology
           ln(IT)          0.256        0.202        0.216        0.180        0.105        0.096        0.323        0.202        0.242        0.176        0.106        0.106
                          (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.029)      (0.003)      (0.000)      (0.046)      (0.021)      (0.015)      (0.038)      (0.128)
Corporate Demography
         ln(Age)                       -0.345                    -0.302                    -0.149                    -0.744                    -0.659                    -0.058
                                       (0.086)                   (0.076)                   (0.087)                   (0.165)                   (0.057)                   (0.672)
         ln(Size)                      -0.173                    -0.155                    -0.163                    -0.424                    -0.295                     0.004
                                       (0.045)                   (0.023)                   (0.001)                   (0.074)                   (0.047)                   (0.973)
Competition
       Herfindahl                      -0.764                    -0.250                     1.120                    -2.348                    -4.052                     1.314
                                       (0.261)                   (0.681)                   (0.002)                   (0.000)                   (0.000)                   (0.001)
Technology
       ln(1+R&D)                        0.012                     0.323                    -1.135                    -0.595                     1.492                    -0.219
                                       (0.982)                   (0.486)                   (0.000)                   (0.530)                   (0.017)                   (0.740)
Financing
        Leverage                       -1.587                    -1.228                    -0.356                    -3.439                    -2.529                    -0.943
                                       (0.007)                   (0.011)                   (0.192)                   (0.002)                   (0.000)                   (0.137)
         Liquidity                      0.149                     0.158                     0.127                    -0.188                    -0.295                    -0.173
                                       (0.293)                   (0.162)                   (0.098)                   (0.607)                   (0.304)                   (0.575)
Systematic Variation
     Abs. Systematic                                 0.264           0.196                                                         0.292        0.167
                                                    (0.000)      (0.000)                                                          (0.000)      (0.001)
       Adjusted R 2        0.773        0.801        0.784        0.800        0.639        0.653        0.705        0.757        0.737        0.787        0.466        0.474
       Sample size         1180         1180         1142         1142         1180         1180         1010         1010          930          930         1010         1010




                                                                                   51
Table 4. Panel Regressions of TFP Growth on Firm-Specific Performance
Heterogeneity and Controls, with Time and Industry Fixed Effects
Panel data are U.S. industries followed from 1971 to 2000, across six non-overlapping five-year interval (1971-1975,
… , 1996-2000). The dependent variable is industry TFP growth rate during each five-year interval. Initial TFP is
measured at the beginning year at each interval. Performance heterogeneity measures and IT intensity are the
average of values over the prior five-year interval, (t-9, t-5). All regressions include time and industry fixed effects.
Observations are weighted by the industry’s total assets, averaged over the prior window. The sample excludes IT-
producing industries, finance industries (SIC 6000 to 6999), and industries with fewer than 5 firms available for
constructing TFP growth rates or performance heterogeneity measures, as well industries whose IT capital is ill
defined. Panel A uses BEA industry-level TFP figures; while Panel B uses TFP measures constructed from
Compustat firms. Numbers in parentheses are probability levels, based on t-statistics adjusted for industry clustering.
Coefficients significant at 10% or better are in boldface.
Panel A. TFP growth defined using BEA industry-level data
                                                                 4a.1      4a.2       4a.3         4a.4         4a.5
Performance Heterogeneity
Absolute firm-specific return variation, ln( σ ε )
                                                 2
                                                                 0.195                            0.147
                                                                (0.001)                          (0.092)

Absolute systematic returns variation, ln( σ m )
                                                 2
                                                                 -0.105                           -0.077
                                                                (0.272)                          (0.328)

Relative firm-specific returns variation, ln( σ ε )-ln( σ m )
                                                     2    2
                                                                           0.191                               0.131
                                                                          (0.002)                             (0.101)
Controls
ln(IT)                                                                               0.073        0.037        0.046
                                                                                    (0.030)      (0.473)      (0.282)
Initial ln(TFP)                                                  -0.140   -0.133    -0.133       -0.139       -0.134
                                                                (0.316)   (0.324)   (0.297)      (0.306)      (0.305)
Adjusted R2                                                     0.693     0.690      0.690        0.694        0.693
Sample size                                                      235       235        234          234          234

Panel B. TFP growth defined using Compustat sample firms
                                                                 4b.1      4b.2       4b.3         4b.4         4b.5
Performance Heterogeneity
Absolute firm-specific return variation, ln( σ ε )
                                                 2
                                                                 0.643                            0.526
                                                                (0.000)                          (0.001)

Absolute systematic returns variation, ln( σ m )
                                                 2
                                                                 -0.289                           -0.214
                                                                (0.165)                          (0.237)

Relative firm-specific returns variation, ln( σ ε )-ln( σ m )
                                                     2    2
                                                                           0.637                               0.470
                                                                          (0.001)                             (0.003)
Controls
ln(IT)                                                                               0.224        0.087        0.126
                                                                                    (0.005)      (0.072)      (0.017)
Initial ln(TFP)                                                  -0.446   -0.413    -0.453       -0.450       -0.425
                                                                (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)
            2
Adjusted R                                                      0.815     0.798      0.790        0.819        0.806
Sample size                                                      235       235        234          234          234




                                                                52
Table 5. Panel Regressions of Firm-Specific Performance Heterogeneity on IT Intensity and Controls, with Time
and Industry Fixed Effects, for Separate New and Old Firm Subsamples
Dependent variables are industry-level measures of firm-specific heterogeneity in stock returns or sales growth rates. Within each set, the first four columns have
absolute firm-specific variation ln( σ ε2 ), as their dependent variables; while the last two columns use relative firm-specific variation, ln( σ ε2 ) – ln( σ m2 ), where ln( σ m2 ) is
absolute systematic variation. IT intensity, IT, is the ratio of IT capital (computers and software) to other capital. Age is the average age of firms in an industry,
defined as years listed in CRSP. Size is the average market capitalization or sales of the firms in each industry in the returns and sales growth heterogeneity
regressions, respectively. The Herfindahl index is sales-based. R&D is estimated R&D capital stock over PP&E. Leverage is short plus long-term debt over total
assets. Liquidity is current assets over current liabilities. Stock return variation is estimated using 12 monthly observations each year. Real sales growth variation is
constructed using 12 quarterly observations over three-year rolling windows. In constructing variation measures, firms with fewer than 12 observations are
excluded. IT intensity and controls are lagged by one year for returns variation regressions, and averaged over lagged three-year windows for sales growth
variation regressions. All regressions include time and industry fixed effects. Observations are weighted by lagged total assets in the returns variation regressions
and average industry total assets over lagged three-year windows for sales growth variation regressions. The sample period is 1971 to 2000. The sample excludes
IT-producing industries, finance industries (SIC 6000 to 6999), industries with fewer than 5 firms, and industries whose IT capital is ill defined. Numbers in
parentheses are probability levels for rejecting the null hypothesis of a zero coefficient, based on t-statistics adjusted for industry clustering to eliminate bias due to
serial dependence within industries. Coefficients significant at 10% or better are in boldface.
Panel A reports regression results for a young firm subsample, which contains firms younger than the median age of eight years as a listed firm in CRSP. Panel B
reports regression results for an old firm subsample, which contains firms that have been listed in CRSP for eight years or more.




                                                                                          53
Panel A. New Firm Subsample

                                                     Stock Returns                                                                 Sales Growth
                         Abs. Firm-   Abs. Firm-   Abs. Firm-   Abs. Firm-   Rel. Firm-   Rel. Firm-   Abs. Firm-   Abs. Firm-   Abs. Firm-   Abs. Firm-   Rel. Firm-   Rel. Firm-
                          Specific     Specific     Specific     Specific     Specific     Specific     Specific     Specific     Specific     Specific     Specific     Specific


Information Technology
           ln(IT)          0.407        0.352        0.325        0.296        0.082        0.074        0.442        0.244        0.293        0.211        0.115        0.116
                          (0.002)      (0.000)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.027)      (0.012)      (0.000)      (0.067)      (0.005)      (0.064)      (0.128)      (0.209)

Corporate Demography
         ln(Age)                       -0.098                    -0.041                    -0.207                    -1.115                    -0.919                     0.126
                                       (0.639)                   (0.826)                   (0.081)                   (0.029)                   (0.004)                   (0.705)
         ln(Size)                      -0.231                    -0.175                    -0.190                    -0.392                    -0.303                     0.085
                                       (0.054)                   (0.072)                   (0.008)                   (0.156)                   (0.172)                   (0.451)
Competition
       Herfindahl                       0.308                     0.326                     0.979                     3.422                     2.368                     0.563
                                       (0.738)                   (0.691)                   (0.003)                   (0.368)                   (0.461)                   (0.696)
Technology
       ln(1+R&D)                       -0.739                     0.044                    -0.797                    -0.046                     1.606                     0.573
                                       (0.327)                   (0.942)                   (0.004)                   (0.964)                   (0.040)                   (0.488)
Financing
        Leverage                       -1.317                    -1.084                    -0.459                    -1.825                    -0.895                    -1.549
                                       (0.009)                   (0.008)                   (0.051)                   (0.065)                   (0.322)                   (0.005)
         Liquidity                      0.418                     0.342                     0.012                     0.364                    -0.147                    -0.215
                                       (0.080)                   (0.100)                   (0.870)                   (0.195)                   (0.504)                   (0.467)

Systematic Variation
     Abs. Systematic                                 0.204        0.161                                                            0.161        0.118
                                                    (0.008)      (0.003)                                                          (0.004)      (0.005)
                     2
       Adjusted R          0.654        0.685        0.646        0.664        0.547        0.557        0.700        0.727        0.712        0.729        0.417        0.421
       Sample size         1055         1055         1025         1025         1055         1055          793          793          706          706          793          793




                                                                               54
Panel B. Old Firm Subsample

                                                 Stock Returns                                                       Sales Growth
                         Abs. Firm- Abs. Firm- Abs. Firm- Abs. Firm- Rel. Firm- Rel. Firm-   Abs. Firm- Abs. Firm- Abs. Firm- Abs. Firm- Rel. Firm- Rel. Firm-
                          Specific   Specific   Specific   Specific   Specific   Specific     Specific   Specific   Specific   Specific   Specific   Specific


Information Technology
          ln(IT)           0.152      0.079      0.131      0.082      0.060      0.059        0.322      0.245      0.284      0.222      0.210      0.186
                          (0.004)    (0.025)    (0.004)    (0.037)     (0.320)    (0.185)     (0.025)    (0.056)    (0.091)    (0.054)     (0.012)    (0.029)

Corporate Demography
         ln(Age)                      -0.368                -0.307                -0.025                  -0.435                -0.499                -0.259
                                     (0.210)               (0.204)                (0.822)                (0.407)               (0.181)                (0.285)
         ln(Size)                     -0.238                -0.243                -0.214                  -0.165                -0.113                0.096
                                     (0.028)               (0.005)                (0.000)                (0.566)               (0.649)                (0.365)
Competition
       Herfindahl                     -0.935                -0.349                1.146                   -4.414                -6.008                0.635
                                     (0.093)               (0.465)                (0.007)                (0.000)               (0.000)                (0.185)
Technology
       ln(1+R&D)                      1.332                 1.392                 -0.881                  -0.522                1.994                 0.189
                                     (0.006)               (0.002)                (0.002)                (0.647)               (0.051)                (0.798)
Financing
        Leverage                      -1.096                -0.669                -0.009                  -3.520                -3.029                -1.446
                                     (0.071)               (0.135)                (0.968)                (0.029)               (0.010)                (0.022)
         Liquidity                    0.304                 0.310                 0.162                   -0.445                -0.520                -0.122
                                     (0.070)               (0.022)                (0.083)                (0.279)               (0.112)                (0.680)

Systematic Variation
     Abs. Systematic                             0.319      0.226                                                    0.161      0.087
                                                (0.000)    (0.000)                                                  (0.065)    (0.124)
                     2
       Adjusted R          0.783      0.818      0.807      0.827      0.673      0.687        0.513      0.564      0.509      0.578      0.379      0.382
       Sample size         1100       1100       1066       1066        1100       1100         949        949        868        868        949        949




                                                                           55
Table 6. Two-Stage Panel Regressions of Firm-Specific Performance Heterogeneity on IT Intensity and Controls,
with Time and Industry Fixed Effects
Dependent variables are industry-level measures of firm-specific heterogeneity in stock returns or sales growth rates. Within each set, the first four columns have
absolute firm-specific variation ln( σ ε2 ), as their dependent variables; while the last two columns use relative firm-specific variation, ln( σ ε2 ) – ln( σ m2 ), where ln( σ m2 ) is
absolute systematic variation. IT intensity, defined as IT capital assets (computers and software) over other capital assets, is estimated in a first stage regression
with IT tax rates and the marginal cost of IT (quality) production as instrumental variables. The control variables are as follows: Age is the average age of firms in
an industry, defined as years listed in CRSP. Size is the average market capitalization or sales of the firms in each industry in the returns and sales growth
heterogeneity regressions, respectively. The Herfindahl index is sales-based. R&D is estimated R&D capital stock over PP&E. Leverage is short plus long-term
debt over total assets. Liquidity is current assets over current liabilities. Stock return variation is estimated using 12 monthly observations each year. Real sales
growth variation is constructed using 12 quarterly observations over three-year rolling windows. In constructing variation measures, firms with fewer than 12
observations are excluded. IT intensity and controls are lagged by one year for returns variation regressions, and averaged over lagged three-year windows for
sales growth variation regressions. All regressions include time and industry fixed effects. Observations are weighted by lagged total assets in the returns variation
regressions and average industry total assets over lagged three-year windows for sales growth variation regressions. The sample period is 1971 to 2000. The
sample excludes IT-producing industries, finance industries (SIC 6000 to 6999), industries with fewer than 5 firms, and industries whose IT capital is ill defined.
Numbers in parentheses are probability levels for rejecting the null hypothesis of a zero coefficient, based on t-statistics adjusted for industry clustering to eliminate
bias due to serial dependence within industries. Coefficients significant at 10% or better are in boldface.




                                                                                          56
                                                 Stock Returns                                                         Sales Growth
                         Abs. Firm- Abs. Firm- Abs. Firm- Abs. Firm- Rel. Firm-   Rel. Firm-   Abs. Firm- Abs. Firm- Abs. Firm- Abs. Firm- Rel. Firm-   Rel. Firm-
                          Specific   Specific   Specific   Specific   Specific     Specific     Specific   Specific   Specific   Specific   Specific     Specific


Information Technology
          ln(IT)           0.411      0.334      0.355      0.307      0.191        0.151        0.381      0.117      0.291      0.194      0.182        0.202
                          (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.005)     (0.001)      (0.000)    (0.432)    (0.016)     (0.056)    (0.000)     (0.010)
Corporate Demography
        ln(Age)                       -0.274                -0.237                 -0.160                   -0.666                -0.618                 -0.148
                                     (0.151)                (0.149)                (0.122)                 (0.192)                (0.070)                (0.514)
        ln(Size)                      -0.178                -0.164                 -0.170                   -0.474                -0.292                  0.056
                                     (0.041)                (0.023)                (0.001)                 (0.065)                (0.072)                (0.673)
Competition
      Herfindahl                      -0.948                -0.468                  1.107                   -2.065                -3.984                  1.295
                                     (0.166)                (0.454)                (0.003)                 (0.006)                (0.000)                (0.004)
Technology
      ln(1+R&D)                       -0.161                0.199                  -1.228                   -0.412                1.528                  -0.421
                                     (0.723)                (0.602)                (0.000)                 (0.688)                (0.020)                (0.539)
Financing
        Leverage                      -1.335                -1.011                 -0.244                   -3.202                -2.236                 -0.878
                                     (0.024)                (0.036)                (0.400)                 (0.003)                (0.000)                (0.191)
        Liquidity                     0.041                 0.062                   0.086                   -0.119                -0.314                 -0.262
                                     (0.804)                (0.639)                (0.155)                 (0.787)                (0.357)                (0.393)

Systematic Variation
     Abs. Systematic                             0.232      0.178                                                      0.287       0.170
                                                (0.001)     (0.000)                                                   (0.000)     (0.001)
                    2
      Adjusted R           0.763      0.794      0.775      0.793      0.632        0.651        0.701      0.751      0.732      0.783      0.464        0.472
      Sample size          1180       1180       1142        1142       1180        1180          990        990        911        911        990          990




                                                                           57
Table 7. Two-Stage Panel Regressions of Firm-Specific Performance Heterogeneity on IT Intensity and Controls,
with Time and Industry Fixed Effects, Estimated Separately for Young and Old Firm Subsamples
Dependent variables are industry-level measures of firm-specific heterogeneity in stock returns or sales growth rates. Within each set, the first four columns have
absolute firm-specific variation ln( σ ε2 ), as their dependent variables; while the last two columns use relative firm-specific variation, ln( σ ε2 ) – ln( σ m2 ), where ln( σ m2 ) is
absolute systematic variation. IT intensity, defined as IT capital assets (computers and software) over other capital assets, is estimated in a first stage regression
with IT tax rates and the marginal cost of IT (quality) production as instrumental variables. The control variables are as follows: Age is the average age of firms in
an industry, defined as years listed in CRSP. Size is the average market capitalization or sales of the firms in each industry in the returns and sales growth
heterogeneity regressions, respectively. The Herfindahl index is sales-based. R&D is estimated R&D capital stock over PP&E. Leverage is short plus long-term
debt over total assets. Liquidity is current assets over current liabilities. Stock return variation is estimated using 12 monthly observations each year. Real sales
growth variation is constructed using 12 quarterly observations over three-year rolling windows. In constructing variation measures, firms with fewer than 12
observations are excluded. IT intensity and controls are lagged by one year for returns variation regressions, and averaged over lagged three-year windows for
sales growth variation regressions. All regressions include time and industry fixed effects. Observations are weighted by lagged total assets in the returns variation
regressions and average industry total assets over lagged three-year windows for sales growth variation regressions. The sample period is 1971 to 2000. The
sample excludes IT-producing industries, finance industries (SIC 6000 to 6999), industries with fewer than 5 firms, and industries whose IT capital is ill defined.
Numbers in parentheses are probability levels for rejecting the null hypothesis of a zero coefficient, based on t-statistics adjusted for industry clustering to eliminate
bias due to serial dependence within industries. Coefficients significant at 10% or better are in boldface.

Panel A reports regression results for a young firm subsample, which contains firms younger than the median age of eight years as a listed firm in CRSP. Panel B
reports regression results for an old firm subsample, which contains firms that have been listed in CRSP for eight years or more.




                                                                                          58
Panel A. New Firm Subsample
                                                 Stock Returns                                                       Sales Growth
                         Abs. Firm- Abs. Firm- Abs. Firm- Abs. Firm- Rel. Firm- Rel. Firm-   Abs. Firm- Abs. Firm- Abs. Firm- Abs. Firm- Rel. Firm- Rel. Firm-
                          Specific   Specific   Specific   Specific   Specific Specific       Specific   Specific   Specific   Specific   Specific Specific

Information Technology
          ln(IT)           0.685      0.593      0.582       0.528      0.100     0.065        0.652      0.267      0.316       0.284      0.205     0.318
                          (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.064)    (0.136)     (0.000)    (0.211)     (0.006)    (0.156)    (0.014)    (0.008)
Corporate Demography
         ln(Age)                      0.077                  0.119                -0.214                  -1.089                -0.842                0.281
                                     (0.743)                (0.597)               (0.081)                (0.046)                (0.048)               (0.436)
         ln(Size)                     -0.258                -0.210                -0.189                  -0.396                -0.300                0.133
                                     (0.055)                (0.079)               (0.009)                (0.179)                (0.199)               (0.312)
Competition
       Herfindahl                     -0.208                -0.151                0.997                   3.428                  2.406                0.013
                                     (0.812)                (0.859)               (0.007)                (0.392)                (0.496)               (0.994)
Technology
       ln(1+R&D)                      -1.032                -0.167                -0.786                  -0.074                 1.560                0.270
                                     (0.116)                (0.761)               (0.005)                (0.944)                (0.051)               (0.760)
Financing
        Leverage                      -0.980                -0.777                -0.472                  -1.708                -0.753                -1.286
                                     (0.084)                (0.100)               (0.064)                (0.138)                (0.417)               (0.097)
        Liquidity                     0.239                  0.235                0.019                   0.346                 -0.209                -0.433
                                     (0.329)                (0.294)               (0.822)                (0.307)                (0.518)               (0.157)
Systematic Variation
     Abs. Systematic                             0.116       0.095                                                    0.147      0.106
                                                 (0.165)    (0.147)                                                  (0.015)    (0.016)
                    2
       Adjusted R          0.605      0.649      0.602       0.628      0.528     0.540        0.675      0.709      0.690       0.709      0.388     0.383
       Sample size         1055       1055        1025       1025       1055       1055         775        775        691         691        775       775




                                                                            59
Panel B. Old Firms Subsample

                                                    Stock Returns                                                       Sales Growth
                            Abs. Firm- Abs. Firm- Abs. Firm- Abs. Firm- Rel. Firm- Rel. Firm-   Abs. Firm- Abs. Firm- Abs. Firm- Abs. Firm- Rel. Firm- Rel. Firm-
                             Specific   Specific   Specific   Specific   Specific Specific       Specific   Specific   Specific   Specific   Specific Specific
Information Technology
            ln(IT)             0.211     0.102      0.201       0.128      0.145     0.122        0.317      0.081      0.292       0.181      0.315     0.334
                             (0.002)    (0.113)     (0.000)    (0.014)    (0.050)    (0.014)     (0.049)    (0.680)     (0.184)    (0.328)    (0.007)    (0.015)
Corporate Demography
           ln(Age)                       -0.352                -0.275                0.021                   -0.588                -0.522                -0.157
                                        (0.246)                (0.258)               (0.853)                (0.253)                (0.179)               (0.559)
            ln(Size)                     -0.240                -0.248                -0.219                  -0.276                -0.148                0.150
                                        (0.028)                (0.004)               (0.000)                (0.334)                (0.572)               (0.215)
Competition
         Herfindahl                      -0.981                -0.436                1.021                   -4.042                -5.928                0.249
                                        (0.080)                (0.365)               (0.009)                (0.000)                (0.000)               (0.725)
Technology
         ln(1+R&D)                       1.302                  1.334                -0.963                  -0.246                 2.059                -0.046
                                        (0.007)                (0.004)               (0.001)                (0.834)                (0.038)               (0.953)
Financing
            Leverage                     -1.070                -0.615                0.061                   -3.709                -3.045                -1.328
                                        (0.092)                (0.181)               (0.824)                (0.020)                (0.015)               (0.061)
            Liquidity                    0.285                  0.276                0.111                   -0.302                -0.476                -0.282
                                        (0.150)                (0.077)               (0.125)                (0.509)                (0.179)               (0.432)
Systematic Variation
      Abs. Systematic                                0.313      0.226                                                    0.162      0.088
                                                    (0.000)    (0.000)                                                  (0.077)    (0.143)
                        2
        Adjusted R             0.774     0.811      0.797       0.819      0.655     0.672        0.479      0.537      0.482       0.555      0.350     0.350
        Sample size            1100      1100        1066       1066       1100       1100         931        931        851         851        931       931




                                                                           60
Table 8. Two-Stage Panel Regressions of TFP Growth on Firm-Specific
Performance Heterogeneity and Controls, with Time and Industry Fixed Effects
Panel data are U.S. industries followed from 1971 to 2000, across six non-overlapping five-year interval (1971-1975,
… , 1996-2000). The dependent variable is industry TFP growth rate during each five-year interval. Initial TFP is
measured at the beginning year at each interval. Performance heterogeneity measures are the average of values
over the prior five-year interval, (t-9, t-5). All regressions include time and industry fixed effects. Observations are
weighted by the industry’s total assets, averaged over the prior window. The sample excludes IT-producing industries,
finance industries (SIC 6000 to 6999), and industries with fewer than 5 firms available for constructing TFP growth
rates or performance heterogeneity measures, as well industries whose IT capital is ill defined. Columns 8.1 and 8.2
use BEA industry-level TFP data while columns 8.3 and 8.4 use TFP measures constructed from Compustat sample
firms. All columns report 2SLS regressions results where IT taxes and marginal cost of IT (quality) production are
used as instruments. Numbers in parentheses are probability levels, based on t-statistics adjusted for industry
clustering. Coefficients significant at 10% or better are in boldface.

                                                                TFP growth defined using   TFP growth defined using
                                                                 BEA industry-level data    Compustat sample firms

                                                                    8.1          8.2            8.3           8.4
Performance Heterogeneity
Absolute firm-specific return variation, ln( σ ε )
                                                 2
                                                                   0.299                       1.130
                                                                  (0.098)                     (0.000)

Absolute systematic returns variation, ln( σ m )
                                                 2
                                                                   -0.206                      -0.822
                                                                  (0.340)                     (0.012)

Relative firm-specific returns variation, ln( σ ε )-ln( σ m )
                                                     2    2
                                                                                0.383                        1.264
                                                                               (0.033)                      (0.000)
Controls
Initial ln(TFP)                                                    -0.180       -0.174         -0.391        -0.340
                                                                  (0.288)      (0.280)        (0.000)       (0.000)
            2
Adjusted R                                                         0.623        0.613         0.749          0.715
Sample size                                                         190          190           190            190




                                                                 61
Table 9. Panel Regressions of Turnover Measure on Information Technology
Intensity and Controls with Time and Industry Fixed Effects
The dependent variable is turnover rate based on market value, operating income, and sales. Turnover rate is the
probability of a firm dropping out of the industry’s top quintile within five years, as defined in Comin and Philippon
(2005). All regressions include time and industry fixed effects. Observations are weighted by lagged total asset. The
sample period is 1971 to 2000. The sample also excludes IT-producing industries, finance industries (SIC 6000 to
6999), industries with fewer than 5 firms, and industries whose IT capital is ill defined. Intercept estimates are not
reported. Numbers in parentheses are probability levels, based on t-statistics adjusted for industry clustering to
eliminate bias due to serial dependence within industries, at which the null hypothesis of a zero coefficient can be
rejected. Coefficients significant at 10% or better are in boldface.

                                   Market Value                 Operating Income                       Sales
                                 9.1            9.2               9.3          9.4             9.5              9.6
 Information
 Technology
          ln(IT)                0.029          0.051             0.032        0.036           0.021         0.035
                               (0.033)        (0.009)           (0.000)      (0.040)         (0.012)       (0.009)
 Corporate
 Demography
        ln(Age)                  0.035         0.046             -0.053      -0.051           0.076         0.083
                               (0.593)        (0.481)           (0.231)      (0.278)         (0.041)       (0.026)
         ln(Size)               -0.099        -0.101             -0.057       -0.057         -0.129        -0.124
                               (0.000)        (0.000)           (0.001)      (0.000)         (0.000)       (0.000)
 Competition
      Herfindahl                -0.077        -0.110             0.022        0.016           -0.076        -0.104
                               (0.690)        (0.541)           (0.871)      (0.910)         (0.496)       (0.387)
 Technology
      ln(1+R&D)                 -0.230        -0.262            -0.011        -0.017          -0.104       -0.120
                               (0.151)        (0.119)           (0.938)      (0.914)         (0.621)       (0.581)
 Financing
        Leverage                -0.020         0.005             0.119        0.124           0.178         0.194
                               (0.920)        (0.981)           (0.466)      (0.466)         (0.056)       (0.038)
         Liquidity              -0.045        -0.063            -0.025        -0.028          0.007        -0.005
                               (0.493)        (0.378)           (0.291)      (0.313)         (0.830)       (0.891)
                     2
       Adjusted R               0.535          0.514             0.647        0.634           0.714            0.700
       Sample size              1180           1180              1180         1180            1010             1010




                                                         62
