                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    SUPPLY SHOCKS AND MONETARY
                         POLICY REVISITED


                          Robert J. Gordon



                       Working Paper No. 1301




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           March 198k




Department of Economics, Northwestern University. This research
has been supported by the National Science Foundation. I am grate-
ful to Robert Flood for helpful discussions and to Glenn Hubbard
and Allan Meltzer for comments on a first draft. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Economic
Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper #1301
                                       March 1984




           Supply Shocks and Monetary Policy Revisited

                              ABSTRACT


      This paper reviews the main issues
 conduct                                 that supply shocks pose for the
         of monetary policy. A simple version of the Gordon—Phelps model
 shows that the necessary condition
                                    for actual real GNP to be maintained
 at its equilibrium level in the wake
 in nominal GNP to                    of a supply shock is for the change
                   exceed the change in the nominal wage by the change in
 the   income share of the raw material in GP. The required 'wedge
between nominal GNP   and wage growth can be accomplished by any combina-
tion of monetary accommodation and
this combination a "macroeconomic nominal wage flexibility. Without
                                   externality" occurs, with real CNP
falling below its equilibrju level.

      The obstacles to monetary
                                accommodation are examined in terms of a
 taxonomic wage adjustment equation that allows for differing responses
 to current inflation, lagged
                              inflation, and lagged wage change. Mone-
tary accommodation is infeasible when there is full indexation to
current inflation and creates a permanent acceleration of inflation
following a one—time permanent shock when there is indexation to lagged
inflation. With "forward—looking"
                                    expectation formation in the sense of
Taylor, a supply shock is likely to
                                     cause changes in parameters of the
wage adjustment equation as workers attempt to avoid the macroeconomic
externality.

     The final section of the paper discusses doctrinal debates that
originated in part from the empirical failures of earlier Phillips
curves that neglected supply shocks.




                                    Robert j. Gordon
                                    Department of Economics
                                    Nor t   hwe st e rn Un iv e r is t v
                                    Evanston, Illinois 60201
                                    (312) 492—3616
      A macroeconomic supply "disturbance' or "shock" is any event which

  creates an autonomous shift in the aggregate supply curve relating the

 economywide price level to the level of output or utilization. The autonomous

 nature of such shifts distinguishes them from other movements in the supply

 curve that represent the consequences of a
                                              current or prior changes in
 aggregate demand. The distinction between supply and demand shocks is valid

 only with reference to their origin, whereas the
                                                    consequences of Supply shocks
 for output and inflation depend fundamentally on the aggregate demand policies

 that are pursued in their wake.

      Autonomous supply disturbances can originate from natural causes,

 including a drought that parches the corn or soybean crop, a freeze that

 withers the oranges in Florida, or a straying ocean current that nudges the

 Peruvian anchovies away from their familiar feeding grounds. Unnatural

 sources of supply shocks include the formation of a cartel that constricts the

supply of a raw material like oil, and price controls
                                                         that temporarily squeeze
normal profit margins. Persistent changes in the foreign exchange rate have

similar effects to those of supply shocks. While
                                                    supply shocks occurred In
earlier eras, e.g., the Napoleonic wars (Joel Mokyr and Gene Savin), their

profound effect on economic analysis and performance
                                                       occurred only within the
last decade.

     This paper is written almost a decade after the first attempts in 1974 to

develop a theory of policy response to supply shocks.'    It provides a simple
algebraic framework that facilitates a summary of the central issues posed by

supply shocks for macroeconomic policy. Primary emphasis Is placed on the

case for and against monetary accommodation, on the nature and extent of wage

indexation, and on the distinction between
                                             permanent and transitory shocks. A
tight space constraint precludes more than passing mention of cost—oriented
                                             2




fiscal policy, oil tariffs, buffer stocks and other policies that mainly
                                   shocks themselves rather than their conse-
influence the magnitude of the
                             performance. Given the difficult tradeoffs faced by
quences for macroeconomic
                                      the merits of accommodation, these supply-
monetary policymakers considering

                        actually   represent the best available policy options.
side alternatives may
                                        real disturbance is a real policy.
The first line of defense against a

                          1. A Simplified Hybrid Model

                                            accommodation of an adverse supply
     The original case for the monetary
                                                                   rests on a
                             1975(a) paper and by Edmund Phelps,
 shock, as developed by my
                                                                         loss of
 'macroecOflomiC externalitY," that is, a spillover from the unavoidable

                                 of the economy to a loss of output in the
 output in the shocked sector
                                                                        The case
 unshocked sector that may be avoidable by monetary accommodation.
                                    in a model with rigid or sluggishly adjusting
 for accommodation is strongest
                                            is weaker in the presence of partial
 nominal wages in the unshocked sector,
                                                      of complete wage index—
 wage indexation, and is nonexistent in the presence
                                clearing achieved by perfectly flexible wages.
 ation or instantaneous market
                                                                conditions
 Both my paper and that of Phelps developed explicit algebraic
                                 externality to occur. These conditions look
  required for the macroeconomic
                                                                  two—sector
  quite different in the two papers, because I was dealing with a
                                 nominal GNP, while Phelps developed a one—sector
  model and assumed exogenous
                                                                      to the
  model but allowed the velocity of money to respond endogenously
                                                                 one—sector
  external shock. Here I set out a hybrid model, sharing Phelps'
                                                      assumption, that allows
  production technology with my exogenous nominal GNP
                                                                         to be
                                externalities and monetary accommodation
  the analysis of macroeconomic
                                      fashion than in the two original papers.
  presented in a more transparent
                                                    (Q) using only labor (N) and a
        Consider an economy that produces output

   raw material (a):
                                                                  3




              Q        = F(N,a),
                                                   FN>O, F0>O.                             (1)
   Thesupply of labor in the economy is fixed at N*, and so "natural" (or
                                                                          "full
   employment" or "potential") output is:

             Q*    =
                                                                                           (2)
  Note  that no capital is used in production. apita1
                                                        appears in Phelps' model,
  but its only role there is to introduce a set of
                                                    complex and ambiguous impacts
  of Supply shocks on the real rate of interest and
                                                     on velocity. Here these
  Second—order effects are neglected through the
                                                 assumption that nominal GNP (Y)
  is exogenous. The
                     economy's demand price (pd) is then simply nominal GNP
  divided by actual real GNP:

                  =     YQ1      =
                                      Y[F(N,a)]1.                                      (3)

 Assuming that the product market
                                                       always clears and labor is paid its marginal
 product, the economy's supply
                                                    price (P5) is equal to the nominal wage rate
 divided by the marginal product of labor:

         PS =
                       W[FN(N,a)].                                                    (4)
        The Conditions for a
                           macroeconomic externality can now be examined by
 subjecting this economy to a single
                                     comparative static experiment, a change in
 the raw material input,
                         a, caused by some unexplained event. A macroeconomic

externality is defined as occurring
                                                         when, starting in equilibrium with      Q Q*
the percentage change in Q needed to keep d pS is
                                                                          not equal to the change
in Q*        Here we shall use the "dot"
                                                         notation for percentage changes
(dQ/Q), and so the difference betweefl the rate of
                                                   actual and natural output
change is, from (3):
         .        •*     •                •*
         Q—Q=Y               —
                                 pd   —
                                               •
                                                                                     (5)
The condition necessary for this to
                                    be zero                      can be worked out by setting
                                                          4




   =   S and      by noting that if the change in actual GNP is equal to that in

natural real GNP, then both output change terms can be evaluated by assuming

that labor input remains at N*, i.e., that
                                                               =   0.    We have from (2) and (4):



       Q—Q =           •         • .*
                       Y—P —Q =Y-W+ —-do—--dc.
                                                •   .F    N
                                                                    F                   (6)


Thus the condition for real GNP to remain at equilibrium can be written,
                           F       F
                                                                                        (7)
       Y—W       =
                       —2---)da,
                        N
                                                                        change in nominal GNP and
i.e., that the difference between the percentage
                                                              to the right—hand side of (7).
that in the nominal wage rate remain equal
                                                                     We can write the income share
       And what is this unfamiliar—looking term?

 of the raw material (cL) as unity minus the share of labor.
                     FN
        CL   = 1 — -4—, so        that &        = (FN +   —




 Because at Q* there is no change in labor input
                                                 ( =                        0),   the change in the raw


 material share is just:

                                        F         F0
                       —
                            F)    =      No
                                                — V)do.                                  (8)
              = _(FN                  —(i—-—
                                            N
                                                               condition:
 Thus substituting (8) into (7), we have the
                                                                                         (9)


                                                                        analysis in the original
       While it is completely consistent with the
                                                          (9) is that it is both simplei and
 Gordon and Phelps papers, the appeal of
                                                                   nominal
 more general.2 There is no need to assume that nominal GNP or the

 wage rate is fixed. Condition (9) applies to either a market—clearing or non

  clearing economy. In a mrket—cleariflg economy the perfectly flexible wage

  can adjust downward by any amount needed to open up the required "wedge"
                                                                   share increases, and there is no
  between dY/Y and dW/W when the raw material
                                                                        a rigid or sticky nominal wage
  necessity for monetary accommodation. However,
                                               5




  rate and an increase in the
                                 raw material share together
                                                               imply that full
  employment can be maintained
                                 Only if policymakers generate a sufficient
  increase in nominal GNP.

       The role of a changing
                                raw material share in creating the
                                                                      basis of the
  case for nominal GNP accommodation
                                       applies equally when the raw material is
  used as a productive input,
                                as in the Phelps model, or
                                                             purely for consumption,
  as in my l975(a) model. Other
                                   authors, e.g., Leonardo Leiderman     have
  attempted to analyze this topic within the
                                               straightjacke of a Cobb—Douglas
 production function, but by assuming away any change of income
                                                                shares, this
 approach misses the heart of the problem, the macroeconomic
                                                                   externality. In
 the case of energy, the most
                                important example of a supply shock in the last
 decade, the value share of
                              energy in GNP increased sharply after both the
 1973—74 and 1979—80 oil
                           price shocks, in contrast to its decline in previous
 decade :

                       1960         1972       1976       1978          1981
 Energy Value
   Share Index          117          100           186       192        323
   (1972=100)

Energy is used both in production and for
                                             direct consumption, and its rising
Income share after 1972 reflects
                                   the relatively low elasticity of substitution
between energy and other factors
                                   on the production side, as well as a
relatively low short—run price elasticity
                                            of demand on the consumption side.

                      II. Accommodation and Indexation

     The theory of monetary
                            policy responses to supply shocks is clear—cut in
unrealistic extreme cases and ambiguous in more realistic intermediate
                                                                               cases.
Here we ignore effects of supply shocks on the velocity of
                                                               money, allowing us
to link central bank control of the
                                      money supply with control over the growth
rate of nominal GNP (Ye). Effects
                                    of indexation are examined in a mechanical
                                                            6




adjustment equation which allows changes in wage rates to depend only on

                                                                     changes, and on the output ratio
current and past price changes, on past wage




            =       +            +                      +                                  (10)

      This equation is not intended to represent the outcome of maximizing

behavior, but rather to allow examination of a taxonomy of consequences of an
                                                                       =
accommodating monetary policy that maintains
                                             full employment, i.e.,      Q.
                                                                        an assumed situation in the
In each of the following cases, we normalize on

period prior to the shock in which Wo
                                                       =         =      = 0,   and we assume that the
                                                            Yo

supply shock has a permanent impact on the level of the raw material share

 only in period "1" (a <
                                     =
                                         a2
                                               =   .... = as).             Thus the only nonzero value


 of    is       > 0. We note also that for full employment to be

 maintained, Pt =
                         —
                                     Substituting           (10) into (9), we have:


      =             -        +                      +
                                                           (l-'-t_1 + QtQ*t)].                (11)


                                                                               values and on the output
      When wage changes depend only on their own past

                 = 0),   full monetary accommodation is clearly optimal.                          During
 ratio ( =
                                                  would set                                 to equal a1.
 period l W1 = 0, so that an accommodative policy
 The opposite extreme occurs with complete indexation of wage changes to

 current changes in the price level,
                                                        =    1   while y =     0.   Now the right—hand

 side of (11) becomes infinite, implying that there is no change in nominal GNP

  that will maintain full employment. Full indexation in the presence of supply

  shocks is clearly suboptimal, as pointed out by Joanna Gray and by Stanley

  Fischer (1977).

       Another possible case is that wage changes are indexed fully to lagged

  price change ( = 0 while y =           1).       In this case (11) reduces to the following,

                                                   =
  when we note that from (2) that                      F:
                                                                     7



                =                +   —
                        t—1
  In    the example of a One—period
                                                      supply shock, in the first period, W1 =        0,
  and this requires the Same accommodative policy as if I =
                                                                                     0, i.e., ' =
  In    the second period, however,
                                                      lagged indexation prevents nominal wage and GNP
  growth from returning to zero.                       Instead, from (8)
          Y =
           2        2
                        =y
                             1
                                 -   =           -         = —i,--
                                             1         1        N

  In   all future periods,

                                         =


 i.e.,    maintenance of full employment
                                                              requires a permanent acceleration of
 inflation and in the growth of nominal wages and GNP
                                                                                following   any Supply
 shock that permanently shifts the raw material share. In this plausible
                                                                         case
 of lagged indexatlon, supply shocks pose a tradeoff between
                                                             a permanent
 acceleration of Inflation and a temporary loss of output. The
                                                                 severity and
 duration of the output loss depend on the Phillips curve
                                                          parameter 4) or, more
 generally, on the economy's "sacrifice ratio"
                                                                         (Gordon and Stephen King). For
 the U. S. case I showed (1982,
                                                     p. 134) that an accommodative policy that

 cumulatively raised the money supply by 9 percent in 1975—80 compared to an

alternative hypothetical
                                     Constant—growth money path would have resulted in 1.9
percentage points more inflation in 1980 with the benefit of 3.2 fewer point—

years of unemployment during 1975—80 (an output gain of 8 percent of a year's

GNP).

        In the realistic case of a permanent shock and partial and/or
                                                                                              lagged wage
indexation, the optimal degree of accommodation depends on a finely balanced

comparison of the welfare costs of inflation
                                                                     and unemployment. The optimal
outcome Is different in a society like the U. S. in 1973—75, where
                                                                   inflation
had high costs due to non—neutral tax rules and binding financial
                                                                  rate
                                              8




ceilings, than in a society like Israel or Brazil, in which real interest
                                     neutral with respect to inflation. In a
rates and tax rates were much more

sense there is a cumulative interaction, as I suggested earlier (1975b),
                                                           contract lengths and the
between monetary accommodation, behavior regarding

Phillips curve parameter ( above)      ,   and institutional rules regarding tax

                                     Inflation begets a neutralized institutional
rates and financial regulations.

environment, which begets accommodation and more inflation.

        III. The Persistence of Shocks and the Formation of Expectations


       In the above example an adverse supply shock causes a permanent reduction
                                            Another possibility is that the shock
 in the economy's productive capacity.

 is temporary, as in the case of an agricultural drought or freeze. In this
                                     lagged indexatlon is between a temporary
 case the tradeoff with partial or
                                                                   inflation.
 output loss and a temporary rather than permanent acceleration of
                                                   rate is not without welfare costs,
 Even a temporary upsurge in the inflation
                                           in the price level at every date in the
 since it causes a permanent increase
                                             wealth of holders of high—powered money
 future and a corresponding loss in the

 (effects on jnterestbeariflg assets and liabilities cancel out).

       Thus far nothing has been said about inflation expectations. If the
                                                                                 would
 indexation parameters     and y are set by legislation, then wage changes

  evolve mechanically in the aftermath of a supply shock, as described above.

  If    and i are relatively low at the time of the shock, e.g., if wage changes
                                              values, then the decline in the real
  are determined mainly by their an past
                                                                    to have
  wage rate associated with the shock may create political pressure
                                                  the percentage "pass through" of price
  indexation legislation changed. Indeed
                                           indexation agreement was raised in 1975
  changes in the Italian scala mobile

  after the first oil shock. However, in most countries indexation parameters

  are not set in legislative stone, but are subject to frequent negotiation
                                                9




   between workers and firms.
                                 Multi—period wage agreements achieved in delicate
   negotiatjo5 would not tend to be altered
                                                in response to a temporary shock
   that is expected to leave output and the real wage unaffected after
                                                                       a
  transition period of a few months or a year.

          But a shock expected to have a permanent effect on
                                                             output and the real
  wage poses a serious dilemma for the
                                          parties in wage negotjatjon, and may
  well lead to a change in any or all of the parameters of (11). As
                                                                          depicted in
  the model of John Taylor,
                              newly negotiated contracts depend not just on the

  current state of demand, as in (ii), but    also   on the expected future state of
 demand. Taylor's agents are "forward looking", not "backward
                                                               looking" as in
 mechanical formulae like (11). Workers with forward—looking
                                                              expectations can
 calculate the future
                      consequences of maintaining high B and y Indexation
 parameters in the face of a
                             permanent supply shock——permanentjy higher
 inflation if the policy authorities
                                        accommodate, and a period of low aggregate
 demand (Q/Q*) if they do not accommodate. Faced with this
                                                           unpleasant
 tradeoff, rational workers would
                                    suspend indexation and allow the real wage to
 fall by the required amount.    Hence the rational expectations
                                                                    response to a
 permanent shock merges together with the
                                             market—clearing outcome described
 above.

      The painless transition
                                implied by quickly adjusting
                                                               forward—looking
expectations to a permanent shock has
                                         not been observed in fact. As
                                                                          Jeffrey
Sachs has emphasized,
                      unemployment increased in virtually all OECD countries
after the 1973—74 oil shock,
                             reflecting a combination of nonaccommodative

aggregate demand policies, and an excess of real wage growth over
                                                                       Productivity
growth. One possible explanation
                                    for this outcome is that economic agents
initially thought the oil shock would
                                        be temporary and were slow to learn that
it was permanent. Karl
                          Brunner, Alex Cukierman, and Meltzer show that, even
within the context of a
                          market—clearing model, a permanent reduction in pro—
                                           10




ductivity can cause stagflation, because agents only gradually learn the

permanent values of real variables and only gradually adjust their anticipa-

tions. Consistent with their analysis is my 1983(b) finding that real wage
                                                much more moderate after the 1979
growth in most large European countries was
                                      1973—74 shock. Having seen the effects of
80 oil shock than after the initial
                                                       to believe that the second
the first shock persist, agents were more prepared

would persist as well.

                         IV. Impact on Doctrinal Debates


     Supply shocks have helped to unify the teaching of macroeconomic theory
                                            results in both subjects can be
with that of microeconotnics, since basic
                                                Undergraduates are now taught that
 summarized with supply and demand curves.

 unemployment and inflation may be either negatively or positively correlated.

 Following an autonomous shift in demand, the extent and duration of any change
                                          of wage contracts and the adjustment of
 in unemployment depends on the length
                                                 shift in supply, the extent and
 expectations, while following an autonomous
                                                    on the interaction of wage
 duration of any change in unemployment depends
                                            The recognition that inflation depends
 indexation and monetary accommodation.

 on shifts in both demand and supply, not just on past changes in the nney
                                       explanations of the inflation process that
 supply, has facilitated econometric
                                                                variable and
 appear able to explain why in the 1970s U. S. inflation was so

 why in 1981—83 it decelerated so rapidly.4
                                                 and unemployment in the 1970s
      The positive correlation of inflation
                                       famous polemic, Robert E. Lucas, Jr. and
  brought forth many responses. In a
                                                                             of
  Thomas Sargent used this positive correlation to challenge the application
                                                         Their stated intent was "to
  "Keynesian" models to macroeconomic policymaking.
                                                  that ny3dern macroeconomic models
  establish that the difficulties are fatal:
                                      and that this condition will not be remedied
  are of no value in guiding policy

  by modifications along any line which is currently being pursued." Especially
                                             1]




with respect to the issue at hand, this dismissa]. is inappropriate. Observa-

 tions in the inflation—unemployment quadrant
                                                    can represent the Interaction of
demand and supply curves. The Lucas—Sargent
                                                    challenge failed to notice the
concurrent development of new "Phillips curve"
                                                      formulations which combined the
effects of supply and demand shifts with
                                            that of sluggish price adjustment,
the basic element in Keynesian economics.
                                              As put forth in Gordon and King
(1982), the U. S. Phillips curve appears to be one of the most stable

empirical macroeconomic relationships of the postwar era, one that shows no

sign as of yet of being subject to Lucas'
                                             econometric critique.5 In basing
their attack on Keynesian economics
                                       on the alleged collapse of the Phillips

curve, Lucas and Sargent seem in retrospect like a teenage prankster who

scares everyone by crying "wolf" and then flees the scene when it is

discovered that there is no wolf.


      Finally, supply shocks have raised the perennial question of the

 optimality of decentralized and uncoordinated wage and price setting.

Decentralization ("the invisible hand") is
                                                  usually supported by economists as
required for microeconoinic efficiency, yet coordination and centralization may

be needed to obtain an Improved
                                    macroeconomic response to supply shocks. In
the past decade economists have debated the merits of alternative responses

that would have required coordinated
                                        action, including a one—time real wage
reduction to match the decline in
                                     productivity caused by the 1973—74 and 1979—
80 oil shocks, changing Indexation formulae to exclude oil prices and indirect

taxes from the price measure used for escalation, and oil import taxes

balanced by reductions in other indirect
                                            taxes to put downward pressure on the
world oil price and to discourage consumption.
                                          12




                                  FOOTNOTES


     1. Edmund S. Phelps (P. 206) lists the 1974 conferences at which he and

I independently developed what Edward Gramlich later called the "Gordon—Phelps

model."

     2. Although it assumes a constant money     supply   and a constant nominal

wage rate, Phelps' paper does include a condition (in the middle of p. 211)

which sets equal the two terms in the parenthesis in (7). Exactly the same

condition as (9) is contained in my 1975(a) paper when it is recognized that

the right—hand term in equation (9) of that paper is the percentage change in

the expenditure share of the external sector.     I discovered after writing this

paper that Stanley Fischer in 1983 developed an analysis that is compatible

with my Part II but is both more complex and more general.

     3. The share index is calculated by multiplying total real energy

consumption by the composite energy deflator (both from the Statistical

Abstract of the United States, 1982—83, pp. 572—3), dividing by nominal GNP,

and setting 1972 as the base of the index.

      4. Models that combine demand and supply elements include those of Otto
                                               Readable descriptions of the role
 Eckstein, Gordon (1982), and Gordon—King.

 of supply shocks in the inflation of the 1970s are provided by Alan Blinder.

 An evaluation of the 1981—3 disinflation is provided by the three papers in

 the volume edited by William Nordhaus.

      5. The stability of the inflation equation to changes in sample period

 is examined by Gordon and King (p. 218) and related to the Lucas critique (pp.

 224—9). Structural shifts in the 20th century prior to 1954 are discussed by

 Gordon (1983a) and by Meltzer.
                                     REFERENCES

  Blinder, Alan S., Economic Policy and the Great Stagflatjon New
                                                                            York,
        Academic Press, 1979.

  _________     "The
                       Anatomy of Double—Digit Inflation in the l970s," in R.

        E. Hall, ed., Inflation: Causes
                                            and Consequences, Chicago:
        University of Chicago Press for NBER, 261—82, 1982.

  Brunner, Karl, Cukierman, Alex, and Meltzer, Allan H., "Stagflatjon,

        Persistent Unemployment and the Permanence of Economic Shocks,"

        Journal of Monetary Economics, October 1980. 6. 467—92,.

 Eckstein, Otto, Core Inflation, Englewood
                                               Cliffs: Prentice—Hall, 1980.
 Fischer, Stanley, "Wage Indexation and
                                            Macro—economic Stability," in K.
       Brunner and A. Meltzer, eds.,
                                         Stabilization of the Domestic and

       International Economy, Carnegie—Roche
                                                          Conference Series, 5,
       1977, pp. 107—47.

              "Supply Shocks, Wage Stickiness, and Accommodation" NBER

       Working Paper No. 1119, May 1983.

 Gordon, Robert J., "Alternative
                                    Responses of Policy to External Supply

      Shocks," Brookings Papers on Economic
                                                  Activity, 1975, no. 1, 6,
      183—206. (a)

__________    "The Demand for and Supply of
                                            Inflation,' Journal of Law and

      Economics, December 1975, 18, 807—36.         (b)

             "Inflation, Flexible Exchange Rates, and the Natural Rate of

      Unemployment," in Martin N. Baily,
                                            ed., Workers, Jobs, and
      Inflation, Washington: Brookings Institution, 1982, 89—158.

__________   "A Century of Evidence on Wage and Price
                                                      Stickiness in the
      United States, the United Kingdom and Japan," in J. Tobin,
                                                                 ed.,
     Macroeconomics Prices, and
                                     Quantities, Washington: Brookings,
     1983, 85—121.       (a)
             "The Wage and Price Adjustment Process in Eight Large

     Industrialized Countries," working paper, October 1983.     (b)


             and King, Stephen R., "The Output Cost of Disinflation in

     Traditional and Vector Autoregressive Models," Brookings Papers on

     Economic Activity, vol. 13 (1982, no. 1), pp. 205—42.

                                    Macroeconomic Approach," Journal of
Cray, Joanna, "Wage Indexation: A

     Monetary Economics, vol. 2 (1976, no. 2), pp. 221—35.

Leiderman, Leonardo, "Monetary Accommodation and the Variability of

      Output, Prices and Exchange Rates," Carnegie Rochester Conference

      Series on Public Policy, 1982, 16, 47—86.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr., and Sargent, Thomas J., "After Keynesian Macro-
                                                      Reserve Bank of
      economics," After the Phillips Curve, Federal

      Boston Conference Series, 1978, 19, 49—72.

Meltzer, Allan H., "Anticipated Inflation and Unanticipated Price

      Change," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, February 1977, Pt.

      2, 9, 182—205.

Mokyr, Joel and N. Eugene Savin, "Stagflation in Historical Perspective:

      The Napoleonic Wars Revisited," in Paul Uselding, ed., Research in

      Economic History, 1976, I, 198—259.

 Nordhaus, William D., ed., Inflation Prospects and Remedies, Alterna-

       tives for the 1980s, no. 10, Washington, Center for National

       Policy, 1983.

 Phelps, Edmund S., "Commodity-SuPPlY Shock and Full—Employment Monetary

       Policy," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, May 1978, 10, 206—

       21.
Sachs, Jeffrey D., "Wages, Profits, and Macroeconomic Adjustment: A

      Comparative Study," Brookings   Papers   on Economic Activity, 1979,
      no. 2, 10, 269—319.

Taylor, John B., "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts," Journal

     of Political Economy, February 1980, 88, pp. 1—23.
