                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              CONSUMPTION RESPONSES TO IN-KIND TRANSFERS:
       EVIDENCE FROM THE INTRODUCTION OF THE FOOD STAMP PROGRAM

                                          Hilary W. Hoynes
                                         Diane Schanzenbach

                                         Working Paper 13025
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13025


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2007




We are grateful to Bob Schoeni and Donna Nordquist for help with the PSID. We thank James Banks,
Richard Blundell, Ken Chay, Steve Haider, Darren Lubotsky, Bob Lalonde, Doug Miller, Jim Ziliak
and seminar participants at the UC Davis EJS Conference, the IRP Summer Workshop and the NBER
Summer Institute as well as LSE, RWI Essen, SOLE, UCL, and ZEW for helpful comments. Alan
Barreca, Peter Huckfeldt, Charles Stoecker and Rachel Henry Currans-Sheehan provided excellent
research assistance and funding was received from the Joint Center for Poverty Research USDA Food
Assistance and Nutrition Research Innovation and Development Grants in Economics Program. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Hilary W. Hoynes and Diane Schanzenbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Consumption Responses to In-Kind Transfers: Evidence from the Introduction of the Food
Stamp Program
Hilary W. Hoynes and Diane Schanzenbach
NBER Working Paper No. 13025
April 2007
JEL No. H31,I38

                                             ABSTRACT

Economists have strong theoretical predictions about how in-kind transfer programs -- such as providing
vouchers for food -- impact consumption. Despite the prominence of the theory, there has been little
empirical work documenting actual responses to in-kind transfers. In this work, we leverage previously
underutilized variation in the date of the county-level original implementation of the Food Stamp Program
in the 1960s and early 1970s. Using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, we employ difference-in-difference
methods to estimate the impact of program availability on food spending, labor supply and family
income. Consistent with theoretical predictions, we find that the introduction of food stamps leads
to a decrease in out of pocket food spending, an increase in overall food expenditures, and a decrease
(although insignificant) in the propensity to take meals out. The results are quite precisely estimated
for total food spending, with less precision in estimating the impacts on out of pocket food costs. We
find evidence of small work disincentive impacts in the PSID, which is confirmed with an analysis
of the 1960, 1970 and 1980 Census.

Hilary W. Hoynes
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Ave.
Davis, CA 95616-8578
and NBER
hwhoynes@ucdavis.edu

Diane Schanzenbach
Harris School
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
schanzenbach@uchicago.edu
I. Introduction

        Providing assistance to the poor through in-kind transfers such as vouchers for food and

housing garners more political support than providing assistance in cash. Supporters of such policies

believe that providing voucher payments for certain goods (like groceries) will cause recipients to

purchase more of the goods being subsidized, and that recipients will not be able to use public

assistance to buy other, less socially desirable goods (like alcohol or cigarettes). According to

canonical economic theory, though, providing a transfer in-kind should lead to the same outcome as a

similar sized cash transfer as long as program participants are inframarginal. As a result, depending

on consumer preferences the provision of in-kind transfers (relative to cash) may have little to no

impact on purchases of the actual goods being subsidized.

        Despite strong theoretical predictions about consumer behavior, little empirical evidence has

been brought to bear on the impacts of providing in-kind transfers on consumer purchases.1 The Food

Stamp Program (FSP) is one of the largest transfer programs for the low income population. In 2004,

for example, the program cost $27 billion and served 24 million persons. This compares to

$25 billion for Temporary Assistance for Needy Families and $33 billion for the Earned Income Tax

Credit. It has been very difficult for researchers to isolate the causal impact of the FSP on food

spending, nutritional intake, labor supply and other outcomes. Because the program is national, there

is not variation in program parameters (such as stark differences in state benefit levels or eligibility)

that are typically exploited by researchers to measure program impacts. In the absence of

programmatic variation, most researchers have studied the impact of the FSP by comparing food

stamp recipients with eligible non-recipients. Since we would expect participants and non-

participants to differ in important – and potentially unobservable – ways (Currie 2006) researchers

1
 There is a literature that explores the impact of cash transfer programs (Engen and Gruber 2001; Gruber 1997,
2000; Hubbard et al 1995; and Kantor and Fishback 1996) and in-kind transfer programs (Gruber and Yelowitz
1999) on consumption and wealth. This literature is particularly concerned with the insurance element in public
programs and in estimating the impact on precautionary savings and consumption smoothing. More recently, Meyer
and Sullivan (2004) examine the impact of welfare and tax reform on consumption, making the argument that
consumption is an important measure of family well-being that has been largely ignored in the evaluation of transfer
programs (Meyer and Sullivan 2003).
                                                         1
have employed a variety of methods to control for selection into the program (see Fraker, 1990, for a

comprehensive review the literature on food stamps and consumption).

        In general, the literature has concluded that food stamps increase food purchase among

program participants by a much larger amount than would be predicted by the canonical economic

model. These studies have found that the marginal propensity to consume food out of food stamp

income is about 4 times higher than it is out of cash income (Fraker 1990). As a result, food stamp

benefits worth $100 are thought to cause about a $17-$47 increase in food spending while a cash

transfer of $100 is associated with closer to a $5-$10 increase in food spending. But, as mentioned

above, these results have been based on studies that rely on strong and untested assumptions. In

addition, they are focused on the impact of the type of income, and only indirectly address the more

basic policy question regarding the impact on food spending and other important outcomes of a

sizeable, targeted transfer to the poor.

        To measure the impact of the food stamp program in this project, we utilize an

underexploited source of variation: the original introduction of the program across counties.2 There

is tremendous variation in the timing of FSP introduction across counties in the United States—the

earliest county programs were established in 1961 and the last county programs were established in

1975. The FSP started as eight county-level pilot programs and later expanded to 43 counties. This

led to passage of the Food Stamp Act of 1964 which gave local areas the authority to start up FSPs in

their county. This led to a steady increase in FSP adoption over the next ten years. Finally, the 1973

Amendments to the Food Stamp Act mandated that all counties offer FSP by 1975.

        Our approach has the appeal of relying on non-marginal changes in incentives faced by

consumers. This “program introduction” research design has been taken in recent analyses of other

social programs such as Head Start (Ludwig and Miller 2007), Medicare (Finkelstein and McKnight

2005), and Title I (Cascio et al., 2006). It is also part of a larger literature examining impacts of the

2
 Currie and Moretti (2006) use food stamp program introduction across California counties to examine the impact
of the program on birth outcomes.
                                                       2
Great Society and Civil Rights era (for example see Almond, Chay and Greenstone 2006).

        We use data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) to address two important

research questions. First, we use the PSID from 1968-1978 to examine the impact of the FSP on food

consumption. Specifically, we look at expenditures on food spent at home, meals out, food stamp

savings, and total food spending. Second, we examine the FSP as a traditional income support

program—a guaranteed benefit combined with a program phase-out or benefit reduction rate. This

structure is well known to cause a disincentive to work (Moffitt 1983). While the benefit reduction

rate in food stamps is quite low compared to cash welfare programs, standard labor supply models

would predict that food stamps would reduce employment and hours worked. Here, we are able to

augment our main estimates from the PSID with estimates based on the 1960, 1970 and 1980

decennial censuses.

        We employ a basic difference-in-difference model where the treatment is at the county level,

with controls for county and year fixed effects and state linear time trends. In this model,

identification requires that there are no contemporaneous county level trends that are correlated with

food stamp introduction and family economic outcomes. We control for possible confounders in two

ways.

        First, we examine the determinants of the food stamp program start dates across counties. We

are guided by the historical descriptions of the political landscape around the FSP. Using county

characteristics from the pre-treatment period, we find that earlier food stamp program introduction

occurs in counties that are more populous, urban, black, low income, and with a smaller fraction of

land used in agriculture. While these county characteristics are statistically significant determinants

of county FSP implementation, we find that they explain little of the overall variation in food stamp

implementation. However, ignoring these underlying determinants of county implementation could

lead to spurious findings if counties that implement food stamps earlier are on a different trend than

counties that implement later. Following Acemoglu, Autor and Lyle (2004), we use these results to


                                                    3
motivate the inclusion of trends interacted with county pre-treatment characteristics in our regression

models.

       Second, food stamp introduction took place during a period of great expansion in programs

for the poor in the United States. To control for the possible coincident expansion of other programs

such as AFDC, Medicaid, Medicare, and social security, we include three measures of annual per

capita county transfer payments (cash public assistance, medical care, and retirement and disability

programs) obtained from Bureau of Economics Analysis Regional Economic Information System

(U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis 2007).

       Overall, our results indicate that people behave as the theory predicts. We find that the

introduction of food stamps leads to a decrease in out of pocket food spending, an increase in overall

food expenditures, and a decrease in the propensity to eat meals out at restaurants. The results are

quite precisely estimated for total food spending, with less precision in estimating the impacts on out

of pocket food costs and meals out. Further, we find evidence that the marginal propensity to

consume food out of food stamp income is close to the marginal propensity to consume out of cash

income. The point estimates consistently point to small negative work disincentive effects, although

few parameters are statistically significant. This is confirmed with an analysis of the 1960, 1970 and

1980 Census. The results are robust to many sensitivity tests including adding more fixed effects,

examining subgroups of the sample, and placebo tests on groups not likely to use food stamps.

       The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section II presents a history of the food

stamp program. Section III discusses the expected effects of the program and Section IV reviews the

existing literature. Section V describes the data and Section VI presents the methodology. Sections

VII and VIII present our results and Section IX concludes.

II. Introduction of Food Stamp Program

       The origins of the modern Food Stamp Program began in 1961 with President Kennedy’s




                                                   4
first executive order establishing eight county-level pilot programs.3 The pilot programs were later

expanded to 43 counties in 1962 and 1963. The success with these pilot programs led to the Food

Stamp Act of 1964 (FSA). The FSA gave local areas the authority to start up Food Stamp Programs

(FSP) in their county. As with the current FSP, the program was federally funded and benefit levels

did not vary across areas. In the period following the passage of the FSA, there was a steady stream

of counties initiating food stamp programs. Support for requiring food stamp programs grew due to a

national spotlight on hunger (Berry 1984). This interest culminated in passage of 1973 Amendments

to the Food Stamp Act, which mandated that all counties offer FSP by 1975.

         At the time the FSP was introduced and expanded, hunger and nutritional deficiencies were

not uncommon among Americans. For example, a survey of low income families in Texas,

Louisiana, Kentucky, and West Virginia in 1968-1970 found that 15 percent of whites and 37 percent

of blacks had low hemoglobin levels (Eisinger 1998). There were also relatively high rates of

deficiencies in vitamin C, riboflavin and protein. In fact, a CBS documentary entitled “Hunger in

America” which aired in 1968 raised national awareness of the problem and possibly influenced the

policy debate on the FSP (Berry 1984).

         It is important to understand the political context in which the FSP was introduced in the U.S.

Prior to the modern day FSP, some counties provided food aid through the commodity distribution

program (CDP).4 The main goal of the CDP was to support farm prices and farm income by

removing surplus commodities from the market. It was seen, however, as inadequate to promote the

nutritional well-being of low income persons and the Citizens’ Board of Inquiry into Hunger and

Malnutrition in the United States declared that “the commodity distribution program is a failure” in

its 1968 report Hunger, U.S.A. (Citizen’s Board of Inquiry 1968). Of the 1,000 poorest counties, one-

third offered no food assistance of any kind in 1967. Furthermore, of counties that did offer the

program, the commodities rarely reached a majority of the poor population because of obstacles such
3
 This section is based on Berry (1984) and MacDonald (1977).
4
 In 1967 – the only year that comprehensive county-level data is available – 44 percent of the population lived in
counties that offered the CDP.
                                                         5
as distribution centers that were difficult to reach, the limited range of products and infrequent timing

of the distribution of goods.5 Consequently, debate about moving from the CDP to the FSP pitted

powerful agricultural interests against advocates for the poor (MacDonald 1977, Berry 1984). In

fact, as described in Berry (1984), passage of the 1964 Food Stamp Act was achieved through classic

legislative logrolling. The farm interest coalition (Southern Democrats, Republicans) wanted to pass

an important cotton-wheat subsidy bill while advocates for the poor (Northern Democrats) wanted to

pass the FSA. Neither had majorities, yet they combined forces, supported each others bills, and

both bills passed.

        This political history is important because it illustrates that there was significant

heterogeneity across the country in support for the FSP. Remember that the 1964 Act allowed for

counties to voluntarily set up food stamp programs. The above discussion suggests that counties with

strong support for farming interests may adopt FSP later in the period while those with strong

support for the low income population may adopt FSP earlier in the period. Consequently, the food

stamp program introduction may not be completely exogenous. We return to this below.

        Figure 1 summarizes the overall pattern of FSP introduction. In particular, the figure plots the

percent of counties offering FSP, where the counties are weighted by their 1970 population. Note

this is not the food stamp caseload, but represents the percent of the national population that lived in

an area offering a FSP. The figure shows that there was a long ramp up period between 1964 and

1975, leading to the eventual universal coverage of the FSP. For example in 1968 about half of the

population lived in counties with FSP and by 1972 this rose to over 80 percent. It is this ramp up

period that forms the basis of our research design.6

        It is important to understand the CDP program in order to interpret the magnitude of the FSP

effects. For example, if all food stamp recipients simply moved over from receiving an equal amount


5
  The boxes were also difficult to transport: the monthly box of food for a family of 4 weighed almost 95 pounds
(Hunger U.S.A.).
6
  County FSP implementation dates are reported in USDA annual reports on county food stamp caseloads (U.S.
Department of Agriculture, various years).
                                                         6
of commodities, we would not expect to find any impact of the FSP on consumption. On the other

hand, if counties adopting the FSP did not previously have access to the CDP or if the FSP provided

a “larger” or “better” set of consumption choices, then the estimated coefficients would pick up the

effect of the introduction of the program.

         The evidence shows that the FSP indeed represents an important “treatment” over and above

the CDP. First, as shown in Figure 2, the FSP caseload quickly overtakes the CDP caseload. In fact,

the CDP was far from universally available prior to the FSP. For example, in 1967 35 percent of

counties (not population-weighted) offered neither FSP nor CDP, 38 percent of counties offered only

a CDP, 21 percent offered only a FSP, and 6 percent of counties offered both a CDP and FSP.7

Second, the CDP provided a very narrow set of commodities—the most frequently available

commodities were flour, cornmeal, rice, dried milk, peanut butter and rolled wheat (Citizens’ Board

of Inquiry, 1968). In contrast, the food stamp benefits can be used to purchase all food items (except

hot foods for immediate consumption, formula and vitamins). Further, the commodities were

distributed infrequently. Finally, analyses of food intake in counties converting from CDP to FSP

found that in its allowing participants to purchase a wide variety of food including fresh meat and

vegetables, the FSP represented an important increase in the quality and quantity of food in

comparison to the CDP (U.S. Congressional Budget Office 1977, Currie and Moretti 2006).

         To get more insight into the geographic variation in the ramp-up to a universal FSP, Figure 3

shows the timing of food stamp introduction by county. In the figure, the shading of the counties is

assigned by county FSP start up date—with darker shading denoting an earlier start up date. This

shows a great deal of variation in FSP introduction within and across states. Our basic identification

strategy uses this county level variation in food stamp “treatment.”

         To further explore the degree of within state variation in FSP start dates, Figure 4 presents

FSP coverage rates by state for 1961-1975. This figure, as in Figure 1, plots the percent of the
7
 Theoretically, counties were not supposed to have both FSP and CDP in place at the same time, but in practice
some places did offer both. We have not been able to find a consistent time series for county participation in the
CDP. Consequently, we are unable to use this information in our empirical analysis.
                                                          7
population (in this case in the state) that lives in a county offering food stamps. In some states, such

as Nevada, Utah, Colorado, Massachusetts, and Florida, there was little or no within state variation in

food stamp start dates. Other states such as California, New Mexico, and Minnesota have much

greater within state variation in the food stamp start dates. The figure shows that in most states, the

county level food stamp introduction took place in a narrower period than for the country as a whole.

        As discussed above, the 1964 FSA allowed counties to start FSP—but it was voluntary.

Therefore, for our research design to be valid, we need for the assignment of county start up of FSP

to be exogenous. The discussion above suggests that northern, urban counties with large poor

populations were more likely to adopt food stamp programs earlier while southern, rural counties

with strong agricultural interests adopted food stamps later. This systematic variation in food stamp

adoption could lead to spurious estimates of the program impact if those same county characteristics

are associated with differential trends in the outcome variables.

        To explore this we compiled characteristics of counties in 1960, on the eve of the first food

stamp pilot programs. We use these “pre” characteristics to predict the date that the county adopted a

food stamp program. The data on county characteristics come from the 1960 City and County Data

Book, which is based on data from the 1960 Census of Population and 1960 Census of Agriculture.

The dependent variable is the month and year of the county’s food stamp start date—expressed as an

index equal to 1 in January 1961, 2 in February 1961, and so on. In some specifications, we omit

from the analysis the initial pilot counties as they were chosen by a different process than the later

counties. In those cases, the dependent variable therefore ranges from 25 (January 1963) to 175 (July

1975). The independent variables include the percent of the 1960 population that lives in an urban

area, is black, is less than 5, is 65 or over, has income less than $3,000 (1959$), the percent of land in

the county that is farmland, and log of the county population. We include the population to capture

the fact that large counties might find the application process less costly relative to the benefits of




                                                    8
application. Descriptive statistics for this data are provided in Appendix Table 1.8

        The results are presented in Table 1. We present estimates with (columns 2-4) and without

(column 1) state fixed effects. All regressions are weighted by the 1960 county population. Focusing

on the results with state fixed effects, we find that counties that are more populous, urban, black, and

low income implement the FSP earlier. Further, those with a larger share of the population that is

very young or old implement earlier and counties where more of the land is used in farming

implement later. The impacts of county characteristics are smaller (in absolute value) in counties the

South (column 4).

        While these regression results show statistically significant impacts of the county

characteristics on the timing of food stamp implementation, the quantitative importance of these

predictors is small and most of the variation remains unexplained. To illustrate this, Figure 5

provides scatter plots of each of six county characteristics (x-axis) against the county FSP

implementation date (y-axis). For guidance, we also provided the univariate linear regression line

(weighted by the county population) for each panel. These figures show that the magnitude of the

association between the county characteristics and the food stamp start date is weak and there is an

enormous amount of variation that is not explained by the characteristics. This is consistent with the

characterization of funding limits controlling the movement of counties off the waiting list to start up

their FSP: “The program was quite in demand, as congressmen wanted to reap the good will and

publicity that accompanied the opening of a new project. At this time there was always a long

waiting list of counties that wanted to join the program. Only funding controlled the growth of the

program as it expanded” (Berry 1984, p. 36-37).

        We view the weakness of the fit of the model as a strength when it comes to our

identification approach—in that much of the variation in the implementation of FSP appears to be


8
  Further, in this analysis—and in the subsequent analyses of the PSID and Census—we drop observations from
Alaska due to inconsistencies in county definitions across samples and over time. Here we also drop very small
counties (with population less than 1,000) because of missing data and a few counties where the percent of land used
in farming was greater than 100 percent.
                                                         9
idiosyncratic. Nonetheless, in order to control for possible differences in trends across counties that is

spuriously correlated with the county treatment effect, we follow Acemoglu et al. (2004) and all of

our regressions include interactions of these 1960 pre-treatment county characteristics with time

trends.9

           This period of FSP introduction took place as part of the much larger federal “war on

poverty.” For example, this period included the introduction of Medicaid, Medicare, Head Start and

the Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children (WIC). Further, AFDC, social

security and disability income programs expanded. If these programs are mainly varying at the state

level then our controls for state linear time trends or state-year fixed effects should absorb these

program impacts. However, to control for the possible coincident expansion of other programs, we

also include annual measures of county per capita transfer payments for cash income support,

medical care, and retirement and disability programs.10

III. Expected Effects of Food Stamp Introduction

           The current Food Stamp program provides a benefit to eligible families which is the

difference between the cost of a family-size adjusted “thrifty food plan” (e.g. the guarantee in

transfer program parlance) and the amount a family can afford to spend on food. In this scenario, as

understood in the canonical Southworth (1945) model and illustrated in Figure 6, the original budget

line reflects the tradeoff between food and all other goods, and is shifted out horizontally by the

amount of food stamps received (labeled here as BF). The basic prediction of this transfer is that

overall spending on food and other goods will increase as shown by the illustrated optimal points C0*

and C1* in the Figure 6(b). Out of pocket food expenses are expected to decrease (here the decrease

is F2−F0 ). Consequently, the increase in food consumption, shown here as F1−F0, is less than the

increase in food stamps BF. It is possible, that a household that has a high demand for non-food

9
 Another approach might be to use these estimates to form propensity scores for matching counties. However, the
weak fit of the model renders this less appealing.
10
   We have no documentation that any of these programs had the county roll out feature that provides the basis for
our identification of the FSP. With respect to other nutrition programs, the National School Lunch Program had long
been established, having started in 1946, and WIC was implemented more universally in 1972.
                                                        10
relative to food might, as shown in Figure 6(c), might be constrained by the in kind nature of food

stamps (relative to a cash transfer) and would locate at the kink. For these families, food stamps

would lead to a larger increase in food consumption than an equivalent transfer in cash.11

         Prior to 1979 (and during the time period studied here), families had to make a cash up front

payment to receive the food stamp benefits. This feature, called the “purchase requirement” did not

change the magnitude of the benefits a family received.12 Figure 7 shows the budget constraint in

this case, where the amount of the purchase requirement is P. Note that the sloped part of the budget

constraint is still shifted outward by the food stamp benefit (again BF) but the top is censored and the

attainable budget set is smaller. That is, a participant can no longer choose any consumption bundles

that would have them spending more than their total income (Y) minus P.13 This means that there

will likely be more people consuming at the kink in the budget constraint under the purchase

requirement program than under the current program. This suggests that in our analysis (when the

purchase requirement was in place), the impact of food stamps on food spending will be somewhat

larger than it would be under current (no purchase requirement) program or under a cash transfer

scheme.14

         The focus of the paper is testing these predictions for consumption. The PSID provides

several measures of food expenditures—cash outlays for food at home, food bought with food stamps

and food away from home—that in theory respond in different manners to the food stamp program.15

Clearly food bought with food stamps should increase after the introduction of the program and cash

11
   Implicit in Figure 6 is the assumption that relative prices of food to nonfood are unchanged with the FSP. While it
seems possible that the FSP could have led to increases in food prices (through increases in demand among the low
income population) we have no data to test this hypothesis. As is typical in household survey data, in the PSID we
measure expenditures not consumption.
12
   That is, if the family was deemed able to afford to spend $100 on food, but the cost of the thrifty food plan was
$300, the family could purchase $300 in food stamps for the cash price of $100. Today, a similar family would
receive simply receive $200 in food stamps and would not have to outlay any cash.
13
   Of course, a potential recipient would choose not to participate in the program if they would prefer to consume
such a bundle to the consumption bundle at the kinked part of the budget constraint.
14
   Beginning in 1971, participants could purchase their food stamp benefits in increments of 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, 1.00 of
their full food stamp allotment (MacDonald 1977). They could make these purchases every 2 weeks. This “variable
purchase option,” as shown in Figure 7(c) will reduce the number of families at the kink.
15
   Food bought with food stamps is the value of food bought less the price paid for the stamps. So it is the “benefit”
or “bonus value” from participating in food stamps.
                                                         11
outlays for food at home should decrease. The prediction for spending on meals away from home is

ambiguous given the positive income effect (due to the income transfer) and negative substitution

effect (due to the reduction in the price of food at home). Given this low income population and high

subsidy to food at home, we expect that the FSP will lead to a decrease in meals out. Finally, we

expect an increase in total food consumed from all sources—deriving from higher total cash plus

food stamp income under food stamps and the distortion of consumption toward food for those

consuming at or near the kink point. Unfortunately, the PSID does not provide the data necessary to

test the prediction that FSP leads to an increase in nonfood expenditures.16

        We also estimate the impact of the FSP on labor supply and family cash income. Like other

means-tested programs, the FSP alters the household’s labor-leisure tradeoff increasing total income

conditional on hours worked. In particular, the food stamp benefit is largest at zero hours of work,

and benefits are reduced for each additional dollar earned (although at 30 percent the tax rate is much

lower than typical tax rates under welfare programs). The combination of the income effect of the

benefit as well as the substitution effect from the benefit reduction rate leads, unambiguously, to a

predicted decline in employment, hours worked, and (if wages are fixed) earnings. In addition,

family cash income (which as measured does not include food stamp benefits) would also be

predicted to fall. We explore the possible work disincentives in the PSID by examining impacts on

head’s employment, annual hours, earnings, and family income.17

IV. Literature Review

        A large literature, mostly using data from more than 20 years ago, focuses on whether the

FSP leads to larger increases in food spending than a similar sized cash transfer. However, the


16
   Depending on the year, the PSID sometimes includes expenditures on rent, utilities, tobacco and alcohol.
Unfortunately, there are not enough years of data to implement our research design.
17
   Given the outward shift in the budget set and the expected increase in food consumption, we would also expect
that the introduction of the FSP would lead to improvements in health. In an earlier version of the paper, we
examined impacts on health outcome using the PSID variable on head’s missed work due to illness. We concluded
that this measure is too crude to capture any impacts as those models were very imprecisely estimated. Almond et al.
(2006) estimate the impacts of the FSP on birth outcomes and infant mortality for the US as a whole and Currie and
Moretti 2006 use natality data from California to examine impacts on birth outcomes.
                                                        12
available variation that can be used to identify the impact is limited. Most of the observational studies

in the literature (described in Fraker, 1990, and Levedahl, 1995) estimate the marginal propensity to

consume food using the following linear specification:

(1)               fspendi = β 0 + β1cashi + β 2 fstampi + Z iγ + ε i

where fspendi is expenditure on food for household i, cashi and fstampi are income in cash and

from food stamps, respectively, Z i is a vector of covariates such as household size and age/gender

makeup, and ε i is a normal disturbance term. Variants on this standard specification include the

“semi-log specification” which replaces cash with ln(cash) (food stamps, though, are typically still

estimated in levels) or a “double-log specification” in which ln(fspend) is the dependent variable.

Here the primary impact of the food stamp program is measured as the increased consumption out of

food stamps compared to cash income, as measured by the differences in estimated coefficients by

income type in equation (1).

        Fraker (1990), in a summary of the literature, reports that most of the food stamp literature

finds that the marginal propensity to consume (MPC) food out of food stamps is 2-10 times higher

than out of cash income and can easily reject the null hypothesis that β 2 = β1 , even when the

samples are restricted to only food stamp recipients who spend more on food than their food stamps

are worth. The median study in Fraker’s literature review reports a marginal propensity to consume

food out of food stamp income that is 3.8 times as large as that from cash income.18 These findings

are often interpreted as evidence that food stamps increase food spending by more than an equivalent

cash-transfer system would.

        The literature suffers from many of the standard shortcomings of observational studies. For

example, most of the estimates were identified from differences between food stamp recipients and

equally low-income families that were eligible for food stamps but for some unobservable reasons


18
  The MPC out of cash is estimated to be 0.03-0.17 (with most estimates between 0.05 and 0.10), and the MPC out
of food stamps is estimated to be 0.17-0.47.
                                                      13
chose not to enroll in the program (such as a preference to consume non-food goods). In this case, a

comparison between participants and non-participants may overstate the impact of the program.

Other studies compare food stamp recipients to higher-income families who are not eligible for food

stamps. These studies rely strongly on the functional form imposed on income, which may fail to

adequately account for the Engel curve which predicts that spending on food accounts for a larger

share of total spending at very low levels of income. If the nonlinearities in food spending implied

by the Engel curve coincide with income from food stamps, then the estimated coefficient on food

stamp income could be biased (Whitmore 2002). Our identification strategy allows us to better

isolate the impact of food stamps on spending.

       Labor supply effects of the FSP have been studied by Fraker and Moffitt (1988), Hagstrom

(1996), and Keane and Moffitt (1998). This prior literature, using more structural estimation

methods, finds insignificant or small work disincentive impacts of the food stamp program. For

example, Moffitt and Fraker find that the FSP reduces hours of work by participants by 1 hour per

week, or since mean weekly hours worked for Food Stamp participants is about 9.5, a 9 percent

reduction.

V. Data

       The PSID is a panel data set collected by the Institute for Social Research (ISR) at the

University of Michigan. The PSID began in 1968 with a sample of about 5,000 households

containing 18,000 individuals, and subsequently all members (and descendants) of these original

survey families were re-interviewed annually. The original 1968 sample consists of two subsamples:

a nationally representative subsample of 3,000 households (Survey Research Center subsample) and

a subsample of 1,900 households selected from an existing sample of low income and minority

populations (Survey of Economic Opportunity subsample). To adjust for this nonrandom

composition, the PSID includes weights designed to eliminate biases attributable to the oversampling

of low income groups and to attrition. All results use the weights provided by the PSID.


                                                  14
         The central focus of the PSID is labor market and demographic variables, containing

substantial detail on income, employment, and family composition. It also includes annual food

(cash) expenditures for food consumed at home, away from home, and food purchased with food

stamps (the value of food purchased less the purchase requirement). These data have been used by

many researchers examining impacts of social programs on consumption (for example see Blundell

and Pistaferri 2003, Gruber 1997, 2000, and Hubbard et al. 1995). In addition, we measure the head’s

employment status, annual hours worked, annual earnings, and total family income.

         The public use release of the PSID includes state level identifiers for each year. In addition,

we have obtained county level identifiers for each family in each year through special arrangement

with the ISR.

         We use data from interview years 1968 to 1978. We stop the sample in 1978 so that our

entire analysis period is before the end of the purchase requirement (which occurred in 1979). For

our analysis of food consumption, we exclude interview years 1968 and 1973 (although we use all

years 1968-1978 for the analysis of labor supply). We drop 1973 because the food consumption

variables were not included in that survey and we drop 1968 because of inconsistencies in the

definition of the food variables in that year.19 In our main estimates, we also trim observations with

unusual values for food expenditures. In particular, we drop observations where the ratio of food

spending to income exceeds 0.85, where total annual food expenditures were less than $100 (in 2005

dollars) or where annual family income was less than $500 (in 2005 dollars). A test of sensitivity to

these excluded observations is included in Table 8.

         There is some ambiguity in what time frame the food variables correspond to. In general, the




19
  In particular, the food stamp variable is measured more broadly as food assistance in 1968 and includes
commodity distribution program, food stamp program, and other in-kind benefits. As a consequence, we find
nontrivial food stamp (=food assistance) participation rates in 1968 in counties that do not as of yet have food stamp
programs in place. Further, the cost of meals away from home is defined more broadly than in later years and the
amounts are bracketed.
                                                         15
survey is taken in spring and families are asked about “typical food consumption.”20 The PSID then

annualizes this measure and applies it to the prior calendar year. Nonetheless we assume, as other

researchers have, that the food spending variables apply to this year (Blundell and Pistaferi 2003,

Gruber 1997, 2000, Hubbard et al. 1995, and Zeldes 1989). All labor supply, earnings, and income

variables correspond to the prior calendar year.

         Unlike virtually all other U.S. public assistance programs there is no categorical eligibility

for the food stamp program. That is, eligibility depends on income and asset tests but it is not

targeted on particular demographic groups, such as single parents with children. Table 2 presents

food stamp participation rates by education, family type and race based on the 1976-78 waves of the

PSID. We use these years because all counties were participating in the program by 1976, but this

period is prior to the elimination of the purchase requirement in 1979.21 These tabulations show that

while food stamp participation is highest among single parent families with children, the

participation is widespread across all demographic groups. For example, among families where the

head has less 12 years of education, 46 percent of single parent families with children, 14 percent of

married couples with children, 14 percent of single nonelderly persons with no children, and 10

percent of single elderly participate in food stamps. The rates are uniformly higher among black

families, with 56 percent of single nonelderly parent families with children (where the head has less

than 12 years of education) participating in food stamps.

         To take advantage of the universal nature of the FSP and to increase the power of our

analysis, our base case model includes all families and singles headed by a nonelderly person.22 To

capture their varying risks of being treated, however, in econometric model (below) we multiply the

20
   Specifically, spending on food at home and food out were first asked about “weekly” (1968-69), then for “last
year” (1970-76), then finally settled into “annual spending” starting in 1976. Between 1968 and 1974 respondents
were asked to report food stamp receipt “last year,” but it is thought that most respondents answered about their
current status. As a result, starting in 1975 the question was changed to inquire about food stamp receipt “last
month.”
21
   The participation rates are very similar when tabulated on the larger sample sizes of the Current Population
Survey in 1980 (the first year in which food stamp information is available).
22
   We limit the analysis to the nonelderly because of low take up rates among the elderly (Currie 2003, Haider et al.
2003). The results are qualitatively unchanged when we include the elderly.
                                                         16
FSP treatment dummy by a group level food stamp participation rate (Bleakley 2007). Specifically,

we use the 1976-78 PSID to calculate FSP participation rates by education (<12, 12, >12), race

(white, nonwhite), marital status (married, not married) and presence of children (yes, no). We also

present estimates for two sub-samples of the PSID—female headed households with children, and

nonwhite female headed households with children. These samples are chosen because they are most

likely to be impacted by the program.

         Descriptive statistics for the consumption sample are presented in Appendix Table 2. There

are a total of 39,623 (person-year) observations in the pooled sample, with 6,002 for all female heads

and 4,501 for nonwhite female heads. All dollar amounts are in 2005 dollars and we use separate

CPIs for food at home and food away from home. The descriptive statistics for the labor supply

sample are presented in Appendix Table 3.

         To augment our analysis of the work disincentive effects of the FSP, we also use the

Decennial Census. The challenge is that our identification strategy relies on identifying counties

which we need to assign the FSP treatment. The public release Census microdata, unfortunately, do

not include county identifiers. We instead use county level tabulations of the full census which the

Census Department releases as separate data products. We use these STF (summary tape file) data to

construct county panels for 1960, 1970, and 1980. The limitation of this data is that we can only use

the variables that have been released with the data and that are consistently available over the three

censuses. The outcome variables we examine include: male and female labor force participation

rates and the percent of families with family income in excess $10,000 (in 1979 dollars). These are

aggregate county outcomes and can not be refined for groups most likely to be impacted by the

FSP.23


23
  The smallest geographic area identified in the census micro data is the county group. We also estimated models
using the 1970 and 1980 public use micro data IPUMS data (there is no microdata for 1960). The advantage of using
the IPUMS is that we can construct the variables we would like for the treatment groups we like. However, we have
to aggregate the FSP treatment across all counties in the country group. Further, we had to combine county groups to
accommodate the changing county group boundaries between the 1970 and 1980 Census. In the end, this
aggregation was substantial and the results had very low power. The results are available on request.
                                                        17
        We merge the PSID and Census data using the county identifiers, with 1960 county

characteristics (from the City and County Data Book), annual per capita county transfers (from the

BEA) and the FSP policy variables (from the USDA).

VI. Methodology

        Our data discussed above consists of household level data with geographic indicators that

span the period during which the FSP is introduced. By pooling periods, we can control for area and

time fixed effects. This helps to address the concerns arising from the voluntary nature of the FSP

introduction across counties.

        Although our identification strategy is based on a person’s county of residence, the

probability of being impacted by the program varies widely across people within a county. Program

participation varies widely with education, race and family type as shown in Table 2. To account for

this variation in program participation, we multiply the food stamp treatment variable–which varies

at the county-by-year level–by a group specific FSP participation rate. This approach has been used

in other recent studies such as Banarjee et al. (2007) and Bleakley (2007). In particular, we estimate

the following model where the unit of observation is the family-year:

(2)     yict = α + δ FSPct Pg + X it β + γ 1Z c 60 ∗ t + γ 2TPct + θ g + θ g ∗ t + ηc + λt + ε ict

where yict is the outcome variable, FSPct is an indicator variable equal to 1 if county c in year t has a

FSP program, Xit are family characteristics, Zc60 are 1960 county characteristics, TPct are per capita

county transfer income variables, ηc are county fixed effects and λt are time fixed effects. (We

estimate additional specifications with state linear time trends and state-year fixed effects.) Pg is the

group (g) specific food stamp participation rate; we use 24 groups defined by race (white, nonwhite),

marital status (married, not married), presence of children (yes, no), and education (<12, 12, >12).

We also include fixed effects for each group and for group interacted with linear time.

        The individual controls X include controls for education, race, urban location, state

unemployment rate, and for the food consumption models the log of family cash income. As

                                                    18
suggested by Currie (2003), X includes a full set of fixed effects for the number of children and

number of adults in the family to control nonparametrically for the differences in food needs across

families. All estimates are weighted using the PSID family weight and the standard errors are

clustered on county.

         We also present estimates that limit the sample to groups that had high participation rates:

unmarried women with children, and the further subset of nonwhite unmarried mothers. In this case,

we do not interact the FSP variable with Pg as in equation (2), and instead estimate the following

model:

(3)               yict = α + δ FSPct + X it β + γ 1Z c 60 ∗ t + γ 2TPct + ηc + λt + ε ict

where all variables are defined as above. These sample restrictions reduce the number of available

observations by more than 80 percent, and generally provide less precise estimates.

         In addition, a series of placebo tests are presented in Table 7. These are estimated using the

specification in equation (3), but the sample is limited to groups that have low FSP participation rates

such as high education married couples with children.

         As described above, the food variables in the PSID measure expenditures as of the interview

which is fielded in spring of each year. Thus t in (2) and (3) above refers to the interview year. Given

this timing, we set the treatment variable FSPct to 1 if county c has a FSP program in place by

January of year t. When examining the labor supply and income, the variables refer to the calendar

year prior to the interview year. In that case, t refers to the year prior to the interview year and we

define the treatment variable to be 1 if county c has a FSP in place by January of the year prior to the

interview year.24

         We include the pre-treatment county variables (Zc60) interacted with linear time trends to

control for the observable determinants of county food stamp adoption (Table 1). The variables in Z


24
  There is some evidence (Berry 1984) that it took some time to ramp up the new county FSP programs. We have
explored the sensitivity to lagging the treatment effects and while the specific estimates change somewhat, the
results are qualitatively similar.
                                                       19
include the log of the population, the percent of land in farming and the percent of population black,

urban, age less than five, age greater than 65 and with income less than $3,000 each interacted with a

linear time trend. We include the county transfer variables TPct to control for the possible coincident

expansions of other transfer programs during this period. In particular, we include three per capita

annual county transfer income variables: (1) retirement and disability programs, (2) medical care

(Medicare, Medicare, and military health care), and (2) cash public assistance (AFDC, SSI, and

general assistance).

VII. Results for Expenditures on Food

        We begin with the overall pooled sample and the estimation approach described in equation

(2). To reflect differing probabilities of being affected by the program, we interact the treatment

dummy with a group specific FSP participation rate. Note that with this interaction, the parameter

estimates represent impacts for families that take up the program (e.g. no post-estimation scaling

needs to be done). The main results, presented in Table 3, provide estimates for three outcome

variables: the log of real expenditures on food at home, a dummy for any meals out, and the log of

real total food expenditures. Expenditures on food at home includes all cash spending on groceries,

but does not include cash outlay for food stamps or the value of food purchased with stamps. The

meals out variable is equal to one if a household reports spending any money on meals out in a

typical week. About three quarters of the pooled sample and only about one-half of single mother

families report any spending on meals out (Appendix Table 2). Finally, total food expenditures

includes money spent on food at home, food out, and also includes food purchased with food stamps

and the value of any other free meals or food that the household received.

        We present five specifications. The first specification includes demographics, the 1960

county characteristics interacted with linear time, and year and county fixed effects. In the second

specification we add state linear time trends. In the third we add the per capita county transfer

income variables. In the fourth, we adopt the basic Engel curve specification and control for the log


                                                  20
of family (cash) income. We postpone concerns about the possible endogeneity of this variable (due

to work disincentive impacts of the food stamp program) to the next section. In the final

specification, we replace the state linear time trends with state-year fixed effects.

        The first panel finds—as predicted by the theory—a small, negative impact of food stamps

on out-of-pocket (cash) spending on food at home. The second panel shows—as expected—a

reduction in purchase of meals out measured as whether a family reports eating any meals out in the

past year. Both of these findings are imprecisely measured, however, and not statistically significant.

Finally, in the third panel, FSP is associated with a statistically significant and robust 18 percent

increase in total expenditures on food. Overall, the results in Table 3 are consistent with the

theoretical predictions but not always statistically significantly so.

        In this double-log specification, the coefficient on log of real family cash income (not

reported in the table) estimates a elasticity of food spending with respect to income of 0.30 and

evaluating at means implies a marginal propensity to consume food out of cash income of 0.09. This

is quite consistent with the existing literature (summarized above).

        The results show that adding the controls for the county transfer income (column 3), family

income (column 4), or including state-by-year fixed effects (column 5) improve precision and the

overall fit of the model, but make little difference for the parameter estimates.

        Table 4 presents the impact of the program on a sample limited to female-headed households

with children. In this case, the first panel displays the impact of the introduction of the program in

one’s county on an individual’s likelihood of receiving any food stamps. The results show

consistently that the introduction of the food stamp program leads to increases in food stamp receipt

(as expected). We can interpret the coefficient as the effective participation rate. Note that these

implied participation rates are somewhat lower than those implied in Table 2 and may be due to a

program ramp up period taking place. Panels B through D present impacts of the program on food

spending at home, meals out, and total food spending. To scale up the results to be per food stamp


                                                    21
family, the numbers in italics divide the parameter estimates by the sample mean food stamp

participation.25 As with the pooled results in Table 3, the results for female headed households show

that the introduction of the FSP leads to a large statistically significant increase in total food

expenditures. Again, we have no statistically significant results for meals out or out of pocket

spending on food. Interestingly, the magnitude of the results for total food from the targeted sample

is quite similar to the pooled sample in Table 3. For example, Table 3 shows an 18 percent increase

in total food expenditures with the introduction of the FSP compared to 26-28 percent in the sample

of female heads of household (after scaling up by sample participation rate).

         Table 5 further narrows the sample to include only nonwhite female headed households with

children. The results are broadly consistent with the earlier results for the overall sample—negative

and insignificant impacts on meals out and cash expenditures on food at home and positive impacts

on total food—but are typically smaller and less precisely estimated. The overall impact on total

food expenditures is more muted in this sample, with a 6-13 percent increase (after scaling up by

sample participation rate).

         In Tables 4 and 5, as well as Table 3, the results are quite consistent across the specifications.

For the remainder of the paper, we adopt as our base specification the specification in column (4)

with state linear time trends, county transfers, and log of family income.

         Policy analysts have long been interested in the impact of an additional dollar’s worth of

income on food spending, and whether the marginal propensity to consume (MPC) food varies out of

cash income versus food stamp income. One can make a further adjustment of these estimates to

calculate how the predicted increase in total food expenses compares to the increase in food stamp

benefits. Table 6 presents the estimates of the MPC out of both types of income. These MPCs are

derived from the estimates on treatment dummy and on log(income) in the model of the log of total

food expenditures. All estimates come from the specification in column (4) of Tables 3-5, with
25
  As with the earlier use of food stamp participation rates, here we calculate the mean food stamp participation rate
using interview years 1976-1978 representing the period after all counties have adopted the program and before the
purchase requirement is eliminated.
                                                         22
controls for county transfer income and state linear time trends. The MPCs are evaluated at the mean

values of food spending and income levels among food stamp recipients. The results in row (1),

based on the pooled sample, indicate an MPC for food out of food stamp income equal to 0.16 and an

MPC for food out of cash income of 0.09. In subsequent rows, we present parameter estimates and

implied MPCs for subgroups with higher probabilities of being impacted by the FSP.26 Consistent

with the Engel curve relationship, as the sample becomes more disadvantaged, the MPC food out of

cash income increases although not dramatically. For example, the MPC food out of cash income

rises from 0.086 in the full sample to 0.111 in the sample restricted to families with income less than

or equal to $25,000 (in 2005 dollars). The MPC food out of food stamps also increases as the sample

becomes more disadvantaged (we will return to this below).27

         Returning to the estimates for the full sample in row (1), the results are consistent with the

theoretical predictions—the MPC food out of food stamps is quite close to the MPC food out of cash

income. This would suggest that most households are inframarginal. This is in stark contrast to the

existing literature that finds the MPC food out of food stamps to be 2-10 times larger than the MPC

food out of cash income. The difference between our results and the previous literature comes fully

from our lower estimate of MPC food out of food stamp income, which we feel is the result of our

credible research design. Our estimate of the MPC food out of cash income is estimated from cross-

sectional variation in cash income – similar to the rest of the literature – and is similar in magnitude

to the older literature.

         While close in magnitude (and certainly much closer than the prior literature suggested), we

are still finding that the estimated MPC food out of in-kind transfers (at 0.16) is larger than the MPC

food out of cash income at (0.09). Thus far, we have maintained that the only reason for a higher

26
   Estimates in rows (1)-(6) use the pooled model specification in equation (2), and in particular the treatment
dummy is interacted with a group FSP participation rate. Thus the parameter estimates reflect impacts for a treated
person. In rows (7)-(8), there is no interaction with the FSP participation rate. The numbers in italics scale up the
parameters by dividing by the sample FSP participation rate as described in the presentation of Table 4. The MPCs
are directly comparable across samples.
27
   As described above, our estimated MPC food out of food stamps is likely to be larger than it would be if our data
corresponded to a period without a purchase requirement.
                                                         23
MPC food out of food stamps compared to the MPC food out of cash income is that households are

constrained by the in-kind nature of the program (as illustrated in Figure 6c). There are, however,

other reasons why the MPCs may differ. The family member with control over food stamp benefits

may be different from the person that controls earnings and other cash income. If the person with

control over food stamps has greater preferences for food, then we may find that the MPC food out of

food stamps is higher than the MPC food out of cash income. Alternatively, it is possible that the in-

kind transfer sets a mental target for how much a family “should” spend on food, and as a result

alters a family’s preferences toward consuming at the budget kink point. Finally, families may

perceive that food stamp benefits are a more permanent source of income compared to earnings.

        Returning to Table 6, we find that as the sample becomes more disadvantaged (cutting on

income, education, or race) the MPC food out of food stamps rises relative to the MPC food out of

cash income, suggesting that more of the lowest-income households are located at the kink. This is to

be expected, as the budget constraint is shifted out further for lower-income families because the

absolute level of food stamp transfers is higher for the poorest families. If preferences are constant

between the higher and lower income groups, it is straightforward to show that a larger shift out in

the budget set will lead to a greater likelihood of locating at the kink for the more disadvantaged

sample. Whitmore (2002) found a similar result when comparing responses to food stamp programs

in Alabama and San Diego. Overall, however, while the ratio of the MPCs rises at the highest (for the

sample of nonwhite nonelderly families) to 3.7, most of our estimates imply the ratio is 2.5 or lower.

        One should be cautious in interpreting these “marginal” calculations for food stamp income

because of the nonmarginal nature of the research design – i.e. the design compares spending when

there was no program to spending after the program was introduced. On the other hand, the MPC for

income is identified off of cross-sectional variation in cash income, and is subject to the usual

criticisms of this type of identification.

Sensitivity Checks


                                                   24
        We conducted many specification tests. First, in Table 7 we present placebo tests—that is, we

estimate the models for groups that are not expected to be impacted by the food stamp program. In

these and all other specification tests, we use the model with state linear time trends and controls for

county per capita transfers and log(family cash income). We estimate the models for high income

(more than $50,000 in 2005 dollars) families, high income married couples with children, and white

high educated (college educated or more) families with children. The results, as expected, show no

significant impacts of the FSP on food consumption for any of these groups. In fact, here the point

estimates on our most robustly estimated outcome—total food expenditures—while small is negative

compared to the consistently positive estimates for the likely impacted groups.

        Further specification testing is provided in Tables 8 and 9. We present the specification tests

for the pooled sample of all nonelderly in the PSID, with the treatment dummy interacted with the

group specific FS participation rate. (The results are qualitatively the same for the female headed

sample and the nonwhite female headed sample.) Panel A of Table 8 presents estimates where we

drop all observations with minor or major imputations to the food variables. Imputations represent

about one to five percent of observations depending on the variable. Panel B of Table 8 presents

estimates where we add back in the observations that were trimmed from the original dataset because

of unusual food consumption data. The results change little with these changes in sample.

        In panel C of Table 8 we test for policy endogeneity by adding a one year lead of the county

FSP implementation. If this were statistically significant, that would suggest that there were

underlying trends in food consumption that are correlated with the county FSP adoption leading to

spurious estimated impacts of FSP. The coefficients on the policy lead variables are small and often

opposite-signed compared to the actual policy variable.28

        Table 9 explores the sensitivity of the results to the particular functional form specified.

28
  In results not presented here, we also explored whether the treatment effect varies over time by adding an
interaction between the treatment effect and a dummy for 1973 or later. Time varying treatments might result
because the early adopting counties were more enthusiastic about the program than the counties that were forced
into compliance. However, we find no evidence of differences over time. We also estimated models adding back in
the 1968 data. The results, while changing somewhat, provide the same qualitative conclusions.
                                                      25
Column (1) of the top panel restates the main results of the paper found in column (4) from Table 3,

estimated as the log of food spending on the availability of the food stamp program along with the

log of income. Subsequent columns experiment with including food spending and cash income in

levels, and including a quadratic in income. To compare the results across specifications, the implied

MPCs out of food stamp and cash income are reported at the bottom of the table. The results of the

introduction of the food stamp program are similar across specifications, although allowing less

curvature in the relationship between cash income and food spending tends to reduce the MPC out of

income. The bottom panel repeats the exercise, limiting the sample to those with relatively low

levels of family income. The estimated MPCs out of food stamp income are larger among the more

targeted group compared to the top panel, and the estimated impact of the program is quite robust

across specifications.

        As discussed earlier, the expansion of the food stamp program took place during a time of

great change in the U.S. system of government support. We address this by controlling for the

county level transfer variables. Another, more direct approach, is to examine the impact of the FSP

on family government transfer income. In particular, with the PSID we can measure income of the

head and wife from AFDC, other welfare income (SSI, General Assistance), and social security. The

results of that exercise, presented in Table 10, show no significant impact of the FSP on other sources

of income support.

        In sum, the results in this section show that the food stamp program is associated with

increases in total food consumption and (less consistently) decreases in out of pocket food spending.

The results are robust to including state linear time trends, state-year fixed effects, and do not appear

to be the result of other program expansions during this time period.

VIII. Results for Work Disincentive Effects

        The FSP has the structure of an income support program. A family is eligible for a given

level of food stamps (“the guarantee”) which decreases as earnings increase. The combination of the


                                                   26
income effect of the benefit as well as the substitution effect from the benefit reduction rate leads,

unambiguously, to a predicted decline in employment, hours worked, and (if wages are fixed)

earnings. In addition, family income—which as measured here as cash income and does not include

food stamp benefits—is also expected to fall. It is important to establish whether there are work

disincentives of the program because the impacts of a reduction in earnings may offset gains in

additional food consumption. The prior literature, which is based mostly on structural estimation,

finds little or no impact of the FSP on labor supply. Here we take a very different approach by using

the introduction of food stamps.

           PSID results for the full nonelderly sample, as well as female heads and nonwhite female

heads (paralleling Tables 3-5) are presented in Table 11. As above, the parameter estimates in the

pooled models reflect impacts for a “treated” family. For the female headed household samples, we

provide in italics the equivalent scaled estimates (which are equal to the parameter estimates divided

by the sample FSP participation rate). We present estimates for whether the head worked at all last

year, the head’s annual hours last year, the head’s annual earnings last year, and the total family

income. Note that hours and earnings are unconditional measures – that is, they include

nonworkers.29 Thus any impact on hours or earnings will reflect both intensive and extensive labor

margins.

           Across all outcomes and all three samples, each of the point estimates is consistent with the

theoretical predictions of decreases in employment, hours, earnings and income. However, few

estimates are statistically significant. There is a large, statistically significant decrease in whether the

head reports any work in the pooled sample, and annual hours worked in the female heads and

nonwhite female heads samples are estimated to decline significantly with food stamp

implementation. The results for annual hours worked suggest a reduction of 12 to 16 percent.

           We also examine the impacts on labor supply using decennial Census data. The only public


29
     Family income is specified in log form. Because they include zeros, the head’s earnings are specified in levels.
                                                            27
use release of the Census that identifies the county of residence is county-level aggregate files—

known as the STF files. Using that data, we estimate models of labor force participation rates for all

females and males (aged 16 and over), and all females with a child under age six. Lastly, we can

examine the propensity to have family income in excess of 10,000 in real 1979 dollars. We estimate

models similar to those presented above, with decade fixed effects replacing the year fixed effects.

Because the observations are at the county-year level, we do not include any demographic

characteristics and the regression is weighted using the county population. As above, standard errors

are clustered on county. The results are presented in Table 12—with panel A reporting estimates for

all persons and panel B reporting estimates for nonwhites (for variables that are available).

        It is important to note that these treatment groups are broader than the targeted samples used

in the PSID and there is no way to weight the treatment by group participation rate (as in our pooled

sample) because the data are county wide averages. With that said, the results show a relatively

statistically precise, small negative estimated work disincentive effect. For example, the estimate for

males shows that implementing a food stamp program leads to a statistically significant 0.003

decrease in the labor force participation rate compared to the mean value of 0.76. In addition, the

probability that overall family cash income (not including food stamps) is less than $10,000 per year

(in 1979 dollars) increases by a statistically significant 1-3 percentage points.

        Together, these results suggest that there is a small, negative impact on income and work

associated with the food stamp program. The relative modest size of these effects is perhaps not

surprising given the low (for income support programs) benefit reduction rate of 30% in the food

stamp program. In the AFDC/TANF program where the work disincentive effects are estimated to be

much larger (Moffitt 1992) the benefit reduction rate is closer to 100 percent. However, as a check

and to gauge the magnitude of the expected labor supply effects of the food stamp program, we

simulated the impact of the program on annual hours worked in our PSID sample using estimated

labor supply elasticities from the Negative Income Tax experiments (Robins and West 1983). These


                                                   28
simulations show that the food stamp program is expected to lead to about a 100 hour reduction in

annual hours worked among our female heads of household sample (compared to our estimate of a

165 hour reduction in Table 11). Note that the simulations predict only the intensive margin effect,

and are therefore expected to be below our estimates which capture the extensive and intensive

margin impacts. The simulations for the full or pooled sample predicted a 30 hour reduction in hours,

which scaled up by the group FS participation rate represents about a 350 hour reduction in hours

somewhat larger than our (insignificant) estimated 229 reduction in Table 11. Overall, we take this as

a useful exercise which corroborates our estimates of modest work incentive effects in the food

stamp program.30

IX. Conclusion

         In this paper we present evidence on the effect of the largest near-cash transfer program –

food stamps – on the consumption and labor supply of the poor. The overall program effects of the

Food Stamp Program have been difficult for researchers to isolate, because there is little cross-state

or over-time program variation to exploit. Here we use county-level variation in the original

adoption of the program from 1963-1975 to identify the impact of food stamps. Using the PSID and

Census data, we find that the FSP significantly increases food consumption, and causes a small

negative impact on work behavior of the poor. By introducing and developing this research design,

the paper provides an important contribution to the literature on evaluating the behavioral impacts of

transfer programs.

         Perhaps more importantly, the paper tests the economics of in-kind transfers. Economic

theory has strong predictions about how consumers will reallocate their spending in response to in-

kind transfers. Despite the well known theoretical predictions, there has been relatively little


30
   More specifically, we assign the compensated wage and income effects based on family type (female headed
households are assigned the effects for “single females” and all male headed singles/families are assigned the effects
for “husbands”). We assign maximum food stamp benefits and the food stamp breakeven income level by family
size using the 1975 food stamp parameters in Table 2.2 from MacDonald (1977). We assume no nonlinear response
to the implementation of food stamps and therefore simulate the change in hours for those families with head’s
earnings below the food stamps breakeven point. Full results of simulation available on request.
                                                         29
empirical work to test those predictions. We find that the poor react to in-kind transfers by reducing

their out-of-pocket spending on the targeted good, just as theory predicts. But total consumption of

the targeted good from all sources – cash outlays and in-kind transfers – increases. Additionally we

find that, consistent with theory, providing the food stamp benefits in voucher form leads to a

minimal distortion of the consumption choice relative to what it would be if the benefit were

provided in cash. This is in stark contrast to the findings in the existing literature, which use data and

methods from more than two decades ago.

        Our findings, then, contribute to the literature in two distinct ways. First, we provide

important and new estimates of the impact of the food stamp program on consumption and labor

supply using a credible research design. Second, we test predictions of the theory of consumer choice

and in particular the differential impacts of cash versus in kind transfers.

        Even though there have been changes in the population of the United States and the

parameters of the Food Stamp Program since the period we are studying, these results are relevant for

today’s policy debates. To date, there have been no studies that we have found that provide credible

evidence on the impact of the FSP on consumption and income. The FSP is once again receiving

considerable political attention, and it is crucial from a policy maker’s perspective to be able to

measure the benefits of the program not only on food spending, but also on other outcomes like

income, child well-being, and health.




                                                    30
VII. References

Acemoglu, Daron, David Autor and David Lyle. 2004. “Women War and Wages: The Impact of
Female Labor Supply on the Wage Structure at Mid-Century.” Journal of Political Economy, 112(3),
June, 497 – 551.

Almond. Doug, Kenneth Chay and Michael Greenstone (2006). “Civil Rights, the War on Poverty,
and Black-White Convergence in Infant Mortality in Mississippi.”

Almond et al. (2006). “The Impact of the Food Stamp Program on Infant Outcomes.”

Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Gilles Postel-Vinay, and Tim Watts. 2007. “Long Run Health
Impacts of Income Shocks: Wine and Phylloxera in 19th Century France,” working paper.

Berry, Jeffrey M. (1984). Feeding Hungry People: Rulemaking in the Food Stamp Program. New
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.

Bleakley, Hoyt (2007). “Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication in the
American South,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1): 73-117.

Blundell, Richard and Luigi Pistaferri (2003). “Income Volatility and Household Consumption: The
Impact of Food Assistance Programs.” Journal of Human Resources, Volume 36.

Cascio, Elizabeth, Nora Gordon, Ethan Lewis, and Sarah Reber (2006). “Fiscal Responses to the
Introduction of Title I.”

Citizens’ Board of Inquiry (1968). Hunger, U.S.A. Boston: Beacon Press.

Currie, Janet (2003). “U.S. Food and Nutrition Programs,” in Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the
United States, Robert Moffitt (ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Currie, Janet (2006). “The Take-up of Social Benefits,” in Alan Auerbach, David Card, and John
Quigley (eds.) Poverty, the Distribution of Income, and Public Policy. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation.

Currie, Janet and Enrico Moretti (2006). “Did the Introduction of Food Stamps Affect Birth
Outcomes in California?” Paper prepared for the National Poverty Center conference Health Effects
of Non-Health Policy.

Eisinger, Peter (1998). Toward an End to Hunger. Brookings Institution Press, Washington DC.

Engen, Eric and Jonathan Gruber (2001). “Unemployment Insurance and Precautionary Saving.”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 47(3), June 2001, 545-579.

Finklestein, Amy and Robin McKnight (2005) “What Did Medicare Do (And Was It Worth It)?”
NBER Working Paper 11609. September 2005.

Fraker, Thomas (1990). “Effects of Food Stamps on Food Consumption: A Review of the
Literature.” Washington, DC: Mathematica Policy Research, Inc.


                                                31
Fraker, Thomas and Robert Moffitt (1988). “The Effect of Food Stamps on Labor Supply: A
Bivariate Selection Model,” Journal of Public Economics, February.

Gruber, Jonathan (1997). “The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance,”
The American Economic Review, Vol. 87, No. 1. (Mar., 1997), pp. 192-205.

Gruber, Jonathan (2000). “Cash Welfare as a Consumption Smoothing Mechanism for Single
Mothers,” Journal of Public Economics, 75(2), February 2000, 157-182.

Gruber, Jonathan and Aaron Yelowitz (1999). “Public Health Insurance and Private Savings,”
Journal of Political Economy, 107(6): 1249-1274.

Hagstrom, Paul (1996). "The Food Stamp Participation and Labor Supply of Married Couples: An
Empirical Analysis of Joint Decisions." Journal of Human Resources 31(2):383-403.

Haider, Steven J., Alison Jacknowitz, Robert F. Schoeni. 2003. “Food Stamps and the Elderly : Why
is Participation So Low?” Journal of Human Resources, 38 (supplement): 1080-1111.

Hubbard, R.G. J. Skinner and S.P. Zeldes (1995) “Precautionary Saving and Social Insurance”
Journal of Political Economy 103:360-399.

Kantor, Shawn and Price Fishback (1995). “Did Workers Pay for the Passage of Workers’
Compensation Laws?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110: 713-42.

Keane, M. and R. Moffitt (1998). “A Structural Model of Multiple Welfare Program Participation
and Labor Supply.” International Economic Review, 39:3, 553-589.

Levedahl, J. (1995): “A Theoretical and Empirical Evaluation of the Functional Forms Used to
Estimate the Food Expenditure Equation of Food Stamp Recipients”, American Journal of
Agriculture Economics, 77 (November): 960-968.

Ludwig, Jens and Douglas Miller (2007) “Does Head Start improve children’s outcomes? Evidence
from a regression discontinuity design.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1): 159-208.

MacDonald, Maurice 1977. Food, Stamps, and Income Maintenance. Institute for Poverty Research
Press: Madison, WI.

Meyer, Bruce and James Sullivan (2003) “Measuring the Well-Being of the Poor Using Income and
Consumption”, Journal of Human Resources, 38: 1180-1220.

Meyer, Bruce and James Sullivan (2004) “The Effects of Welfare and Tax Reform: The Material
Well-Being of Single Mothers in the 1980s and 1990s” Journal of Public Economics, 88:1387-1420.

Moffitt, Robert (1983). “An economic model of welfare stigma.” American Economic Review
73(5):1023-1035.

Moffitt, Robert (1992). “Incentive Effects of the U.S. Welfare System: A Review.” Journal of
Economic Literature 30(1):1-61.



                                                32
Robins, Philip and Richard West (1983) “Labor Supply Response.” In Final Report of the
Seattle/Denver Income Maintenance Experiment, edited by SRI International. Vol 1:pp91-198.
Washington DC: US GPO.

Southworth, H.M. (1945). “The Economics of Public Measures to Subsidize Food Consumption.”
Journal of Farm Economics, February 27: pp. 38-66.

U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (2007). “Regional Economic Accounts,”
http://www.bea.gov/bea/regional/reis/

U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service (various years). “Food Stamp Program,
Year-End Participation and Bonus Coupons Issues.”

U.S. Congressional Budget Office (1977). “The Food Stamp Program: Income or Food
Supplementation?” Washington, U.S. Government Printing Office.

Whitmore, Diane (2002). “Using the Food Stamp Cash-out to Test Intra-Household Bargaining,”
mimeo.

Zeldes, Stephen (1989). “Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical Investigation.”
Journal of Political Economy, 97: 305–346.




                                               33
Figure 1: Cumulative Percent of Counties with Food Stamp Program, 1960-1975

                                               100
                                                                                                    1973 Amend:
                                                        1961: Pilot           1964 FSA:            Manditory FSP by
                                                         Programs            Counties Can               1975
  Counties Participating in FSP (weighted %)




                                                         Inititated            Start FSP
                                               80



                                               60



                                               40



                                               20



                                                 0
                                                 1960    1962         1964         1966     1968   1970       1972    1974


Source: Author’s tabulations of county FSP start dates. Counties are weighted by their 1960 population.




                                                                                            34
Figure 2: Food Assistance Program Participation, 1968-1976


                                             20
  Monthly Average Participation (millions)




                                             16




                                             12




                                              8




                                              4




                                              0
                                              1969   1970     1971         1972          1973        1974            1975   1976
                                                                                  Year
                                                            Food Stamp Program       Commodiy Distribution Program




Source: Berry (1984), Table 3.




                                                                                    35
Figure 3: Food Stamp Program Start Date, By County (1961-1975)




Note: Authors’ tabulations of food stamp administrative data (U.S. Department of Agriculture, various years).




                                                                                   36
Figure 4: Percent of Counties with Food Stamp Program 1961-1975, By State

                                                                AL                           AR                           AZ                          CA                           CO                            CT                           DC                          DE
                                              10 0
                                              50
                                              0
   Weighted % of Counties in State with FSP




                                                                FL                           GA                           HI                           IA                           ID                           IL                           IN                          KS
                                              10 0
                                              50
                                              0




                                                               KY                            LA                          MA                           MD                           ME                            MI                           MN                          MO
                                              10 0
                                              50
                                              0




                                                               MS                            MT                          NC                           ND                           NE                           NH                            NJ                          NM
                                              10 0
                                              50
                                              0




                                                               NV                            NY                          OH                           OK                           OR                           PA                            RI                          SC
                                              10 0
                                              50
                                              0




                                                               SD                            TN                           TX                           UT                          VA                            VT                          WA                            WI
                                              10 0
                                              50
                                              0




                                                                                                               61   64   67    70   73 75   61   64   67    70   73 75   61   64   67    70   73 75   61   64   67    70   73 75   61   64   67    70   73 75   61   64   67    70   73 75


                                                               WV                           WY
                                              10 0
                                              50
                                              0




                                                     61   64   67    70   73 75   61   64   67    70   73 75



                                                                                                                                            Years 1961-1975


Source: Authors’ tabulations of food stamp administrative data (U.S. Department of Agriculture, various years). Counties weighted by 1960 population.


                                                                                                                                                                                        37
Figure 5: 1960 County Characteristics and County Food Stamp Start Date

(a) Percent Black                                                                                                                                                (b) Log of Population
                         1973 1975




                                                                                                                                                 1973 1975
    Date FSP Implemented




                                                                                                                            Date FSP Implemented
                  1970




                                                                                                                                          1970
         1967




                                                                                                                                 1967
 1964




                                                                                                                         1964
                 1961




                                                                                                                                         1961
                                     0               20                40                60                   80                                             6             8            10               12           14            16
                                                                 Percent Black, 1960                                                                                                  Log of Population, 1960
                                         Month Food Stamp Program Initiated                   Fitted values                                                        Month Food Stamp Program Initiated               Fitted values




(c) Percent with Income<$3,000                                                                                                                                   (d) Percent Urban
                         1973 1975




                                                                                                                                                 1973 1975
    Date FSP Implemented




                                                                                                                            Date FSP Implemented
                  1970




                                                                                                                                          1970
         1967




                                                                                                                                 1967
 1964




                                                                                                                         1964
                 1961




                                                                                                                                         1961




                                     0               20                    40               60                 80                                            0            20             40             60            80            100
                                                          Percent w ith Income<$3,000, 1960                                                                                             Percent Urban, 1960
                                         Month Food Stamp Program Initiated                   Fitted values                                                        Month Food Stamp Program Initiated               Fitted values




(e) Percent of Land in Farming                                                                                                                                   (f) Percent Age >65
                         1973 1975




                                                                                                                                                 1973 1975
    Date FSP Implemented




                                                                                                                            Date FSP Implemented
                  1970




                                                                                                                                          1970
         1967




                                                                                                                                 1967
 1964




                                                                                                                         1964
                 1961




                                                                                                                                         1961




                                     0          20               40              60              80                100                                       0             5            10               15           20            25
                                                          Percent of Land in Farming, 1960                                                                                        Percent of Population >65, 1960
                                         Month Food Stamp Program Initiated                   Fitted values                                                        Month Food Stamp Program Initiated               Fitted values




Note: Each graph provides a scatterplot of a 1960 county characteristic (x-axis) against the food stamp start date (y-
axis) where the points are weighted by the 1960 county population. The graphs also contain the linear fit where the
regression is weighted by 1960 county population. 1960 County characteristics are from the 1960 City and County
Databook and the FSP implementation dates are from U.S. Department of Agriculture (various years).



                                                                                                                         38
Figure 6: Food Stamps and Food/Non-Food Consumption: No Purchase Requirement

(a) Basic budget constraint with and without food stamps

                         Region unattainable
 All                     with food stamps
 Other
 Goods

                BF

                                          With Food Stamps

          Without
          Food
          Stamps

                                                             Food


(b) FSP and consumption

All
Other
Goods



                                      C1 *
                          C0 *

                    F2

                         F0          F1                      Food

                      BF
(c) FSP and consumption: constrained outcome

All
Other
Goods                         C 1*
             C0*




                                                         Food




                                                         39
Figure 7: Food Stamps and Food/Nonfood Consumption: With Purchase Requirement

(a) Basic budget constraint with and without food stamps

A ll                              U n attain ab le w ith
O ther                            foo d stam p s and
G o od s                          p urchase requ irem en t

 P urchase
 requirem ent
     P

                                                     W ith F o od S tam ps
                                   BF
                 W itho ut
                 F o od
                 S tam ps


                                                                         F ood


(b) FSP and consumption
A ll
O ther
G o od s

P u rchase
requ irem en t
     P
                                                   C 1*
                                     C 0*

                             F2

                                  F0            F1                           F oo d

                                       BF

(c) Variable purchase option

                             W ith variable purchase option and
 A ll                        purchase requirem ent, m ore of upper
 O ther                      range is attainable
 G oods




                                                                               Food




                                                                   40
Table 1: Determinants of County Level Food Stamp Program Start Date
Analysis Using the 1960 City and County Data Book

                                                       All Counties                  Limiting to post-pilot counties
                                                  (1)                  (2)                (3)                 (4)
Percent of land in farming                      -0.025                0.124              0.114               0.136
                                               (0.830)             (0.028)***         (0.027)***          (0.033)***
Percent of pop with income<$3000                0.005                -0.544             -0.347               0.085
                                               (0.050)             (0.092)***         (0.088)***            (0.147)
Percent of pop urban                             0.214               -0.068              -0.040              -0.001
                                               (4.36)**             (0.041)             (0.039)             (0.053)
Percent of pop black                            -0.326               -0.208             -0.212              -0.474
                                               (4.36)**            (0.070)***         (0.067)***          (0.145)***
Percent of pop age < 5                          -3.566               -2.329             -2.954              -3.557
                                               (4.92)**            (0.625)***         (0.593)***          (0.786)***
Percent of pop age > 65                         -1.030               -0.982             -1.133              -3.048
                                               (2.49)*             (0.390)**          (0.371)***          (0.524)***
log population                                 -11.229               -9.139             -7.819              -7.335
                                              (13.44)**            (0.752)***         (0.718)***          (0.932)***
South * % of land in farming                                                                                 -0.125
                                                                                                           (0.058)**
South * % pop with income<$3000                                                                             -0.603
                                                                                                          (0.188)***
South * % pop urban                                                                                         -0.110
                                                                                                            (0.080)
South * % pop black                                                                                          0.373
                                                                                                           (0.165)**
South * % pop age < 5                                                                                        0.787
                                                                                                            (1.222)
South * % pop age > 65                                                                                       3.467
                                                                                                          (0.754)***
South * log population                                                                                       0.645
                                                                                                            (1.548)

State Fixed Effects                                                    X                   X                    X
Number of Observations                          2,957                2,957               2,939               2,939
R squared                                       0.14                 0.56                0.55                0.56

Notes: The data is at the county level and the dependent variable is equal to the calendar month (normed to 1 in January 1961)
that the county began offering the Food Stamp Program. The control variables come from the City and County Databook for
1960. Alaska counties are dropped due to missing data on the food stamp program. Very small counties (with population less
than 1,000) are dropped because of missing data on some control variables. A small number of counties are dropped because the
variable percent of land in farming exceeds 100 percent. Estimates are weighted using the 1960 county population.

                                                              41
Table 2
Food Stamp Participation Rates by Demographic Group

                                                                 Education Group
                                                                   High School
                                         All        Less than HS      Grad       More than HS
A. All Races
All family types                        0.08              0.14           0.06             0.02
Single with children                    0.32              0.46           0.23             0.15
Married with children                   0.07              0.14           0.06             0.01
Single, no children                     0.07              0.14           0.05             0.03
Married, no children                    0.02              0.04           0.01             0.01
Single, no children elderly             0.07              0.10           0.03             0.01
Married, no children elderly            0.03              0.05           0.00             0.00
B. White
All family types                        0.05              0.10           0.04             0.02
Single with children                    0.22              0.38           0.14             0.07
Married with children                   0.05              0.12           0.05             0.01
Single, no children                     0.05              0.11           0.04             0.03
Married, no children                    0.01              0.03           0.00             0.01
Single, no children elderly             0.05              0.07           0.02             0.01
Married, no children elderly            0.02              0.04           0.00             0.00
C. Nonwhite
All family types                        0.22              0.28           0.18             0.09
Single with children                    0.51              0.56           0.44             0.43
Married with children                   0.16              0.22           0.14             0.03
Single, no children                     0.13              0.20           0.09             0.04
Married, no children                    0.06              0.10           0.02             0.02
Single, no children elderly             0.24              0.25           0.11             0.00
Married, no children elderly            0.10              0.13           0.00             0.00

Notes: Weighted means of food stamp participation rates using families in the 1976-1978 Panel Study of Income
Dynamics. These years were chosen because by 1976 all counties had implemented food stamp programs yet it was
before the elimination of the purchase requirement in 1979.




                                                     42
Table 3
Impact of Food Stamp Introduction on Family Food Expenditures
All Nonelderly Singles and Families
                                                              (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)
A. Log(Real Expenditures on Food at Home)
County FSP Implemented X                 0.061     -0.034                                     -0.034           -0.042            -0.050
    Group Participation Rate            (0.089)   (0.094)                                    (0.093)          (0.085)           (0.090)
Number of Observations                  39,243     39,243                                    39,243           39,243            39,243
R Squared                                 0.56      0.56                                       0.56             0.60              0.61
B. Any Meals Out (0/1)
County FSP Implemented X                -0.109     -0.040                                     -0.040          -0.045            -0.046
    Group Participation Rate            (0.081)   (0.081)                                    (0.082)          (0.082)           (0.085)
Number of Observations                  39,623     39,623                                    39,623           39,623            39,623
R Squared                                 0.27      0.27                                       0.27             0.29              0.30
C. Log (Real Total Food Expenditures)
County FSP Implemented X                 0.212      0.184                                    0.184             0.174             0.179
    Group Participation Rate          (0.080)*** (0.082)**                                 (0.082)**         (0.073)**        (0.075)**
Number of Observations                  39,623     39,623                                    39,623            39,623           39,623
R Squared                                 0.53      0.54                                      0.54              0.60             0.60

Demographics                                                  X                 X                X                X                X
1960 Cty Vars * Linear Time                                   X                 X                X                X                X
Year and County Fixed Effects                                 X                 X                X                X                X
Group Fixed Effects                                           X                 X                X                X                X
Group * linear time                                           X                 X                X                X                X
Per Capita Cty Transfers                                                                         X                X                X
Log(Real Family Income)                                                                                           X                X
State x Linear Time                                                             X                X                X
State x Year Fixed Effects                                                                                                         X

Notes: Each parameter is from a separate regression of the outcome variable on the Food Stamp implementation dummy multiplied by a group
food stamp participation rate. The food stamp implementation dummy equals one if the county-year observation had a food stamp program in
place by January of that year. The group food stamp participation rate is calculated for each education-race-marital status-presence of children
cell using the 1976-1978 PSID. The estimation sample includes all PSID families with nonelderly heads in interview years 1969-1972 and 1974-
1978. There is no food data in 1973 and 1978 is chosen due to the purchase requirement being eliminated is as of 1979. Observations from
Alaska are dropped because of missing data on food stamp program start date and observations with unusual expenditure values are dropped
(annual food expenditures less than $100, annual family income less than $500, or income share on food greater than 0.85). All outcome variables
correspond to annual measures taken as of the interview (in spring of the interview year). Demographic controls include dummies for education,
number of children, number of adults, race, urban location and state unemployment rate. 1960 county variables include log of population, percent
of land in farming, percent of population black, urban, age<5, age>65 and with income less than $3,000 each interacted with a linear time trend.
Per capita county transfer income comes from the BEA REIS and includes measures for public assistance (AFDC, General Assistance), medical
care (Medicare, Medicaid, military), and retirement and disability benefits. Estimates are weighted using the PSID weight and clustered on
county. Standard errors are in parentheses and ***, **, and * indicate that the estimates are significant at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels.




                                                                      43
Table 4
Impact of Food Stamp Introduction on Family Food Expenditures
Female Headed Households with Children
                                                              (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)
A. Any Food Stamps (0/1)
County FSP Implemented                     0.158     0.186      0.194      0.200      0.190
                                       (0.040)*** (0.040)*** (0.040)*** (0.040)*** (0.040)***
                                          0.436      0.514      0.536      0.552      0.525
Number of Observations                     6002      6002       6002       6002       6002
R Squared                                   0.39      0.40       0.40       0.46       0.49
B. Log(Real Expenditures on Food at Home)
County FSP Implemented                    -0.008     0.034      0.042      0.031      0.008
                                         (0.053)   (0.055)    (0.055)    (0.054)    (0.070)
                                         -0.022      0.094      0.116      0.086      0.022
Number of Observations                     5788      5788       5788       5788       5788
R Squared                                   0.43      0.45       0.45       0.51       0.55
C. Any Meals Out (0/1)
County FSP Implemented                    -0.080    -0.051     -0.055     -0.060     -0.060
                                        (0.048)*   (0.048)    (0.048)    (0.048)    (0.048)
                                         -0.221     -0.141     -0.152     -0.166     -0.166
Number of Observations                     6002      6002       6002       6002       6002
R Squared                                   0.36      0.37       0.38       0.40       0.40
D. Log (Real Total Food Expenditures)
County FSP Implemented                     0.039     0.095      0.102      0.095      0.095
                                         (0.039)  (0.043)** (0.042)** (0.041)** (0.049)*
                                          0.108      0.262      0.282      0.262      0.262
Number of Observations                     6002      6002       6002       6002       6002
R Squared                                   0.48      0.49       0.49       0.55       0.58

Demographics                                                   X                X                 X                X                X
1960 Cty Vars * Linear Time                                    X                X                 X                X                X
Year and County Fixed Effects                                  X                X                 X                X                X
Per Capita Cty Transfers                                                                          X                X                X
Log(Real Family Income)                                                                                            X                X
State x Linear Time                                                             X                 X                X
State x Year Fixed Effects                                                                                                          X

Notes: Each parameter is from a separate regression of the outcome variable on a dummy variable equal to 1 if the county-year observation had a
food stamp program in place by January of that year. The sample includes PSID families with children headed by an unmarried woman using
interview years 1969-1972 and 1974-1978. There is no food data in 1973 and 1978 is chosen due to the purchase requirement being eliminated as
of 1979. Observations from Alaska are dropped because of missing data on food stamp program start date and observations with unusual
expenditure values are dropped (annual food expenditures less than $100, annual family income less than $500, or income share on food greater
than 0.85). All outcome variables correspond to annual measures taken as of the interview (in spring of the interview year). Demographic controls
include dummies for education, number of children, and number of adults, race, urban location and state unemployment rate. 1960 county
variables include log of population, percent of land in farming, percent of population black, urban, age<5, age>65 and with income less than
$3,000 each interacted with a linear time trend. Per capita county transfer income comes from the BEA REIS and includes measures for public
assistance (AFDC, General Assistance), medical care (Medicare, Medicaid, military), and retirement and disability benefits. Estimates are
weighted using the PSID weight and clustered on county. Standard errors are in parentheses and ***, **, and * indicate that the estimates are
significant at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels. The numbers in italics inflate the parameter estimate by the sample food stamp participation rate in
1978.




                                                                      44
Table 5
Impact of Food Stamp Introduction on Family Food Expenditures
Nonwhite Female Headed Households with Children
                                                              (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)
A. Any Food Stamps (0/1)
County FSP Implemented                    0.300      0.373      0.379      0.363      0.188
                                       (0.053)*** (0.067)*** (0.070)*** (0.074)*** (0.064)***
                                          0.550      0.684      0.695      0.666      0.345
Number of Observations                    4501       4501       4501       4501       4501
R Squared                                  0.33       0.35       0.35       0.40       0.47
B. Log(Real Expenditures on Food at Home)
County FSP Implemented                   -0.031     -0.062     -0.090     -0.067     -0.094
                                        (0.077)    (0.056)    (0.058)    (0.054)    (0.064)
                                         -0.057     -0.114     -0.165     -0.123     -0.172
Number of Observations                    4311       4311       4311       4311       4311
R Squared                                  0.39       0.41       0.41       0.48       0.54
C. Any Meals Out (0/1)
County FSP Implemented                   -0.036     -0.066     -0.067     -0.056     -0.013
                                        (0.060)    (0.058)    (0.059)    (0.060)    (0.070)
                                         -0.066     -0.121     -0.123     -0.103     -0.024
Number of Observations                    4501       4501       4501       4501       4501
R Squared                                  0.26       0.28       0.28       0.31       0.38
D. Log (Real Total Food Expenditures)
County FSP Implemented                    0.071      0.039      0.036      0.055      0.031
                                        (0.060)    (0.047)    (0.048)    (0.045)    (0.053)
                                          0.130      0.072      0.066      0.101      0.057
Number of Observations                    4501       4501       4501       4501       4501
R Squared                                  0.43       0.46       0.46       0.51       0.55

Demographics                                                   X                X                 X                X                X
1960 Cty Vars * Linear Time                                    X                X                 X                X                X
Year and County Fixed Effects                                  X                X                 X                X                X
Per Capita Cty Transfers                                                                          X                X                X
Log(Real Family Income)                                                                                            X                X
State x Linear Time                                                             X                 X                X
State x Year Fixed Effects                                                                                                          X

Notes: Each parameter is from a separate regression of the outcome variable on a dummy variable equal to 1 if the county-year observation had a
food stamp program in place by January of that year. The sample includes PSID families with children headed by an unmarried woman using
interview years 1969-1972 and 1974-1978. There is no food data in 1973 and 1978 is chosen due to the purchase requirement being eliminated is
as of 1979. Observations from Alaska are dropped because of missing data on food stamp program start date and observations with unusual
expenditure values are dropped (annual food expenditures less than $100, annual family income less than $500, or income share on food greater
than 0.85). All outcome variables correspond to annual measures taken as of the interview (in spring of the interview year). Demographic controls
include dummies for education, number of children, number of adults, race, urban location and state unemployment rate. 1960 county variables
include log of population, percent of land in farming, percent of population black, urban, age<5, age>65 and with income less than $3,000 each
interacted with a linear time trend.. Per capita county transfer income comes from the BEA REIS and includes measures for public assistance
(AFDC, General Assistance), medical care (Medicare, Medicaid, military), and retirement and disability benefits. Estimates are weighted using
the PSID weight and clustered on county. Standard errors are in parentheses and ***, **, and * indicate that the estimates are significant at the
1%, 5% and 10% levels. The numbers in italics inflate the parameter estimate by the sample food stamp participation rate in 1978.




                                                                      45
Table 6
Estimated Marginal Propensities to Consume Food Out of Food Stamps and Income
                                                                                                       Estimated MPCf for
                                                                          Regression Estimates
                                                                                                             treated
                                                                         Coef (SE)          Coef (SE) MPCf Food      MPCf
                                                               N          FS Elig          log(income) Stamps       Income
(1) All nonelderly singles and families                    39,623          0.174               0.295               0.163              0.086
                                                                         (0.073)**           (0.007)***

(2) Nonelderly <=$50,000                                   23,660          0.227               0.270               0.209              0.086
                                                                        (0.072)***           (0.012)***

(3) Nonelderly <=$35,000                                   16,079          0.228               0.262               0.201              0.091
                                                                        (0.083)***           (0.015)***

(4) Nonelderly, <=$25,000                                  13,048          0.282               0.285               0.238              0.111
                                                                         (0.114)**           (0.024)***

(5) Nonelderly, head<=12 yrs of educ                       30,905          0.228               0.278               0.219              0.084
                                                                        (0.069)***           (0.008)***

(6) Nonelderly, nonwhite                                   15,990          0.258               0.270               0.317              0.086
                                                                        (0.079)***           (0.014)***

(7) All female heads                                        6,002          0.095               0.289               0.297              0.098
                                                                         (0.041)**           (0.019)***
                                                                            0.262

(8) Nonwhite female heads                                   4,501           0.055              0.286               0.165              0.101
                                                                           (0.045)           (0.026)***
                                                                            0.101


Notes: Each row reports results from a separate regression of the log of total food spending on the FSP treatment, the log of real family income,
demographics, county variables, and fixed effects. The results in rows (1)-(6) are estimated on the sample of nonelderly singles and families
where the specification is identical to column (4) in Table 3. The treatment effect (coefficient on county FSP implementation) is scaled up to
reflect the impact per food stamp participant family. This is because in the estimating equation the treatment dummy is multiplied by the food
stamp participation rate, assigned by education-marital status-race-presence of children cells. The results in rows (7)-(8) correspond to the
specification in column (4) in Tables 4-5. The numbers in italics inflate the treatment effect by the sample food stamp participation rate in 1978.
See the notes to tables 3-5 for more details. Standard errors are in parentheses and ***, **, and * indicate that the estimates are significant at the
1%, 5% and 10% levels. Estimates are weighted using the PSID weight and clustered on county. All samples trim the data to drop observations
with unusual expenditure values (annual food expenditures less than $100, annual family income less than $500, or income share on food greater
than 0.85). The marginal propensities to consume food are evaluated at mean values for food expenditures and family income among food stamp
recipient families.




                                                                         46
Table 7
Impact of Food Stamp Introduction on Family Food Expenditures
Estimates on Placebo groups
                                               Any Food             Log Real Exp on Any Meals Out  Log of Real
                                              Stamps (0/1)           Food at Home       (0/1)     Total Food Exp

A. High Income Families (>$50,000 in 2005$)
County FSP Implemented            0.005                                     0.002                   -0.031                  -0.009
                                 (0.003)                                   (0.015)                 (0.018)*                 (0.014)
Number of Observations           16,797                                    16,787                   16,797                  16,797
R Squared                          0.10                                      0.58                    0.21                    0.51

B. High Income Married Families with Children (>=$50,000 in 2005$)
County FSP Implemented            0.004            -0.003           -0.010                                                   -0.023
                                 (0.004)          (0.018)          (0.020)                                                  (0.019)
Number of Observations            9,814             9,808            9,814                                                    9,814
R Squared                          0.13             0.51             0.25                                                     0.51
C. White High Educated Married Families with Children
County FSP Implemented            0.003            -0.035                                           -0.016                  -0.066
                                 (0.003)           (0.033)                                          (0.035)               (0.032)**
Number of Observations            1,947             1,947                                            1,947                   1,947
R Squared                          0.29              0.67                                             0.30                   0.67
Notes: Each parameter is from a separate regression of the outcome variable on a dummy variable equal to 1 if the county-year observation had a
food stamp program in place by January of that year. The models correspond to specification (4) in Table 4. See the notes to that table for more
details. Standard errors are in parentheses and ***, **, and * indicate that the estimates are significant at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels. Estimates
are weighted using the PSID weight and clustered on county. Each panel corresponds to estimates from a different sample. The first panel
includes families where family income exceeds $50,000. The second panel takes the high income sample and restricts it further to include
married families with children. The third panel includes white married families with children where the head has 16 or more years of education.
All samples trim the data to drop observations with unusual expenditure values (annual food expenditures less than $100, annual family income
less than $500, or income share on food greater than 0.85).




                                                                       47
Table 8
Impact of Food Stamp Introduction on Family Food Expenditures
Specification Tests: All nonelderly singles and families
                                                    Log Real Exp on Any Meals Out  Log of Real
                                                     Food at Home       (0/1)     Total Food Exp

A. Drop allocated observations
County FSP Implemented X                                   -0.036                    -0.061                  0.164
  Group participation rate                                 (0.085)                   (0.081)               (0.073)**
Number of Observations                                     37,172                    39,211                 37,088
R Squared                                                   0.61                      0.30                    0.60

B. Add in trimmed observations
County FSP Implemented X                                   -0.037                    -0.048                  0.189
  Group participation rate                                 (0.087)                   (0.081)               (0.077)**
Number of Observations                                     40,005                    41,047                 40,785
R Squared                                                   0.58                      0.29                    0.57
C. Add lead of policy variable
County FSP Implemented X                                   -0.056                   -0.074                   0.162
  Group participation rate                                 (0.083)                  (0.096)                (0.072)**
Lead of County FSP X                                        0.035                    0.072                   0.028
  Group participation rate                                 (0.104)                  (0.116)                 (0.107)
Number of Observations                                     39,243                   39,623                  39,623
R Squared                                                    0.60                    0.29                     0.60

Notes: Each parameter is from a separate regression of the outcome variable on a dummy variable equal to 1 if the county-year observation had a
food stamp program in place by January of that year interacted with a group specific food stamp participation rate. The models correspond to
specification (4) in Table 5 and are based on the sample of nonelderly singles and families. See the notes to that table for more details. Standard
errors are in parentheses and ***, **, and * indicate that the estimates are significant at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels. Estimates are weighted
using the PSID weight and clustered on county. Each panel corresponds to estimates from a different sample or specification. Panel A drops
observations where any food expenditure variables have been allocated (imputed). Panel B adds back in the trimmed observations (those with
annual food expenditures less than $100, annual family income less than $500, or income share on food greater than 0.85). Panel C includes a
one year lead of the policy variable.




                                                                        48
Table 9
Impact of Food Stamp Introduction on Total Food Expenditures
Sensitivity to Alternative Functional Form

Specification                                               log-log               semi-log                linear              quadratic
Dependent Variable                                     log(total food) total food exp total food exp total food exp
Income                                                   log(income)            log(income)              income             quad income

All Nonelderly singles and families
County FSP Implemented X                                    0.174                    975                   1138                  1110
   Group participation rate                               (0.073)**                 (613)                 (611)*                (603)*
log(income)                                                  0.295                  2,150
                                                             (0.007)***            (85)***
income                                                                                                     0.038                0.048
                                                                                                          (0.002)***            (0.003)***
income squared (/$10,000)                                                                                                       0.000
                                                                                                                                (0.000)***
Number of Observations                                      39,623                 39,623                39,623                 39,623
R squared                                                    0.60                   0.57                  0.59                   0.59
Estimated MPC food stamps                                    0.163                  0.127                 0.148                  0.145
Estimated MPC income                                         0.086                  0.087                 0.038                  0.048

Nonelderly singles and families with family income<$50,000 (2005$)
County FSP Implemented X                   0.227          1620                                            1670                  1656
  Group participation rate              (0.072)***      (523)***                                        (523)***              (522)***
log(income)                                                  0.270         1,163
                                                             (0.012)*** (54.461)***
income                                                                                                     0.051                0.070
                                                                                                          (0.003)***            (0.009)***
income squared (/$10,000)                                                                                                       -0.003
                                                                                                                              (0.002)**
Number of Observations                                      23,660                 23,660                23,660                 23,660
R squared                                                    0.51                   0.53                  0.53                   0.53
Estimated MPC food stamps                                    0.209                  0.217                 0.224                  0.222
Estimated MPC income                                         0.086                  0.054                 0.051                  0.057

Notes: Each column presents estimates from a regression of total food expenditures on a dummy variable equal to 1 if the county-year
observation had a food stamp program in place by January of that year interacted with the group participation rate. The models differ with
respect to the functional form (logs or levels for dependent variable, logs or levels for income). All other control variables and sample selection
correspond to specification (4) in Table 3. See the notes to that table for more details. Standard errors are in parentheses and ***, **, and *
indicate that the estimates are significant at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels. Estimates are weighted using the PSID weight and clustered on county.
The marginal propensities to consume food are evaluated at mean values for food expenditures and family income among food stamp recipient
families.




                                                                        49
Table 10
Impact of Food Stamp Introduction on Family Transfer Income (2005 dollars)
All nonelderly singles and families

                                                                      (1)                          (2)

AFDC income (2005$)
County FSP Implemented X                                             773                          840
  Group participation rate                                          (968)                        (969)
Number of Observations                                             44,098                       44,098
R Squared                                                            0.24                         0.24

Other cash welfare (2005$)
County FSP Implemented X                                             506                          495
  Group participation rate                                          (628)                        (631)
Number of Observations                                             40,299                       40,299
R Squared                                                            0.12                         0.12
Social Security Income (2005$)
County FSP Implemented X                                           -1213                        -1226
  Group participation rate                                         (1633)                        (262)
Number of Observations                                             40,299                       40,299
R Squared                                                           0.14                          0.14

Demographics                                                          X                             X
1960 Cty Vars * Linear Time                                           X                             X
Year and County Fixed Effects                                         X                             X
Per Capita Cty Transfers                                                                            X
State x Linear Time                                                   X                             X

Notes: Each parameter is from a separate regression of the outcome variable on a dummy variable equal to 1 if the county-year observation had a
food stamp program in place by January of the year prior to the interview year interacted with a group specific food stamp participation rate. The
sample includes nonelderly singles and families from the PSID for interview years 1968-1978. The sample ends in 1978 due to the purchase
requirement being eliminated is as of 1979. All other control variables and sample selection correspond to specification (4) in Table 3. See the
notes to that table for more details. All outcome variables correspond to annual measures for the year prior to the interview and are expressed in
real 2005 dollars. Estimates are weighted using the PSID weight and clustered on county. Standard errors are in parentheses and ***, **, and *
indicate that the estimates are significant at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels.




                                                                       50
Table 11
Impact of Food Stamp Introduction on Labor Supply and Income

                                                           Head any             Head annual                          Log Family
                                                                    Head annual
                                                           work now              earnings                              income
                                                                       hours
                                                             (0/1)               (2005$)                              (2005$)

All Nonelderly Singles and Families
County FSP Implemented X                                     -0.179               -229               -4716               0.017
  Group participation rate                                  (0.074)*             (156)              (4848)              (0.092)
Number of Observations                                       48,168             48,168             48,168               48,168
R Squared                                                     0.22                0.30                0.39                0.51
Mean of dependent variable                                    0.86               1,947             $41,742               10.76
All Female Headed Families
County FSP Implemented                                        -0.066            -165.1                -842               -0.055
                                                             (0.043)           (69.3)**             (1001)              (0.040)
                                                             -0.182              -456                -2326               -0.152
Number of Observations                                         7,281             7,281               7,281                7,281
R Squared                                                      0.38              0.42                 0.49                0.50
Mean of dependent variable                                      0.58             1,068             $14,187                10.19

Nonwhite Female Headed Families
County FSP Implemented                                        -0.018             -136                -590                -0.023
                                                             (0.052)            (71.2)*             (946)               (0.052)
                                                             -0.033              -249               -1083                -0.042
Number of Observations                                         5,465             5,465              5,465                 5,465
R Squared                                                      0.33               0.39               0.40                 0.45
Mean of dependent variable                                      0.48              863              $10,008                9.94

Demographics                                                     X                 X                   X                    X
1960 County Variables * Linear Time                              X                 X                   X                    X
Year and County Fixed Effects                                    X                 X                   X                    X
Per Capita County Transfers                                      X                 X                   X                    X
State x Linear Time                                              X                 X                   X                    X
Notes: Each parameter is from a separate regression of the outcome variable on a dummy variable equal to 1 if the county-year observation had a
food stamp program in place by January of the year prior to the interview year. The policy variable is multiplied by a group specific food stamp
participation rate for the results in the first panel, for all nonelderly singles and families. The sample comes from the PSID for interview years
1968-1978. The sample ends in 1978 due to the purchase requirement being eliminated is as of 1979. All other control variables and sample
selection correspond to specification (4) in Tables 3-5. All outcome variables correspond to annual measures for the year prior to the interview
(except the first column which is at the time of the survey) and all dollar amounts are expressed in real 2005 dollars. Estimates are weighted using
the PSID weight and clustered on county. Standard errors are in parentheses and ***, **, and * indicate that the estimates are significant at the
1%, 5% and 10% levels.




                                                                        51
Table 12
Impact of Food Stamp Introduction on Labor Supply and Family Income
1960, 1970, 1980 Census STF Analysis


                                                               Labor Force Participation Rate

                                                         Females 16           Males 16        Females with Family Income <
                                                          and over            and over         children<6  $10,000 (1979$)


A. All Races
County FSP Implemented                                       -0.002             -0.003              0.004                  0.009
                                                            (0.001)           (0.001)**            (0.008)              (0.002)***
Number of Observations                                        7,898              7,898              7,898                  7,898
Mean of dep variable                                          0.396              0.762              0.337                  0.238

B. Nonwhites
County FSP Implemented                                       0.002              -0.004                n/a                  0.027
                                                            (0.004)            (0.003)                                  (0.006)***
Number of Observations                                       7,443               7,321                                     7,093
Mean of dep variable                                         0.457               0.703                                     0.455


1960 Cty Vars * decade fixed effects                            X                  X                  X                        X
Per capital county transfer payments                            X                  X                  X                        X
Decade fixed effects                                            X                  X                  X                        X
County fixed effects                                            X                  X                  X                        X

Notes: Each parameter is from a separate regression of the outcome variable on a dummy variable equal to 1 if the county-year observation had
a food stamp program in place in that year. Data is from 1960-1980 Census county level STF files. Counties in Alaska are dropped because of
missing data on food stamp program start date. 1960 county variables include log of population, percent of land in farming, percent of population
black, urban, age<5, age>65 and with income less than $3,000 each interacted with decade fixed effects. Per capita county transfer income comes
from the BEA REIS and includes measures for public assistance (AFDC, General Assistance), medical care (Medicare, Medicaid, military), and
retirement and disability benefits. Estimates are weighted using 1960 county population and are clustered on county. Standard errors are in
parentheses and ***, **, and * indicate that the estimates are significant at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels.




                                                                       52
Appendix Table 1
Descriptive Statistics for Analysis Using the 1960 City and County Data Book

                                           # nonmissing
                                                   obs.        Mean       Std Dev    Minimum      Maximum

All Races
LFPR Women 16+                                    7,898        0.396        0.114        0.051        0.798
LFPR Men 16+                                      7,898        0.762        0.058        0.202        0.975
LFPR Women with children<6                        7,898        0.337        0.341        0.000       31.329
Family Income<$10,000 (1979$)                     7,898        0.238        0.123        0.039        0.872
Year                                              7,898         1971            8         1960         1980
County FSP implemented                            7,898        0.556        0.497             0           1
County % black, 1960                              7,898        10.26        11.84             0        83.4
County % urban, 1960                              7,898        70.23        28.73             0         100
County % farmland, 1960                           7,898        44.42        29.66             0       239.8
County % ≤$3,000, 1960                            7,898        21.31        12.94           2.1          78
County % <5 years, 1960                           7,898        11.36         1.53          4.7         20.4
County %>65 years, 1960                           7,898         9.18         2.70             1        24.9
log(1960 county population)                       7,898        12.34         1.72         6.80        15.61
County per cap ret. and dis. payments             7,898        809.2        564.4           0.0     18421.5
County per cap medical payments                   7,898        164.2        149.2           0.0       833.2
County per cap cash PA payments                   7,898         74.6        100.2          0.0        519.4

Nonwhites
LFPR Women 16+                                    7,443        0.457        0.111            0            1
LFPR Men 16+                                      7,321        0.703        0.083            0            1
Family Income<$10,000 (1979$)                     7,093        0.455        0.186            0            1
Year                                              7,572         1972            8         1960         1980
County FSP implemented                            7,572        0.638        0.481            0            1
County % black, 1960                              7,572        19.98        15.43            0         83.4
County % urban, 1960                              7,572        75.31        29.53            0          100
County % farmland, 1960                           7,572        38.53        28.05            0        239.8
County % ≤$3,000, 1960                            7,572        24.61        15.47          2.1           78
County % <5 years, 1960                           7,572        11.46         1.63          4.7         20.4
County %>65 years, 1960                           7,572         8.60         2.37            1         24.9
log(1960 county population)                       7,572        12.73         1.82         6.82        15.61
County per cap ret. and dis. payments             7,572        824.9        482.7          0.0      18421.5
County per cap medical payments                   7,572        195.7        165.2          0.0        833.2
County per cap cash PA payments                   7,572        109.0        132.8          0.0        519.4

Notes: Data from 1960, 1970, and 1980 county level summary tape files. Counties in Alaska are dropped because of
missing data on food stamp program start date. All outcome variables refer to the prior calendar year. Statistics are
weighted using the 1960 county population.




                                                          53
Appendix Table 2: Descriptive Statistics for PSID Expenditure Analysis Sample
                                           All Nonelderly Singles and Families              Female Headed Households            Nonwhite Female Headed Households
                                        # nonmissing                                  # nonmissing                            # nonmissing
                                                obs.     Mean        Min       Max            obs.   Mean      Min     Max            obs.   Mean       Min      Max
FSP participation                            39,623      0.066           0        1         6,002    0.297         0      1         4,501    0.459          0       1
Real food at home                            39,623       6737           0   35347          6,002     5902         0 24131          4,501     5475          0  23462
log(real food at home)                       39,243       8.64       2.63     10.47         5,788     8.52     3.87   10.09         4,311      8.44     3.87    10.06
Any meals out                                39,623      0.766           0        1         6,002    0.560         0      1         4,501    0.412          0       1
Real all food                                39,623       8179      122.8    40200          6,002     7197      175  35378          4,501     7017     174.9   27782
log(real all food)                           39,623       8.86         4.8     10.6         6,002     8.75       5.2   10.5         4,501     8.71        5.2    10.2
Food at home / Income                        39,623      0.171           0    0.849         6,002    0.259         0  0.849         4,501    0.301          0   0.849
All food / Income                            39,623      0.179      0.003     3.620         6,002    0.287    0.009   2.140         4,501    0.351     0.009    2.140
Real family income                           39,623     59643         769 503346            6,002   32625       824 308554          4,501   24780        824 123162
Log(real family income)                      39,623      10.77       6.64     13.13         6,002    10.19     6.71   12.64         4,501      9.94     6.71    11.72
Year                                         39,623      73.78         69        78         6,002    73.94        69     78         4,501    73.96         69      78
County FSP implemented                       39,623      0.864           0        1         6,002    0.884         0      1         4,501    0.893          0       1
Urban county                                 39,623      0.605           0        1         6,002    0.650         0      1         4,501    0.705          0       1
Female headed household                      39,623      0.215           0        1         6,002        1         1      1         4,501         1         1       1
Education<12 years                           39,623      0.327           0        1         6,002    0.481         0      1         4,501    0.600          0       1
Education=12years                            39,623      0.361           0        1         6,002    0.380         0      1         4,501    0.311          0       1
Education>12 years                           39,623      0.312           0        1         6,002    0.140         0      1         4,501    0.089          0       1
White                                        39,623      0.856           0        1         6,002    0.635         0      1         4,501         0         0       0
Number of children                           39,623       1.27           0       13         6,002     2.12         1     11         4,501     2.54          1      11
Number of adults                             39,623       1.97           1       14         6,002     1.47         1      8         4,501     1.63          1       8
State unemployment rate                      39,623        6.19          2     12.5         6,002     6.33         2   12.5         4,501     6.32          2    12.5
County % black, 1960                         39,623       9.62           0     81.3         6,002    12.30         0   62.1         4,501    19.60        0.1    62.1
County % urban, 1960                         39,623      70.03           0      100         6,002    74.59         0    100         4,501    82.17          0     100
County % farmland, 1960                      39,623      44.89           0    239.8         6,002    41.78         0  126.6         4,501    36.51          0   116.2
County % ≤$3,000, 1960                       39,623      20.92        5.5      74.4         6,002    20.51      5.5      68         4,501    21.40        5.5      68
County % <5 years, 1960                      39,623      11.26        5.6      18.2         6,002    11.22      6.7    18.2         4,501    11.26        7.4    15.1
County %>65 years, 1960                      39,623       9.27           1     24.9         6,002     9.22      2.8    24.9         4,501     8.94       2.8     24.9
log(1960 county population)                  39,623      12.28       7.72     15.61         6,002    12.62     7.72   15.61         4,501    13.20      8.74    15.61
County per cap ret. and dis. payments        39,623      994.2      112.4 2969.3            6,002 1013.9      172.8 2609.4          4,501    986.8     220.2 2609.4
County per cap medical payments              39,623      226.6       35.0     690.8         6,002    237.3     37.0   686.7         4,501    252.7      65.6    686.7
County per cap cash PA payments              39,623      226.7        0.0 1086.8            6,002    272.2     15.6 1086.8          4,501    330.2      20.0 1086.8

Note: PSID interview years 1969-1972 and 1974-1978. No food data is available in 1973 and 1968 is dropped due to inconsistencies in variable definitions. Observations
from Alaska are dropped because of missing data on food stamp program start date and observations with unusual expenditure values are dropped (annual food
expenditures less than $100, annual family income less than $500, or income share on food greater than 0.85). All outcome variables correspond to annual measures taken
as of the interview (in spring of the interview year).



                                                                                      54
Appendix Table 3: Descriptive Statistics for PSID Labor Supply Analysis Sample
                                            All Nonelderly Singles and Families                Female Headed Households             Nonwhite Female Headed Households
                                         # nonmissing                                    # nonmissing                             # nonmissing
                                                  obs.    Mean        Min       Max              obs.   Mean      Min     Max             obs.   Mean       Min      Max
Real AFDC income                              44,098         339         0    51080            6,674     2703        0  39054           5,014     4498         0   39054
Real Soc security income                      40,299         650         0    43400            6,062     2184        0  41453           4,563     1699         0   41453
Real other welfare income                      40,299        153         0    40039            6,062       779       0  35122           4,563     1273         0   32099
Head work last week                           48,168      0.857          0          1          7,281    0.583        0        1         5,465    0.478         0         1
Head work last year                           48,168      0.926          0          1          7,281    0.707        0        1         5,465    0.615         0         1
Head annual hours                             48,168       1947          0      5824           7,281     1068        0    4628          5,465       863        0     4628
Head real annual earnings                     48,168     41742           0 503346              7,281   14187         0 117854           5,465   10008          0   75516
Real family income                            48,168     59228         748 503346              7,281   32683      824 308554            5,465   24901       824 130699
Log(real family income)                       48,168      10.76       6.62     13.13           7,281    10.19     6.71   12.64          5,465      9.94     6.71    11.78
Year                                          48,168      73.18         68        78           7,281    73.42       68      78          5,465    73.42        68        78
County FSP implemented                        48,168      0.824          0          1          7,281    0.856        0        1         5,465    0.867         0         1
Urban county                                  48,168      0.622          0          1          7,281    0.670        0        1         5,465    0.724         0         1
Female headed household                       48,168           0         0          1          7,281         1       1        1         5,465         1        1         1
Education<12 years                            48,168      0.335          0          1          7,281    0.482        0        1         5,465    0.609         0         1
Education=12years                             48,168      0.353          0          1          7,281    0.376        0        1         5,465    0.304         0         1
Education>12 years                            48,168      0.312          0          1          7,281    0.142        0        1         5,465    0.087         0         1
White                                         48,168      0.857          0          1          7,281    0.634        0        1         5,465    0.000         0         0
Number of children                            48,168        1.29         0        13           7,281     2.15        1      11          5,465      2.57        1        11
Number of adults                              48,168       1.98          1        14           7,281     1.48        1        8         5,465     1.62         1         8
State unemployment rate                       48,168        5.82         2       12.5          7,281      6.00       2     12.5         5,465      5.99        2      12.5
County % black, 1960                          48,168         9.7         0      81.3           7,281     12.4        0    62.1          5,465     19.7       0.1     62.1
County % urban, 1960                          48,168       70.2          0       100           7,281     75.0        0     100          5,465     82.0         0      100
County % farmland, 1960                       48,168       44.8          0     239.8           7,281     41.4        0   126.6          5,465     36.4         0    116.2
County % ≤$3,000, 1960                        48,168       20.9        5.5      74.4           7,281     20.5      5.5      68          5,465     21.5       5.5       68
County % <5 years, 1960                       48,168       11.2        5.6      18.2           7,281     11.2      6.7    18.2          5,465     11.3       7.4     15.1
County %>65 years, 1960                       48,168         9.3         1      24.9           7,281       9.2     2.8    24.9          5,465       9.0      2.8     24.9
log(1960 county population)                   48,168      12.29       7.72     15.61           7,281    12.65     7.72   15.61          5,465    13.19      8.74    15.61
County per cap ret. and dis. payments         48,168      983.0          0    23532            7,281 1025.1          0  23532           5,465    985.2         0     4539
County per cap medical payments               48,168      219.0          0      6647           7,281    236.2        0    6647          5,465    246.4         0     1282
County per cap cash PA payments               48,168      225.0          0    14071            7,281    283.9        0  14071           5,465    332.7         0     2714

Note: PSID interview years 1968-1978. Observations from Alaska are dropped because of missing data on food stamp program start date and observations with unusual
expenditure values are dropped (annual food expenditures less than $100, annual family income less than $500, or income share on food greater than 0.85). All outcome
variables (except head working last week) correspond to annual measures taken as of the interview (in spring of the interview year).




                                                                                    55
