                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE ORIGINS OF STATE CAPACITY:
                      PROPERTY RIGHTS, TAXATION, AND POLITICS

                                           Timothy Besley
                                           Torsten Persson

                                        Working Paper 13028
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13028


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2007




The authors are grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Oriana Bandiera, Steve Coate, Avner Grief, Patrick O'Brien,
Andrei Shleifer, Barry Weingast and seminar participants at Oxford and Stanford for useful comments
and discussions We also thank Mick Keen for providing us with with data, Dario Caldara for excellent
research assistance, and to the CIAR, the Swedish Research Council, the ESRC, and the Tore Browaldh
Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Timothy Besley and Torsten Persson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Origins of State Capacity: Property Rights, Taxation, and Politics
Timothy Besley and Torsten Persson
NBER Working Paper No. 13028
April 2007
JEL No. D70,E60,H10,K40,O10

                                             ABSTRACT

Economists generally assume the existence of sufficient institutions to sustain a market economy and
tax the citizens. However, this starting point cannot easily be taken for granted in many states, neither
in history nor in the developing world of today. This paper develops a framework where "policy choices",
regulation of markets and tax rates, are constrained by "economic institutions", which in turn reflect
past investments in legal and fiscal state capacity. We study the economic and political determinants
of these investments. The analysis shows that common interest public goods, such as fighting external
wars, as well as political stability and inclusive political institutions, are conducive to building state
capacity. Preliminary empirical evidence based on cross-country data find a number of correlations
consistent with the theory.

Timothy Besley
Department of Economics
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE ENGLAND
T.Besley@lse.ac.uk

Torsten Persson
Director, Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University
S-106 91 Stockholm
SWEDEN
and NBER
Torsten.Persson@iies.su.se
1     Introduction
Traditional economic theory presumes suﬃcient institutions to sustain a mar-
ket economy and tax citizens. The Arrow-Debreu model implicitly assumes
a government that flawlessly enforces contracts. Similarly, studies of opti-
mal taxation explicitly acknowledge informational constraints, but implicitly
assume a bureaucracy able and willing to enforce any tax policy respecting
those constraints. The same is true for positive analyses in political economics
of how the power to tax or regulate is chosen in a political equilibrium with
collective choice. However, such a starting point cannot be taken for granted
in many states around the world.
    The standard approach in economics contrasts with the perspective on
the origins of the state taken by historians, who see the evolution of state
capacity in taxation and market-supporting institutions as a central fact to
be explained. An intriguing argument by political historians (see, e.g., Tilly,
1990) holds that state capacity evolved historically over centuries in response
to the exigencies of war. War placed a premium on sources of taxation and
created incentives for governments to invest in institutions for the mainte-
nance of trade and property rights.1
    The historical link between the introduction/development of modern in-
come tax systems and the onset or risk of war provides an interesting back-
ground to our work. For example, Britain first introduced an income tax
in 1798 given the pressure on its public finances during the Napoleonic war,
and the USA first introduced a form of income taxation in 1861 during the
civil war and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) was founded at the same
time. Both countries significantly extended their income tax systems during
the first and second world wars; in Britain, e.g., the pay-as-you-earn method
of tax collection was introduced in 1944. In Sweden, a system of relatively
uniform permanent taxation of land and temporary taxation of wealth goes
back as far as the 13th century. Sweden first introduced a general income tax
in 1861 and an expanded progressive income tax in 1903, in both cases with
the motive to increase military expenditures. Our analysis suggests that the
significance of war in state capacity building comes from the fact that it is an
archetypical public good representing broadly common interests for citizens.
    The paper is also motivated from some empirical questions in develop-
   1
     O’Brien (2005) argues that British naval hegemony over nearly three hundred years
was rooted in the a superior power to raise taxes. Brewer (1989) and Hoﬀman and Rosen-
thal (1997) discuss the link between the development of taxation and political institutions.


                                             2
ment economics. Why are rich countries also high tax countries with good
enforcement of contracts and property rights? Why do parliamentary democ-
racies have better property rights protection and higher taxes than presiden-
tial democracies? Why is it so hard to find evidence in aggregate data that
high taxation is negatively related to growth, while there seems to be good
evidence that poor property rights protection is?
    Figure 1 illustrates the positive correlation between measures of the power
to tax and financial development, and between both of these and income per
capita. The share of government revenue raised from income taxes as a
share of GDP is graphed against the average private credit to GDP ratio
(both measured in 1995), for countries with below median income per capita
(marked with red dots) and above median income per capita (marked with
blue dots). We include a regression line to indicate that income taxes and
private credit are positive correlated. Poorer countries are scattered to the
south west in the graph, while the richer ones cluster in the north east. Our
theory will emphasize that nothing causal can be read into these correlation
patterns. However, the cross country correlations are hard to square with
simplistic notions that small government is a precondition for the emergence
of rich and developed nations, and rather suggest that higher taxation and
financial development have common underlying causes.
    In this paper, we build a model to better understand some of these theo-
retical, historical, and empirical issues. Of course, we cannot build a model
of everything, so we focus on two specific aspects of state capacity. In our
framework, regulation of market supporting measures and tax rates are en-
dogenous "policy choices". But these are constrained by the state’s legal
and fiscal capacity, "economic institutions" inherited from the past. Current
policy choices also reflect "political institutions" inherited from the past. We
then explore the relationships between taxes and property rights, redistrib-
ution vs. the provision of public goods, income levels, and political regimes.
Key to our model is to treat the state’s legal and fiscal capacity as ex ante
investments under uncertainty.2
    Beyond the theoretical, historical and empirical work discussed above,
our paper is related to several recent strands of literature. In particular,
a number of researchers have sought to explain the institutions supporting
   2
     The idea of studying dynamic investments in institutions which aﬀect subsequent
policy choices is similar in spirit to Lagunoﬀ (2001) and, more generally, to the literature
on strategic debt issue — see Persson and Svensson (1989).



                                             3
financial markets, such as shareholder protection, or the protection of pri-
vate property rights (see, e.g., La Porta et al, 1998, Rajan and Zingales,
2003, Acemoglu and Johnson, 2005, and Pagano and Volpin, 2005). Our
paper shares with this work the treatment of market supporting institutions
as endogenous. However, it diﬀers in two important respects. We analyze
market supporting institutions together with taxation, which allows us to
address the crucial question why a particular ruling group would not provide
maximum eﬃciency of markets and further its own selfish interests through
redistributive taxation.3 One of our key findings is that legal and fiscal ca-
pacity are complements, which has a number of interesting implications. A
second diﬀerence with the financial development literature is the distinction
we make between economic institutions and policy choices constrained by
these institutions. This distinction allows us to consider how factors such as
political instability, conflict and polarization shape institutions.
    As already mentioned, we build a simple two-period model where rulers
make policy decisions regarding the protection of property rights and the tax-
ation of income, given the constraints of past investments in legal and fiscal
capacity. Section 2 studies optimal private decisions in this model. Then, in
Section 3 we analyze optimal policy choices for given economic institutions,
whether these choices are made by a Utilitarian planner or a politically moti-
vated government. In Section 4 we analyze the optimal investments in legal
and fiscal capacity in a variety of political regimes. We derive a number
of comparative statics results on the economic and political determinants of
legal and fiscal capacity and spell out the implications for economic growth.
Section 5 considers four extensions, including the presence of quasi-rents tied
to market access for some agents, and purposeful accumulation of private
capital. Section 6 presents some empirical evidence consistent with the main
predictions of our model. Section 7 concludes.


2       Model and Optimal Private Choices
In this section, we set up our model and study equilibrium private behavior.
In subsequent sections, we turn to optimal policy choices for given economic
institutions, and go on to the equilibrium investments in legal and fiscal
    3
    Acemoglu (2006) considers the spillovers to regulatory policies of the state’s capacity
to tax, but treats the latter as exogenous.



                                            4
capacity. Our model has two main moving parts — trade in a private capital
market and taxing/spending by government.

Basics There are two periods s = 1, 2. Markets are open in both peri-
ods and consumers cannot save. In period 1, the government makes invest-
ments in institutions, assuming that the world ends in period 2. This simple
dynamic framework captures the essentials of a representative time period
within a fully specified dynamic model.
    There are two groups, J = A, B. Group membership is due to some
attribute that is observable by everybody, including the government. These
groups make up shares β A , β B of the population. For simplicity, we assume
that all agents within each group have the same wealth level, wJ .
    The preferences of all agents are linear in private consumption, as well as
in government spending (see below).

Production opportunities As well as diﬀering in their (observable) group
membership, individuals also have diﬀerent (privately observed) production
opportunities. Each person can engage in a project where the gross return
for individual I is rI,s ∈ {rL , rH } and rH > rL . (Alternatively, think about
the L types as having access to a simple storage technology with return rL ).
We denote the share of group J agents with high returns by σ J (the same
in each time period), with type H individuals in group J making up a share
β J σ J of the total population.

Borrowing, property rights protection, and legal capacity Entre-
preneurs can expand the size of projects by borrowing in a competitive capi-
tal market. To prevent default, a member of group J can in period s can put
up a share of her wealth wJ as collateral. While, contracts between borrow-
ers and lenders are upheld by the legal system, we assume that only a share
pJs ≤ 1 of collateral is "eﬀective", where pJs is an index for the enforcement
of property rights. Since lenders (and borrowers) have linear preferences, pJs
can be interpreted as the probability that a lender gains access to collateral
in case of default.4 As collateralized investment will earn no less than the
(gross) market return rs in period s, someone from group J can only borrow
as much as she will be expected to repay at rs .
   4
    Property rights here refer to protection against risk of expropriation by other private
agents, not expropriation by the government, which is ruled out by assumption.


                                            5
    We model pJs , J = A, B, as a policy choice by the government which is
made before private choices are made. We say that property-rights protection
is better for group J, when pJs is higher, as this allows more borrowing for
each piece of collateral. Property-rights protection can be diﬀerentiated by
observable group J, but not by unobservable type I. Allowing this to be group
specific reflects the possibility that resources put into contract enforcement
can depend on the sector or geographical location of economic activity. We
say that property rights are universal if pA        B
                                              s = ps , i.e., when everyone in the
economy has equal access to contract enforcement.
    The government’s ex post choice of how well to enforce property rights
is constrained by pJs ∈ [0, π s ], where the maximum protection level π s is
determined by past investments in "legal capacity". In concrete terms, this
reflects legal infrastructure such as building court systems, employing judges
and registering property. The initial stock is π 1 and the investment in period
1 is thus given by π 2 − π 1 . Because there is no depreciation of legal capacity,
we require π 2 −π 1 ≥ 0. The costs of such investments are given by L(π 2 −π1 ),
an increasing convex function with L (0) = 0 and Lπ (0) > 0.
    These investment costs could, for example, depend on the legal tradition
in the country of study. Because a higher value of π s allows for more extensive
financial contracts (more credit as a share of output), we can also think about
πs as closely related to an index of financial development.

Spending, taxes, and fiscal capacity The other current policy instru-
ment is taxation of the net (after lending or borrowing) output from invest-
ment projects. The government can only observe net output brought to the
market by a member of group J, not whether the output has been derived
from a high or low return project or through lending.5 Thus, tax rates in
period s can be made group specific, tJs , but not project specific. We will
say that the tax system is fair when both groups are taxed at the same rate:
tA     B
 s = ts . To allow for redistribution in the simplest possible way, we allow
tax rates to be negative.
    Taxation is constrained, because any individual can earn a fraction (1−τ s )
of her returns — either from projects or lending — in an informal sector where
he/she avoids taxation. This implies that the tax rates in period s must
satisfy tJs ≤ τ s (see Appendix). As with legal capacity, these non-taxable
   5
     This parallels the standard informational assumption made in the optimal income tax
literature.


                                           6
fractions are determined by investments. Let τ 1 be the initial (i.e., period
1) stock of "fiscal capacity" (a higher τ raises the feasible tax rate). As
legal capacity, fiscal capacity does not depreciate but can be augmented by
nonnegative investment in period 1, which costs F (τ 2 − τ 1 ). We assume
F (0) = 0 and Fτ (0) > 0. It is plausible to think that investments in fiscal
capacity become cheaper as an economy develops.
    Apart from the need to invest in legal and fiscal capacity and the possi-
bility to redistribute, there is an additional public-goods motive for raising
taxes. Public goods have a linear payoﬀ, αs Gs , common to all individuals.
We assume that αs has a distribution H of possible realizations on [0, X]
where X > 1. This shock is assumed to be iid over time. The realized value
of αs is known when taxes tJs are set in period s. But when investments in
fiscal capacity take place in period 1, the future value α2 is stochastic and
the investing government knows only its distribution. A first-order stochastic
dominating shift in this distribution represents greater perceived benefits of
public goods, e.g., due to a greater risk of war in future.

Capital market equilibrium Optimal individual choices (see Appendix)
imply horizontal demands for borrowing up to the point σ J β J pJs wJ by high-
return members of group J, i.e., these individuals put up all their wealth as
collateral and invest maximally. Conversely, individuals with low returns are
happy to lend at any market rate rs ≥ rL , implying a horizontal supplies of
lending up to the point (1 − σ J )β J wJ by low-return individuals in group J.
    We assume that the maximal supply of lending exceeds the maximal
demand for borrowing. This will be the case if the number of high-return
projects is relatively low. Then, in a competitive equilibrium, the interest
rate will be rL . If we make the "natural" assumption that lenders in each
group invest the same portion, ls , of their wealth, we can write the market-
clearing condition as:

   (σ A β A pA  A   B B B B               A  A A        B  B B
             s w + σ β ps w ) = ls ((1 − σ )β w + (1 − σ )β w ) .              (1)

Indirect Utilities Putting this together yields the following indirect utility
functions for individuals in group J depending on whether they have access
to a low or high return project. These are:
           J
          vH,s (tJs , pJs , Gs ) = αs Gs + (1 − tJs )(rH + pJs (rH − rL ))wJ   (2)


                                          7
and
                      J
                     vL,s (tJs , pJs , Gs ) = αs Gs + (1 − tJs )rL wJ .          (3)

Tax bases and government budget constraints As a preliminary, de-
fine per capita net output in each group:

                Y (pJs , σ J , wJ ) = {σ J (1 + pJs )(rH − rL ) + rL }wJ .       (4)

Notice that this function is increasing in pJs , because more property rights
protection for group J allows for more financial intermediation which raises
net output. It is also increasing in wJ and σ J since richer individuals can
aﬀord larger projects, and surpluses are generated only by agents with high
returns. Moreover, the derivative Yp (p, σ J , wJ ) = (rH −rL )σ J wJ is increasing
in wealth and the share of high-return agents, Ypw , Ypσ > 0, as both make
eﬃciency gains more important. Note also that Ypp = 0.
   The government budget constraints are
          X
              tJ1 β J Y (pJ1 , σ J , wJ ) = G1 + [L(π 2 − π 1 ) + F (τ 2 − τ 1 )] (5)
            J

in period 1, and            X
                                   tJ2 β J Y (pJ2 , σ J , wJ ) = G2              (6)
                              J

in period 2. The diﬀerent form of the constraints reflects the assumption that
there are no investments in period 2.

Government preferences and turnover In each period power is held by
a government, which (over)represents group A or group B. We parametrize
government preferences by the weights that they attach to the utility of each
group. Formally, let φJJ ≥ β J denote the weight that group J gives to itself
when holding political power, and φK   J ≤ β
                                             K
                                                the weight that group J gives
to group K 6= J. We normalize so that φJ + φK  J
                                                    J = 1. In this notation,
φJJ = β J represents the Utilitarian case. It is most convenient to work with
an “overweighting” parameter ρ = φ/β. For ease of exposition, we deal with
a symmetric case where:

                                  φA
                                   A   φB
                                        B       φB
                                                 A   φA
                                                      B
                         ρ=          =    ≥ ρ =    =    .
                                  βA   βB       βB   βA

                                               8
Each group thus attaches the same relative weight to its own group vs. the
other group. We use the binary indicator γ s ∈ {A, B} to denote the type
of government in period s, and the parameter γ J ∈ [0, 1] to denote the
(exogenously given) probability that the policy maker is of type J in each
period.
    Below, we shall interpret a larger diﬀerence (ρ− ρ) as representing a more
polarized society, resulting either from greater ethnic or linguistic fractional-
ization or from a less representative political system.6 We represent greater
political stability as increasing the value of γ J when group J is in power.

Timing The economy starts out with some fiscal and legal capacity, given
by history: {π1 , τ 1 }. The subsequent timing is as follows:
  1. Nature determines which private agents have first-period investment
     opportunities, the first-period value of public goods (military threat),
     α1 and first-period political control, γ 1 .
  2. The first-period government picks a policy vector comprising taxes,
     property-rights protection levels, government spending and investments
     in
     © Astate    capacity (economic institutions):   ª
             B A B
       t1 , t1 , p1 , p1 , G1 , π 2 − π 1 , τ 2 − τ 1 subject to the government budget
     constraint (5) and anticipating equilibrium private sector responses.
  3. Private agents pick their first-period projects, the capital market clears,
     and agents consume.
  4. Nature determines which private agents have second-period investment
     opportunities, the second-period value of public goods, α2 and second-
     period political control, γ 2 .
  5. The second-period government picks a policy vector comprising taxes,
     property-rights
     © A B A B protection   ª      levels, and government spending:
      t2 , t2 , p2 , p2 , G2 subject to the government budget constraint (6)
     and anticipating equilibrium private sector responses.
  6. Private agents pick their second-period projects, the capital market
     clears, and agents consume.
   At this point time ends. As we have already described private-sector
behavior, we can focus on government behavior in the following.
  6
      In a crude way, it can capture the idea of checks and balances on state power.

                                             9
3     Optimal Policy
We begin by studying the choice of taxes, property-rights enforcement, and
public spending in each period. Given the structure of our model, these
choices can be studied separably from the investment decisions in period 1.
    Let group J be in power and group K be out of¡ power.¢ Aggregate utility of
group J in period s can be written as β J [αs Gs + 1 − tJs Y (pJs , σ©J , wJ )], with       ª
an analogous expression or group K. Therefore, the policy vector tJs , tK         J    K
                                                                             s , ps , ps , G chosen
at stages (2) and (5) maximizes the objective:
             ¡       ¢                           ¡       ¢ K
   [αs Gs + ρ 1 − tJs β J Y (pJs , σ J , wJ ) + ρ 1 − tK       K    K     K
                                                       s β Y (ps , σ , w )] ,      (7)
for given αs subject to the government budget constraint, (5) or (6), and the
“institutional” constraints:
                     pJs ≤ π s , pK          J            K
                                  s ≤ π s , ts ≤ τ s and ts ≤ τ s .

Our first result is:
Proposition 1 (Diamond and Mirrlees) For s ∈ {1, 2} and any γ s ∈ {A, B} ,
αs ∈ [0, X], optimal property rights always fully utilize all legal capacity,
pJs = pK
       s = πs.

    The formal argument is straightforward. Intuitively, better property-
rights enforcement
        ¡ A B¢       raises both public and private goods, for any given tax
vector ts , ts . That legal capacity is always fully utilized ex post is essen-
tially an application of the famous Diamond and Mirrlees (1971) production
eﬃciency result. It serves as a useful benchmark. However, in Section 5
we discuss a set of conditions under which it fails to hold. As will be clear
already in Section 4, however, the eﬃcient use of legal capacity in each pe-
riod certainly does not imply that every economy and polity will have high
levels of property rights protection, as these depend directly on investments
in legal capacity.
    Optimal taxation is a little more complicated, as it depends on the re-
alizations of αs and γ s . The first result applies when public goods are less
valuable than transfers to the ruling group, and is described as follows.
Proposition 2 Suppose that αs < ρ and ρ > ρ. Then, for all J, K ∈
{A, B}, tK
         s = τ s for s ∈ {0, 1}. The first-period tax on the ruling group is

                   [L(π 2 − π 1 ) + F (τ 2 − τ 1 )] − τ 1 β K Y (π 1 , σ K , wK )
           tJ1 =                                                                  ,
                                      β J Y (π 1 , σ J , wJ )

                                              10
while the second-period tax on the ruling group is:

                                     −τ 2 β K Y (π2 , σ K , wK )
                             tJ2 =                               .
                                       β J Y (π2 , σ J , wJ )

Finally, public goods provision is set equal to zero, i.e., Gs = 0 for s ∈ {0, 1}.

    To derive this result formally, substitute the government budget con-
straints into the objective (7) and take the derivative with regard to each tax
rate. Because the resulting derivatives are constant, it is optimal to choose
the corner solutions described in Proposition 2.
    The result makes intuitive sense. As the ruling group values its own
welfare and $1 of public goods are less valuable than $1 of private income, it
finds it optimal to provide no public goods and set a maximal tax on the non-
ruling group to finance a transfer to itself. In period 1, this transfer is smaller
to the extent that public revenues are set aside for financing improvements
in state capacity. Note, that fiscal capacity is less than fully utilized in this
case.7
    Proposition 2 holds provided that ρ > ρ. In the Utilitarian case where
ρ = ρ, there is no gain from distributing from one group to another and no
need to set any taxes at all (although the levels described in Proposition 2
remain weakly optimal in this case).
    We now turn to the case where public goods are valuable, e.g., a “war
time” economy. Following the same steps as in the derivation of Proposi-
tion 2, we have:

Proposition 3 Suppose that αs ≥ ρ. Then for s ∈ {0, 1} taxable capacity
on both groups is fully utilized,

                                       tJs = tK
                                              s = τs ,

and public goods are provided as
         £                                                 ¤
 G1 = τ 1 β J Y (π 1 , σ J , wJ ) + β K Y (π 1 , σ K , wK ) − L(π 2 − π 1 ) + F (τ 2 − τ 1 )

and                      £                                                ¤
                 G2 = τ 2 β J Y (π2 , σ J , wJ ) + β K Y (π 2 , σ K , wK ) .
   7
    We are assuming that fiscal capacity does not aﬀect the size of the income transfer
that can be made to group J.

                                              11
    Here, taxes are used solely to finance public goods (there are no transfers
in either period), except that the period 1 government also needs to pay for
investments in state capacity (which implies less public goods provision).
    Together, Propositions 2 and 3 reveal exactly how political control
with ρ > ρ distorts policy outcomes, compared to a Utilitarian outcome. It
implies a taxation distortion, whereby one group always pays maximal taxes
to fund redistribution, whereas the Utilitarian criterion does not favor such
redistribution. It also implies a public goods distortion, whereby public goods
are not provided even though they are valuable according to the Utilitarian
criterion: αs ≥ 1. The size of this distortion depends on the size of ρ. If ρ
is very large, or public goods are not very valuable (war not very likely ) so
the distribution of α is skewed to the left, the state is used as an instrument
for redistribution rather than providing socially valuable public goods.
    Since institutions have been chosen prior to the realization of α, it is
useful to see the public goods distortion in an ex ante sense. Public goods
are not provided with probability H(ρ) compared to H (1) in the case of a
Utilitarian planner.


4     Optimal Investment in State Capacity
We now turn to the investments in legal and fiscal capacity in period 1.
To characterize the optimal investments, we need some further results and
notation.

4.1      Preliminaries
Assume that group J holds power in period 1. At this point it faces un-
certainty over the period 2 realization of α as well as government identity.
Drawing on the results in Propositions 1-3 and going through some alge-
bra, the Appendix shows that the expected payoﬀ to group J as a function
of the two forms of state capacity can be written:

W J (τ 2 , π 2 ) = ρβ J Y (π 2 , σ J , wJ ) + ρβ K Y (π2 , σ K , wK )                    (8)
                        © J                                                               ª
                   +τ 2 [λ2 − ρ]β J Y (π 2 , σ J , wJ ) + [λJ2 − ρ]β K Y (π 2 , σ K , wK ) ,

where:
                                                   £       ¡       ¢ ¤
           λJ2 = [1 − H (ρ)] E (α2 |α2 ≥ ρ) + H (ρ) γ J ρ + 1 − γ J ρ                   (9)

                                            12
is the expected (marginal) value of period-2 public funds to group J. Observe
that (one minus) the probability of turnover γ J only enters the payoﬀ function
of the ruling group through λJ2 .
    Using these results, we can state the optimal investment decision in state
capacity, as the maximization of:

                 W J (τ 2 , π 2 ) − λ (α1 ) [L(τ 2 − τ 1 ) + F (τ 2 − τ 1 )] ,

where λ (α1 ) = max{α1 , ρ} is the realized value of the cost of public funds in
period 1.
   The first-order conditions for investing in state capacity are:

            [ρJ + τ 2 (λJ2 − ρJ )] (rH − rL ) Ω 0 λ (α1 ) Lπ (π 2 − π 1 )
                                   c.s. π 2 − π 1 > 0                                 (10)

and
           £                            ¡                 ¢¤
(λJ2 − ρJ ) (1 + π 2 ) (rH − rL ) Ω + rL β J wJ + β K wK      0 λ (α1 ) Fτ (τ 2 − τ 1 )
                                               c.s. τ 2 − τ 1 > 0 ,              (11)
             £                       ¤
where Ω = σ A wA β A + σ B wB β B is total pledgeable wealth by agents with
                                                                      J J J
high-return projects, and where ρJ = ωJ ρ + ωK ρ, with ω J = σ wΩ β , J ∈
{A, B} , is a weighted sum of the two groups’ policy weights.8 Note that
ωJ and ω K reflect each groups economic power in terms of investment op-
portunities. Conditions (10) and (11) summarize all the forces that shape
investment in state capacity.
    Before exploring in detail the implications of (10) and (11) for observable
outcomes, observe that a necessary condition for group J to invest anything
in taxable capacity is:

λJ2 − ρJ = (1 − H (ρ)) E {α2 |α2 ≥ ρ} + H (ρ) [(γ J − ω J )ρ + (γ K − ωK )ρ] ≥ 0 .
                                                                              (12)
The first term in (12) is always positive, while the second could be positive
or negative depending on the distribution of economic power, as measured by
the ω 0 s, and political power, as measured by the γ’s. In the Utilitarian case
ρ = ρ, the second term of (12) is zero. This makes intuitive sense, because
   8
    This assumes that there is suﬃcient inherited fiscal capacity to fund these investments
at the desired level.


                                              13
(with linear utility) a Utilitarian decision-maker has no intrinsic demand for
redistribution and no need for fiscal capacity if there is no need for the public
good. It is then easy to see that if the expected demand for public goods is
suﬃciently high, both groups will demand a positive level of taxable capacity.
If the state is used mainly for distributive purposes, however, the incentives
to invest in fiscal capacity are weaker. The formula in (12) also shows that,
if economic power and political power are broadly similar, i.e., γ J ≈ ω J and
(1 − γ J ) = γ K ≈ ω K , it is likely that λJ2 − ρJ ≥ 0.
    If (12) holds for both groups J ∈ {A, B}, the left hand side of (10) is
increasing in τ 2 and the left hand side of (11) is increasing in π 2 . Then,
investments in legal and fiscal capacity are complements. As a result, the de-
mand for fiscal capacity — to finance redistribution or public goods — is greater
when the economy is more productive, as a given increment of taxation raises
more revenues. Equally, having larger fiscal capacity gives an extra incentive
to invest in legal capacity to support markets. This complementarity is of
genuine economic interest.
    Moreover, if (12) holds for J ∈ {A, B} this greatly simplifies the compar-
ative statics. Under complementarity, the payoﬀ functions are supermodular
and we can exploit results on monotone comparative statics: any factor that
raises the value of the left hand side of either (10) or (11) will raise invest-
ments in both forms of state capacity. From now on, we thus focus on the
case where λJ2 − ρJ ≥ 0 for both groups.

4.2     Determinants of State Capacity
What does the model say about investment in economic institutions? We
first prove a set of results that hold under very general conditions and re-
gardless of which group is in power, exploiting the complementarity of invest-
ment decisions.9 Suppose that we write the objective function in “reduced
form” as f (τ 2 , π 2 ; m) for relevant “parameters” m and suppose that f (·) is
supermodular in (τ 2 , π2 ) . Then (τ 2 , π 2 ) is monotonically increasing in m if
∂ 2 f (·) /∂τ 2 ∂m ≥ 0 and ∂ 2 f (·) /∂π 2 ∂m ≥ 0. This is exactly the condition
that a change in a certain parameter raises the left hand side of (11) or (10).
     As a second step, we derive more specific results on how the distribution of
economic and political power aﬀect institution building. These latter results
  9
    See Theorems 5 and 6 in Milgrom and Shannon (1994). This result is originally due
to Topkis — and has been generalized in Milgrom and Shannon (1994) Theorem 4.



                                         14
require some regularity conditions. The first set of results refer to weak
inequalities and are strict only at an interior optimum of the investment
decisions.

Proposition 4 Countries with higher wealth, as measured by Ω, optimally
choose greater state capacity. Increasing the gains from trade in markets, as
measured by higher σ A , σ B ,or (rH − rL ) , also leads to greater investment in
both fiscal and legal capacity.

    This implies that richer countries will optimally choose to have greater
state capacity. The marginal benefit to investing in fiscal capacity
                                                                   ¡ J is  related ¢
to the size of national income, the term (1+π 2 ) (rH − rL ) Ω+rL β w + β K wK
                                                                        J

in (11). And, the marginal benefit of investing in legal capacity is propor-
tional to the marginal benefit of better property rights, the term (rH − rL ) Ω
in (10). Note that Proposition 4 applies, even if higher wealth or better
trading opportunities accrue exclusively to the group that is not in power.
This is because taxes finance public goods and this creates a common interest
in investing even if ρ = 0.
    The results in Proposition 4 are consistent with the observation in Fig-
ure 1 that the size of the public sector, as well as measures of the protection of
property rights are positively correlated with income both across and within
countries. They are also consistent with the argument by Rajan and Zin-
gales (2003) that financial development is positively correlated with openness
to international trade, because the latter expands the returns to reallocating
capital. These authors present historical evidence that financial development
and openness have co-varied, both being high in the period before WWI, low
in the interwar period and immediately after WWII, and then higher again
in the last 30-40 years.10 We return to the relationship between financial
development and income (growth) in Sections 4.3 and 5.4 below.
    We next explore how demand for public goods aﬀects the incentive to
invest.

Proposition 5 A higher expected demand for public goods, a first order sto-
chastically dominating shift in α, raises λJ2 and thereby investment in state
capacity. Investments in fiscal and legal capacity are decreasing in λ (α1 ).
  10
    The informal theoretical discussion by Rajan and Zingales emphasizes the rent-
protection incentives of incumbents, which do not appear in our basic model, but a similar
point arises in Section 5.3 below.


                                           15
    The first result can be interpreted as a version of Tilly’s (1990) hypothesis
on the importance of war in building state capacity. However, it clearly
applies more widely to any public goods that are national in character. If
the demand for such goods is expected to be high, there is a large incentive to
invest in state capacity as these are common interest investments. But such
investments have to be financed. This eﬀect is represented in the parameter
λ (α1 ). When the period 1 demand for public goods is great, public funds are
at a premium and investments lower. The greatest incentive to invest arises
when λ (α1 ) = ρ, i.e., when period 1 taxes are used for redistribution.
    The next results concern the impact of political turnover.

Proposition 6 An increase in political stability, represented by an increase
in γ J , raises λJ2 and thereby investment in state capacity.

   To see this, observe that

                          ∂λJ2        ¡     ¢
                             J
                               = H (ρ) ρ − ρ ≥ 0 ,
                          ∂γ
i.e., a higher probability of group J remaining in power (lower turnover)
raises the group’s expected value of public funds in future. Intuitively, the
risk is smaller that the investing group J will see group K use the state for
redistributive purposes against group J’s interest in the future. This eﬀect is
also lower if ρ − ρ is close to zero. As mentioned before, we can interpret the
relative weight that the political process places on the ruling group versus
the non-ruling group, i.e., ρ̄ − ρ, as reflecting either a less representative
political system oﬀering less minority protection, or a high degree of ethnic
or linguistic conflict.
     A testable prediction is thus that we should observe less developed eco-
nomic institutions in politically unstable countries, and that the negative
eﬀect should be particularly large in less representative or conflict-ridden po-
litical systems. Alesina, Baqir, and Easterly (1999) have emphasized how
ethnically divided communities spend less on public goods. This property is
clearly true in our model, as the probability of no public-goods provision is
given by H (ρ) . But what we say here is that such divisions interact with po-
litical instability to curtail investments in legal and fiscal capacity. We know
of no empirical study of these issues.
     A good illustrative historical case study for how political stability can
shape investment in state capacity comes from England after the Glorious

                                       16
Revolution in 1688. This lead to the political dominance of the Whigs until
the revival of the Tories under George III. It was also a period in which
there was considerable investment in state capacity by a dominant elite.
    In addition to this interaction eﬀect, we are interested in the direct eﬀect
of higher polarization. To ¡get at this,
                                     ¢ consider the eﬀect of rasing ρ, subject to
                      J            J
the constraint that β ρ+ 1 − β ρ = 1. In general, this eﬀect is quite com-
plicated, interacting with the distribution of political power as represented
by γ J and economic power as represented by ωJ . We can neutralize these
eﬀects by supposing that β J = ω J = γ J . While the assumption γ J = β J says
that political power is allocated (probabilistically) in proportion to popula-
tion size, β J = ω J implies that σ J wJ is the same in both groups, i.e., they
have the same opportunities to invest.
    We refer to this comparative static as an institutionalized polarization
result, as we have in mind a measure of consensual political arrangements.
For this case, we have:

Proposition 7 If β J = ωJ = γ J , a decrease in institutionalized polarization,
as measured by ρ − ρ, raises investment in both fiscal and legal capacity.

     The key to this result is that the assumption β J = ω J = γ J eliminates
¡the eﬀect
                                 J
          ¢ of polarization on ρ . If we assume that    β JR = γ J and use β J ρ +
        J                                             J      X
  1 − β ρ = 1 to substitute out ρ, then we get λ2 = ρ α2 dH (α) + H (ρ) ,
 which is independent of J. The eﬀect of an increase in ρ on λJ2 is then given
 by:
                            ∂λJ2
                                  = h (ρ) [1 − ρ] < 0 .
                             ∂ρ
Intuitively, increasing polarization makes the outcome under redistributive
policy look worse for the investing group.
     A long tradition in political science, e.g., Lijphart (1999) considers pro-
portional electoral systems more consensual than majoritarian systems, while
Persson, Roland and Tabellini (2000) argue that parliamentary democra-
cies are more representative than presidential democracies. Proposition 7
suggests that we should see more investment in legal and fiscal capacity in
such democracies, which appears consistent with the findings in Persson and
Tabellini (2004) that parliamentary and proportional democracies have much
higher government spending. The comparative static in Proposition 7 also
captures the idea that states with greater checks and balances are likely to


                                       17
have more state capacity. This parallels the argument of Schultz and Wein-
gast (2003) who suggests that greater checks and balances in British political
arrangements facilitated revenue raising leading to triumph over the French
in the Napoleonic wars.
    Finally, we would like to say something specific the distribution of eco-
nomic power and investments in state capacity. To do this, we simplify the
model and set rL = 0. We then look at the eﬀect of a higher share of wealth
in the hands of group J, i.e., an increase in ω J . With a few additional
regulatory conditions, we obtain:

Proposition 8 Under Assumption 1 (see the Appendix), an increase in the
economic power of the ruling group, i.e., an increase in ωJ , increases invest-
ment in legal capacity and reduces investment in fiscal capacity.

    Proof: see the Appendix.
    The argument is straightforward to see. An increase in ωJ raises ρJ which,
in turn, raises the marginal return to legal capacity but reduces the marginal
return to fiscal capacity. Under Assumption 1, the comparative statics go in
the expected direction, i.e. according to the change in the marginal benefits
of the two types of state capacity.
    Proposition 8 speaks to the wealth distribution between the groups in
and out of power. It suggests that, ceteris paribus, a more unequal income
distribution raises investments in legal capacity and cuts investments in fiscal
capacity if the rich has a hold on political power, whereas the eﬀect goes the
other way if the poor has political power. Because the eﬀect of ω J on ρJ is
larger, the higher is ρ this eﬀect should be most pronounced in autocracies. In
other words, the model predicts the protection of property rights to improve
(deteriorate) and taxation to fall (rise) as income inequality becomes more
pronounced in autocracies ruled by rich elites (poor masses).
    Altogether, Propositions 4-8 give a fairly complete understanding of
the forces that shape the incentives to invest in state capacity.

4.3    Implications for Economic Growth
The simple structure of the model allows us to develop implications for eco-
nomic growth. The latter can be defined as the proportional increase in
national income from period 1 to period 2. Using the definition of per capita



                                      18
(group) outputs in (4) and the results in Proposition 1, a little algebra es-
tablishes:
              Y2 − Y1           (π 2 − π 1 )(rH − rL )Ω
                      =                              P       .
                 Y1      (1 + π1 )(rH − rL )Ω + rL J β J wJ
This shows that the growth rate is directly proportional to the investments
in legal capacity. Since there is no private accumulation, this achieved solely
by facilitating gains from trade — achieving higher TFP. Thus, there are
strong reasons to see a positive correlation between improvements of market-
supporting economic institutions and income growth.
    Legal capacity in our model is closely related to financial development
due to the amount of private credit being proportional to π. Many empirical
studies have measured financial development precisely in this way and found
it to be positively correlated with growth of GDP per capita. According to
our model financial deepening can indeed cause growth. But the relation can
easily go the other way. As we have seen in Proposition 4, higher income
generally raises the incentives to invest in legal capacity leading to financial
deepening.
    In terms of fiscal institutions and growth, the complementarity between
fiscal and legal capacity delivers clear cut results. If higher legal capacity is
driven by any of the determinants emphasized in Propositions 4-7, we expect
it go hand-in-hand with higher fiscal capacity. Variation in these forces would
lead us to observe a positive correlation between higher taxes and higher
growth. On the other hand, higher legal capacity driven by a more unequal
income distribution, as in Proposition 8, would induce a negative correlation
between taxes and growth.
    These observations are interesting given the findings in the macro liter-
ature on growth and development. Many researchers have found a positive
correlation between measures of property rights protection or financial devel-
opment and economic growth (see e.g., King and Levine, 1993 and Hall and
Jones, 1999 and a number of subsequent papers). The discussion above cau-
tions us that such correlations may indeed reflect a two-way relationship. On
the other hand, those expecting to find a negative relation between taxes and
growth have basically come up empty-handed (see e.g., the overview in Ben-
abou, 1997). As simple as it is, our model suggest a possible reason for these
findings, namely the basic complementarity between the two components of
state capacity.



                                       19
5     Extensions
5.1    Over-investment in Long-run Capacity
We
¡ J now¢ discuss the long-run outcome after many alternations in power
 γ < 1 and many diﬀerent realizations of α. This outcome can be stud-
ied formally by extending the two period model to an infinite time horizon
and studying the Markov perfect equilibria of the ensuing game. The results
in Sections 3 and 4 would then be relevant to the transitional dynamics to the
steady state. Developing this analysis in detail would require a considerable
investment in further notation. Instead, we take a shortcut by characterizing
the level of fiscal and legal capacity {π ∗J , τ ∗J } at which neither group would
wish to make a further investment in state capacity. We would expect the
economy to converge to this outcome, because at capacity levels below these
at least one group would wish to make further investments in state capacity.
    Let {π ∗J , τ ∗J } be defined by:
                       ¡ J      £        ¤¢
                        ρ + τ ∗J λJ2 − ρJ (rH − rL ) Ω = ρLτ (0)              (13)

and
   £ J     ¤£                            ¡               ¢¤
    λ2 − ρJ [1 + π ∗J ] (rH − rL ) Ω + rL β J wJ + β K wK = ρFπ (0) .        (14)

By multiplying the costs by ρ̄, we are eﬀectively assuming that the marginal
cost of investing in state capacity is low. These could be thought of as “peace
time” investments in state capacity.
   There are two possible cases. In the first one group prefers more fiscal
and the other group more legal capacity. To see when this is true, observe
that:
    £ J       ¤ £            ¤ £¡         ¡       ¢¢ ¡         ¢¤ £       ¤
      λ2 − ρJ − λK   2 −ρ
                           K
                              = H (ρ̄) 2γ J − 1 − 2ω J − 1 · ρ − ρ

and                             ¡       ¢ £     ¤
                       ρJ − ρK = 2ωJ − 1 · ρ − ρ .
These conditions are more likely fulfilled when γ J ' 12 and political control
fluctuates evenly between the groups, and/or when H(ρ) ' 0 so that provi-
sion of public goods is very likely. In this case, the distribution of investment
demands will determine which group prefers more fiscal and which more legal
capacity.

                                       20
                            ¡       ¢
     Suppose that H (ρ) 2γ J − 1 ' 0 and ωA > 1/2. Then π ∗A > π ∗B and
τ ∗A < τ ∗B . In this case, we expect state capacity to evolve such that group A
eventually gets its preferred level of legal capacity and group B its preferred
level of fiscal capacity. However, long-run state capacity then becomes too
high in a well-defined sense. Since investments in state capacity are strategic
complements in this setting, both groups would prefer lower levels of both
fiscal and legal capacity. This result suggests that in the long-run states may
become “too powerful” in the sense that each group would prefer some aspect
of state capacity to be weaker.11
     The second case is that where ¡ one  group
                                             ¢ prefers
                                                   ¡ J more ¢ fiscal and legal ca-
                                       J
pacity. This occurs when H (ρ) 2γ − 1 and 2ω − 1 have the same sign
and the former expression is larger in absolute terms. Intuitively, one group
has dominance in both wealth and political power. In this case, long-run state
capacity will be determined by the preferences of the political/economic elite
even if, along the way, non-elite groups occasionally hold power.

5.2     Pure Distribution
So far, we have considered the case λJ > ρJ . This can be true for both groups
only when there is suﬃcient demand for common-interest public goods. We
now focus on what happens when X < ρ. In this case we have:
                                  ¡         ¢¡      ¢
                       λJ2 − ρJ = γ J − ω J ρ − ρ .

an expression that can be positive for at most one group. Hence, investment
in fiscal and legal capacity are no longer complements. In particular, the
group whose political power is lower than its economic power, γ J < ω J , will
not wish to invest in fiscal capacity at all because taxation only redistributes
and on average this benefits group K at group J’s expense. Past investments
in fiscal capacity, this will tend to lower investments in legal capacity, because
the benefits of legal capacity also tend to accrue to group K. State capacity
will thus develop in a lop-sided way, since only the "left-wing" group whose
political power exceeds its economic power will invest in the state. This
  11
     In cases where fiscal and legal capacity can depreciate, this would lead us to expect
that diﬀerent types of government would favor either market development (through legal
capacity) or greater taxation (through fiscal capacity). This parallels the shades of polit-
ical opinion that characterize the main political forces apparent in advanced democracies.




                                            21
further illustrates why a high demand for common public goods will boost
the development of state capacity.

5.3     Labor Markets and Quasi-Rents
Proposition 1 showed that it is always optimal to fully utilize legal capacity
— doing so is Pareto superior. In this section, we show that pecuniary exter-
nalities — factor-price eﬀects in the language of Acemoglu (2006) — may lead
to one group being excluded from fully utilizing available legal capacity. We
show that this is more likely to happen when political institutions are po-
larized and when taxable capacity is low. The latter may appear somewhat
surprising at first glance, but is really a further application of Diamond and
Mirrlees (1971)’s insights.12 If there are suﬃcient powers to tax, then it is
optimal to maximize national income and to use the tax system to redistrib-
ute it. Using the access to the legal system as a form of redistribution is
generally dominated by taxation. This gives another reason why an eﬀective
tax system can lead to an increase in national income.
    To capture these ideas in the simplest possible way, we keep the basic
set-up from above, but add a labor market. This will be a source of quasi-
rents since a group with greater productive capital may prefer to have lower
wages. Lower wages, in turn, may be achieved by denying the other group
full access to the legal system.
    Suppose now that rL = 0. A fraction σ J of each group has the oppor-
tunity to develop a project using labor, J , and capital, kJ ,using ¡ ¢ a con-
stant returns to scale production technology, written as J Z K J .where
η (x) = − ZZxxx(x)x
               (x) ¡
                     ∈ [0, 1] , and K J denotes the group J capital-labor ra-
                            ¢                 ¡      ¢               ¡     ¢
tio kJ / J = wJ 1 + pJ / J .13         Let K pA , pB = [β A σ A wA 1 + pA +
          ¡        ¢                                                     ¡     ¢
β B σ B wB 1 + pB ]/ be the aggregate capital-labor ratio, where = β A 1 − σ A +
    ¡        ¢
β B 1 − σ B is aggregate supply of labor. Agents who do not develop projects
become laborers and each individual is endowed with one unit of labor, which
  12
     In this section, the introduction of a labor market introduces untaxed quasi-rents.
This is analogous to what happens when there is decreasing returns in the original
Diamond-Mirrlees model and no taxation of pure profits.
  13
     The assumption on η (x) always holds for a Cobb-Douglas production function and
also for a CES function:                             1
                                     [ζxχ + (1 − ζ)] χ
provided that χ ∈ [0, 1].


                                          22
she supplies inelastically.
   It is straightforward to see that equilibrium labor demand, ˆJ , by a type
J entrepreneur satisfies:
                            ¡ ¢       ¡ ¢
                         Z K J − Zx K J K J = W ,

where W is the economy wide wage rate.
                                     ¡ A There
                                             ¢ is a common labor market
                                           B
where the equilibrium wage rate is Ŵ p , p . This implies
        ¡ ¡        ¢¢     ¡ ¡       ¢¢ ¡      ¢    ¡       ¢
       Z K pA , pB    − Zx K pA , pB K pA , pB = Ŵ pA , pB .

Observe that:

 ∂ Ŵ     ¡ ¡ A B ¢¢ ¡ ¡ A B ¢¢ β J σ J wJ
      = Zx K p , p  · η K p ,p             > 0 where J ∈ {A, B} .
 ∂pJ
This expression just formalizes an intuitive fact: the wage rate is higher when
more capital is productively employed in the economy.
    Finally, we derive the per capita income of a “representative member” of
group J, when the level of legal enforcement is pJ for members of their own
group and pK for members of the other group:
       ¡       ¢ ¡        ¢ ¡         ¢       h     ¡ ¢       ¡        ¢ i
   Ŷ J pJ , pK = 1 − σ J Ŵ pJ , pK + σ J ˆJ Z K J − Ŵ pJ , pK ˆJ .

Clearly, group J’s income depend on group K’s property rights, pK , through
the endogenous wage rate. If group J has a net demand for labor, it prefers
a lower wage rate. This can be achieved if group K has less access to legal
services.
    This model can be used to illustrate when a conflict of interest in property-
rights enforcement can lead to under-exploited legal capacity. Intuitively, this
happens precisely when one group wishes to keep wages low. We now have:

Proposition 9 If ρ − ρ = 0 or τ = 1 legal capacity is always fully utilized.
For high enough σ J , there exists τ̂ (ρ) such that pK = 0 for all τ ≤ τ̂ (ρ)

   This proposition
               ¡      ¢carries two key insights. If there is no institutionalized
polarization, ( ρ̄ − ρ = 0) we are guaranteed full use of legal capacity ex
                                         ¡      ¢
post. But if political control matters ( ρ̄ − ρ > 0) and taxable capacity is
low, it becomes optimal for a ruling group to completely exclude the other

                                       23
group from use of the legal system. This reflects a pecuniary externality:
by granting full property rights, the ruling group shuts oﬀ a supply of cheap
labor. While not fully exploiting existing legal capacity is ex post Pareto
eﬃcient, given the available fiscal instruments, it leads to lower national
income. It is a violation of production eﬃciency.
   We can show that an analogous mechanism applies when we relax the
assumption in Section 2 that the supply of capital by agents with low re-
turns is always large enough to satisfy the demand from high-return groups.
When capital is scarce enough to invalidate this assumption, the ruling group
once again finds it optimal to deny the non-ruling group full property-rights
protection ex post, so as to ensure access to capital to its own group.

5.4    Endogenous Private Accumulation
We now demonstrate what happens when private accumulation is added to
the model. We show that building fiscal capacity has a “standard” negative
eﬀect on economic growth, while — perhaps less expectedly — building legal
capacity has an additional positive eﬀect on growth through its aﬀect on
accumulation.
    The simplest way to add private accumulation is to assume that it takes
place between stages 1 and 2 in the previous model. Individuals with a high-
return project at stage 1 now also have access to an increasing and concave
production technology in both time periods, which is given by:
                                J        J
                               yH,s = Z(kH,s ),

where η = − ZZxxx(x)x
                 (x)
                                     J
                      ∈ [0, 1], and kH,s = (1 + pJs )wsJ . Thus, having a high
return is now persistent at the individual level. We allow individuals in the
high-return group to set aside a portion of their wealth in period 1 to augment
their period 2 wealth. We assume that
                 J
                wH,1 6 wJ , and wH,2
                                 J
                                     = wJ + (wJ − wH,1
                                                   J
                                                       ).                 (15)

Hence, negative accumulation in period one is ruled out. To simplify the
notation, we set rL = 0.
    With this timing, government choices are exactly as described in Sec-
tions 3 and 4 above, since private choices have already been made at the
time when period 2 state capacity is chosen. High-return individuals make
their accumulation decisions under rational expectations about government

                                      24
                                                  ¡ ¢
choices, which they take as exogenous. Let E tJ2 be the expected period 2
taxes faced by a member of group J. Then the accumulation decisions of
high-return individuals solve the following problem
                   J
                                                                ¡           ¢
     MaxwH,2
           J  Z[(wH,1 (1 + π 1 )](1 − tJ1 ) + Z[wH,2
                                                 J
                                                     (1 + π 2 )] 1 − E(tJ2 ) ,

subject to (15).
   We are interested in how the solution depends on τ 2 and π 2 . The results
can be summarized in:
                                                        J
Proposition 10 Accumulation for both groups, wH,2         , J ∈ {A; B}, is increas-
ing in period 2 legal capacity π 2 , It is decreasing in period 2 fiscal capacity τ 2
as long as public goods are valuable enough.

    The first part says that investments in legal capacity unambiguously im-
prove private investment incentives, because future wealth can be “collater-
alized”, generating high investment returns.14 The second part is standard
eﬀect of taxation on incentives. This is relevant when public goods are valu-
able enough, since no group will then face a lower expected tax as fiscal
capacity expands, due to more redistribution.
    How do these results alter our previous conclusions about economic growth
in Section 4.3? Consider a first-order approximation to the economy’s growth
                                                J        J
rate around the point where π 2 = π 1 and wH,2     = wH,1    = wJ :
              P J J
  Y2 − Y1         β σ Zk [(1 + π1 )wJ ][wJ (π 2 − π 1 ) + (1 + π1 )2(wH,2
                                                                      J
                                                                          − wJ )]
           ' J
     Y1                                      Y1
                                                                              (16)
The first term in (16) represents the eﬀect of improved institutions on growth
for a given level of capital. The second term reflects the feedback of improve-
ments in state capacity on private accumulation decisions.
    Combining this expression together with Proposition 10 yields:

Corollary 11 Consider a change in the environment that raises investments
in state capacity {π 2 , τ 2 }. Compared to the economy without private accumu-
lation, we get an additional positive eﬀect on growth, via the positive eﬀect of
π2 on accumulation, and a negative eﬀect on growth, via the negative eﬀect
of τ 2 on accumulation.
  14
     The assumption η (x) ≤ 1, is needed to ensure that investment returns do not fall too
fast as capital applied in period two production increases.

                                           25
    This shows how fiscal capacity taken in isolation will generally have a neg-
ative aﬀect on growth, once we endogenize private accumulation of wealth.
However, the complementarity between fiscal and legal capacity still holds,
so we typically observe an expansion of fiscal capacity together with an ex-
pansion of legal capacity. With endogenous private accumulation, the latter
has an additional positive eﬀect on growth. Moreover, as we have discussed
in Section 4.3, higher growth implies a stronger incentive to invest in legal
capacity. A more full-fledged analysis would also consider how negative in-
centive eﬀects of tax capacity on private accumulation would feed back onto
the government’s investments in state capacity.15


6      A First Look at the Data
The model presented in this paper suggests that fiscal systems and market-
supporting legal institutions (particularly those that foster financial develop-
ment) should be considered as jointly endogenous to a large set of economic,
political and social variables. In this section, we take a preliminary look
at data on measures of financial development, contract enforcement and tax
structure. We explore the correlations between these outcome variables and
the determinants suggested by our model.
    The outcomes include three sets of independent variables. We hypothesize
that the historical incidence of war serves as a proxy for the past demand for
common public goods, G. Then, the model has the non-trivial implication
that this proxy should be correlated with both forms of state capacity today.
We use data from the Correlates of War data base to create a measure of how
large a share of the years between 1800 (or the independence year if later)
and 1975 that a country was involved in an external conflict.16
  15
     This analysis is related to Acemoglu (2005) which develops a model where a govern-
ment raises taxes to spend on a mixture of transfers to the ruler and productivity enhancing
public goods. Spending on public goods increases future tax revenues. Weak states where
rulers have short time horizons spend too little on productive public goods while strong
states where rules have too much security of tenure blunt accumulation incentives.
  16
     http://www.correlatesofwar.org/.
  The mean of this variable is 0.03 with a standard deviation of 0.73. The results in
Tables 1 and 2 are robust to looking at diﬀerent lags for this variable including using the
average years of war up to 1900. The results also hold up if we use a dummy variable
denoting whether a state has been involved in any external conflict before 1975 which
guards against the influence of outliers such as France and Britain.


                                            26
    We also consider some measures of political institutions. The theory
predicts that the inclusiveness of political institutions is one of the key factors
shaping investments in state capacity. As in the case of war, we should
thus consider the incidence of inclusive institutions in the past. Accordingly,
we measure the share of years from 1800 (or independence) to 1975 that a
country was democratic (as defined by a strictly positive value of the polity2
variable in the Polity IV data base).17 Given the discussion in Section 4 of
diﬀerences across democracies, we also measure the share of years the country
was a parliamentary democracy.
    Finally, our specification for each outcome variable includes a set of indi-
cators for legal origins, as in many recent studies of institutions. Our model
suggests a theoretical role for legal origins via the cost function L (·). If some
legal origins aﬀect the ease with which contracting can be done, we would
expect this to aﬀect investments in legal capacity. Perhaps less trivially, we
would also expect the same legal origins to aﬀect investments in tax systems
in the same direction through the basic complementarity between the two
forms of state capacity.
    Table 1 considers legal capacity, measured via financial development and
contract enforcement, as the dependent variable. The first column reports
results for a common measure of financial development in the literature be-
ginning with King and Levine (1993), namely the private credit to GDP
ratio. We take the average of this variable over all years from 1975 onwards.
As all other outcome variables in Tables 1 and 2, this measure is scaled to lie
between 0 and 1, with higher values indicating higher state capacity. To rule
out that results are driven by systematic diﬀerences across geography, we
always include a set of regional fixed eﬀects (eight regions) on the right hand
side of the regression. An increase in the proportion of years up to 1975 that
a country has been in an external conflict is strongly positively correlated
with this measure of financial development. However, democracy does not
seem to matter in a significant way. German and Scandinavian legal origins
are positively correlated with private credit, but English and Socialist legal
origin are not (French legal origin is the excluded category).
    Column (2) looks at the country’s rank in terms of access to credit, using
the indicators from the World Bank’s Doing Business web site.18 Again, our
  17
   http://www.cidcm.umd.edu/polity/.
  18
   http://www.doingbusiness.org/ The overall ranking is put together from four sub-
components: (i) a Legal Rights Index, which measures the degree to which collateral and
bankruptcy laws facilitate lending, (ii) a Credit Information Index, which measures rules


                                           27
incidence-of-war variable is positively correlated with legal capacity. Parlia-
mentary democracy is also significantly correlated with higher legal capacity
according to this measure (the sum of the two democracy variables is sig-
nificantly diﬀerent from zero). As in column (1), German and Scandinavian
legal origin are positively correlated with the outcome. Column (3) also uses
a variable from the Doing Business indicators this time the country’s rank
in terms of investor protection.19 The findings are consistent with those in
column (2).
    Finally, we use a perceptions index of government anti-diversion policies
from the International Country Risk Guide (ICRG), which itself is the sum
of five diﬀerent indexes, including contract enforcement and the rule of law.
This index has been extensively used in the macro development literature
(e.g., Hall and Jones, 1999, Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2001), as a
measure of the protection of property rights. We take the average of this
index from the early 1980s to the late 1990s. Even though the source of this
variable is quite diﬀerent from the others, it tells the same story in terms of
war experience, parliamentary democracy and German and Scandinavian le-
gal origins. To summarize, the patterns in the data appear entirely consistent
with the determinants of contract enforcement and financial development
suggested by the model.20
    How does the fiscal capacity side of the story hold up? Fiscal capacity
is more diﬃcult to measure in terms of realized outcomes, since the model
predicts that such capacity may not always be fully utilized. What matters
are the past investments that make it possible to raise taxes. Governments in
aﬀecting the scope, access, and quality of credit information, (iii) public credit registry
coverage, and (iv) private credit bureau coverage. See Djankov, McLeish and Shelifer
(2006) for further details.
   19
      http://www.doingbusiness.org/
   This ranking is assembled from four underlying indexes: (i) transparency of transac-
tions (Extent of Disclosure Index) (ii) liability for self-dealing (Extent of Director Lia-
bility Index) (iii) shareholders’ ability to sue oﬃcers and directors for misconduct (Ease
of Shareholder Suit Index) (iv) strength of Investor Protection Index (the average of the
three index). See Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (2006) for details.
   20
      These findings are also consistent with wars directly stimulating financial systems
through issuance of public debt. Of course, this is not inconsistent with our general argu-
ment and ideas. Indeed, it reinforces the general complementarities that we are pointing
out. However, it is another channel for war to have an impact on financial development.
That being said, introducing more public debt would not necessarily lead to better private
contract enforcement and private credit (in theory) except as an unintended consequence
of public sector financial development.


                                            28
countries with little fiscal capacity tend to use border taxes, such as tariﬀs, as
the basis of their tax systems. They also tend to require less institutionalized
structures of compliance compared to income taxation.
    In Column (1) of Table 2, we use one minus the share of revenue from
trade taxes as a first measure of fiscal capacity. This measure is based on IMF
data and is expressed as an average from 1975 and onwards.21 As predicted
by the model, countries with a history of war are less reliant on trade taxes.
German and Scandinavian legal origins are also correlated with greater fiscal
capacity measured in this way. In column (2), we add in indirect taxation and
find similar results, except that a high incidence of parliamentary democracy
now also has the expected positive correlation.
    In column (3), we proxy the level of fiscal capacity by having an extensive
income tax systems, using the income tax to GDP ratio as our outcome mea-
sure. Again, we find past wars, past parliamentary democracy and German
and Scandinavian legal origin to correlate with high fiscal capacity. Column
(4) looks at overall taxes raised as a share of GDP. This outcome shows a
similar pattern to the share of income taxes in GDP.
    Putting the results in Tables 1 and 2 together, the historical incidence
of war, the historical incidence of parliamentary democracy, and German
and Scandinavian legal origins emerge as remarkably stable predictors of
both legal and fiscal capacity. This is entirely in line with the predictions
of our model, where both forms of state capacity have common origins in
political institutions, the need to finance common interest public goods, and
factors that shape the cost of investments. It is also worth noting that if
we run regressions of the same kind as those reported in Tables 1 and 2,
but with income per capita as the dependent variable, we obtain exactly the
same patterns of sign and significance. While this preliminary exercise is
suggestive, much remains to be done before we can claim to have identified
causal eﬀects in line with the predictions of our theory.


7      Concluding Comments
The historical experience of today’s rich nations hint that the creation of
state capacity to collect taxes and enforce contracts are key aspects of de-
  21
    We thank Mick Keen for making the data on the structure of taxation used in Baun-
sgaard and Keen (2005) available to us. Their paper documents the sources for these
variables.


                                         29
velopment. Equally, the fortunes of many of today’s poor countries indicate
that state capacity cannot be taken for granted. This paper views invest-
ments in state capacity as purposive decisions reflecting circumstance and
institutional structure. Our analysis has highlighted the factors that shape
these decisions and a first inspection of the data suggests that the factors sug-
gested by the theory do indeed correlate in the predicted way with various
measures of legal and fiscal capacity. The theory brings together ideas from
economic history, finance, development economics and political economics.
    However, our paper takes only a first step in modeling the forces that
shape investments in state capacity. Much remains to be done. Since the
model uncovers clear links from political institutions to investments, it would
be interesting to explore endogenous political change (and the emergence of
democracy) in our framework. It is also clear that, even if war is an impor-
tant source of common interest public goods, it cannot be assumed to evolve
exogenously. Ideally, this would be explored in a model of multiple inter-
dependent governments. But even in the rudimentary form developed here,
our analysis oﬀers a new perspective on how institutions shape development
— the state capacities that we analyze are institutional features that typi-
cally evolve quite slowly. This may help to explain why historical patterns
of prosperity appear to be highly persistent.




                                       30
8     Appendix
Private optimal choices A borrower from group J can only borrow in
period s by putting up a share, cJs ≤ 1, of her wealth wJ as collateral.
Denoting the amount borrowed by bJs , incentive compatibility implies the
constraint (see further below):

                                      bJs ≤ pJs cJs wJ .                                 (17)

In addition to the notation in the text, let ls denote the amount of lending
provided by an individual, ks the amount invested in a project, ns the amount
withheld from taxation in the informal sector, and let ds ∈ {0, 1} be a binary
indicator for default on any amount borrowed. Since preferences are linear
in private consumption (net income), we can then write the utility of an
individual in group J and period s as

 vsJ = αs Gs +(1−tJs )(rI ksJ −rs bJs +rs lsJ )+(tJs −τ s )nJs +rs (bJs −pJs cJs wJ )dJs . (18)

The second term on the right-hand side is the net after-tax return from
projects cum capital markets transactions, the third is the return to conceal-
ing income from tax in the informal sector, and the fourth the net gain from
defaulting on borrowing.                  ¡                          ¢
    Consider an individual choosing ksJ , bJs , nJs , cJs , dJs , lsJ ≥ 0, in period s
subject to the wealth constraint, ksJ + lsJ ≤ wJ + bJs , the collateral constraint,
cJs ≤ 1, and the tax avoidance constraint, nJs ≤ wJ . It is immediate that any
individual with an investment opportunity would find it optimal to borrow
and invest a large amount, and then default on his debt, i.e., set dJs = 1, as
long as bJs > pJs cJs wJ . This formally motivates the upper bound on borrowing
in (??). Moreover, as long as taxes exceed the critical level tJs > τ s , it is
optimal to set nJs = wJ , i.e., put all projects in the informal sector. This
formally motivates the upper bound on the tax rate
    Imposing the no-tax-arbitrage and no-default constraints, the optimal
choices for individuals with diﬀerent rates of return are simple to characterize.
High-return individuals for whom rI ≥ rs find it optimal to put up all their
wealth as collateral, cJs = 1, invest a maximum amount ksJ = (1 + pJs )wJ ,
and borrow pJs wJ to enjoy the surplus of their project. Individuals with low
returns are happy to lend at any market rate rs ≥ rL that makes up for
their opportunity cost of foregone return. Putting this logic together yields
equations (2) and (3) in the text.

                                             31
Derivation of the investment objective Exploiting Propositions 1-3,
we can define in a straightforward way the payoﬀs to each group depending
on whether it has control over policy in period 2. If group J controls policy,
its utility is:
                                          ¡             ¢           ¡            ¢
           wJJ (α2 , τ 2 , π 2 ) = ρβ J Y π 2 , σ J , wJ + ρβ K Y π 2 , σ K , wK +       (19)
 ½                          ¡            ¢                   ¡              ¢
    τ 2 [(α2 − ρ) β J Y π 2 , σ J , wJ +    ¡ (α2 − ρ)β K ¢ Y π 2 , σ K , wK ] if α2 ≥ ρ
                         τ 2 (ρ − ρ)β K Y π 2 , σ K , wK if α2 < ρ .
Since this expression is increasing in both τ 2 and π 2 , the ruling group prefers
access to greater taxable and legal capacity, other things equal. The corre-
sponding payoﬀ to group J when the other group K controls policy, calcu-
lated by applying group J’s own welfare weights, is as follows:
                                         ¡              ¢           ¡              ¢
           wKJ
               (α2 , τ 2 , π2 ) = ρβ J Y π 2 , σ J , wJ + ρβ K Y π s , σ K , wK +         (20)
 ½                         ¡            ¢ ¡            ¢ K ¡                  ¢
    τ 2 [(α2 − ρ) β J Y π s , σ J , wJ +  ¡  α  2 −   ρ  β¢ Y π s , σ K
                                                                        , w K
                                                                               ] if α2 ≥ ρ
                         τ 2 (ρ − ρ)β J Y π s , σ K , wK if α2 < ρ .
These two expressions highlight a latent conflict of interest. When α2 ≥ ρ,
no such conflict exists and the groups in power and out of power both want
better state fiscal and legal capacity. When α2 < ρ, instead, the group out
of power is worse oﬀ when τ 2 is higher (cf. the negative term (ρ − ρ) in the
last term of (20)), because taxes are used to redistribute income away from
the non-ruling group towards the ruling group. While there is an obvious
conflict of interest over fiscal capacity in this case, both groups continue to
value improvements in legal capacity.
    Let’s assume that group J holds power in period 1. Define the expected
payoﬀ to this group with economic institutions (τ 2 , π2 ):
                            ©                     ª ¡       ¢ © J                  ª
    W J (τ 2 , π 2 ) = γ J E wJJ (α2 , τ 2 , π 2 ) + 1 − γ J E wK (α2 , τ 2 , π 2 ) .
 Using (19) and (20), it is straightforward to derive expected utility (over the
realization of α) as a function of τ 2 , π 2 to group J:
W J (τ 2 , π 2 ) = ρβ J Y (π 2 , σ J , wJ ) + ρβ K Y (π2 , σ K , wK )                   (21)
                        © J                                                               ª
                   +τ 2 [λ2 − ρ]β J Y (π 2 , σ J , wJ ) + [λJ2 − ρ]β K Y (π 2 , σ K , wK ) ,
where:
                                                   £       ¡       ¢ ¤
           λJ2 = [1 − H (ρ)] E (α2 |α2 ≥ ρ) + H (ρ) γ J ρ + 1 − γ J ρ                   (22)

                                             32
is the expected (marginal) value of period-2 public funds to group J. Observe
that (one minus) the probability of turnover γ J only enters the payoﬀ function
of the ruling group through λJ2 .

Proof of Proposition 8 In order to prove the proposition, we define:
                             Fτ τ (τ 2 − τ 1 )           Lππ (π 2 − π 1 )
                      ητ =                     and η π =                  .
                                    Fτ                        Lπ
Next, we state

                                              £            ¡            ¡   ¢¢¤
Assumption 1: For all (τ 2 − τ 1 ) ∈ 0, Fτ−1 2rH Ω 1 − ρJ
                                                            (τ 2 −τ 1 )
and (π 2 − π 1 ) ∈ [0, L−1π (ΩrH )], η τ > λ (X) 1−τ 1 −(τ 2 −τ 1 )
                                 ∙                                        ¸
                      (π 2 −π1 )       (1−τ 1 −(τ 2 −τ 1 ))(1−ρJ )
and η π > λ (X) 1+π1 +(π2 −π1 ) ρJ (1−τ 1 −(τ 2 −τ 1 ))+τ 1 +(τ 2 −τ 1 ) .



    Proof:       The Hessian to the system made up by (10) and (11) is:
                ∙                                      ¡ J    J
                                                                ¢ ¸
                          −Lππ¡         ¢ (rH − rL ) Ω  λ  − ρ
                                                                    .
                  (rH − rL ) Ω λJ2 − ρJ           −Fτ τ
For an optimum, we require that the determinant of this matrix be positive.
Using the first-order condition, this boils down to:
                                 "¡       ¢              #
                                        J
                                   1 − ρ    (τ 2 − τ 1 )     (π 2 − π1 )
            η π η τ − [λ (α1 )]2    J              J
                                                           ·             > 0.
                                   ρ + τ 2 (1 − ρ )           (1 + π 2 )

which is implied by Assumption 1. We now derive the comparative statics.
The simplest way to do so is by using Cramer’s rule, which implies:
                                   µ        h           i                             ¶
                                               (1+π 2 )           (1−τ 2 )(λJ 2 −ρ )
                                                                                  J
                            ΩrH −η π (π2 −π1 ) + λ (α1 ) ρJ +τ λJ −ρJ
d((τ 2 − τ 1 )                                                          2( 2        )
               =                              h                   h                   i               i ,
    dρJ          Fτ (τ 2 − τ 1 ) (τ 2 − τ 1 ) η π η τ − [λ (α1 )]2 (1−ρ
                                                                          J )(τ −τ )
                                                                                2   1
                                                                                        · (π 2 −π 1 )
                                                                     J
                                                                    ρ +τ 2 (1−ρ ) J        (1+π2 )

an expression which is negative if:
                                            ¡         ¢ ∙              ¸
                                  (1 − τ 2 ) λJ2 − ρJ     (π 2 − π 1 )
                   η π > λ (α1 ) · J        ¡        ¢ ·                 ,
                                  ρ + τ 2 λJ2 − ρJ         (1 + π 2 )

                                                 33
which is part two of Assumption 1. Now we have:

d(π 2 − π 1 )                    ΩrH ((1 − τ 2 ) η τ − λ (α1 ) (τ 2 − τ 1 ))
       J
              =                            h                    h                 i                  i ,
    dρ          Lπ (π 2 − π 1 ) (π2 − π 1 ) η π η τ − [λ (α1 )]2 (1−ρ
                                                                      J )(τ −τ )
                                                                            2  1
                                                                                    ·   (π2 −π 1 )
                                                                  ρJ +τ 2 (1−ρJ )        (1+π 2 )


which is positive if:
                                                (τ 2 − τ 1 )
                                  η τ > λ (X)                ,
                                                 (1 − τ 2 )
which is also part of Assumption 1. ¥
                                                       h        ¡       ¢i ¡ ¡ J K ¢¢
                                                          J ˆJ
                                                             J        J
Proof of Proposition 9 First observe that if σ > σ             − 1−σ        η K p ,p  >
                            J
                                            ¡ ¡ J K ¢¢
0 (which always holds as σ → 1, since η K p , p          < 1) then
                 h                     i
      ¡ J K¢ ⎡ ¡          J
                            ¢     J ˆJ
                                                           ⎤
    J
∂ Ŷ p , p          1 − σ     − σ         ¡ ¡       ¢¢          ¡ ¢
        J
             =⎣                          η K pJ , pK + σ J ⎦ Zx K J ·β J σ J wJ > 0.
      ∂p

and
      ¡     ¢   ⎡ h¡        ¢          i                ⎤
    J   J K         1 − σ J
                              − σ J ˆJ
                                           ¡  ¡       ¢¢     ¡ J¢ J J J
∂ Ŷ p , p
              = ⎣                        η  K  pJ
                                                  , pK ⎦
                                                          Zx  K · β σ w < 0.
      ∂pK

Thus there is a conflict of interest between creating property rights for the
ruling group and the non-ruling group.
    Suppose that α < ρ̄. Then the payoﬀ function of ruling group J is
                ¡       ¢           ¡       ¢   h        ¡       ¢¡     ¢i
      ρ̄β J Ŷ J pK , pJ + ρβ K Ŷ K pK , pJ + τ β K Ŷ K pK , pJ ρ̄ − ρ .

If either ρ̄ − ρ = 0 or τ = 1, this becomes:
                                  ¡       ¢          ¡       ¢
                          β J Ŷ J pK , pJ + β K Ŷ K pK , pJ .

Observe that:
        h       ¡       ¢          ¡        ¢i
      ∂ β J Ŷ J pK , pJ + β K Ŷ K pK , pJ                   ¡ ¢
                                                      = σ J Zx K J β J σ J wJ > 0
                            ∂pJ


                                             34
so fiscal capacity is always used maximally. Now suppose that ρ = 0 and
                                                     ¡       ¢
τ = 0, then the ruling party’s payoﬀ function is Ŷ J pK , pJ which is strictly
decreasing in pK . Thus, pK = 0. The result now follows by applying the
intermediate value theorem.
    Now turn to the case α ≥ ρ̄. In this case the payoﬀ function of the ruling
group J is
   J J
        ¡ K J¢       K K
                          ¡ K J¢ h              J J
                                                      ¡ K J¢ ¡         ¢ K ¡ K J¢ i
ρ̄β Ŷ p , p +ρβ Ŷ        p , p +τ (α − ρ̄) β Ŷ p , p + α − ρ Ŷ             p ,p .

Observe that in this case too, if τ = 1 or ρ̄ − ρ = 0 then this is proportional
to:                  h        ¡       ¢          ¡        ¢i
                      β J Ŷ J pK , pJ + β K Ŷ K pK , pJ
which again implies full legal¡ capacity
                                      ¢ is used. It is also the case that if
τ = 0 this payoﬀ is again Ŷ J pK , pJ and again the argument above applies.
¥

Proof of Proposition 10 Assume an interior solution to the accumulation
problem, defined by the first-order condition
                J
−(1 +π 1 )Zk [(wH,1 (1+π 1 )](1−tJ1 ) +(1+π 2 )Zk [(wH,2
                                                     J
                                                         (1+π 2 )](1 −E(tJ2 )) = 0 .

The comparative statics satisfy
                    J
                  dwH,2    Zk (·) [1 − η (·)] (1 − E(tJ2 ))
                        =−                                  >0
                   dπ 2                   ∆
and
                           J
                        dwH,2   Zk (·)(1 + π 2 ) dE(tJ2 )
                              =                           ,
                         dτ 2          ∆          dτ 2
                            J
where ∆ ≡ (1+π 1 )2 Zkk [(wH,1 (1+π 1 )](1−tJ1 )+(1+π 2 )2 Zkk [(wH,2
                                                                  J
                                                                      (1+π 2 )](1−
   J
E(t2 )) is negative by the concavity of Z. Because we have

                      dE(tJ2 )              J
                                              β −J σ −J yH,2
                                                          −J
                               = [1 − H(ρ)γ                  ],
                       dτ 2                    β J σ J yH,2
                                                        J


the second expression is negative provided that H(ρ) is small enough which
is equivalent to saying that the probability of providing public goods is high
enough. ¥

                                         35
References
 [1] Acemoglu, Daron, [2005], “Politics and Economics in Weak and Strong
     States,” Journal of Monetary Economics 52, 1199-1226.

 [2] Acemoglu, Daron, [2006], “Modeling Ineﬃcient Institutions”, in Blun-
     dell, Richard, Whitney Newey, and Torsten Persson (eds.), Advances in
     Economic Theory and Econometrics: Proceedings of the Nineth World
     Congress of the Econometric Society, Cambridge University Press.

 [3] Acemoglu, Daron and Simon Johnson, [2005], “Unbundling Institu-
     tions”, Journal of Political Economy 113, 949-95.

 [4] Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson, [2001], “The
     Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investiga-
     tion”, American Economic Review 91, 369-1401.

 [5] Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir, and William Easterly, [1999], “Public
     Goods and Ethnic Divisions”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 114,
     1243-84.

 [6] Baunsgaard, Thomas and Michael Keen, [2005], “Tax Revenue and (or?)
     Trade Liberalization”, typescript, IMF.

 [7] Benabou, Roland, [1997], “Inequality and Growth”, NBER Macroeco-
     nomics Annual 1996, MIT Press.

 [8] Brewer, John, [1989], The Sinews of Power: War, Money and the Eng-
     lish State, 1688-1783, New York: Knopf.

 [9] Diamond, Peter and James Mirrlees, [1971], “Optimal Taxation and
     Public Production: I Production Eﬃciency”, American Economic Re-
     view 61, 8-27.

[10] Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and An-
     drei Shleifer, [2006], “The Law and Economics of Self-Dealing,” unpub-
     lished typescript.

[11] Djankov, Simeon, Caralee McLiesh and Andrei Shleifer, [2006], “Private
     Credit in 129 Countries,” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.



                                    36
[12] Hall, Robert and Chad Jones, [1999], “Why Do Some Countries Produce
     so Much More Output per Worker than Others?”, Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 114, 83-116.
[13] Hoﬀman, Philip T., and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, [1997], “Political
     Economy of Warfare: and Taxation in Early modern Europe: Historical
     Lessons for Economic Development,” in Drobak, John N. and John V.C.
     Nye, eds., The Frontiers of the New Institutional Economics, Academic
     Press.
[14] Robert G. King and Ross Levine, [1993], “Finance and Growth: Schum-
     peter Might Be Right”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 717-37.
[15] Lagunoﬀ, Roger, [2001], “A Theory of Constitutional Standards and
     Civil Liberty,” Review of Economic Studies 68, 109-32.
[16] La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and
     Robert Vishny, [1998], “Law and Finance”, Journal of Political Econ-
     omy 106, 1113-55.
[17] Lijphart, Arend, [1999], Patterns of Democracy: Government Forms
     and Performance in Thirty-Six Countries, Oxford University Press.
[18] Milgrom, Paul and Chris Shannon, [1994], “Monotone Comparative Sta-
     tics”, Econometrica 62, 157-80.
[19] O’Brien, Patrick, [2005], “Fiscal and Financial Preconditions for the
     Rise of British Naval Hegemony: 1485-1815,” typescript, LSE.
[20] Pagano, Marco and Paolo Volpin, [2005], “The Political Economy of
     Corporate Governance”, American Economic Review 95, 1005-30.
[21] Persson, Torsten, Gerard Roland, and Guido Tabellini, [2000], “Com-
     parative Politics and Public Finance”, Journal of Political Economy 108,
     1121-61.
[22] Persson, Torsten and Lars Svensson, [1989], “Why a Stubborn Conserv-
     ative Would Run a Deficit: Policy with Time-Inconsistent Preferences”,
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 325-45.
[23] Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini, [2004], “Constitutional Rules and
     Fiscal Policy Outcomes”, American Economic Review 94, 25-45.

                                     37
[24] Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales, [2003], “The Great Reversal: The
     Politics of Financial Development in the Twentieth Century”, Journal
     of Financial Economics 69, 5-50.

[25] Schultz, Kenneth A. and Barry Weingast, [2003], “The Democratic Ad-
     vantage: Institutional Advantage of Financial Power in International
     Competition,” International Organization, 57, 3-42.

[26] Tilly, Charles, [1990], Coercion, Capital and European States, AD 990-
     1992, Blackwells.




                                    38
                                                  Figure 1

                             40
Share of Income Taxes in GDP
    10        200     30




                                  0   50               100             150            200
                                              private credit to GDP

                                      Above median income       Below median income
                                      Fitted values
                            Table 1: Economic and Political Determinants of Legal Capacity
                                                (1)                               (2)                               (3)                     (4)
                                       Private Credit to GDP            Ease of Access to Credit            Investor Protection   Index of Government
                                                                            (country rank)                    (country rank)      Anti-diversion Policies

Incidence of External                            0.573***                          0.676***                       0.436***                0.689***
Conflict up to 1975                              (0.138)                           (0.191)                        (0.147)                 (0.143)

Incidence of Democracy                            0.102                             0.034                         - 0.182                  0.068
up to 1975                                       (0.079)                           (0.130)                        (0.121)                 (0.060)

Incidence of Parliamentary                       – 0.037                            0.219                        0.396***                 0.138**
Democracy up to 1975                             (0.071)                           (0.146)                       (0.126)                  (0.067)

English Legal Origin                             – 0.004                            0.099                          0.064                 – 0.003
                                                 (0.038)                           (0.073)                        (0.070)                (0.051)

Socialist Legal Origin                            0.000                           – 0.180                        – 0.117                   0.008
                                                 (0.000)                          (0.153)                        (0.154)                  (0.066)

German Legal Origin                              0.396***                         0.401***                        – 0.011                 0.290***
                                                 (0.094)                          (0.068)                         (0.109)                 (0.055)

Scandinavian Legal Origin                        0.164***                         0.405***                         0.221**                0.362***
                                                 (0.033)                          (0.061)                         (0.097)                 (0.057)

Observations                                       94                               127                            125                     117
R-squared                                         0.601                            0.480                          0.314                   0.603

Robust standard errors in parentheses: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
All specifications include regional fixed effects (for eight regions).
                            Table 2: Economic and Political Determinants of Fiscal Capacity
                                                (1)                                (2)                               (3)                     (4)
                                        One Minus Share of                One Minus Share of               Share of Income Taxes   Share of Taxes in GDP
                                        Trade Taxes in Total               Trade and Indirect                     in GDP
                                               Taxes                      Taxes in Total Taxes

Incidence of External                           0.921***                          0.683***                        0.747***                0.678***
Conflict up to 1975                             (0.229)                           (0.201)                         (0.246)                 (0.211)

Incidence of Democracy                            0.005                           – 0.037                          0.057                   0.097
up to 1975                                       (0.085)                          (0.096)                         (0.062)                 (0.064)

Incidence of Parliamentary                        0.123                           0.208**                         0.231***                0.166**
Democracy up to 1975                             (0.086)                          (0.094)                         (0.074)                 (0.069)

English Legal Origin                            – 0.013                           - 0.012                         – 0.015                  0.013
                                                (0.069)                           (0.061)                         (0.056)                 (0.051)

Socialist Legal Origin                            0.051                         – 0.332***                       – 0.155**                – 0.110
                                                 (0.095)                          (0.084)                         (0.065)                 (0.082)

German Legal Origin                              0.283***                        0.290***                         0.295***                0.206***
                                                 (0.064)                          (0.093)                         (0.084)                 (0.065)

Scandinavian Legal Origin                        0.333***                         0.195**                         0.364**                 0.363***
                                                 (0.068)                          (0.078)                         (0.141)                 (0.092)

Observations                                      104                               104                             104                     104
R-squared                                        0.412                             0.435                           0.628                   0.639

Robust standard errors in parentheses: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
All specifications include regional fixed effects (for eight regions).
