NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REPLICATION IN ECONOMICS
Daniel S. Hamermesh
Working Paper 13026
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13026

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2007

I thank Dwayne Benjamin, Bernd Fitzenberger and Gerald Oettinger for helpful suggestions on an
earlier draft, the authors of several of the studies cited here for useful clarifications of their views on
the controversies in which they were involved, and several editors for their experiences at their journals.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Daniel S. Hamermesh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Replication in Economics
Daniel S. Hamermesh
NBER Working Paper No. 13026
April 2007
JEL No. A14,B41,C59
ABSTRACT
This examination of the role and potential for replication in economics points out the paucity of both
pure replication -- checking on others' published papers using their data -- and scientific replication
-- using data representing different populations in one's own work or in a Comment. Several controversies
in empirical economics illustrate how and how not to behave when replicating others' work. The incentives
for replication facing editors, authors and potential replicators are examined. Recognising these incentives,
I advance proposals aimed at journal editors that will increase the supply of replication studies, and
I propose a way of generating more scientific replication that will make empirical economic research
more credible.
Daniel S. Hamermesh
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712-1173
and NBER
hamermes@eco.utexas.edu

1. Introduction—What Is Replication?
Economists treat replication the way teenagers treat chastity—as an ideal to be professed but not
to be practiced. Why is this? How much replication is done by economic researchers? What are
the incentives/disincentives to engage in replication exercises? These are positive questions.
Does our current treatment of replication lead to credible knowledge about human behaviour?
Does it do so in a manner that is socially optimal? These are normative questions.
Even before these questions can be answered, we need to clarify what we mean by
replication in the context of economic research. One dictionary defines replicate as “duplicate,
repeat, as in a statistical experiment;” another defines it as “to make or do something again in
exactly the same way.”1 This clarity exists only at the level of dictionaries. Indeed, in a recent
lawsuit involving economists the definition of replication constituted one of the two central
issues, with the judge granting the defendant summary judgment by accepting the dictionary
definition.2 Here I will refer to the dictionary definition as pure replication.
In economists’ common parlance the idea of replication clearly goes beyond this. A
useful taxonomy was provided by the psychologist John Hunter (2001), who described statistical
replication—different sample, but the identical model and underlying population. Statistical
replication is only marginally relevant for us: I cannot imagine, for example, anyone taking a
different sample from a major data set to examine the same model that has already been studied
using those data. Presumably the original author used the entire data set, subject to excluding
cases because of item non-response or disqualifying characteristics. One could, however, repeat
the same lab experiment on a different set of undergraduate subjects, and that is the closest we
can approach statistical replication. Scientific replication—different sample, different population
and perhaps similar, but not identical model—appears much more suited in type to our methods
of research and, indeed comprises most of what economists view as replication.
In economic research examining the same question and model using the underlying
original data set amounts to pure replication (and in one of the controversies discussed below,

Antonovics and Goldberger, 2005, did exactly that). In the context of research by members of our
profession scientific replication also merits substantial attention. Using this taxonomy, I examine
the history of, facts about and prescriptions for pure replication in Section II. Section III focuses
on scientific replication, particularly on internal replication—examining multiple sets of data
within one study.

Throughout I concentrate on the efforts that have been made to ensure

replication and replicability, and I examine the incentives for replication facing the agents in the
market for scholarly research in economics.
2. Pure Replication
2.1. Recent History
Pure replication depends on the availability of all the information from the project that is to be
replicated. Its potential importance was demonstrated to the profession in the mid-1980s by a
project undertaken by the editor of the Journal of Money, Credit and Banking (Dewald et al,
1986). He sought data sets and documentation from authors of recently published and accepted
manuscripts from his Journal, received them from a disturbingly small fraction (about one-third),
and attempted to replicate the authors’ results. In some ways the results were encouraging:
Replication uncovered what the authors believed were many minor errors, but only in a few cases
were the mistakes severe enough to alter the original work’s qualitative conclusions. Of course,
one wonders whether those data sets that were provided were not self-selected from the upper tail
of quality of empirical work, so that the apparent relative lack of major errors underestimates the
general severity of difficulties with published studies.
Even without positive selection, the results of the JMCB project should be disturbing to
empirical researchers, to those theorists who pay attention to empirical work and, most important,
to the public generally, whose inchoate notions about economic phenomena are in the end partly
formed by evidence generated through economic research. The findings clearly disturbed the
editors of what is by far the most widely-read refereed economics journal, the American
Economic Review. Shortly after publishing the report on the JCMB experiment, the editors

2

mandated that authors of accepted articles pledge to make their data sets available upon request
unless the data were proprietary. Published articles never were required to state explicitly that the
data were available, but a generalised editorial statement made that fact clear to the profession.
Beginning with the 2005 volume the AER altered the policy to take advantage of
technologically induced economies of scale by requiring authors of empirical papers to submit
their data sets for inclusion on a special website maintained by the Review. Compliance with this
requirement has been prompt and complete.3 Authors can opt out of the requirement if the data
set they used was proprietary and/or confidential. Regrettably, very few other journals (the
Journal of Applied Econometrics being a rare exception) have yet adopted this technological
advance.
Other than the AER none of the top-ranked general journals in economics explicitly
requires provision of the data; and my perusal of the journals more generally suggests such
statements are indeed quite rare. In my own subfield of labour economics, however, by the early
1990s two of the three leading publication outlets began requiring authors to include a statement
about the availability of their data in the Acknowledgement footnote (beginning with the 1990-91
volume of the Industrial and Labor Relations Review (ILRR), and with the 1991 volume of the
Journal of Human Resources (JHR)). With the example of the AER confronting economic
researchers, it is clear that authors today are expected to make their data available and that they
can expect to field inquiries about their data.
With explicit statements of the availability of data and the development of the ethos that
pure replication should be facilitated by authors of empirical studies, it is worth examining
whether in fact these new tools for putting economic research on a more scientific basis have
been taken up by economists. To examine this I sent an email survey to authors of all 139
empirical studies published in the ILRR and JHR in 2002-2004. Each author was asked how
many times s/he had received requests for the data used in the published study (and whose
availability was advertised on the first page of the article).

3

The first two rows of Table 1 present the results of the survey of experiences at these two
specialised journals. First, one should note that the response rate was unusually high. While unit
non-response may be non-random, it is difficult to conjure up arguments why the nonrespondents may have been self-selected from the upper tail of articles in terms of requests for
data. Absent such arguments, I shall assume that the respondents are taken randomly from the
distribution of empirical articles in these journals along the dimension of requests. The mean
number of requests for data in each of these two specialised journals was just one. More
important, 67 percent of authors of articles in the ILRR, and 54 percent of those in the JHR, never
received a request for data. The histogram in Figure 1 combines both journals’ experiences.
While most papers received no data requests, a few papers did receive a substantial number.4 The
conclusion from these data is that, despite the effort to make data available, few researchers are
availing themselves of the opportunities offered.
Perhaps the low demand for data and the small supply of replication studies suggested by
the first two rows of Table 1 arises from the relatively low readership of these journals and their
specialised nature. To examine this possibility I sent the same email questionnaire to authors of
empirical articles published in 1999 and 2000 in the AER, whose circulation is over three times
that of any other refereed journal in our field.5 The response rate here too was excellent—83
percent. A few of the responses may have been exaggerated (one author responded “over 100
times”), so that the mean of nine requests may be biased up; but data from the median article
were requested three times, and only 22 percent of the authors received no requests for their data.
A fair conclusion from these little surveys is that, except for articles published in the most
visible outlets, data sets are simply not requested for any purpose. One wonders whether even
those that are requested are used for scholarly purposes or simply for pedagogy: One of my own
data sets (Hamermesh and Biddle, 1994) has been requested over twenty times, but all but one of
these have been for use as an example in course work in econometrics or labour economics.

4

Requests for classroom or textbook use are important for developing future scholars; the data sets
are clearly being used, but hardly for pure replication for scientific purposes.
2.2. Incentives in the Market for Replication—Positive Aspects
One might consider the market for replication as containing three types of agents: Editors of
scholarly journals, who decide what to publish and what requirements about data to impose on
authors of empirical studies; the authors of such studies; and other researchers, especially those
who might potentially be interested in replicating a particular published work. Each set of agents
has different goals, and changes in the technology of doing research and publishing alter their
ability to meet those goals. In this sub-section I examine for each agent how the possibility of
replication might affect behaviour and how that interaction has changed with technology.
Journal editors presumably have one simple goal: Publishing articles that by their
scholarly novelty and perhaps contemporary relevance maintain the current readership’s interest
and attract new readers. To achieve this goal the editor needs to make sure that the research is
credible. This is less difficult for theoretical work: A properly chosen referee can check the
lemmas and theorems and recommend rejection, or at least revision, if there are mistakes. No
referee of empirical papers can or will re-estimate the models that the author has written up, so
that the editor must rely on the author’s credibility as a researcher and the general believability of
the results. In almost all instances the editor is thus at the mercy of the author and can only hope
that the authors’ incentives are compatible with the journal’s.
Technological changes, in the form of greater portability of data and the frequent use of
readily available standardised data sets, have probably made the editor’s job easier. Although
such cases are very rare and less common than they should be, electronic communication does
enable the editor to insist on verifying, or having an assistant verify some particular calculation to
satisfy his/her concerns about the submission.6 Even with lower costs of verification, however, it
is unlikely that the editors will take the time or, in many cases, have the ability to verify the
results of an empirical submission.

5

Every empirical paper that I have published over the last forty years has involved
repeated estimation and re-estimation of the underlying models. No study sprang Athena-like
from my brow or that of my computer—all involved re-specifications, obtaining additional data
to extend the model, and other extra work. Before the advent of the personal computer this meant
keeping detailed chronological records of the computer output that I had generated—an
econometric equivalent of a bench researcher’s lab book. With a personal computer the pile of
output has been replaced by electronic files marked by date/time of production. Maintaining
these records and the underlying data files has always taken time, and it would be much easier for
me to be sloppy (or even sloppier than I am) in doing so. Nonetheless, the cost of keeping
records has dropped over time.
The benefits of careful record-keeping and maintaining one’s data files appear to have
risen over time. As Ellison (2002) has shown, the number of rounds through which an economics
paper goes before publication has increased over the past thirty years, and the time between initial
submission and eventual acceptance at the leading journals has more than doubled. That being
the case, knowing that multiple revisions will be requested, and recognising that resurrecting a
particular result from the distant, often multi-year past may be difficult, empirical researchers
today have greater incentives to maintain careful records.
Publishing a mistake has always left researchers open to general opprobrium from their
fellows, and if the mistake is viewed as deliberate—as reflecting falsified data—can lead to the
scholarly equivalent of Mennonite shunning (Kevles, 1998), including the loss of funding and
position. With instant gossip through email and blogs, the ease and speed with which one’s
mistakes might subject one to sanctions have increased. With any reasonable loss function, and
most scholars are particularly risk averse along this dimension, changing technology has
increased the benefits of careful documentation and maintenance of one’s data sets for this reason
too.

6

For most scholars the payoff is in the influence of one’s ideas—having other scholars
base their work on those ideas, having students learn from them, and (an old man’s perhaps vain
hope) having public policy influenced by them (perhaps particularly important in the case of
economics). The incentives we face here are clear: Our ideas are unlikely to be taken seriously
if our empirical research is not credible, so that the likelihood of positive payoffs to our research
is enhanced if we maintain our data and records and ensure the possibility of replication.
Technology has not altered these incentives—they have always been there. Here too, however,
the greater ease of communication worldwide may have enhanced these returns, particularly in
the areas of influencing policy and stimulating students.
The third agent in the market for any empirical research is the worldwide set of
researchers who might seek to replicate the study. For any individual the costs of replication are
substantial—obtaining the data set and/or computer code and understanding what the author did.
More important is the opportunity cost—with teaching and other duties, time for research is
limited, so why spend it on replication if one has one’s own ideas and data on which to test them?
For most of us the return to spending time on replication is not great. First, most of the empirical
studies are going to have at most only marginal impacts on economists’ thinking. That is perhaps
why we see such a difference between the experiences reflected in the first two rows of Table 1
and the third row.

Second, assuming authors are careful, the likelihood of the replication

providing substantial new knowledge rather than minor corrections is small—but the counterexample of Feldstein (1974; 1982) and Leimer and Lesnoy (1982), probably the best-known
replication issue in this profession in the past forty years, suggests that this is not always so. As
that example showed, and as theory would indicate, the likelihood of somebody attempting
replication rises with the visibility of the published study and its author, and decreases with the
visibility of the potential replicating author. Under those circumstances the benefits of replicating
are greater, and the costs are lower.

7

Technology has diminished the costs of providing the materials necessary for replication
at the same time that changes in the publication process in economics have increased the benefits
to authors of maintaining the records that might make replication possible. Even without journals
requiring posting of data sets, or acknowledging the availability of data, I have no doubt that there
would be greater possibilities for pure replication today than in the 1970s.

So were the

requirements for making data available necessary when they were imposed? More important, are
they still necessary?
I had a paper accepted by the AER shortly after it instituted its policy of accepting
empirical articles conditional on the author acknowledging his/her willingness to make the data
available. I was really angry about this new requirement, as I felt it increased the cost of doing
empirical relative to theoretical work at a time when, in my view, too much useless theory was
already being published. Why not impose a similar tax on theorists, e.g., require submission of
all the scribbled notes that led up to the work, or at least every last detail of proofs? Require
theorists to submit photographs of blackboards on which they chalked down their ideas in front of
colleagues! I calmed down after a bit, recognising both that I could not do anything about the
requirement and that the rigors it imposed on me might improve the quality of my work. Today I
have no doubt that this requirement and similar subsequent ones hastened the move toward an
equilibrium in which empirical researchers behave in a way that is based on the expectation, or at
least the fear, of having their work replicated.
I doubt that removing the current strictures that make replication easier would return us to
the old equilibrium in which authors who potentially might replicate published work could not
expect to obtain the data they desire. The cost of maintaining records is small. Also, I hope
empirical researchers now recognise that it is in their own interest to maintain their data sets and
make them available when asked. If nothing else, a few researchers’ continuing willingness to
make data available spills over onto others’ behaviour, so that it is unlikely that removing
requirements would shift the current equilibrium. Nonetheless, increasing the possibility of

8

replication by maintaining these requirements or, better still, providing a centralised depository
for data as in the new AER policy, seems especially desirable.
Does this availability mean that pure replication will take place? The survey evidence
provided above suggests that in most cases replication is a threat that might keep potential
cheaters honest rather than a common practice.

Indeed, two attempts to institutionalise

replication work with which I am familiar died from neglect. The Journal of Political Economy
ran a section entitled “Confirmations and Contradictions” from 1977 to 1999, occasionally
publishing what were in most cases comments using new data, not pure replications. Labour
Economics, which began publication in 1993, stated in its opening issue that it explicitly
welcomed replication studies. After a few years, however, the invitation was dropped, despite the
Editors’ commissioning a short piece (Hamermesh, 1997) touting the virtues of replication. As
the then-Editor wrote, there was a, “…lack of interest: we simply got no submissions. There is a
structural lack of interest in replication.”7 A similar lack of response is reported by the Editor of
the Replications section of Empirical Economics.
An optimistic explanation for the apparent disinterest is that major errors (as opposed to
the minor mistakes found by Dewald et al, 1986) are relatively infrequent. Editors have a clear
bias in favor of publishing papers in which maintained hypotheses are refuted (DeLong and Lang,
1992). Perhaps authors’ interest in writing up the results of replications is only spurred when a
central qualitative result of the original study is contradicted; and perhaps editorial decisions are
motivated by the “gotcha” mentality that pervades such diverse aspects of modern life as
Presidential politics and celebrity-watching.
2.3. Some Normative Conclusions Based on Replication Controversies
Economists cannot use the social-science equivalent of genetically identical laboratory rats:
People do not behave that way, and, in any event, we are looking for social behaviour not the
purely biological responses of organisms. Nonetheless, making replication possible offers the
social virtue of allowing those findings that seem most important to be verified or refuted directly

9

on the particular data set used to generate them rather than examined later on a different and
perhaps less appropriate set of data. If a finding is specious, better to have its props knocked out
from under immediately than have it chipped away at slowly. This is especially important given
how avidly the media pick up unusual findings (and how avidly some of us seek to publicize
those findings, even highly preliminary ones, in the media). Given the incentives outlined above,
I doubt that much pure replication will take place; but anything that aids it is praiseworthy.
To facilitate replication, if one receives a request for one’s data sets or code, one should
comply fully and speedily, and should make the data available in a readily usable fashion.
Among the few requests for data that I have made over the years, most were handled
expeditiously and completely; but one was complied with in name only, with the data being
essentially useless to anyone except the original author.
Despite the paucity of replication studies, a number of Comment-Reply pairs involving at
least in part pure replications have been published, and the controversies implicit in them have
gripped the attention of many members of the profession (appealing, perhaps, to the same prurient
interest as mud-wrestling). I briefly review four recent examples, with the sole purpose of
providing instruction on how to behave in such situations, not to judge who was right (or even if
there was a “right” in the controversy). In reviewing them one should remember that the
replicating author usually views him/herself as on the attack. Usually too, as noted above, the
replicating author is more junior and sees the opportunity to make his/her reputation through
discrediting a more senior economist’s highly visible work. With these incentives it is all the
more important to take a gentle, restrained, professional tone in the comment.
Leimer and Lesnoy (1982) made the bald statement, “This paper presents new evidence
that casts considerable doubt on Feldstein’s conclusion.” While measured, but perhaps stronger
than the work merited (although they did catch an important error), the statement is neither
gratuitous nor ad hominem. In their long comment on Card and Krueger’s (1994) evidence
suggesting the absence of negative effects of higher state minimum wage rates on employment,

10

Neumark and Wascher (2000) used both the original and new data, and concluded that, “… the
payroll data raise serious doubts about the conclusions CK drew from their data….” Antonovics
and Goldberger (2005) engaged in pure replication to examine a study of the role of mother-child
transfers of human capital (Behrman and Rosenzweig, 2002) and concluded, “We have seen that
the results are not robust and that the policy inference may be misguided.” Again, this is a fairly
mild conclusion given the force of the arguments the authors had presented about problems with
the underlying data.
Perhaps the best recent example of how to write a Comment based on a replication is
Easterly et al (2004), commenting on a recent paper (Burnside and Dollar, 2000), whose data set
was the third most frequently requested among those AER studies included in the sample reported
in Table 1. The Comment extended the earlier data set to some additional countries and a few
additional years, so that it falls somewhere between pure replication and scientific replication. Its
main result was to demonstrate that the original finding—that the amount of foreign aid a
developing nation receives interacts with good macroeconomic policy to induce growth but does
nothing absent such policy—did not seem to be robust to the addition of relatively few data
points.
If one complies with a request for data and shortly thereafter finds an article circulating
that claims to have destroyed the principle findings of one’s paper by challenging or at least
casting considerable doubt upon them, what should one do? If a mistake was actually made,
admit it honestly and immediately and move on to set out the importance of the error for your
fundamental conclusions, thus “limiting the damage” while also advancing closer to
understanding the phenomena under consideration.

The best model for this admission is

Feldstein’s (1982) “Reply,” the first sentence of which was, “I am embarrassed by the
programming error that Dean Leimer and Selig Lesnoy uncovered but grateful to them for the
care with which they repeated my original study.”

11

Following in order the Comments discussed above, consider the Replies. Card and
Krueger (2000) responded by analysing the new Neumark-Wascher data and obtaining additional
data in a different manner from their original data set (whose method of collection was the
replicating authors’ main concern) and concluded that, “… the non-representative sample…
produced [Neumark and Wascher’s] anomalous results.”

Behrman and Rosenzweig (2005)

reworked the original data set and examined a new one, but concluded, using even stronger
terminology than in the Comment, “We show that the focus of AG’s comments is misguided,
given the policy issues.” The Burnside and Dollar (2004) Reply is a modern model of
scholarship; but like the other Replies it concluded that additional re-specifications lent stronger
support to the original work.
By the time final versions of the Comment and Reply are in print and belong to the ages,
replicating and original authors in these major controversies usually rise to appropriate standards
of scientific discourse (whether voluntarily or at the insistence of an editor is unknown). When
these significant scientific controversies play out in the press or in unpublished drafts, however,
the comments and replies often are phrased in more strident tones, One example comes from a
highly publicised (Wall Street Journal, October 24, 2005, page 1) controversy about Hoxby
(2000), on which in an advanced, but as yet unpublished draft, Rothstein (2005) wrote, “…
Hoxby has not provided the precise data set from which her published results were derived.”
Hoxby (2005) countered and made a crucial point about the process of empirical research today:
“The original data simply do not exist and for a very good reason. I was trained
to … [write] code that takes research … from the raw data to estimation. Such
code may create intermediate datasets…, but they are replaced every time the
code is run. …. Obsolete datasets are not left sitting around to be used later,
accidentally. The procedure prevents the unwitting propagation of erroneous or
superseded data and code.”
In the four more recent controversies touched upon here questions of simple mistakes did
not arise. Rather, the issues involved sample selection, choice of instrumental variables, questions
about model specification and other legitimate econometric concerns. In all but one case both

12

new data were collected and the original data were reworked, so that most comments amounted to
a mixture of pure and scientific replication. Readers of each should have been able to take away
from the exchanges an assessment of each side’s merit. If nothing else, the exchanges should
have the additional benefit of offering students a better feel for the care needed in empirical work,
particularly the importance of choice of sample and construction of variables. Both of these goals
are enhanced if replicating and original authors temper their comments, not just in the published
versions (as is true in all the examples discussed here) but also in the early drafts, so that they,
and bystanders, including those who may be referees, can concentrate on the technical merit and
the importance of the arguments.
One should remember that professional and public perceptions of facts do not in the end
rest solely on the validity of one particular empirical study. Any alleged fact that affects the way
that we think about a phenomenon will be hardened diamond-like by the heat and pressure of
repeated empirical examination before it becomes background to our beliefs about how the world
works. Nevertheless, given the media interest in reporting novel or titillating empirical findings,
and politicians’ desires to robe their proposals in scientific empirical cloth, however novel or
inconsistent with prior research, it is crucial that as a profession we ensure that replication, or at
least fear of replication, is our norm.8 Empirical economics is never going to become a laboratory
science; but recognising the role of replication can move us slightly in that direction by
preventing us from propagating erroneous results.
2.4. A Modest Proposal
As the discussion in this Section shows, replication is rare, mainly because the incentives for
empirical researchers to perform replication studies are weak. Feldstein’s (1982) prediction, “…
replication studies … should become increasingly important,” has not proven to be accurate.
Clearly, reductions in the cost of replication, and even the further reduction in cost created by
central archives like that created by the AER, are unlikely to move the equilibrium quantity of
replication studies very far from zero. Absent incentives on the supply side, what are needed are

13

additional demand-side incentives for potential replicating authors. Given the reward structure in
the economics profession, however, we cannot expect junior or even mid-level researchers to
undertake replication studies. Even very senior economists, whose age-earnings and age-status
profiles are at best flat, are unlikely to undertake replications without incentives beyond those that
have been provided so far (editors’ general expressions of interest in publishing such studies). A
more proactive approach is required of editors of scholarly journals.
One arrangement consistent with the incentives I have discussed and that would generate
additional replications would be for journal editors to commission leading senior empirical
researchers to undertake a replication study of a paper of their choice, one that had previously
been published in the journal.

If editors of each of the three leading general journals

commissioned two replication studies per year, with publication guaranteed subject to refereeing
(NOT by the author of the original study) to assure some minimum quality level, more
replications would be undertaken. Original authors would be expected to write a short reply to the
final version of the replication study.
The cost of this proposal (the opportunity costs of the time of some very senior
economists and of the journal pages that would otherwise be filled with what one hopes are the
marginally acceptable papers) seems fairly small. The benefits, in terms of nudging the profession
toward additional legitimacy and providing guidelines for researchers on how to conduct
empirical research, seem substantial. Without this direct subsidy, however, I am certain that,
while we will continue to see sporadic calls for more replication, the supply of replication studies
will hover near zero.
In these studies the replicating author should expect reasonable cooperation from the
original author. If the original author has provided documentation showing how s/he chose the
samples and constructed the variables that underlay the published tabular material, s/he should
not be required to do much more to help the replicating author. Nor should the replicating author

14

expect much more:

The original author cannot be expected to co-author a commissioned

replication of his/her own work!
3. Scientific Replications
3.1. The Sad State of Scientific Replication in Economics
Most of what economists view as replication represents scientific replication—re-examining an
idea in some published research by studying it using a different data set chosen from a different
population from that used in the original paper. The recent Comments discussed in Section II
may have started as attempts at pure replication, but in most cases soon transformed themselves
into hybrids of pure and scientific replication. There are a variety of reasons why scientific
replication is likely to be more important in economics (and social sciences more generally) than
in the natural sciences. With laboratory experiments one might argue that scientific replication is
not very useful (but are the usual subjects of economic experiments—college students at selective
American universities—credibly representative of the average consumer in Bourkina Faso?). The
argument might be applied, albeit with less force, to field experiments, increasingly in vogue in
the literatures in policy evaluation and mechanism design (see Levitt and List, 2007). But for
most empirical work we need to replicate analyses obtained on one data set many times over
before the underlying and hopefully general economic point is to be believed.
By far the most important justification for scientific replication in non-experimental
studies is that one cannot expect econometric results produced for one time period or one
economy to carry over to another. Temporal change in econometric structure may alter the size
and even the sign of the effects being estimated, so that the hypotheses we are testing might fail
to be refuted with data from another time. This alteration might occur because institutions
change, because incentives that are not accounted for in the model change and are not separable
from the behaviour on which the model focuses, or crucially that even without these changes the
behaviour is dependent on random shocks specific to the period over which an economy is
observed.

15

The same types of differences can generate non-robust estimates in studies based on one
cross-section of data (from a particular area or economy). Institutions differ across and even
within economies, and different random shocks buffet different cross-sections at any particular
time. Even more of a problem arises from the nature of the social interactions that might generate,
or at least affect the behaviour to which our hypotheses are addressed and for which we do not,
and perhaps even cannot account in our models. While social norms and ethnic capital have
become an important focus of economic analysis in the past fifteen years, their likely impact goes
far beyond the few areas of behaviour in which they have been studied.
Underlying the importance of scientific replication is the dominance of American
economists, and American data, in the study of economic phenomena. It is not the case that
American journals have a bias toward publishing studies based on American data (Hamermesh,
2002). Rather, researchers at American universities have for many years been pre-eminent in the
profession; and U.S.-based journals have circulations that far exceed those of journals produced
elsewhere. If our theories are intended to be general, to describe the behaviour of consumers,
firms or markets independent of the social or broader economic context, they should be tested
using data from more than just one economy.
There is nothing wrong with our research jingoism, provided we make it clear that the
statistical evidence we adduce about our hypotheses may well only be applicable to the United
States, so that the verification of the idea is quite limited. One might argue that many such
studies do not claim to be general—they deal with a specifically American problem—and that, in
any case, U.S.-based journals should be dealing with specifically American problems.
Unfortunately many studies do not stake out such a narrow area; and too often modesty about the
broader applicability of U.S.-based results is missing.
Consider the results shown in Table 2, which presents statistics describing studies
published in regular issues of the AER, in 2005 and 2006, and in the JPE and Quarterly Journal
of Economics (QJE) from 2004-2006, that use or are based on data. (This compilation thus

16

includes the calibration literature.) I exclude comments, replies, Presidential and Nobel lectures.
I first divide the studies into two groups, those that could not be interpreted (and that the authors
do not interpret) as dealing with anything other than a country-specific issue, and those that
examine a general hypothesis or claim that the idea is generally applicable to economic
behaviour. I further divide the latter group into studies that deal with international economics and
those dealing with other topics. Finally, within each of these three categories I sub-divide the
studies into those based solely on American data, those based on some other single country’s data
(or on EU or Latin American data) and those that use data from at least two countries. It is only
the last group of studies that demonstrates scientific replication within the same study; and those
studies alone are ones that have any hope of vitiating concerns about the broader applicability of
our empirical work.
That the country-specific studies are disproportionately based on U.S. data is
unsurprising: After all, these are U.S.-based journals. Also unsurprising is the tremendous
concentration of studies in international economics that use multi-country data: After all, their
topic is international economics. The bulk of the 292 studies that are tabulated (85 percent) deal
with general issues other than those in international economics, however, and of these 60 percent
are based solely on U.S. data. Of the studies that deal with general issues outside international
economics, only 16 percent use data from more than one country. Moreover, about half of those
deal with issues in political economy where data from many countries are used to examine how
institutional differences affect political and market outcomes. The conclusion from this brief
examination of the pinnacle of the scholarly literature in economics is that it presents empirical
research on general economic ideas that is to a great extent based on data representing one
country, by far most often the United States.9
Are we economists are particularly guilty of jingoistic testing of general ideas on
American data? Not being knowledgeable about the categories/distinctions in other disciplines, I
cannot answer this question broadly, and even a narrow answer is fraught with problems. To

17

attempt an answer, however, I tried to classify two years of empirical articles in the American
Journal of Sociology (AJS) (like the JPE, published by the University of Chicago Press) and the
American Sociological Review (ASR) (the Association journal), the two leading journals in that
field. I was unable to distinguish between General/International and other General research, so
that I present the results for the two types combined. While categorising studies in a field outside
one’s own is problematic, many of the topics and, to a lesser extent, the approaches in sociology
are similar to those in parts of empirical economics.
I present the results of this little exercise in the bottom row of Table 2. The distribution
looks remarkably like that for the aggregate of economics journals.10 More than half of all the
papers can be classified as claiming general implications based on empirical analyses performed
solely on U.S. data. The classifications suggest that economists are no more guilty of intellectual
ethnocentrism than practitioners of this related social science.
Now there may be reasons for immodesty and for the absence of much within-study
scientific replication. First, and most obviously, the profession puts a premium on the creativity
and generality of the idea, not on verifying the breadth of its applicability. Also, the academic
world offers us a variety of incentives to generate a coterie of followers of our research ideas.
Engaging in scientific replication within an original study reduces the opportunity for others to
publish scientific replications of our work and thus reduces the potential size of a scholar’s group
of disciples. One might argue that many of the publications in second-level general journals and
in many specialised journals too are essentially scientific replications (on similar data sets for a
different country, or different data sets for the same country) of a publication in a major general
journal. Those publications enhance the original scholar’s professional standing, and we can
maximise them by producing a novel and broadly applicable idea that seems supported by the one
data set we used but that leaves wide room for additional confirmation/contradiction/extension.
I doubt that many (any?) empirical researchers consciously engage in such gaming. The
rarity of scientific replication within studies may well arise from the extra data work it would

18

involve. In order to perform a within-study replication one must become familiar with a different
data set, often one that is not coded in English. It is also the case, however, that the incentives for
doing within-study scientific replication are non-existent.
One might dismiss this concern by saying that adding a second sampling base to one’s
study will merely increases the reader’s confidence in one’s findings (assuming the results are
similar) in proportion to √2. Whether one views it approvingly as Baconian scientific method or
disapprovingly as specification search (Leamer, 1983), testing an idea on a single set of data is
likely to lead to the conclusion of most interest to the author(s) (and to journal editors). A second
data set, one that does not merely sample from the same population as the first, should enhance a
reader’s confidence in the validity of the results by a proportion far above √2.
3.2. What Is To Be Done?
Given the incentives in the academic market, the outcomes suggested by the compilation reported
in Table 2 are unsurprising: The rewards to within-study scientific replication are small. The
compilation does not clarify whether editors do not care much about within-study scientific
replication, or whether the supply of such studies is tiny. I should imagine, however, that
editorial demand will create its own supply, so that the crucial issue is altering editorial
recognition of the importance of scientific replication. No editor of a major journal is likely to
publish replications of previous original pieces. Also, why should an editor wish to burden
empirical researchers with more work, and why should the relative burden compared to writing
purely theoretical papers be raised still further?
The answer must be the unappealing equivalent of the moral imperative: Because it is
right for the profession. The best empirical economists are quite adept at writing down clever,
novel models that are wonderfully consistent internally, that are intellectually beautiful and are
supported by the single set of data on which they are “tested.” As I noted above, however, the
validity of these tests is questionable; and adding a second data set will enhance their validity
more than proportionately. The most credible studies I have done are those that have proposed an

19

idea (hopefully a fairly novel one) and then tested it either on data sets from different economies
or at least from the U.S. at different points in time. Policy makers and the general public will take
the work that editors choose to publish (and the unpublished studies that, given editorial lags,
circulate widely pre-publication) much more seriously if they do include scientific replications.
One cannot expect editors to require all authors to include within-study scientific
replications: In some cases data sets are unique to a particular idea, even though the model may
be universally applicable. In other cases, however, the data set is just one of many, equally useful
and generally available sources. For example, why the concentration on the American PSID
when the equally readily available and quite comparable Australian HILDA, British BHPS,
Canadian SLID and German SOEP are readily at hand?

Editors and referees should be

sufficiently aware of these cases to require authors of papers that appear acceptable for
publication to broaden their empirical focus beyond the single (usually American) data set they
have used.
One might take the Alfred E. Newman approach to scientific replication: “What, me
worry?” about studies based on just one set of data. Eventually an idea will be tested in the
market by subsequent empirical studies that are usually published further down the food chain of
journals. Also, survey articles and meta-analyses of the leading and following studies can
eventually tease out general facts about the particular phenomena (assuming that such facts exist).
One difficulty with this Panglossian view is that these follow-ups are usually not brought
to fruition until many years after the initial original empirical piece is published. During that
hiatus perceptions of the truth can easily crystallize around results that are not generalisable and
perhaps not even essentially correct. Also, academic incentives are such that the people
undertaking the surveys and meta-analyses do not usually have the same professional visibility or
credibility as the author of the original study (and may not be viewed as being as competent
professionally). For these reasons it is crucial that editors of the leading journals tilt the
publishing process a bit more in favor of within-study scientific replication.

20

4. Conclusions
The cost of pure and scientific replication in economic research has diminished over the past forty
years. At the same time our verbal nods toward the need for replication have increased (as shown
by the authors’ common practice in the Replies discussed in Section II of thanking the authors of
the Comments and stressing the great scientific benefits that result from replication). Despite the
declining costs and despite our expressions of preferences, both pure and scientific replications
are very rare in leading journals; and even within-study scientific replication is unusual.
Our expressions of preference are cheap talk. The profession provides few incentives for
most active economists to produce replications of others’ research, and similarly few to increase
the believability of one’s own research by testing ideas on multiple sets of data. Any demand for
replication must arise from the profession as a whole, as intermediated by the actions and
decisions of the editors of the most visible professional journals. Editors need to take the lead by
providing sufficient incentives for top-flight authors of empirical work to engage in pure and
scientific replication, and by insisting on within-study scientific replication in many more articles.
Without these changes occasional paeans to the virtues of replication are as likely to enhance the
scientific soundness of empirical research in economics as programmes that urge abstinence are
to reduce teenagers’ sexual activity.

21

REFERENCES
Antonovics, Kate, and Arthur Goldberger (2005) ‘Does Increasing Women’s Schooling Raise the
Schooling of the Next Generation? Comment,’ American Economic Review 95, 17381744
Behrman, Jere, and Mark Rosenzweig (2002) ‘Does Increasing Women’s Schooling Raise the
Schooling of the Next Generation?’ American Economic Review 92, 323-334
--------------- and ----------------- (2005) ‘Does Increasing Women’s Schooling Raise the Schooling
of the Next Generation? Reply,’ American Economic Review 95, 1745-1751
Burnside, Craig, and David Dollar (2000) ‘Aid, Policies and Growth,’ American Economic
Review 90, 847-868
------------------- and ---------------- (2004) ‘Aid, Policies and Growth: Reply,’ American Economic
Review 94, 781-784
Card, David, and Alan Krueger (1994) ‘Minimum Wages and Employment; A Case Study of the
Fast-Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania,’ American Economic Review 84,
772-793
-------------- and ----------------- (2000) ‘Minimum Wages and Employment; A Case Study of the
Fast-Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania: Reply,’ American Economic Review
90, 1397-1420
De Long, J. Bradford, and Kevin Lang (1992) ‘Are All Economic Hypotheses False?’ Journal of
Political Economy 100, 1257-1272
Dewald, William, Jerry Thursby and Richard Anderson (1986) ‘Replication in Empirical
Economics: The Journal of Money, Credit and Banking Project,’ American Economic
Review 76, 587-603
Easterly, William, Ross Levine and David Roodman (2004) ‘Aid, Policies and Growth:
Comment’ American Economic Review 94, 774-780
Ellison, Glenn (2002) ‘The Slowdown in the Economics Publishing Process,’ Journal of Political
Economy 110, 990-1034
Feldstein, Martin (1974) ‘Social Security, Induced Retirement and Aggregate Capital
Accumulation,’ Journal of Political Economy 82, 905-926
--------------------- (1982) ‘Social Security and Private Saving: Reply,’ Journal of Political
Economy 90, 630-642
Hamermesh, Daniel (1997) ‘Some Thoughts on Replications and Reviews,’ Labour Economics 4,
107-109

22

-------------------- (2002) ‘International Labor Economics,’ Journal of Labor Economics 20, 709732
----------------------- and Jeff Biddle (1994) ‘Beauty and the Labor Market,’ American Economic
Review 84, 1174-1194
----------------------- and Peter Schmidt (2003) ‘The Determinants of Econometric Society Fellows
Elections,’ Econometrica 71, 399-407
Hoxby, Caroline (2000) ‘Does Competition Among Public Schools Benefit Students and
Taxpayers?’ American Economic Review 90, 1209-1238
-------------------- (2005) ‘Does Competition Among Public Schools Benefit Students and
Taxpayers? A Reply to Rothstein,’ National Bureau of Economic Research, Working
Paper No. 11216
Hunter, John (2001) ‘The Desperate Need for Replications,’ Journal of Consumer Research 28,
149-158
Kevles, Daniel (1998) The Baltimore Case. (New York: Norton)
Leamer, Edward (1983) ‘Let’s Take the ‘Con’ Out of Econometrics,’ American Economic Review
73, 31-43
Leimer, Dean, and Selig Lesnoy (1982) ‘Social Security and Private Saving: New Time-Series
Evidence,’ Journal of Political Economy 90, 606-629
Levitt, Steven, and John List (2007) ‘On the Generalisability of Lab Behavior to the Field,’ this
Journal 40,
Neumark, David, and William Wascher (2000) ‘Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case
Study of the Fast-Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania: Comment,’ American
Economic Review 90, 1362-1396
Rothstein, Jesse (2005) ‘Does Competition Among Public Schools Benefit Students and
Taxpayers? Comment,’ National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No.
11215

23

FOOTNOTES
1

Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary; Cambridge Advanced Learner’s Dictionary.

2

Lott v. Levitt, Northern District of Illinois, ruling of January 11, 2007, Judge Ruben Castillo.

3

Report of the Managing Editor, American Economic Association, Papers and Proceedings, May 2006,

Table 8, May 2007, Table 8. The Editor of a specialised journal mentioned that he does not get involved in
requests for data unless the author is slow to respond, which he notes has occurred only twice in five years.
4

In statistical terms, the distribution is highly over-dispersed: A negative binomial approximates it far

better than a simple Poisson distribution. One might worry that using examples from 2002-2004 fails to
allow enough time for requests to have been made. Indeed, time since publication for the ILRR is
significantly positively related to the number of requests in a negative binomial regression; but for the JHR
the opposite is surprisingly true.
5

Circulation of the ILRR is currently 2400, that of the JHR is 2200. The circulation of the AER is over

21,000.
6

One such occurrence involved a paper of mine (Hamermesh and Schmidt, 2003), for which the journal

Editor insisted upon receiving the data set and presumably re-checking some of the estimates before
agreeing to publish the piece. Initially I was extremely annoyed that the Editor of this predominantly
theoretical journal, himself a theorist, had the temerity to question my competence and/or honesty. After
some thought, however, I was less bothered, wishing only that more people were subjected to this but
wondering whether the Editor might not have had something better to do with his time.
7

Email communication, Joop Hartog, February 2, 2007.

8

The best example is President Clinton’s seizing on the Card-Krueger results to justify a proposal to raise

the federal minimum wage (State of the Union Message, January 24, 1995.).
9

While the research disproportionately uses the U.S. as the “guinea pig,” a remarkable variety of other

countries’ data sets form the basis for the research published in these outlets. Data sets from 27 different
countries, the EU and Latin America underlie the empirical research published recently in these journals.
As a bibliometric note, a test of the hypothesis that the patterns of publication by type across the three
journals are independent cannot reject that hypothesis (χ2(14) = 9.28, not significantly different from zero at
any conventional level).

Implicitly these three general journals publish remarkably similar types of

research based on remarkably similar types of data (classified by country of origin).
10

Comparing the distribution of all economic studies except those classified as general-international to that

of the sociological studies, a test that the distributions are identical cannot reject the null hypothesis (χ2(4) =
6.89).

24

Table 1. Statistics Describing Data Requests, Articles in the ILRR 2002-04, JHR
2002-04, AER 1999-2000
Journal

Mean
(Std. Error
of Mean)

Median

Response Rate

N

ILRR

0.78
(0.24)

0

0.87

69

JHR

0.95
(0.21)

0

0.87

70

AER

8.88
(2.53)

3

0.83

60

25

Table 2. The Distribution of Empirical Studies by Type of Problem and Source of
Data Used, Recent Volumes, AER, JPE and QJE, and AJS/ASR
Type of Issue
General

General (Intl.)

US

Other

Many

US

AER (N=115)
2005-2006

54

26

13

2

1

8

8

3

JPE (N=82)
2004-2006

49

12

10

0

1

3

5

2

QJE (N=95)
2004-2006

46

16

18

2

1

4

5

3

149

54

41

4

3

15

18

8

75

14

18

7

8

All three (N=292)
journals
AJS, ASR (N = 122)
(2003-2004)

26

Other Many

Country-Specific
US

Other

.6
.4
Density
.2
0
0

2

4

6
Requests

8

10

Figure 1. Distribution of Requests for Data, Industrial and Labor Relations Review
and Journal of Human Resources, 2002-2004

27

