                    NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     TAXATION AND SAVINGS - A
                     NEOCLASS ICAL PERSPECTIVE


                      Laurence J. Kotlikoff



                      Working Paper No. 1302




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            March   19814




Moses Abramovitz, provided extensive and extremely valuable com-
ments on each of several drafts of this article.   I am also
indebted to Stanley Fischer, Alan Auerbach, Michael Boskin, David
Bradford, Christophe Chamley, Mervyn King, John Pencavel, James
Poterba, John Shoven and Lawrence Sunmiers for their very careful
reviews and helpful comments, John Musgrave provided revised data
from the BEA for which I am most grateful. Andrew ers and Linus
Yamane provided excellent research assistance.   The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Taxation
and project in Macroeconomics. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #1302
                                                    March 1984



                          Taxation and Savings — A
                          Neoclass ical Perspective


                                    ABSTRACT


           This paper discusses recent neoclassical analyses of taxation and

savings.     Contrary to the popular view that fiscal policy has highly ambiguous

impacts on savings, neoclassical models admit a host of policies with clear and

potentially quite powerful affects on the accumulation of wealth.       The paper

considers four fundamental types of fiscal policies and compares their

quantitative affect on savings.     The essential elements of these policies

involve inter— and intragenerational redistribution, marginal and intra—

marginal taxation, and the level of government consumption.       Conventional

accounting   measures of "taxes", spending!, and "deficits" provide, at best,
little guide to changes in underlying fiscal instruments and, at worst, pre-
cisely opposite    indicators of the direction of such changes.    Indeed, the con-

tinued use of and concern with conventional fiscal measures is symptomatic of

widespread fiscal illusion.     These points are developed within the context of

certainty models.    The paper also considers the role of fiscal policy in both

mitigating and exacerbating economic risks facing the private sector.       Since

precaution is a major motivation for saving, governments can greatly influence

wealth accumulation either by using fiscal policy to pool private risks or by

making fiscal policy itself highly uncertain.




                                                   Laurence J. Kotlikoff
                                                   National Bureau of
                                                   Economic Research
                                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                                   Cambridge, NA 02138
                                           —1—


I.   Introduction

      The ability of governments to alter an econon"s rate of wealth accumula-

tion is a question that has intrigued economists since the inception of the

discipline.     Recently the issue has received considerable attention from

researchers puzzled by historically low U.S. saving rates and dramatic dif-

ferences in saving rates anross industrialized countries.         While no consensus on

the appropriate ndel of saving behavior has been reached, investigation of

tax policy within a variety of neoclassical nxdels suggests that governments can

significantly influence the accrual of national wealth.         This assessment of the

current state of knowledge about neoclassical savings behavior and government

policy differs markedly from a view, still accepted in many circles, that tax

policy   within the standard economic paradigm has highly ambiguous impacts on
wealth accumulation.       The ambiguity is associated with allegedly opposing income
and substitution effects arising from changes in tax rates, in particular, capi-

tal income tax rates.      While this allegation is true for a subset of tax

changes, neoclassical ndels admit a host of policies with clear and potentially

quite powerful affects on national savings.

     "Structural" tax changes provide an important example of such effective

policies.     They are   defined   here as changes in either the tax base or the

progressivity of the rate structure used to generate a given time path of

receipts while holding the time path of government consumption fixed.         Holding

constant the time path of receipts provides a prescription for setting tax rates

through time.     A key feature of these policies is that they "compensate" the

private sector for imposing a new tax by removing an old one.         Since these poli—
                                     —2—


cies involve no changes in the timing and level of the government's direct

absorption of resources, they leave unchanged the private sector's intertemporal

consumption and leisure possibility frontier.1   If it so chooses the private

sector can consume as much and work as little in the new tax regime as it does

in the old.   Such a response clearly leaves the private sector with the same

collective resources to finance its own as well as the government's unaltered

time path of consumption.   The private sector will, however, generally respond

to new tax regimes by choosing a different point on its bidget frontier.     The

movement along this intertemporal frontier and its associated changes through

time in savings and labor supply are determined by unambiguous substitution

effects and, potentially, income effects.   Although there is no aggregate change

in income for the private sector, since its possibility frontier has not

changed, structural tax changes typically redistribute resources across and

within generations.    However, for iny structural tax policies the net income

effects of this redistribution reinforce the substitution effects in raising or

lowering savings.

     The distinction between compensated and uncompensated policy changes is

clarified by considering the government's intertemporal budget constraint.

Excluding the possibility that government debt can grow indefinitely at a faster

rate than that of the econon, this constraint requires governments to equate

the present value of receipts, inclusive of base money creation, to the present

value of expenditures, inclusive of interest and principal parments on net

government debt.    While restricting the set of policies, including structural

tax policies, that can be used over time to alter wealth formation, the
                                         —3—




government's long term budget is consistent with a wide range of short        and

medium term policies.     In particular, the government can permit   debt   to grow for

a long time at a faster rate than the econoitry, although indefinite use of this

policy is not feasible.2

     In addition to Structural Tax Policy, the government's intertemporal budget

constraint suggests three other classes of policies for organizing a discussion

of taxation and saving.     These are:

         Tax—financed Changes in Government Consumption——

         changes in the time path of government consumption that are

         contemporaneously financed by adjustments in tax rates of a

         particular tax base.

         Intergenerational Tax Policy——

         reduced taxation of particular cohorts financed by increased

         taxation of other cohorts, holding constant the tax base and

         the time path of government consumption.     In contrast to

         structural tax policy, this rule for setting tax rates involves

         changes in the time path of total annual tax receipts since

         total annnual tax receipts need not equal annual government

         consumption.

         Intragenerational Tax Policy——

         reduced taxation of particular members of a cohort contem—

         poraneously financed by increased taxation of other members

         of that cohort.     In contrast to broad structural changes in

         either the tax base or tax progressivity which are not cohort—
                                     _14



         specific and, consequently, redistribute intergenerationally,

         these cohort—specific policies involve only intragenerational

         redistribution.

Analysis of these four classes of policies provides insight into the economic im-

pacts of the essentially unlimited broader combination of these and other policies.

     This survey is limited to the savings effects of fiscal policy in "full

employment" neoclassical models, assuming, in most of the discussion, well func-

tioning capital markets.    The emphasis on "full—employment" neoclassical models

may be justified by the secular, rather than cyclical nature of the subject.     In

addition, the very significant new body of literature based on such models pro-

vides more than enough material for a single survey.     Finally, much of the popu-

lar discussion concerning the behavior of savings and related variables over the

cycle invokes these models, although not always validly.

     Section II provides background information for the subsequent discussion;

it describes long—term trends in U.S. saving rates and domestic investment

rates.   Striking differences in postwar saving behavior among industrialized

nations are also documented.    This historical and international evidence provi-

des a healthy perspective on the issue of taxation and saving.     Few would argue

that long—term trends in U.S. saving rates and the current low rate of U.S.

saving relative to those of our principal trading partners are due solely, or

even primarily, to differences in fiscal environments.     Government policy is a

significant determinant of national savings, but it is only one of several

important forces at play.    Other critical factors that jointly influence savings

are intertemporal preferences, demographics, existing technolor and the rate of
                                         —5—




technical    change, patterns of human capital formation, the extent of market and

intra—fainily lending, and the degree of market and intra—family risk—pooling.

     Each of the four stylized policies is considered sequentially in Sections 14

through T.   Their examination raises a numbe of traditional topics including the
impact of government debt on national savings, the extent to which government

consumption substitutes for private consumption, the distinction between invest-

ment and savings incentives, the savings impact of progressive taxation, the

relationship between human and physical capital ajcumulation the degree to

which borrowing constraints alter the analysis, and the welfare implications of

alternative tax structures.      The discussion in these sections, which takes up a

large portion of this article, ignores issues of uncertainty.         Many important

and interesting insights can be obtained by working with ixidels of certainty.

The introduction of uncertainty, in some cases, obscures these insights.         In

addition, many of the results from certainty models carry over to ndels with

uncertainty.     In general, certainty models provide a benchmark for examining

current policies in nore realistic settings in which tastes, technologies, and

indeed future government behavior is uncertain.

     Analysis of the four classes of policies as constrained by the government's

long term budget makes it clear that the fundamentals of fiscal policy are not

aggregate    "taxes",   "spending", and "deficits", rather they are changes in margi-

nal incentives,    intra—marginal redistribution across and within generations, and

direct government consumption.       Section III examines government and private

intertemporal budget constraints for purposes of precisely defining the policies

considered in Sections IV through VII.         The main objective of Section III is,
                                       —6—




however, to identi the government's underlying policy instruments and to
                                                                  expenditures,
caution the reader that official accounting definitions of taxes,
                                                                       On the
and debt provide little guide to the underlying fiscal structure.
                                                                          policy
contrary, our proclivity to discuss such issues as savings and government
                                                                        fiscal
in terms of this conventional nomenclature is symptomatic of widespread

illusion.      To drive home this point, Section III demonstrates how identical
                                                               essentially any
fiscal policies can be conducted with the government reporting
                                                             Describing fiscal
level of taxes, spending, and deficits that it desires.
                                                                     transfers,
policy in terms of its effects on marginal incentives, intramarginal

and direct absorption of resources requires changes in vocabulary and
                                                                           the
accounting, but a new fiscal language is necessary to discuss consistently

savings impact of our plethora of fiscal policies, all of which ultimately

involve these basic elements.      A key feature of the new fiscal language should

be descriptions of the lifetime budget constraints of a small set of represen-

tative households as well as descriptions of the fundamental fiscal instruments

that affect these constraints.      Household budget constraints depend only on net

marginal prices and net intramarginal endowments.      Since the calculation of

                                                                   set of repre-
 these prices and endowments are free of accounting conventions, a
                                                                 analyzing the
 sentative budget constraints would provide a coherent basis for

 changes in and the consequences of a large variety of fiscal policies.

          Section VIII addresses the impact of taxation on savings in uncertain

 environments.      A series of contributions (Evsey Domar and Richard Musgrave,

 l941; James Tobin, 1957; Jan Mossin, 1968; Peter Diamond, 1977; James
                                                                       Mirrlees,


 19714;    Diamond and Mirrlees, 1978; Martin Bailey, 1978; Steven Shavell and
                                     —7—




Laurence Weiss, 1979; Hal Varian, 1980; Roger Gordon, 1981;    Alan Auerbach, 1981;

Jerenv Bulow and Lawrence Summers, 1982; Jonathan Eaton and Harvey Rosen, 1980;

Robert Merton, 1981) expressly or by implication suggest that a variety of

tax/transfer schemes constitute implicit insurance markets.     To the extent that

private provision of insurance is both available at the margin and is as effi-

cient as government insurance, the government's pooling of risks through the

tax/expenditure system will have few or no implications either for risk—pooling

or for national saving.   At the opposite extreme one could imagine that, in the

absence of government insurance, particular risks would be pooled neither in

formal private markets nor in informal family settings.    In this case the effect

of government taxation on savings is analyzed by simply considering the impact

of the availability of each particular type of insurance on national savings.

     Section VIII describes the potential insurance properties of a number of

fiscal policies including capital and labor income taxation, and Social

Security's unfunded tax/benefit provisions.    Unfortunately, there are few stu-

dies that directly compare wealth accumulation with and without particular forms

of insurance.   Section VIII, as a consequence, draws inferences about taxation,

insurance, and savings that are rather speculative in nature.     These types of

comparisons certainly represent a promising area for future research.

     The government as a cause of uncertainty, rather than a source of

insurance, is an alternative possibility explored briefly in Section VIII.        In

principle the private sector could self—insure against random government

redistribution ang current generations.       Capricious redistribution between

current   and future generations is also potentially insurable assuming interge—
                                       —8—




nerational    altruism as in Robert Barro (19Th).   Without such private insurance,

the impact on savings of government imposed uncertainty is again determined by

comparing economies with and without the particular risks generated by the

government.

     The final section plays devil's advocate to Sections IV through VII, by

presenting a set of conditions under which government policy, regardless of

type, has no effect whatsoever on national saving.      The conditions required are

extreme and reveal the improbability of such behavior.      But the example also

illustrates the fact that the underlying effective tax schedules influencing

saving may have little or nothing to do with the legislated tax system.        The

distinction between effective and legislated tax schedules dates at least from

Tiebout (1956) and underlies the emerging literature on the "dynamic

inconsistency" of government policy (Finn Kydland and Edward Prescott, 1977;

Guillermo Calvo 1978; Stanley Fischer, 1979, Stephen Turnovsky and William

Brock, 1980).     Dynamic inconsistency refers to the proposition that, as ongoing

institutions, governments are likely continually to reoptimize their fiscal

choices taking current, but not past circumstances into account.       As a result

policies slated today to go into effect in the future will likely be altered by

the government in power in the future.       In this sense, the government's actual

actions may be inconsistent with its previously expressed intention.

     Research in this area cautions that rational households look at what

governments do, not what governments say.       If households understand the

government's objective function, they can potentially deduce the course of

future tax policy independent of the government's current declarations.        The
                                        —9—




difficulty   of ascertaining private beliefs about future government actions pre-
                                                                      policy.
sents special problems for studying the savings impact of current tax

Such analyses    are   clearly sensitive to assumptions concerning private beliefs

about    actual future tax policy.


II.     U.S. Savings Behavior — Some Slized Facts
                                                                            of a
        The net national saving rate is one of several important indicators

nation's savings behavior.       It records the fraction of annual net output that
                                                                            pri-
viii be available to support future consumption, and is defined as NNP less
                                                                by NNP.       The
vate and government consumption, C and G, respectively, divided
                                                                          saving
first column of Table 1 presents averages of the annual U.S. net national
                                                                     1982.
rate over the five decades prior to 1980 and the period 1980 through
                                                                    National
Values for NNP, C, and G differ somewhat from those reported in the

Income and Product Accounts (NIPA).       The ijor difference is that private

spending on consumer durables and government spending on highways, struc-

tures, equipment, other durables, and military hardware are treated as

 saving in the present figures.      Private consumption excludes expenditures on

 durables, but includes imputed rent on the stock of durables.      Government

 consumption excludes purchases of structures and other durables, but inclu-
                                                                             NNP
 des imputed rent on these tangible assets, Including military assets.
                                                                       depre-
 includes imputed rent on consumer durables and government assets less

 ciation of these assets.3       The figures in column one are little affected by

 the treatment of military durable purchases as investment.       For reference

                                                              definitions of
 column 2 presents the net national saving rate based on NIPA

 the relevant variables.
                                          TABLE 1

                             Indices of U.S. Saving Behavior,
                                        1930—1982

                   (Average Annual Rate Over Specified Period)


                                                                                    Rate of1
                    Net             Net                                         Household
                                                              1                 1
                  National        National    Household           Governnaent  Consumption
  Sample           Saving          Saving    Consumption          Consumption    Out of
  Period            Rate            Rate        Rate                 Rate     Disposable NNP
                                (NIPA Basis)   (C/NNP)              (G/NNP)         (C/NNP-G)


1930—1939          —1.17%           —2.86%          87.66%           13.51%           101.149%



19140—1949         10.23%            5.32%          68.35%           21.142%           87.29%


1950—1959          15.60%           8.79%           67.614%          17.02%            81.60%


1960—1969          114.25%           8.71%          65.35%           20.140%           82.09%


1970—1979          11.90%            7.70%          67.10%           21.00%            814.92%



1980—1982           7.014%           5.07%          68.62%           24.35%            90.71%




    1:     Household consumption, C, equals NIPA personal non durables consump-

           tion expenditures plus imputed rent on household durables.                  Govern—

           ment consumption, G, equals NIPA government nondurables consumption

           expenditures plus imputed rent on government tangible assets,

           including military harthiare.      NNP equals NIPA NNP plus imputed rent

           on household durables and government tangible assets less depre-

           ciation of these assets.
                                          —10—


        Both sets of figures reveal major variations in the saving rate over the 53

year    period.     The corrected numbers in column one show a 28 percent reduction in

the average saving rate since 1970 compared with the average rate In the pre-

ceding two decades.       The comparable reduction is 19 percent based on the NIPA

definitions of the relevant variables.

        Columns 3 and 14 display rates of household and government consumption out

of NNP.     At first glance the 7 percentage point increase in the government con-

sumption rate between the 1950s and early 1980s appears responsible for the

recent dramatic decline in the rate of U.S. saving; household consumption as a

share of NNP increased by only 1 percentage point across these two time inter-

vals.     Had this share remained constant, the nation's saving rate would still

have fallen by 21 percent.

        A neoclassical perspective suggests, however, that private behavior deter—

mines most if not all of these historical changes in the nation's saving rate.

Consider the following two alternative hypotheses.        The first assumes that

government consumption substitutes perfectly for household consumption.        In this

case, since household consumption is a marginal choice, the figures in columns 3

and 4    indicate    that households, on average, collectively chose to consume 85

percent of NNP in the 1950s and l960s and 89       percent of NNP in the 1970s and

early 1980s. NNP, in this case, properly measures annual household disposable

income, since the government is simply engaging in consumption the household

sector would otherwise do on its own.

        The second extreme hypothesis is that government consumption provides no

welfare whatsoever to the private sector.        As section III points out, under
                                        —11—


reasonable assumptions concerning limitations on deficit finance, the private

sector must eventually pay for current government consumption.      Hence the amount

of net national product remaining after government consumption, NNP—G, provides

a measure of the private sector's effective annual disposable income; this is

true despite the fact that   net   tax payments may differ from government consump-

tion in particular years.    Column 5 examines the rate of consumption out of this

definition of annual household disposable net national product.      Note that this

consumption rate rose from 82 percent in the 1950s to 91 percent in the early

1980s.   Had the post 1969 rate of household consumption out of NNP—G remained at

its 1950—1969 average value, the net national savings rate would have fallen by

5   percent rather than 28 percent.    This second assumption concerning the substi-

tutability of private and government consumption attributes none of the

increased government consumption to private sector decisions.      Hence, from this

perspective, increased government consumption is directly responsible for at

most one fifth of the post 1969 drop in the net national saving rate.

       The figures in Table 1 showing considerable variations in national and

household saving propensities may appear surprising in light of what has been

dubbed "Denison's Law."     Edward Denison (1958), Bert Hickman (1966), and Paul

David and John Sca.dding (19TI) document that the U.S. ratio of gross private

saving to gross national product has been remarkably stable through time.

Without questioning the validity of this proposition, it is well to point out

that gross private saving is the difference between gross national saving and

the NIPA definition of government deficits.      As Section III emphasizes, the NIPA

definition of deficits is an entirely arbitrary accounting choice.       If one assu—
                                     —12—


irs that economic behavior depends on real variables rather than accounting con-

ventions, then the U.S.   gross private saving rate is similarly an entirely

arbitrary accounting construct.   Had government accountants chosen a quite dif-

ferent definition of deficits, the gross private saving rate would have exhi-

bited substantial variation through time)    Unlike the gross private saving

rate, measurement of the net national saving rate is independent of accounting

conventions that arbitrarily lable particular variables as "private" or

"government"; in addition, assuming no fiscal illusion on the part of economic

agents, the actual rate of net national saving responds only to economic

variables and not to accounting labels.

     Much of the variation in saving rates described in Table 1 may simply

reflect intertemporal consumption smoothing during periods of fluctuating net

national product.   Figure 1 displays deviations from trend in corrected measures

of private consumption and net national product.     Detrended consumption is

clearly a aich smoother series than detrended NNP.     This well known fact provi-

des some empirical support for examining neoclassical models that assume reaso-

nably well functioning capital markets and predict intertemporal consumption

smoothing.


International Comparisons of Saving Rates and International Capital Mobility

     For the period 1930 to 1982 the correlation coefficient between the U.S.

net national saving rate and the net domestic investment rate, defined as the

ratio of the net domestic investment to NNP is .99.     The absolute discrepancy

between these two rates exceeds 1.5 percentage points in only b    of   the last 53

years.   Studies by Martin Feldstein and Charles Horioka (1980) and Feldstein
  Fig U r e
  In Millions
of 1972 Dollars
                                    national
                      volatility ofproduct,           aggregates
                                            private consumption
                                     net national
         $


   1500001

              •1


   1000001
                                             Net National Product

                                                                                                    /P_            iOfl
    50000-




   —50000

          .
  —1 00000•




  -1500001


  -2o0o0o____         -
                          ——rv
                          1937.5        1945.0
                                                       t -—— ——r
                                                      1952.5          1960.0    1967.5     1975.0         3982.5
             1930.0
                                                               YEAR

                                   devat1or,o crom   First   order trend in 1972 doilore
                                        —13—


(1982) of time series and   cross    country correlations between saving and invest-

ment rates suggest   that policies    generating an additional dollar in national

saving increase domestic investment by roughly 85      cents.   Arnold Harberger

(1980) and Jeffrey Sachs (1981a, 198Th) reject this view, presenting evidence

that nwnerous countries are financing major portions of their domestic invest-

ment through foreign sources.

    While the debate on the degree of international capital mobility has       been

joined, the issue has not been resolved.       Eaton and Mark Gersowitz (1981), and

Michael Dooley and Peter Isard (1980) provide a theoretical foundation for the

Feldstein—Horioka findings based on a perception of potential foreign

expropriation; their models suggest positive net as well as gross intra—marginal

international capital mobility, but little or zero mobility at the margin.           The

limited mobility of financial capital at the margin is ascribed to the

increasing probability of expropriation of equity investments and default on

loans as foreign countries absorb greater net amounts of international capitaL.

An alternative explanation of the Feldstein/Horioka findings, that is consistent

with full international capital mobility at the nrgin, is that factor price

equilization eliminates the incentives for international capital flows.5            Given

the unresolved nature of this debate prudence suggests analyzing the savings

impact of domestic fiscal policies in both closed and open economics; as orii—

nally pointed outby Peg Musgrave (1969) and recently examined by          Larry
Goulder, John Shoven, and John alley (1983) and Harberger (1983), in open eco-

nomies policies that stimulate domestic investment can be quite different froc

policies that stimulate national saving.       The concluding subsection in   III
                                   114


briefly points out the nature of these differences.

     Whether or not capital is perfectly mobile internationally, cross country

comparisons of saving rates are obvious guides to changes over time in the

international distribution of wealth and in relative standards of living.      TabLe

2 compares the net national saving rates of U.S. and other OECD countries based

on newly available OECD data.   The OECD concepts of NNP, C, and G are roughly

those used in the U.S. National Income and Product Accounts except that govern-

ment consumption, G, excludes expenditures on non—military durables and struc-

tures.

     Table 2 provides evidence of persistent and sizeable international dif-

ferences in rates of net national saving and rates of household consumption out

of NNP—G.   Since 1960, the U.S. net national saving rate has averaged 55 percent

of the corresponding rate for the European OECD countries, and 314 percent of the

Japanese rate.   For this period the average U.S. household consumption rate

(C/(NNP—G)) exceeds the corresponding European OECD rate by 8 percentage points

and the Japanese rate by i8 percentage points.

     International differences in rates of domestic capital formation and

increases in capital—labor ratios are equally striking.    OECD data indicates

that the U.S. net domestic capital stock grew at an average annual rate of 3.6

percent between 1960 and 1982; the comparable figures for France and Germany are

12.3 percent and 10.14 percent, respectively.    Over this period U.S. capital per

worker grew on average by 1.5 percent per year compared with 11.6 percent in

France and 10.14 percent in Germany.
                                       TABLE 2

           Saving and Consumption Rates —        International      Comparisons1

                 (Average Annual Rates Over Specified Period)

                                         (1)

                                               Government                  Household
                     Net National              Consumption                Consumption
                     Saving Rate               Rate (G/NNP)             Rate (C/(CNNP-G))
                                                                    Out of Disposable NNP

                         OECD                     OECD                        OECD
Period         U.S.     Europe Japan    U.S.     Europe     Japan     U.S.   Europe   Japan

1955—59        9.8       NA    21.5     19.1       NA       10.6      87.9    NA      76.0

1960—69       10.5      17.3   17.0     20.1      15.7       9.14     86.9    79.8    70.2

1970—79        8.0      15.1   25.5     20.1      18.5      10.14     89.9    81.5    70.5

1980—81        5.0      11.0   21.3     20.9      19.9      11.7      93.6    86.3    75.9


1960—81        8.7      15.7   25.8     20.2      17.3      10.1      88.9    81.0    71.3



NA — Not   available.
1Source:   OECD National Accounts, 1952—1981; variables are defined according
           to U.N. System of National Accounts (SNA).
                                ___



                                      —15—

III.    Government and Private Budget Constraints:     A Description of Fundamental

       .Policy Instruments


       The government, as an institution with potentially unlimited life, is in a

position to borrow from succeeding new generations to meet its liabilities to

existing generations.      If the real interest rate paid on such borrowing exceeds

the econorw's rate of population plus productivity growth, a policy of con-

tinually borrowing to meet all interest and principal payments means that

government debt continually grows relative to the size of the econonj.       Such a

policy is clearly infeasible; if government creditors demand real resources upon

settlement with the government, all current output plus claims to existing

assets will eventually be insufficient to meet these demands.       In an econorw in

which the pre—tax real return paid on government borrowing exceeds the

underlying rate of economic growth, deficit—financed spending ultimately

requires the government to raise real resources either by explicit taxation or

by expropriation through inflation or otherwise of its creditors' nominal

assets.    In the long run, these revenues must meet government spending plus the

excess of interest payments on past borrowing over the expansion of debt that

could perpetually be financed by the growth in the economy.       The limitation on

debt finance implies the following relationship between the course of taxation,

base money creation, spending on government consumption plus transfer payments,

and the ns.rket value of the government's initial net liabilities, D0:


                Tt +AM t          E

          t=o
                 l+rt            1+r t +D o                                      (i)




       Equation (i) expresses the government's intertemporal budget constraint in

terms of conventional fiscal taxonomy.        Tt, M, and Et are, respectively, nomi-

nal taxes, base noney creation, and nominal expenditures on consumption and
transfer payments in year t.     These flows are discounted at nominal interest

rates, r. that are realized between time zero and t.          In a world of certainty,

the rs are given by the term structure of interest rates prevailing at time

zero.     D0, the rrket value of net government liabilities at time zero, can

also be witten as the discounted value of interest plus principal repayments.

        The budget constraint indicates that 'printing" of high powered nmney is a

source of government revenue; in the U.S. and in mny other countries government

acquisition of real resources by simply "printing" noney is effected by the

treasury or finance ministry selling bonds to the private sector which the

central bank then purchases with newly created money.         Equation Cl) consolidates

the fiscal behavior of these institutions.

        The long—run connection between this constraint and the econow's growth

and interest rates is evident in equation (2) which expresses the constraint

when the econonor is in a stationary state in which all real variables are

growing at the rate n and the inflation rate is         II:




            t + Am = e + Cr — II —    n(l   +   Ii))d                               (2)


Each of the variables in (2)     is    measured per effective worker.   This expression

verifies the proposition that long—run real revenues including base money

creation (t + Am) less spending Ce) must cover real interest payments on debt

(r—ii)d less the additions to the stock of debt that can be financed by economic

growth alone n(l +    fl)d.

B.   The Fragility of Government Bookkeeping and the Potential for Fiscal

     Illusion

        Macro economists typically discuss fiscal policy in terms of officially
                                       —17—


reported    values of "taxes", "spending", and "deficits". "Taxes" in excess of
"spending" is commonly referred to as "tight" fiscal policy, while the converse
is   described as "loose" fiscal policy.      Unfortunately, the accounting defini-

tions    of "taxes", "spending", and "deficits" are arbitrary, having no counter-
parts in economic theory; in full employment equilibrium models with operative
capital markets,   household budget constraints depend on marginal prices and

endowments    and are independent of accounting conventions with respect to govern-
ment policy.    From the perspective of these micro budget constraints, fiscal

policies that are tight are often mislabelled loose and vice versa.        The failure

to discuss fiscal policy in terms of household budget constraints raises the

potential for fiscal illusion.

        The "pay—as—you—go" financing of the U.S. Social Security System provides

an excellent example of our propensity to engage in fiscal illusion.        The Social

Security System represents the Federal government's largest program of interge-

nerational transfers, yet none of what effectively constitutes enormous

borrowing from current and future generations was officially recorded as

"deficits".     Recent estimates by Social Security actuaries suggest an unfunded

Social Security liability of 1 to 6    trillion    dollars owed to the current adult

population.     These liabilities, while they are not legally enforceable obliga-

tions and have different risk properties than official debt, swamp estimates of

the government's current official net liabilities.        Indeed, official U.S. net

liabilities (D0 above) measured at market value appear to be slightly negative

(the government's official net worth is positive), reflecting considerable

federal holdings of financial and tangible assets and sizeable capital gains on
                                      —18—




nominal government liabilities accrued during the 1970s (Robert Eisner and Paul
Piper, 1983; 1982 Economic Report of the President, Chapters 4 and 5).

     Historically,   the government could have made its hidden annual Social

Security   "deficits" explicit by simply handing each Social Security taxpayer a
piece of   paper indicating his or her projected claim to additional future bene-

fits "purchased" with his or her annual payment of Social Security "taxes".          Had

the government recorded Social Security "taxes" as payments for Social Security

bonds, the government would have reported deficits, inclusive of these bond

issues, in excess of $300 billion dollars in several of the last 20 years, and

deficits in excess of $100 billion dollars in nst of the last 20 years.        One

imagines that this alternative tally of govermnent indebtedness would have

engendered very different estimates of concepts such as "the full employment

deficit" and would have led to an array of quite different econometric findings.

Economists, insensitive to the problem of' fiscal illusion, may   well   have reached

very different conclusions about the degree of fiscal stimulus.

     Presumably, such a redefinition of official government liabilities would

raise the question of classifying other implicit commitments to future expen-

ditures as government debt.6    If one is willing to label implicit promises to pay

future retirement benefits official liabilities, why not include implicit expen-

diture commitments to maintain the national parks, to defend the country, or to

provide minimum sustenance to the poor?

     A heated debate about the appropriate definition of' government debt would

likely lead some exasperated officials to suggest eliminating deficit financing

entirely and simply relying on taxation.     These officials might also argue that one
                                                 —19-


could.switch from "deficit" to taxt finance with no effect whatsoever on the

economy.     Under the assumption of perfect capital markets, they would be quite

correct.     Rather than raise additional funds by issuing treasury securities, the

government could simply levy a head "tax" per adult promising to provide each

adult in the following year a tax credit equal to the tax plus interest on the

tax.    If the adult died during the year, the payment would be made to his or her

estate.     Those too poor to pay the head tax could borrow against next year's

tax credit to obtain the required funds.                The equality, in present value, bet-

ween each household's head tax and its head tax credit, leaves household budgets

and, therefore, private behavior unaltered.                However, since future tax credits,

like future Social Security benefit payments, are not recorded in the current

budget, this policy permits the government to report a smaller deficit.

       An analysis of (1) indicates nre precisely how shrewd accounting can

eliminate the reporting of deficits without changing any real policy.                 Define a

sequence of head taxes, Tt, that may be negative or positive, but that sum in

present value for each household and, therefore, for the aggregate economy to

zero, by:


                 = D0C1   +   r0)   + E0 —    CT0 + M0),   and

                                                                                           (3)
            Tt    E - (Tt       +   M)   for t > 0.


Condition (14) follows imndiately from (i) and (3).




                   l+rt
                                0                                                          (14)




Adding zero as defined by (14)           to   the left—hand side of (1) and letting
                                               —20—



T* ET          produces:
         +



               Tt+ AMt                    Et

        t=0
                l+r t             t=0
                                         i+r'
                                            t


and for all t > 0,


         T +    AM    =   E.                                                          (6)



   According   to (6)     the   government can now report zero debt and zero deficit

in every year in the future, while running exactly the same policy.            The trick

in going from (1) to (6)        is    simply to have the government label private sector

loans to the government positive "taxes" and to classify government loan

repayments as negative "taxes".

     Starting from (6)      the      government could further modify its accounting prac-

tices and start reporting enormous "surpluses", although it again engages in no

real policy change.       The me here involves the government imposing additional

positive head taxes,              and positive head transfer payments, t+l' related by:


                          (l+rt)
         T — Et+i     (i +


Provided the "tax" payers at t are the "transfer" recipients at t+l, this policy

has no effect on household budget constraints.            The official "surplus" (a stock)

at time t, S,, for t > 0 is now reported as:
                                                          —21--




             S       =   St_i
                                  (1+rt)
                                 (1 +   rt_i)
                                                  =
                                                + T   +
                                                            **
                                                           Tt     +     — Et    --
                                                                                         =
                                                                                         Et   =   ,
                                                                                                  —
                                                                                                                       (8)


         =                  (1    +   rt)                                  **
since        =   St_i      (1 +       rY    by construction, and Tt                  +


                                                                      and, therefore, its reported
                                                                                                  — Et equals zero from

(6).     The government can potentially make

surplus at time t as large as the econorry's stock of wealth at time t.T

        The fact that economic theory does not distinguish positive "taxes" or

negative "spending" from government "borrowing" and positive "spending" or nega-

tive    "taxes" from government "debt service" potentially permits the government
to    report essentially any level of debt and deficits it wants                                      without affecting
the    econoiir,,.       In addition to this freedom to manipulate the reporting of

"deficits", the government has essentially unlimited flexibility in altering the

size of reported "taxes" and "spending" given the level of "deficits" it chooses

to report.           The government, could, for example, declare a new set of taxes,

       and transfers, Et, of equal value.                         Assuming that households paying these

additional "taxes" receive an identical amount back in the form of additional

"spending" and that any changes in marginal incentives (prices) associated with

the new "taxes" are exactly offset by changes in marginal incentives (prices)

associated with the new "spending", economic activity will remain unchanged.

Reducing the "size" of government taxes and spending with no real consequences

is also in the power of government bookkeepers.

        Between 1960 and 1983, U.S. Federal spending on transfer payments,

including grants in—aid to State and Local Governments, rose from 6                                          percent      to

14 percent of GNP, leading many to praise, many to decry, and others to study

the "growth" in government.                     The bulk of Federal transfer payments, 15                        percent,
                                           —22-.



are direct payments to individuals; most Federal transfers to state and local

governments are ultimately paid to individuals in the form of medical, housing

and general welfare support.

      In principle, the Federal government could have incorporated all post—war

transfer payments within the tax code in the form of special tax credits and

deductions.     Had   the   government imbedded this "growth" in spending in the tax

code as additional "tax expenditures", a term coined by Stanley Surrey (1973),

and adopted in the Congressional Budget Act of l974, reported Federal spending

would simply have consisted of consumption.         Federal consumption, excluding

purchases of durable goods, but including imputed rent on government assets,

fell as a fraction of NNP in the post—war period from 10 percent in the 1950s to

8   percent   in the 1982.     One presumes that this manner of displaying economic

reality would have led many of those who now praise, decry, and study the growth

in government, to decry, praise, and study its decline.

       The point here is certainly not to claim that there were no economic

effects from the post war rise in reported transfer payments.          These policies

were associated with significant changes in the intertemporal budget constraints

of virtually all American households.          The point is that the size and character

of the effects of fiscal policy cannot be judged from the size of "taxes,"

"deficits," etc, because these accounting entries can vary widely without having

any affect whatsoever on economic activity.          Discussing fiscal policy and

savings without engaging in fiscal illusion requires identifying the

government's fundamental policy instruments including those that have a

direct impact on the econon' and those that indirectly affect the econonrj by

altering household budget constaints.
                                                                         ____




                                                  —23—



C.   Real Versus Illusory Fiscal Policy

      Equation (9)   represents a final rewriting of equation (1) that con-
veniently illuminates the government's fundamental policy instruments.                            This

description of the government's budget uses the fact that                             the government's

initial net liabilities, may be expressed as the present value of net interest

plus principal payments on D0.          In (9)       all         government outlays including

interest and principal payments on D0, but excluding consumption outlays, Gt,

are incorporated in the          tax code.         The   "       tax    code treats all such outlays as

either refundable tax credits or deductions, specifying, where necessary, the

names of particular households in society receiving these payments.                            All house-

holds that are alive or will be alive are referenced by the index j.                            Obviously,

the Ts are zero for years prior to and after the households are in economic

existence.


                 T +M                   T
                                            •jt
                                                  +Mt_                     G

          t=o
             V
             L   l+r   t
                             V

                           t=o
                                   41
                                            l+r t            —
                                                                   V
                                                                   L
                                                                  t=o
                                                                         l+r   t


     Transforming all non—consumption outlays into equivalent "tax expenditures"

permits one to focus directly on net lump sum and net marginal taxation of

households; i.e., each T term equals a net (positive or negative) lump sum

tax imposed in year t on households j, plus year t, household j                          tax   schedules

applied to corresponding year t, household j                       tax    bases.8

     In the U.S., earnings—and incomes—tested welfare and social insurance

programs significantly alter marginal incentives to work and save.                             By adding

this implicit net tax schedule to other explicit federal, state and local tax

schedules, the       code identifies the ultimate effective tax structure                         facing

each household.      Piercing the "welfare veil" of taxation under the tax code
                                       —2 1


reveals that "negative income taxation" is already a reality in the U.S.,

although the negative income tax schedules     confronting U.S. households differ

greatly from those that   have been proposed (Milton Friedman, 1962); current U.S.

negative income tax schedules are categorical, depending on the household's

demographic composition, and often exhibit extraordinarily high marginal tax

rates on labor supply     at low earnings levels.   The   tax code should also be

understood   as piercing the "corporate veil", taking account of both corporate
and personal   taxation and subsidization, (e.g., investment incentives) of the

return to capital in describing the government's net influence on the tradeoff

between current and future consumption and leisure.9

     Since household preferences and budget constraints are, by assumption, the

sole determinants of household consumption and labor supply      decisions,   govern-

ment policy involving choices of the terms T,,            and Gt alter private beha-

vior only by changing the after—tax prices and after—tax endowments appearing in

household intertemporal budgets.     The government's fundamental policy instru-

ments are thus its choices of Mt, Gt, its effective net marginal tax scheduLes,

and its net intraxnarginal taxation.

D.   Marginal Taxation and Human Capital Formation

      The government's effective rginal tax schedules affect household budgets

in three ways.    First, they change after—tax prices between current and future

values of consumption and leisure.     Second, they change the present value of

households' resource endowments, including their human and nonhuman wealth.

Third, they change incentives to accumulate human capital, which, in turn,

alters the household's time path of pre—tax wage rates.       Research on fiscal
                                       —25--



policy and savings has focused trost closely on the first two channels by which

government marginal taxation affects household behavior.      Michael Boskin's

(1975)   article   on taxation and human capital formation is a notable exception.

Under the assumption that time spent in training and related activities is the

only input into human capital formation, Boskin showed that a proportional labor

tax has no distorting affect on the human capital investment decision; the pro-

portional labor tax reduces the opportunity cost of human capital accumulation

(i.e., it reduces the size of net foregone earnings) while also reducing the

return from the investment paid in the form of future after tax wages.      The

additional incentive to invest in human capital is exactly offset     (in present

value) by the additional disincentive in the case of proportional labor taxa-

tion.

    Boskin further clarified the net disincentive to human capital formation

under progressive taxation of labor income or under proportional taxation,

assuming that additional inputs are required for this investment and that

expensing of these inputs is not permitted.      Subsequent articles by James

Heckman (1976) and Kotlikoff and Summers (1979) stressed the incentive to human

capital formation arising from capital income taxation; higher capital income

tax rates mean lower after tax rates of return and larger discounted       values of

the future returns from human capital investment.

    In neoclassical nodels with no uncertainty and no borrowing constraints

the timing of household consumption decisions is not contingent on the timing of

the receipt of labor earnings.      Hence, more human capital investment means less

current labor supply, less current output, as conventionally measured, and, with
                                        —26—


household consumption not directly reduced, less conventional saving.      In addi-

tion, if consumption goods, such as educational services, are used in human

capital investment, the expansion of such investment directly increases consump-

tion of this type, further lowering current saving.      A corollary to this point

is that tax incentives that promote human capital formation typically do so at

the cost of less non—human capital formation.      In the case of capital income

taxation, incentives for greater current human capital formation (smaller

current labor earnings) reinforce incentives to substitute current for future

consumption in discouraging non—human wealth accumulation (Kotlikoff and Summers

(1979)).

     While additional investigation of the tradeoffs between human and non—human

capital formation is needed, it appears unlikely that realistic modeling of

these interactions would greatly affect many of the findings about taxation and

non—human capital formation described below.


E.   Structural Tax Policy

     Household budget constaints, like that of the government, can be rewritten

in multiple ways.   In particular, quantities can be multiplied by either before—

tax or after—tax prices, with additional terms appearing in the eipression that

uses before—tax prices.      The conventional formulation multiplies quantities by

after—tax prices, since households are presumed to consider after—tax prices in

making economic choices.      In the standard expression the present after—tax pri-

ces of current and future consumption incorporate consumption and capital

income tax rates, while the present after—tax prices of current and future

leisure incorporate labor and capital income tax rates.      Structural tax policy
                                              —21—


involves changes in tax rates and, therefore, changes in relative prices of

current and future consumption and leisure.                   The requirement that the new tax

code generate the same time path of receipts as the code it replaces provides a

rule for setting net tax rates through time.                   Such changes in tax bases or the

rate structure under a given tax base leave unchanged the private economy's

intertemporal possibilities frontier, although they typically induce different

choices of points on that frontier.1°

    While each household, acting independently, perceives that its budget has

been changed by structural policy, the private sector as a whole ultimately

operates with the same budget; i.e., it experiences no aggregate change                  in


income.   To see this consider equation (10) that presents the aggregate (private

plus government) economy's intertemporal budget constraint.                   In (10) Z equals

expenditures in year t by household j on leisure and consumption goods,

including imputed rent on consumer durables and rney holdings.                    Ho and Ao are,

respectively, human wealth (the present value of labor earnings) and the market

value of non—human wealth of the economy at time zero.                   All terms in (10) are

measured in pre—tax nominal units of account discounted at pre—tax nominal

interest rates.

                                          G
                            +             i-tr       = Ho +   Ao                              (10)
                                      i
          t=o =1        t       t=o              t




The right—hand side of (10) indicates the total present value of the                  economy's

current and future resources available to finance the present value of govern—

ment consumption and private purchases of consumption goods and leisure, the
                                                —28—



first       term on the left side of (10).

           For a given time path of Gt, (10) corresponds to the private econonrf's

intertemporal budget, i.e., the resources available for private consumption and

leisure are the econolw's total resource endowment, Ho + Ao, less the governmentts
                                       Gt
claim on that endowment,
                                      i+r
                                                Hence, one feasible response to the
                                t=o         t
government's switching tax bases or altering the rate structures of prevailing

tax bases is that private behavior as well as all before tax prices (including

the rt's) remain unaltered.            Changes in the tax structure in the presence of

unchanged private behavior and before tax prices implies, of course, changes in

some if not all the T's,           but, according to (9)        these new taxes plus base

money creation must still equal, in present value, the present value of                     govern-
ment consumption.        From (io), then,       the econonw's resources remaining for pri-

vate expenditures on consumption and leisure are unaltered.                      Stated differently,

if    real    private sector behavior and the Gt'S remain unchanged, the government

will       be forced to choose tax rates under the new tax structure that are con-
sistent with (9) for       unchanged values       of both the rt's, the 1M,'s         and the

     's.


           If the private sector consisted of a single, infinitely—lived household, one

would expect that household to understand the aggregate econo's budget

constraint (io).        Such a rational household would know it had to pay for the

govermnentts time path of consumption regardless of what tax system was being

used to collect the resources; more precisely, it would know that changes in its

behavior would automatically lead to changes in tax rates.                     A single household

would, therefore, internalize the gverneflt$ budget constraint and                       treat
                                             —29—


taxes, no matter how they were imposed, as lump sum levies.             In such a setting

structural tax changes would have no effect whatsoever.             However, in the case of

a large number of households, none of whom pay more than a trivial fraction of

total taxes, the assumption that no single household considers the                feed-

back of its behavior on government tax rates is more appealing.                 Under this

Cournot—Nash assumption each household attempts to "free ride" on the tax

payments of other households by altering its behavior in response to changes                 in


tax incentives.       In partial equilbrium, i.e. ,    holding   constant before tax pri-

ces, including the rt's, (9) and (10) indicate that the new values of private

consumption and leisure (summarized by                after   the private sector responds

to the new tax structure, lie on the private econoIij's original budget frontier.

Thus, structural tax changes, in partial equilibrium, produce compensated

changes in behavior of the type described by Harberger (l961) and Diamond

(1970).     These compensated changes along the initial budget frontier, like John

Hick's (1912) compensation around an initial indifference surface, are unam-

biguous in sign.

      Figure 2 illustrates this type of partial equilibrium compensated change

for a consumer who chooses consumption over two periods, C1 and C2, based on an

exogeneous initial endowment, E1.            The government taxes the consumer to finance

its consumption which has a present v1ue of G1.               The slopes of lines 1 and 2

equal 1 +    r    where r is the before tax interest rate.        The slope of line 3 is

                 where Tr is the capital income tax rate.        Point A is the equilibrium

under lump sum taxation, while point B corresponds to the equilibrium under a

capital income tax structure.            The government collects the same present value,
                                          —30—



G1, in taxes under both tax structures, and private consumption occurs along the

same budget frontier, line 2;l2        the increase in capital income taxation is com-

pensated by a decline in lump sum taxation permitting the consumer to end up

consuming on his initial budget frontier.          Assuming smooth convex indifference

curves, private consumption in period 1 unambiguously rises from C1 to C1              .     Note

that if the private sector had naintained its initial consumption bundle, the

government's capital income tax rate would have been lower by the difference in

the slopes of lines 3 and 14    divided   by r.

     Figure 2 can be used to describe the impact on national savings of a

structural shift from lump sum to capital income taxation.           Since structural

tax policy, as here defined, leaves unaltered the time path of government reve-

nues, the lump sum tax, like the capital income tax, is assumed to be levied in

period two.     The post—tax endowment point in figure 2 is thus E1' under the lump

sum tax and       under the capital income tax.

        In a simple two period overlapping generations life cycle nDdel (Franco

Modigliani and Richard Brumberg, 19514; Albert Ando and Modigliani, 1963), each

generation lives for exactly two periods.          The young generation in this model

has no initial wealth and all private wealth is held by the old generation.                  The

wealth of the old generation, in turn, corresponds to the savings accumulated by

the old generation when it was young.           Letting W1 stand for the private wealth

of the old generation accumulated during its first period and letting Wg denote

government wealth, then National Wealth W is given by: W =          Wg +   W1J3    In


terms    of figure 2,   W1 under lump sum taxation equals E1—C1 , since           is


first    period income, and      is   first   period consumption.   The period to period
change    in national wealth, national saving, equals output less government               and
               Piure 2




C2



     1




         I,.       Cl     I   Cl

                         rE
                                         —31—


total private consumption.       By assumption government consumption is fixed; hence,

current    changes in national saving depend only on changes in private
consumption.
     Consider an announcement at time      t    that   the   government will   permanently

switch to capital income taxation starting at time t+1.               Such a policy has no
impact    on the consumption of the elderly at time t, since they still face the

lump sum tax in period t and do not survive to period t+l.               The young at time

t, however, increase their consumption according to figure 2 by C1                —   C1, which

corresponds precisely to the partial equilibrium reduction in national wealth.

This savings reduction is permanent because all successive, young generations

face the same budget constraint, line           in the diagram, and save          — C1


rather than       —   C1.   In this example, the change in national savings is unam—

bigious in sign.       This compensated tax change involves only substitution

effects; the change in income for the private sector in tote and for each age

cohort is zero.1

     An example of a structural tax policy in which income effects also arise is

an immediate switch from proportional capital income to consumption taxation.

While the government collects the same total revenue each period inder the new

tax structure, as Summers (1981) recently emphasized, such a policy typically

alters the taxes collected from each cohort.            In particular, the tax extracted

from the elderly at the time the change is introduced is likely to be

substantially in excess of their tax liability under the capital income tax.

Since, as implied by (9),       the present value of all future taxes remains
unchanged, the greater tax burden on the initial elderly implies a smaller

lifetime tax burden on young and/or future generations.              This redistribution

away from the elderly reinforces the substitution effects of the tax policy in
                                      —32—


lowering current consumption and stimulating current saving; while the larger

tax burden imposed on the initial elderly means a smaller burden on the initial

young, the elderly, in life cycle laDdeis, have larger marginal propensities to

consume than the young.     In addition the associated reduction in tax burdens for

future generations obviously has no affect on current consumption.     The larger

consumption propensities of the elderly than the young in a strict life cycle

model simply reflect their shorter life expectancies and their absence of a

bequest motive.

     To sumnarize, structural tax policies leave the private sector's aggregate

income unchanged, but they produce unambiguous substitution effects and income

effects may, on net, reinforce the substitution effects.


E.   Tax—financed changes in Government Consumption

      In contrast to structural tax policy, contemporaneous tax—financed changes

in government consumption can produce aggregate changes in income for

the private sector. Assume government consumption does not enter private utility

functions; then permanent increases or reductions in government consumption

require permanent increases on reductions in taxes to finance such changes in

government consumption15.     If the government is using distortionary taxation, the

required changes in tax rates produce a rotation of the private intertemporal

budget reflecting government induced changes in private after—tax relative

prices.   As an example consider how private consumption is altered when both

government consumption and the capital income taxation used to finance that con-

sumption are eliminated.     For the initial elderly generation alive in the period

the new policy is first implemented the change provides a windfall gain equal
                                      —33—


to the capital income taxes it would otherwise have paid.      Since the old are in

the last period of their life and have no bequest rwtive, they immediately con-

sume the entire amount of the windfall.      But since government consumption, by

assumption, had exactly equaled capital income tax revenues, the reduction in

government consumption in the first peroid of the policy is exactly offset by an

equal increase in the consumption of the initial elderly.      Hence, the policy's

initial period affect on total national consumption and, therefore, initial

period total national saving, depends on the consumption of the young in the

initial period.   The impact on the consumption of the young at the time the

policy is implemented is ambiguous.    For the young the elimination of capital

income taxation serves to rotate their lifetime budget from line 14 to line 1 in

figure 2.   The initial period change in national consumption (which equals the

change in national saving) has, in this case, the opposite sign as the uncompen—

sated elasticity of first period consumption (consumption of the current period

young) with respect to the interest rate.      Thus, this is a question about tax

policy and saving to which a particular "interest elasticity" by itself provides

useful information, but this is a very special type of policy experiment

imbedded in one very simple neoclassical nrdel.

     Unfortunately, much research effort (Harberger, 19614; Feldstein, 1978;

Wright, 1969; Warren Weber, 1970, 1975; Alan Blinder 1975; Boskin, 1978; Philip

Howrey and Saul Hymans, 1978; Summers, 1981, 1982; Owen Evans, 1983;

David Starrett, 1983); has focused on defining and measuring "the interest

elasticity of saving" suggesting that a single number could provide a summary

statistic for the effects of a wide range of government policies.      Such is not
                                       _3J


the case.

     According to the government's budget constraint, exogenous changes in the

return to saving arising from changes in capital income tax rates

necessarily require some offsetting adjustment in current and/or future

fiscal instruments.   Changes in the course of government consumption is only one

of many possible adjustments to changes in capital income taxation that would

restore balance to the government's intertemporal budget.    Suppose, for example,

that the cut in capital income tax rates is temporary; in this case the fiscal

adjustment might take the form of higher future capital income tax rates.

Exactly which policy instrument or set of instruments is used to satisfy (9)

and the timing of their use is critically important for determining the response

of current national saving to a current reduction in capital income taxation.

Thus "the interest elasticity" of current saving will be one number if the tax

cut is expected to last one year, it will be a different number if the tax cut

is expected to last 10 years, and it will be a still different number if the tax

cut is expected to last 20 years.   Furthermore, the percentage response of

national saving to a tax cut depends on whether the tax cut is financed by

reduced government consumption, concomitant increases in other tax rates, or

future increases in other tax rates.    Neither the sign nor the absolute magni-

tude of the change in saving can be determined without specifying precisely what

policies will accommodate a current reduction in capital income tax rates.

     The time series regression analyses of private consumption decisions

referenced above do not include variables capturing the future time path of acco—

modating fiscal policy.   In particular they do not distinguish current from
                                        —35—



future    capital income tax rates, nor do they include estimates of the future

values of wage or consumption tax rates. A a consequence the estimated coef-

ficients are of dubious value in describing the potential saving impact of

changes in fiscal policy.      Other studies (Summers, 1981a, 1982; Evans, 1983;

Starrett, 1983) purport to simulate the interest elasticity of savings by exa-

mining the impact on wealth accumulation of a permanent cut in capital income

taxation.    Since they alter no other tax rates in this analysis of interest

elasticities, they are implicitly assuming, according to (9),       that   government

consumption will be permanently reduced.        These elasticities have, therefore, as

much to do with the savings response to reduced government consumption as they do

with private responses to capital income taxation.        Indeed, since the bulk of

government consumption is financed by wage taxes it is surprising that attention

has focused on "the interest elasticity of saving" as opposed to "the wage

elasticity of saving".

       Other research has   been iare sensitive to the multiplicity of future after—

tax prices determining current consumption and saving.        Boskin and Lau (1978)

estimate aggregate demands for consumption and leisure taking account of several

current and future cross price effects.        Unfortunately, while they report

sizeable elasticities of current consumption both with respect to the current wage

and the price of future consumption, they do not trace out the implications of

these findings for feasible, concomitant changes in the time paths         of fiscal

instruments.    A different approach to determining potential household responses

to government policies is direct estimation of household intertemporal preferen-

ces.     Robert Hall (1978) is the first of a series of articles (Sanford Grossman
                    ______




                                           —36—


and Robert Shiller (1981); Lars Hansen and           Kenneth Singleton (1983); Hall
                             Julio Rothemberg,
(1981); and Greg Mankiw,                          and Suimirs (1982)) that directly tests

some of the implications of intertemporal optimization under uncertainty.             These

tests, the results of which are rather mixed, require specifying explicit func-

tional forms for household utility.            A by—product of these tests is estimates of

key preference parameters, knowledge of which is sufficient to determine house-

hold responses to virtually all hypothetical policy changes.             Several of the

utility functions estimated in the empirical literature have been used in simu-

lation studies discussed below.

        The effects on national saving of contemporaneous tax—financed changes in

government    consumption depend not only on concomitant adjustments in par-
ticular tax instruments, but also on private valuation of government consump-
tion.     If government consumption is a perfect substitute for private consumption
and is always intramargina.l with respect to private consumption decisions (i.e.
the private sector always consumes nre of each good than the government

directly provides) then (10) may be re—expressed as:




            t=o         r    = Ho   + Ao   ,                                          (10')


where Z equals consumption by household j             inclusive   of its imputed consumption

of government purchases of consumption goods and services in year t.

        Intramarginal changes in the level and/or timing of government consumption

as well as concurrent changes in its finance through the tax system need not,

according to (10'), necessitate any changes in the Z.'s.               As in the case of

structural tax changes, such alterations in government policy leave the private

sector with sufficient resources to maintain its prior behavior.              Here again
                                                   -.37 —



there    is no change in aggregate income for the private econorr'; from a partial

equilibrium perspective, i.e., holding before—tax factor returns constant, tax—

financed increases in government consumption simply alter after—tax relative pri—

ces and produce compensated ixvements along the private sector's pre-tax

budget frontier.            Assuming   changes     in particular households' imputed government

consumption are not exactly matched by intra—marginal changes in their net tax

burden, there will be offsetting income effects across households.                            In this case

one   must account not only for the impact of tax changes on the after tax rela-
tive prices confronting particular households, but also for the net income
effects    on those households arising from the government's revised pattern of con-

sumption.


F.    Intergenerational Tax Policy

        Intergenerational tax policy, as defined here, involves reduced taxation of

particular cohorts paid for (in present value) by increased taxation of other

cohorts.     The time path of government               consumption is    held constant under       this
policy. As in the case of structural tax policy, in partial equilibrium, this
intergenerational           redistribution leaves unaltered the intertemporal consumption

and leisure frontier of the private sector.                   To simplify the analysis,

assume for the nment            that all    taxes are lump sum.         If   the   private   economy con-
sists    of a single household that, because of concern for its progeny, is effec—

tively "infinitely lived" (Barro, 1974), its budget constraint, from (10), is:


             r        z                                G
                      +tr       Ho + Ao —                                                            C")
            t=o
                  1
                            t                t=0   1   +r t

Since intergeneration tax policy, by definition, generates zero revenue in pre—
                                      —38—




sent ialue and, under the assumption of non—distortionary (lump sum) taxation,
also alters no marginal prices, the private sector's budget constraint (n) is

completely unaffected by such policy.    Consequently, intergenerational redistri—

bution will have no impact whatsoever on the economy.    This argument, origi-

nating with David Ricardo (1951) and rigorously demonstrated by Barro (19Tt), can

obviously be extended to the case of multiple infinitely—lived households each

of which experiences intergenerational net lump sum taxation that sums to zero

in present value.

     In   contrast to "infinitely lived" households, for "finite—lived" life cycle
households who,   at least after their children are adults, are concerned

only with their own welfare, government intergenerational, non—distortionary

transfers alter private sector behavior.     According to the strict, non—

altruistic life cycle paradigm, household heads and their spouses selfishly

spend their resources over the remainder of their own lives.     The age of the

household is, thus, a critical variable in determining its marginal propensity

to consume; elderly households with only a few remaining years exhaust addi-

tional resources at a much faster rate than younger households, who spread

incremental resources over nDre periods.     These age—related differences in

marginal propensities to consume goods and leisure explain why intergenera-

tional transfers to older generations lead to increased aggregate consumption

and reduced aggregate labor supply.

     To procure the resources to redistribute towards early generations, the

government either draws down its own stock of assets, "borrows" from the pri-

vate sector, or "taxes" the private sector.     As indicated above whether the
                                       —39--



government aquires current resources under the heading "borrowing" as opposed to

"taxes" may be of little or no economic consequence.        Increased taxation

(resource payments to the government) of younger (including future) generations

which is not offset in present value by increased transfers (resource receipts

from the government) to such generations is necessary either to restore the

government's own net asset position, or, at a minimum, to offset the reduction

in the government's net capital income.        Such higher net lifetime taxes are

likely to fall nist heavily on young or yet unborn generations.        Thus the econo-

mic as opposed to accounting definition of "deficit finance" is any policy

resulting in an intergenerational redistribution of resources (Anthony

Atkinson and Joseph Stiglitz, 1980).

     Assuming those households experiencing positive increases in net lifetime

resources predate those experiencing the losses, the policy will increase

the consumption and leisure of early generations and decrease the consumption

and leisure of later generations assuming consumption and leisure are both nor-

mal goods and that net taxation is lump sum.        In real terms the additional con-

sumption accorded early generations is financed not by additional current

output, since early generations presumably work less not nore, but by reductions

in the econonr's stock of wealth.   This "crowding out" of the econon's real

assets leaves future generations with less capital to combine with their labor

in production and implies, except for small open economies, general equilibrium

changes in factor returns.   Each future generation may associate their reduced

standard of living resulting from economic deficits with higher net lifetime

taxation; but equation (ii), which holds from each point in time forward, mdi—
cates that, under lump sum taxation, it is ultinntely a lower value of Ao, rela-

tive to what would otherwise have occurred that limits the private sector's

future consumption and leisure possibilities.    A necessary and sufficient con-

dition for intergenerational redistribution under lump sum taxation is a change

in the time path of the econonT's holding of real wealth (i.e., values of Ao in

successive years).

     While income effects are the primary focus of intergenerational tax policy,

redistribution across generations is typically conducted by changing the timing

and level of distortionary taxes.   Hence, substitution as well as income effects

play a role in determining the full economic consequences of nny intergenera-

tional tax policies.


G.   Intragenerational Tax Policy

      This policy is defined as contemporaneous redistribution among members of

a given cohort.   Assuming these members belong to different households such a

policy will produce offsetting income effects, with the net impact on aggregate

private consumption and saving depending on household differences in marginal

propensities to consume and to work.     Intragenerational tax policy encompasses

redistribution potentially cross—classified by a very large set of socio-

economic characteristics including sex, race, education, marital status, number

of children, earnings, and accumulated wealth.    Unfortunately, empirical evi-

dence on differences in marginal propensities to consume and work by such

characteristics is exceedingly scarce.

      The commonplace notion that "redistribution from the rich to the poor redu-

ces saving" is probably the central concern surrounding intragenerational tax
                                       —iii—




policy.    This concern seems based, to a large extent, not on a detailed com-

parison of differences in consumption propensities, but rather on the simple

observation that the rich have wealth and the poor do not.     There are at least

four imndiate reasons why the level of current assets could be unrelated to

underlying differences in preferences, and, therefore, differences in consump-

tion propensities.    First, current wealth my reflect receipt of intergenera-

tional transfers from wealthy parents and ancestors Kuznets (1961).       Second,

current wealth my reflect random high returns to past investments (Friedman,

1957).     Third, current wealth my simply reflect differences in the timing of
receipt of labor earnings for a given present value (Modigliani and Brumberg,
l954;    Ando and Modigliani, 1963).   Fourth, household differences in earnings

abilities will produce differences in levels of accumulated wealth when house-

hold intertemporal preferences and marginal consumption propensities are iden-

tical.

        Of course, the current rich at a given age my be rich because of differen-

ces in intertemporal preferences.      Alternatively, the rich my differ from the

poor with respect to marginal consumption propensities because the poor are

liquidity constrained at the margin.      Section VII briefly examines the available

evidence concerning intragenerational transfers in the presence of differences

in intertemporal preferences and liquidity constraints.


 IV.    Savings and the Quantitative Impact of Structural Tax Policy

        Neoclassical nxdels of economic growth posit utility maximizing consumption

and leisure decisions over either a finite or infinite horizon.        Modigliani and

 Brumberg (195b) and Ando and Modigliani (1963) invoke the former assumption in
                                            — 2—



their    seminal development of the life cycle nDdel, while the later assumption is

an implication of Barro's      (19114)   equally   seminal article on intergenerational

altruism.     Structural tax policies as well as the three other fiscal policies

defined above can have nrkedly different transitional and long term effects

depending on which of these two sets of preferences is considered.

        The extent to which altruistic as opposed to selfish behavior best charac-

terizes actual intertemporal preferences is a nEtter of considerable contro-

versy.     Articles by Ando and Modigliani (1963), James Tobin (1967), James Davies

(1981), King and Dicks—Mireaux (1982), and Modigliani (1983) provide evidence

in support of the strict, non altruistic life cycle ndel.             In contrast, Betsy

White (1978), Thad W. Mirer (1979), Michael Darby (1919), Kotlikoff and Summers

(1981), Sheldon Danziger, Jacques van der Gaag, Eugene Smolensky and Michael

Taussig (1982), and Douglas Bernheim (1982) report results contrary to the life

cycle rxdel, suggesting an important, if not predominant role for private

intergenerational transfers in explaining the current stock of U.S. wealth.

Kotlikoff    and Summers stress that      the shapes of age—earnings and age—consumption

profiles    are far from   those   required under the strict life cycle nodel to pro-
duce significant    hump saving.      This finding does not, however, preclude the

possibility that the    majority of households conform to the selfish life cycle
model.     The majority of households could have such preferences, but simply have

very litle "hump" savings.         We may well live in a mixed society consisting of a

minority of quite wealthy, altruistic households, and a majority of rather poor,

life—cycle households (Kuznets, 1961).             While life cycle households may hold

little, if any, of the current stock of wealth, their response to new structural
                                       _14 3.....




as well as intergenerational tax policies could well dictate the econon''s

saving behavior over several decades, even if not the indefinite future.

     Another explanation of the evidence for significant intergenerational

transfers that is consistent with life cycle behavior involves imperfections in

the market for annuity insurance.     In the absence of a well functioning annuity

market, elderly households may share the risk of their uncertain longevity with

their children in a manner that involves intergenerational transfers (Kotlikoff

and Avia Spivak 1981).    Alternatively, the elderly may simply involuntarily

bequeath to their children extracting either nothing or non—monetary services in

exchange (Davies, 1961; Bernheim, Andre Shleifer, and Sumrs, 1983).

     Section VI describes the failure of econometric research based on the

limited available data to clarify the degree of marginal altruism in the U.S.

econon'.     Given our state of ignorance concerning the distribution of intertem—

poral preferences, exploring the implications of tax policy within each of the

two alternative models is important; indeed, analysis of models with heteroge-

neous preferences is an obvious area for additional research.


A.   StructuMi Tax Policy in a Life Cycle Model

     In the life cycle model each household makes independent choices, but the

combined behavior of more than 60 contemporaneously living adult age cohorts

enters into the determination of the general equilibrium transition path of a

life cycle econo.       The econoixy's transition path also depends on the

future decisions of generations not yet in existence; today's generations base

current economic choices partly on information about future wages and interest

rates.     These future prices are determined not only by the saving and labor
                                    _)4 4_



supp1, decisions of those currently alive, but also by the saving and labor

supply behavior of succeeding generations; today's twenty year old's expec-

tations about wage rates when she reaches thirty is partly   influenced   by her

expectations of the labor supply of twenty year old's ten years from now whose

labor supply, in turn, depends on expectations of the labor supply of twenty

year olds twenty years from now, and on and on.

     The complexity of the multi—cohort life cycle idel as well as its exten-

sive, if not unlimited data requirements, has led ny economists to simulate

rather than empirically estimate the effects of government policy in non—

altruistic neoclassical environments.    Simulation analysis of steady (or

stationary) state predictions of life cycle economies dates from Ando and

Modigliani (1963), Tobin (1967), and Atkinson (1971).    Papers by Tobin and

Walter Dolde (1971, 1981), Eytan Sheshinski (1978), and Kotlikoff (1919) simu-

late the impact of social security on steady state labor supply and savings.

Summers (1981) presents a steady state simulation analysis of other government

fiscal policies, in particular, structural tax policy.    Merton Miller and

Charles Upton (1971) and Summers (1981a) simulate effects of selected government

policies on the growth path of life cycle economies under the assumption of

nopic expectations.

     Summers' 1981 article represents a very important contribution to the aria—

lysis of taxation and savings.   His comparison of equal (annual) revenue wage

and consumption tax regimes illustrates the intergenerational redistribution

underlying many structural tax policies; the paper also stresses that     lowering

capital income tax rates reduce current private consumption not only through
                                        _1; 5—




substitution     effects associates with the higher price of current relative to

future consumption, but also through income affects associated dth the reduced

present value of a household's human capital endowment.

       In a series of articles Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1983a, 1983b, 1983c, 1982)

and Auerbach, Kotlikoff and Jonathan Skinner (1983) extended this research by

developing a perfect foresight general equilibrium life cycle simulation model.

"Perfect foresight" in this context means that households make economic choices

based on common projections of future wages, interest rates, and tax rates, and

these decisions, in the aggregate, produce equilibrium time paths of these

variables equal to those projected.      In the life cycle version of the model con—

sidered here agents live for 55     periods,     corresponding to adult ages of 21 to

T5, and   are   concerned only with their own welfare, i.e., they have no bequest

motive.    The model incorporates variable labor supply, including endogenous

retirement, and a wide range of fiscal instruments, including investment incen-

tives, progressive taxes, and social security.          Its chief contribution is deter-

mining the equilibrium transition path generated by         fiscal   policies.

"Equilibrium    transition path" corresponds to the course of the economy as it
moves from one stationary equilibrium to another. During this transition there
is   market clearing for all goods, factors, and assets.        While the model solves

for the course of all economic variables over a 150 year period, convergence for

the new stationary state in the simulations described here typically occurs

within 70 years.

       The extended focus on this particular model's results in the succeeding

discussion y appear excessive, but the intention is to illustrate potential
                                        —b 6—




differences   in the quantitative affects of the four policies considered;

obviously, isolating these differences requires holding the model constant while

changing the experiment.      One ny also question the emphasis on simulation

results rather than empirical findings.         Simulation analysis is certainly no

substitute for empirical research; rather it provides a nthodolor for

exploring the full implications of empirical findings.           Unfortunately there is

no large scale neoclassical econometric nodel that can be simulated to estimate

the general equilibrium savings impact of policy.           The computer simulation nodel

used here incorporates CES utility and production functions, which are fre-

quently posited in empirical studies.       In addition, the parameterization of the

model is based on empirical findings.

    While simulation studies of this kind are best viewed as a second stage of

empirical analysis, i.e., as ways to display the implications of parameter esti-

mates and assumptions about particular function forms, they are also useful

tools for designing empirical studies.          Empirical work proceeds by assuming

functional relations and testing their validity; simulating the affects of these

functional relations for different parameter values in advance of empirical

testing permits the researcher to trace out         the   full implications of his (her)

assumptions and    to   distinguish critically important from less important para-

meter values.     Such knowledge will likely lead the econometrician to "spend"

more of his (her) limited data on estimating parameters to which the simulation

results are nost sensitive.

     While one ry be dubious about the absolute magnitude of changes in econo-

mic variables arising in simulation models, the nodels are likely to permit nore
                                         147

reliable   inferences concerning the relative effects of alternative policies.

Thus one may find through simulation analysis that one tax structure is vir-

tually always more conducive to saving than another within a large class of eco-

nomic models.     For certain policy choices a qualitative ranking of alternatives

may be all that is needed.

     Equation (12) presents the CES utility function of consumption, C, and

leisure, £,    underlying   the life cycle policy simulations described below.

                                                               l—y

           u          (1)a_]. IUCa(1l/P)   +   (i   —   a(1_1l_h1                     (12)
               = a1

In (12) 8 in the time preference rate, p is the "static" elasticity of substitu-

tion between consumption and leisure at each age a, and y is the interternporal

elasticity of substitution between consumption and leisure at different ages.

The reciprocal of y equals the coefficient of relative risk aversion.

     Baseline arameter values for 6, y, p and a, the elasticity of substitution

of capital for labor in the production function, are .015, .25,      .8   and   1.   These

figures are mid—range estimates based on a variety of empirical studies many of

which are cited in Auerbach, Kotlikoff and Skinner (1983).

     Table 3 contains simulation results for three structural tax policies

involving changes in the tax base from proportional income taxation to either

proportional consumption, wage, or capital income taxation with each designed to

yield equal revenues.       The simulated econon' has an initial steady state

capital—output ratio of 3.7, a capital—labor ratio of 5, a pre-tax wage nor-

malized to 1, a 6.7     percent pre—tax real interest rate, a 3.7 percent net
national saving rate, and a 15 percent proportional tax on all income.           Since
                                                                           Table 3

                                                       Structural Tax Change1
                           (Switch from 15% Proportional Income Tax to Specified Proportional Tax Regimes)


                                                                  Wage Rate                  Real Interest Rate                       Net National
                       Capital-Labor Ratio                        (Pre Tax)              ____        (Pre   Tax)                      Saving Rate

                                 Tax Base                         Tax Base                           Tax Base                          Tax Base

                     Consunip—              Capital   Consuinp—               Capital    Consuinp—              Capital     ConsuiTip—             Capital
                      tion         Wage      Income    tion                    Income     tion         Wage      Income      tion                   Income

   Initial
Steady State             5.0       5.0        5.0      1.00         1.00        1.00      6.7%         6.7%         6.7%     3.7%         3.7%        3.7%




   Year of      1                  5.1        14.8      .99         1.00         .99      6.9%         6.6%         6.8%     9.3%          5.3%      —2.9%
 Transition
                         5.1       5.1        14.14    1.01         1.01         .97      6.5%         6.5%         7.3%     8.2%          5.0%      —1.9%
                 5



                         5.14      5.2        14.1     1.02         1.01         .95      6.3%         6.14%        7.7%     1.2%          14.7%     —1.0%
                10



                50       6.2       5.14       3.0      1.05         1.02         .88      5.7%         6.3%         9.7%                   14.0%      2.0%



                         6.2       5.14       2.9      1.06         1.02         .87      5.7%         6.3%        10.1%     14.14%        14.o%      2.5%
               150



   1:   Simulations assume a population growth rate of 1.5 percent, a                   time preference rate of 1.5 percent, "static" and

        interteniporal    elasticities of substitution in consumption                and leisure of .8 and         .25, respectively, and a
        Cobb—Douglas production function.
there are no transfer programs conducted either through "official" or

"unofficial" mechanisms, receipts from the 15 percent income tax are solely used

to finance government consumption.          In each of Table 3's simulations government

consumption per capita is held fixed, and the tax rate of the specified tax

base is adjusted to produce revenues equal, on an annual basis, to the exogenous

path of government consumption.

     Table 3    displays   the primarily large impact structural tax policies can

have on an econon's saving rate and related variables.           Relative to the initial

income tax regime, long run       saving   rates are 19 percent larger under a consump-

tion tax, 8    percent larger under a wage tax, and 32 percent smaller under a
capital income tax.        Changes in the econon's saving rate during the transition

period are even xrre dramatic; in the first year after the switch to consumption

taxation, the saving rate rises to 9.3         percent from an initial value of 3.T.        In
the case of the capital income tax, there is a negative 2.9 percent saving rate

in the first year of the transition, and saving rates remain negative for over a

decade.   As Table 1   indicates    such swings in saving rates are within the range

of U.S. historical experience, although U.S. saving experience is certainly

neither solely nor primarily a reflection of historical changes in fiscal

policy.   The figures in Table 3 would, of course, all be magnified in           absolute
value if one started with a larger initial steady state income tax.          For

example, a structural shift to consumption taxation starting from a 30 percent

income tax ultimately increases the capital—labor ratio by 63         percent,    rather

than the 2 percent increase of Table 3.

     The capital deepening associated with switching from the 15 percent income
                                          —4 9—




tax    to consumption and wage taxation generates long run pre—tax wage rates that

are respectively 6       percent and 2 percent larger than their initial values.            In


the case of capital income taxation, the long run wage rate is 13 percent

snller     than in    the initial equilibrium.     The long—run pre—tax real interest

rate    declines    by one percent or less under consumption or wage taxation, while

it    rises 3. percentage points     under capital income taxation.          Long run tax

rates are 17.6       percent under a consumption tax, 20.1 percent under a wage tax,
and 62.7    percent under a capital income tax.        The much larger rate required

under capital income taxation obviously reflects the fact that capital income is

a much smaller tax base than total income, labor income, or consumption.

        These changes in after tax prices of factors and goods obviously alter the

utility levels of each cohort alive at the time of the tax change or born

thereafter.        One measure of these utility differences is the equivalent percen-

tage increase in full lifetime resources needed in the original income tax

regime to produce each cohort's realized level of utility under the specified

alternative tax regimes.        For cohorts living in the new long run equilibrium

under consumption, wage, and capital income tax regimes the equivalent

variations are 2.32 percent, —.89       percent,    and —   1.l   percent.    These figures

are smaller than the long run changes in wage rates indicated in Table 3,

because    they encompass the additional amount of both lifetime leisure and con—

sumption that could hypothetically be afforded in the old steady state.                Stated

differently since 65       percent of lifetime resources are spent on leisure in the
initial steady state, a 2.32 percent increase in full time resources would per-

mit a 6.63    (2.32/.35) percent    increase in lifetime consumption, holding leisure
                                      —50—



constant.
     One perhaps surprising feature of these numbers is that steady state uti-

lity is lower under wage taxation than under income taxation despite an 8    per-
cent increase in capital intensity.    While the before tax wage rises to 1.02

from an initial value of 1, the after tax wage is .80 in the wage tax steady

state compared with .85 under the income tax.    In addition, the long—run after—

tax interest rate, which determines prices of future consumption and leisure is

only .61 percentage points greater in the wage taxation steady state.     These

numbers are indicative of, rather than the reason for, the lower level of steady

state welfare under wage versus income taxation.     Despite the 21 percent greater

capital stock in the wage tax steady state, aggregate steady state consumption

is lower reflecting the smaller aggregate supply of labor induced by the

increased wage tax.   While the new steady state has sufficient resources to

sustain a higher level of welfare, the choice between consumption and leisure is

suboptimally skewed towards leisure by the new post—tax intertemporal price

structure imposed by a wage tax.   Auerbach, Kotlikoff, and Skinner (1983) demon-

strate that for the CES utility function given in (12) wage taxation is Pareto

inefficient relative to income taxation over a wide range of parameter values

partly because it places all the tax distortion on the static choice between

consumption and leisure, while leaving intertemporal decisions free of marginal

distortions; i.e., it does not directly alter the after—tax rate of return, a

key determinant of relative prices of goods and leisure at different dates.       The

income tax, in contrast, spreads the tax distortions over both margins of choice

and the larger tax base permits lower tax rates.16     The situation here is similar
                                           —51—


to that    pictured   in figure 2, where utility at B is less than at A, although the

resource endowment (line 2) is unchanged.

        The consumption tax affords a higher steady state level of welfare than the

income, wage, or capital income taxes, because it derives a part of its portion

revenue from an implicit lump sum levy, which implies less dead weight loss from

distortionary taxation.       Intuitively, consumption taxation is, in part, effec-

tively equivalent to a capital levy, because household wealth is indirectly taxed

when it is ultimately surrendered in exchange for consumption goods.              The capi-

tal levy represents a lump sum tax, since at the time the consumption tax is im-

posed, current wealth is given (i.e., is in perfectly inelastic supply.)

Chamley (1981) and Black (1981) emphasize the equivalence, for time invariant

tax rates, of consumption taxation to wage taxation plus a one time capital

levy.     In the case of time varying     tax   rates a consumption tax is structurally

equivalent to a capital levy, plus taxation of wage and capital income at dif-

ferent rates over time.

        The second reason for the long run utility gain under consumption taxation

as opposed to income taxation is the shift in the tax burden from later to

earlier generations, a point stressed by Summers (1981) and David Bradford

(1982). Take the age 55      life   cycle agent as an example.        In his last year in the

15 percent income tax steady state he consumes the principle plus 85              percent    of

the capital income earned from his terminal period assets.               Since the pre—tax

interest rate in the initial steady state is 6.7           percent,    terminal consumption

is 1.067    times terminal assets plus any after tax labor income.            If the economy

switches abruptly to a consumption tax,           the first year consumption tax rate is
                                            —52—


19.2 percent, and the 55         year old's terminal assets will purchase only .839
units of       consumption times the amount of these assets.           While   the   equivalent

negative variation in lifetime utility for the 55              year old in the consumption
tax simulation is less than one third of a percent, the equivalent variation is

negative 15.2 percent if one considers only the remaining life span of the 55

year    old.     The loss in welfare to these early generations plus the use of a irore

efficient tax       structure   are what pays for the higher level of welfare of later

generations, including those in the new steady state, under consumption taxation.


B.     Simulated Structural Tax Policy      -   Sensitivity    Analysis

       The sensitivity of the Table 3       results    to assumed parameter values and func-

tional form for preferences and production is of obvious importance for their

evaluation.       The empirical literature suggests extreme values for i, the inter—

temporal elasticity of substitution, of between .1 and .5, and values for p, the

static elasticity of substitution of between .1 and 1.5.                  Holding all other

parameter values constant, combinations of these values generate percentage

increases in the long run         capital—labor    ratio under the structural shift from

income to consumption taxation ranging from 22.6 to 26.9.                  The baseline (y=.25,

p.8) simulation generated a 2.O percent increase.

       There is ixore sensitivity to these parameter values in the case of struc-

tural wage tax policy.          Here the baseline increase in capital intensity is 8.0

percent with extreme values of 3.8 percent            and   11.1   percent over the specified

range of values for y and p.          The third structural tax policy described in Table

3,   a shift from income to capital income taxation, produces a 2.0 percent drop

in the capital—labor ratio for baseline values of y and p and a sensitivity
                                         —53—



range of 28.6 to 51.5 percent.

       Evans' 1983 article suggests that life cycle simulation results may be

highly sensitive to assumptions concerning the rate of time preference.              This

appears not to be the case for a structural change to consumption taxation.                 The

baseline simulation that incorporates a 1.5 percent rate of time preference,

yields a 214.0 percent change in capital intensivity.          Lowering the time pre-

ference rate to negative 3 percent produces a 214.8 percent increase, while

raising it to 14   percent   yields a 214.6 percent increase.     Similar experiments for

shifting to wage taxation led to respective changes in capital—labor ratios of

2.23 percent and 12.9 percent compared with the 8          percent baseline change.       In

the case of a structural shift to capital income taxation, the sensitivity to

time preference rates is quite substantial.           The percentage decrease in capital

intensity is 12.5 percent when the time preference rate, ó, is —.03, it is 142.0

percent when a is .015, and it is 56.5      percent when a is     .014.


       A final parameter value to consider in the context of this model is the

elasticity of substitution in the production function.           Lowering this rate in

the CES production function from 1 to .8        led   to 19.8 percent, 9.6    percent,   and

50.7   percent long—run changes in capital—labor ratios respectively, from con-

sumption, wage, and   capital    income structural tax changes.       These numbers can be

compared with 214.0 percent, 8.0     percent,   and 142.0 percent in the baseline case.

       The following points summarize these results concerning structural changes

in proportional tax bases in the standard CES life—cycle mDdel.              First, for a

set of plausible parameter values a shift from income to consumption taxation

generates significant increases in long—run savings, wage rates, and economic
                                           —54—



welfare.        The opposite is true for capital income taxation.     Structural wage tax

policy, on the other band, while it stimulates some additional savings, can

lower long—run economic welfare.         Second, long—run gains or losses in economic

welfare are paid, in part, by opposite changes in the welfare of certain genera-

tions alive during the transition induced by the new tax structure.           Third, the

impact of a shift to consumption taxation is quite insensitive to reasonable

variations in parameter values.         The effects of these structural wage and capi-

tal income tax policies are tore sensitive to deviations in baseline parameter

values, but such deviations do not alter the sign of their impact on long—run

savings.        Finally, substitution effects appear to dominate offsetting cross—

cohort income effects in altering long—run savings rates.           The move to capital

income taxation provides a good example.          Here the negative income effects of an

increased tax burden faced by the elderly and the corresponding positive income

effects of decreased taxation experienced by young and middle—aged cohorts, which

serve to stimulate saving (because of generational differences in marginal pro-

pensities to consume goods and leisure), are outweighed by the negative substitu-

tion effects that induce tore current and less future consumption and leisure.

These substitution effects are determined not only by preferences, but also by

the household's time path of full—time earnings capacity; i.e., as stressed by

Summers (1981), a given change in after—tax interest rates will produce dif-

ferent revaluation of the worker's endowment of full—time earnings if these

full—time earnings, arrive tore in the future than in the present.           Summers'

"human—wealth      effect" plays   a role in determining both income and substitution

effects    of   changes in discount rates.
                                         —55—



        A final issue of sensitivity analysis involves choice of functional form.

Presently there appear to be no studies comparing structural tax changes in life

cycle nodeis using different general functional forms for preferences and tech-

nologies.     Such a study would be quite informative.     Starrett (1983) uses the

Stone—Geary generalization of the CES utility function in a study of tax—

financed changes in government consumption.        He finds smaller increases in

national wealth arising from reductions in government consumption that are

financed by cuts in capital income taxation than does Summers (1981) who employs

the standard CES functional form.       Whether Starrett's nonhomothetic preferences

are nore plausible than those considered here is obviously an issue to be deter-

mined empirically.


B.   Structural Tax Policy —    Increasing   the Progressivity of the Rate Structure

     in a Life Cycle Model

        The impact of progressive tax schedules on savings is illustrated, in part,

by considering an equal revenue switch from proportional to progressive taxa-

tion.     There is obviously no unique progressive tax schedule to compare with

proportional taxation, but consideration of the linear marginal tax schedule

given in (13) provides a sense of potential affects.


        Tm=1+ B                                                                    (13)



In (13) B stands for the tax base, and a1 and a2 are two coefficients that are

chosen each year subject to the constraint that the new tax schedule produces

the same    annual   revenue as the proportional tax structure.

        The baseline life cycle siimilation nodel outlined above was used to examine
                                           —56—




the consequences of switching from 30 percent proportional taxation to a
progressive tax schedule featuring a marginal rate of 20 percent (i.e.,                 =    .2)
at zero income.       Pegging a1 at .2 leaves the annual revenue constraint to deter-

mine a2 in (13).       Households in the model fully incorporate the time path of

changes in progressive tax schedules (annual changes in a2 occuring during the

transition) in making their intertemporal consumption and leisure decisions.                  With

the exception of the income tax, this type of progressive structural tax change

produces rather small changes in capital—labor ratios and savings rates.               The

percentage change in capital intensity (saving rates) is —36          (-J46) percent    in

the case of income taxation, it is —10 (—7)          percent under capital income taxa-
tion, and —6 (_!4)percent under wage taxation.           There is a positive 3.7   (2.8)
percentage change in capital intensity (the net national saving rate) in the

case of the switch from proportional to progressive consumption taxation.               Since

the reduction is capital intensity and, therefore, the reduction in the tax base

per capita is greatest under the progressive income tax, the level of a2 needed

to generate the requisite percapita revenues is substantially larger (over 3

times)    under   progressive income taxation than under wage or consumption taxa-

tion, and almost twice as large as the a2 obtained in the case of progressive

capital income taxation.       Marginal tax rates peak at 82 percent, 51 percent, 145

percent,    and 33 percent, respectively     ,   under the progressive income, wage,

capital    income, and consumption tax regimes.

     The increase in savings in the progressive consumption tax simulation

reflects, in large part,      the   intergenerational transfer from the initial

elderly implied by this policy.         Since consumption rises with age   in   the initial
                                             —57—



steady   state, the first generation of aged face a larger tax burden under the

equal revenue progressive consumption tax than under the proportional consump-

tion tax; i.e., the initial elderly find themselves in higher narginal consump-

tion tax brackets than younger cohorts.             In contrast, the shift from

proportional income to progressive income taxation reduces the tax burden of the

initial elderly, since their income (capital plus wage) is low relative to that

of middle aged workers, although their capital income is relatively high.               Hence

the intergenerational income effects reinforce the substitution effects of

lowering savings under progressive income taxation.             Similar income effects do

not arise in the case of increasing the progressivity of either a wage tax or a

capital income tax.


C.   Structural Tax Policies —         Proportional   Taxation in an Infinite Horizon

     Model

      Barro's (1974) article describes how overlapping intergenerational altruism

generates a utility function in which each household effectively acts as if it

were infinitely lived.        The argument is clarified in (14) which assumes that

each generation t's utility, U., depends on its own consumption and leisure and

the utility of its imnEdiate offspring,                   For simplicity generations are

assumed to live for only one period.


             =   u., (Ct,   £t, u.,1    (C+1,   £t+l, U.•4•2 (c+2,   Lt+2,...)
                                                                                 =      (14)
                 =   Vt (Ci, £t, Ct,1,


      The utility linkage of generation t to generation t+1 effectively connects

generation t to all future generations, and (114) collapses into a function of

the entire future time path of consumption and leisure of the current household
                                                —58—




and its descendants.      If this utility function is homothetic then the
                                   av                av
marginal   rate of substitution               is independent of the stationary
                                                /
                                   t+1     t
state levels of C and L.t.     Utility maximization requires an equality

between this rate of substitution and 1 plus the after tax real rate

of return, denoted here as r(1_rr), where
                                                          Tr
                                                               is    the marginal tax rate

on capital income.     Hence the long run after tax rate of return is equal to the
                                   av
time preference   rate,        /            —       1, a constant for a homothetic utility
                           t            t
function that is independent of the levels of consumption and leisure.                         The

term r, however, is determined in general equilibrium by the marginal product of

capital.   Assuming constant returns to scale in production, it is easy to show

that the long—run capital—labor ratio is independent of marginal wage or con-

sumption taxes, but depends simply on the capital income tax rate, the constant

steady state rate of time preference and parameters of the production function.

For example, if the production function is Cobb—Douglas with a capital share of

.25, a switch from a 15 percent income tax to either a wage or consumption tax

increases long—run capital intensity in general equilibrium by 24 percent;

starting with a 30 percent income tax, the long run percentage increase is 61

percent.   A switch to capital income taxation from a 10 percent income tax

steady state lowers long—run capital intensity by 147 percent; structural shifts

to capital income taxation starting with a larger initial income tax are not

feasible long run policies for this ndel.                  The reason for the reduction in

capital intensity in the case of a structural shift to capital income taxation

is the higher tax on capital income, 14 percent instead of 10 percent required

to satisfy the revenue constraint.              Using a .8          elasticity   of substitution in
                                       —59—



production,    a, reduces these changes in capital intensity by about 30 percent;

the sensitivity of tax policy to this parameter value is discussed in Chamley

(1981).     The fact that a lower value of a reduces the impact of structural tax

policy is intuitive, at least in the limit; when a equals zero, capital and

labor are used in fixed proportions, and the distinction between capital and

labor income taxes disappears.

        In the case of progressive taxation, homothetic preferences of the form

given in (114) still imply a steady state equality between the after (marginal)

tax return to capital and the time preference rate.     If the progressive tax

structure exhibits monotone increasing tax rates, marginal tax rates will exceed

average tax rates, and the steady state marginal tax rate under the progressive

tax structure nxist differ from that in the initial proportional tax steady state

due to the equal revenue requirement.     While it seems likely that a switch from

proportional to progressive taxation of all income or simply capital income will be

associated with higher marginal taxation of capital income and, therefore,

smaller values of capital per worker, this remains an area for future investiga—

tion.     A related set of apparently unexplored structural tax questions is the

consequence of switching from proportional to progressive wage or consumption

taxation.     The results in each of these cases will depend on assumptions con-

cerning legal restrictions and additional tax obligations confronting altruistic

households in shifting taxable income to family members in lower marginal tax

brackets.


E.   Structural Tax Policy in a Small Open Econon'

        The foregoing discussion applies to closed economies or to a world econonrj
                                      —6o—




consisting   of countries that are identical up to a scale factor and that

simultaneously engage in the same fiscal policy.     To see how strikingly dif-

ferent the impact of particular structural tax policies can be in an open eco—

nonw, consider switching from wage to capital income taxation under the

following four simplifying assumptions.      First, the econov in question is

small and places no restrictions on imports or exports of perfectly mobile finan-

cial and physical capital.   Second, there are only two factors of production,

capital and labor.   Third, labor is mobile domestically, but not internationally.

Fourth, foreign governments do not engage in any fiscal policy whatsoever.

     Under these circumstances the foreign pre—tax rate of return is given and

domestic residents will change their mix of foreign and domestic investment to

maximize their after—tax return.    If the home country taxes the capital income

of domestic residents regardless of where that income is earned, the switch

from wage to capital income taxation will have the type of effects on savings

just described, except that general equilibrium changes in before—tax factor

prices will be trivial because the home country is small.     If, on the other

hand, the home country taxes both its own residents and foreigners at the same

rate on income earned only on domestic capital, capital will flow out of the

home country until after—tax rates of return are equalized internationally.       The

domestic pre—tax wage will fall in response to a reduction in the capital—labor

ratio.   If labor is supplied inelastically, the pre—tax wage will decline until

the fall in pre—tax labor income exactly equals the government's tax revenue;

i.e., labor bears the entire burden (incidence) of the capital income tax.

Hence, "the shift to capital income taxation" in this case simply replaces an
explicit wage tax with an implicit wage tax.     If labor is elastically supplied

the wage will differ somewhat across the two tax regimes, but the basic point

holds that the econon effectively ends up with a wage tax despite the reported

change in tax structure.

      The degree of international capital ibility at the margin is particularly

important for determining whether to try to stimulate savings through changes in

corporate or personal capital income taxation.     If the personal capital income

tax is levied on such income regardless of where it is earned, while the cor-

porate income tax is levied only on capital income earned domestically, a switch

from wage to corporate profits taxation may simply replace an explicit wage tax

with an implicit one.   Switching to personal taxation on capital income earned

either at home or abroad, on the other hand, could have major impacts on inter-.

temporal prices confronting domestic households, and, therefore, major impacts

on household consumption and national savings.


V.   The Impact of Contemporaneous Tax—Financed Increases in Government
     Consumption

A.   Results for the Life Cycle Model

      This section considers changes in government consumption under the assump-

tion that such consumption either is not an argument of private utility

functions or that the utility of government consumption is separable from that

of private consumption and leisure.     In either case the choice of government

consumption does not directly affect private marginal rates of substitution bet-

ween current and future consumption and leisure.     Hence, changes in government

consumption affect private choices of these variables only indirectly
                                          —62—


altering variables (e.g., tax rates) entering private budget constraints.

In    life cycle economies increases in the level of government consumption,
financed on    a contemporaneous basis by increases in tax rates have quite dif-

ferent impacts on national savings depending on the tax base in place.           For

example, using the baseline parameter values of section IV, a permanent doubling

of the level of government consumption per capita (from an initial level equal

to 15 percent of the specified tax base) leads to respective reductions between

initial and final steady states in capital—labor ratios and national savings

rates of 26.2 percent and 20.4 percent under the income tax, 12.3 percent and

9.7   percent under the wage tax, 14.5 percent and 11.0 percent under the capital

income tax, but only 1.2 percent and .01 percent under the consumption tax.

Long—run crowding out of capital per dollar increase in government consumption

is 5.9    dollars   under income tax finance, 4.8   dollars   under wage tax finance, 6.5

dollars    under capital income tax finance, but negative 3 cents under consumption

tax finance.17

       Different income and substitution effects experienced by particular cohorts

are important for understanding these results.         Compare, for example, the con-

sumption and wage      tax results.   In the consumption tax case initial elderly
generations, with high marginal propensities to consume, share immediately and

significantly       in the burden of the higher taxes and reduce    their consumption and
leisure accordingly.       Younger cohorts also lower their current consumption and

leisure in response to their lower effective lifetime resources; however, they

spread this lifetime loss over the future as well as the present.           These private

changes significantly offset the increased rate of government consumption; in
                                        —63—




the first year of the economic transition each dollar increase in government
consumption is offset by 89     cents less in private consumption.
        In contrast, the contemporaneous wage   tax   financed increase in government

consumption    has little impact on the elderly who are largely out of the
workforce; while younger cohorts do reduce their current        consumption and leisure

in   response to the increased lifetime tax burden, their immediate response is
limited    because of their ability and desire to smooth these reductions over the

remainder of their lives.      In addition, the substitution effects leading to

reduced labor by the young and middle—aged are significantly greater under wage

taxation    than under consumption taxation; the reason is the higher effective tax
on labor earnings and lower effective net wage, when the net wage is measured in
terms of additional consumption that can be attained by working an additional
hour.     The fact that   initial elderly generations pay for little if any of the
additional    government consumption means higher effective marginal taxation     of

labor    supply for younger and future generations.

        In the first year of the wage tax transition there is over a 3 percent

reduction in the simulated econonf's labor supply.         This implies, of course, less

current output, and less current saving even holding aggregate consumption

constant.     These initial effects are not transitory; they are part of an

equilibrium shift to a permanently different econony.         The reduction in

current saving means lower capital—labor ratios in subsequent periods, lower

pretax wages, and higher wage tax rates given the prespecified revenue require-

ment of the government.

        Substitution effects also play a major role in the simulation of income tax
                                      —6b--



and capital income tax financed increases in government consumption.         The higher

capital income taxes here lead households to substitute current consumption and

leisure for future consumption and leisure.    In the income tax case, each dollar

of increased government consumption in year 1 of the transition is offset by

only T3   cents of reduced private consumption; in addition there is a 1.5 percent
reduction in employment.    Under a pure capital income tax regime the private

consumption offset is only 10 cents on the dollar; however, the initial change

in employment is minimal.

      These results are presented to illustrate rather than exhaustively examine

the savings impact of contemporaneous tax financed increases in government con-

sumption.    As in the case of structural tax policy some of these results are

sensitive to certain parameter values and the functional form of the utility

function (Starrett (1983)).


B.   Tax—Financed Increases in Government Consumption   —   the   Infinite Horizon

     Model

      Under the assumption of a homothetic, infinite horizon utility function and

constant returns to scale in production the discussion in section III indicated

that steady state capital intensity is independent of wage or consumption income

taxes since neither tax structure directly alters the marginal return to

saving in the steady state.18    Hence, an immediate permanent increase in govern-

ment consumption will have no long—run affects on capital—labor ratios to the

extent this consumption is financed by wage or consumption taxation.         The abso-

lute levels, however, of capital and labor supply may change both in the short

and long run in response to the increased taxation.     This clearly depends on
                                        —65--



variability    in labor supply.   If labor supply is exogenous and the utility tune-.

tion is time separable, the private sector immediately reduces its own consump-

tion by an amount exactly equal to the increase in government consumption and

the   capital stock, a closed econonr's wealth in a one good model, remains

unchanged.19    When labor supply is variable or the increase in government consump-

tion is financed, at least partially, by capital income taxation, there will be

short— as well as long—run effects on the absolute amount of savings.

      Illustrative simulations of steady—state changes in levels of government

consumption for the infinite horizon version of the CES utility function in

(12), assuming section IV's baseline parameter values and government consumption

initially financed by a 15 percent tax rate, produce the following results.

Doubling government consumption decreases the econoi"s long—run per capita.

wealth by 22 percent if financed by income taxation, by .5     percent if financed
by wage taxation, by 22 percent if financed by capital income taxation, and by

—2 percent if financed by consumption taxation.


VI.   The Savings Impact of Intergenerational Tax Policy

 A.   Major Themes in the Literature

      Feldstein's (1974) article on social security and savings sparked an

intensive empirical and theoretical analysis of the savings     impact of interge-

nerational transfers.    Much of this research has focused on the particular

effects of unfunded social security on savings (Alicia Munnell, 1974; Feldstein

and Anthony Pellechio, 1979; Kotlikoff, 1979a, 1979b; Barro, 1978; Darby,

19T9; Mordecai Kurz, 1981; Selig Lesnoy and Dean Leimer, 1981; Feldstein,

1980, 1982a; Alan Blinder, Roger Gordon, and Donald Wise, 1980; Kurz, 1981;
                                      —66—



                                                   1982).    But this research
Diamond and Hausman, 1982; Auerbach and Kotlikoff,
                                                       but potentially quite
also stimulated economists to search for other subtle,

powerful uchanism by which the government transfers resources across genera-
                                                                Feldstein (1977)
tions.    In his second seminal contribution to this literature
                                                                     intramargi—
demonstrates how tax—induced revaluation of land transfers resources

nally across generations.    While such asset revaluationS have no effect in inf i—

                                                           Carlos Rodriguez,
nite horizon economies (Barro, 19T4; Calvo, Kotlikoff, and
                                                                       elderly
19T9), they are important in the life cycle model; for middle—aged and
                                                               government—
cohorts who are the principal owners of land and other assets,
                                                           measured in terms of
induced capital losses lower the value of non—human wealth

consumption goods.     It is important to realize that these capital losses can far

                                                           revaluations.     In
exceed the current explicit tax payments which induce such
                                                            present value of
the case of a land rent tax, the price of land falls by the
                                                            For young and unborn
the infinite stream of current and future tax payments.
                                                                        since
generations the reduced land price is equivalent to a lump—sum subsidy,
                                                                    consumption
they now purchase this fixed productive asset by surrendering fewer

 goods to their predecessors.2°    As mentioned in section III, such intergenera-

                                                                          of
 tional redistribution in life cycle models alters current saving because
                                                                        leisure.
 cross—cohort differences in marginal propensities to consume goods and

         Just as unfunded social security constitutes a hidden wa for governments
                                                                       hidden way
 to run economic deficits, tax—induced asset revaluation constitutes a

 for governments to run economic surpluses.     If they so choose, governments could

                                                                         real
 explicitly report very sizeable official surpluses without changing any
                                                                  generations and
 economic policy: rather than covertly taxing the wealth of older
                                          —67—




indiectly        handing the receipts to young and future generations, they could

explicitly levy a one time wealth tax, collecting proceeds that exactly equal

each household's capital loss under the corresponding implicit policy,            and

distribute the funds over time in a lump sum fashion to young and future genera-

tions.        While this change in accounting procedures, if properly enacted, alters

no one's intertemporal budget constraint, including the government's, the

increase in current period receipts from the wealth tax would be reported as a

surplus.

        Feldstein's (1977) essay was    followed   by analyses by King (1977), Auerbach

(1979), and David Bradford (1980, 1981) demonstrating that if corporations are

prohibited from repurchasing their shares, one may         still,   observe corporations

paying dividends despite that fact that personal income taxation favors capital

gains relative to dividend income.        The advantage to capital gains is arbitraged

away,    in    equilibrium, by equity values that rise by less than a dollar for every

dollar of retained earnings.        That is, shareholders are indifferent at the

margin between receiving dividends, or having corporations retain earnings.

Dividends are taxed at higher rates, while retained earnings lead to less than

dollar for dollar capital gains, but are taxed at a lower rate when realized.

In such economies where dividends are being paid, equity values always adjust to

provide the same effective rate of return old investments yielding dividends as

on investments yielding capital gains.           In these xdels the marginal after—tax

return to capital income is a direct function solely of the tax rate on capital

gains.        The tax rate on capital gains is the rate that influences marginal capi-

tal income taxation because it is lower than the dividend tax rate; i.e., the
                                       —68—



return on dividends is forced to adjust to the return on retained earnings via
equity valuation.     A corollary of this result is that increasing the dividend

tax rate has no direct impact on the after—tax return to capital.        Increasing
dividend    taxation does, however, lead to a fall in stock market values and an

associated intergenerational redistribution of resources that stimulates life

cycle savings.

     This surprising result in which increasing a particular capital income

tax instrument unambiguously    stimulates    savings in a life cycle ntdel is charac-

teristic of a much broader class of policies than simply increases in dividend

taxation.    Summers (1981c) describes the implications for asset valuation of a

variety of fiscal policies, pointing out that the price of old capital declines

in response to investment incentives that discriminate in favor of new capital.

Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1982) demonstrate in a general equilibrium Context that

investment incentives, such as accelerated depreciation or investment tax cre-

dits, stimulate saving (investment in a closed econor,r) through implicit      one-

time wealth taxation of pre—existing capital; in addition, in the presence of

significant investment incentives, such as those now in place in the U.S.,

raising either corporate or personal tax rates on capital income also lowers

stock market values, thereby redistributing resources intergenerationalLy and

stimulating savings in life cycle economies.

     The example of introducing 100 percent expensing of new capital in an eco—

non' with a v percent proportional income tax permits an intuitive explanation

of these results.    Assume, for simplicity, that there is a single homogeneous

form of capital that does not physically depreciate.       Then the legislated and
                                       —69—



effective    marginal tax rate on capital income is r prior to the introduction of

expensing.     Introducing full expensing completely eliminates the effective

marginal tax on capital income; for new capital the immediate subsidy of i cents

per dollar invested offsets in present value the stream of taxes that are paid

on the return to this marginal infinitely lived investment.21

     By assumption, pre—existing capital is either ineligible for expensing, or

is effectively ineligible because of recapture taxes.     Hence, in order to pro-

vide the same after tax return to investors as new capital, the market value of

old capital must fall by T cents on the dollar; i.e., the value of capital rela-

tive to its replacement cost, "Tobin's q," is given by q = 1—r.       If 100 percent

expensing is initially in place, raising t has no impact on the marginal return

to capital, since investing in new capital provides a larger initial subsidy to

offset the now larger future taxes on the investment's return.       On the other

hand, raising t induces additional capital losses to old capital according to

the formula for q.     This covert redistribution from older to young and future

generations reduces current national consumption and increase savings in the

life cycle ndel because of cross—cohort differences in marginal consumption

propensities.

     Hidden economic surpluses of this type can be quite sizeable relative to

officially reported deficits.     Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1982) estimate that the

1981 U.S. Tax Act imposed an implicit tax, in the form of a 1981 capital loss to

holders of the U.S. capital stock of roughly $260 billion.     Had   the   government

explicitly imposed this wealth tax, reported tax receipts would have risen by

approximately    $260 billion, and the government would have reported a $202
                                     —70—


billion surplus for 1981.   Such a change in the reported 1981 deficit not-

withstanding, real policy would have remained unchanged had the government also

redistributed the $260 billion tax on stock holders in a non—distorting fashion

to young and future generations according to the benefits that would otherwise

have accrued to them under the implicit surplus policy.

     The estimated $260 billion capital loss assumes zero marginal costs of

adjusting the econonJ's capital stock, i.e., zero costs to physically installing

new capital or training workers to use new capital.   The assumption of substan-

tial adjustment costs is likely to reduce this $260 billion figure by roughly

one quarter (Auerbach and Kotlikoff, 1983c).   The relationship between invest-

ment and stock market valuation dates from the "q" theory of Tobin (1969).

Papers by Andrew Abel (1979) and Fuinio Hayashi (1982) analyze the firm's optimal

investment strater in the presence of adjustment costs, producing a simple

linear relationship between a firm's investment rate and q. when adjustment costs

are quadratic.   James Poterba's (1980) study of housing investment appears to be

the first inclusion of taxation in the q investment model.   Summers (1981) and

Michael Salinger and Summers (1983) employ this partial equilibrium model to

study the impact of corporate and personal taxation on investment in plant and

equipment.

     The general equilibrium implication of this research is that, apart from

policies such as investment incentives that have a direct depressing affect on

stock values, fiscal policies that increase (decrease) national capital for-

mation will likely be associated with temporary increases (decreases) in stock

market values; such capital revaluations arise because capital that has already
                                     —71—


been installed is a Quasi—fixed factor that earns intramarginal rents on its

ability to aid in the installation of additional capital.   As indicated, even in

the case of investment incentives, the presence of adjustment costs can signifi-

cantly mitigate the fall in stock values associated with tax policies which

discriminate against old capital.   In a life cycle nDdel the income effects of

asset revaluation arising from adjustment costs appear to lengthen fiscal policy

transitions as well as reduce the size of short—run changes in nrst economic

variables; however, their impact on long—run outcomes appears minor (Auerbach and

Kotlikoff (1982)).   The slower transitions reflect not only the adjustment costs

of varying capital stocks over a short period of time, but also the intergenera-

tional income affects of the capital gains and losses associated with the short

term asset revaluation.


B.   Empirical Research on Savings and Intergenerational Transfers

      Time series analysis of the effect of intergenerational transfers on aggre-

gate consumption has proved inconclusive.   Estimates of the impact of unfunded

social security on consumption vary from very large positive effects (Feldstein,

19Th) to negative effects (Selig Lesnoy and Dean Leimer, 1980, 1981).

      If one takes the life cycle ndel as the maintained hypothesis of these

studies, the econometrics is plagued by special problems of aggregation,

simultaneity, misspecification, and errors in neasuring indices of intergenera—

tional transfers, such as Social Security wealth (Samuel Williamson and Warren

Jones, 1983).   The standard procedure ignores difference s by cohort in marginal

consumption propensities, producing coefficients of the resulting aggregated

equation that are a weighted average of cohort—specific coefficients.    There is
                                    —72—


no reason to suspect the weights will be constant through time.   The simuLta-

neity problem arises from the inclusion of aggregate disposable income as an

explanatory variable that is presumed exogeneous from current consumption.

Misspecification arises from using disposable total income, rather than the

after—tax present value of future labor earnings as an explanatory variable.        In

addition, even at the cohort level, the specified coefficients are not, in

general, constant; rather they are variables that depend on the anticipated time

paths of future tax rates and benefit levels, and such anticipations change

through time.

     Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1983c) demonstrate the problem of the time series

statistical approach for the life cycle xmdel by running the standard time

series specification on simulated data that conform perfectly to this theory's

predictions concerning the impact of unfunded social security on savings.     The

coefficients on the critical social security wealth variable as well as many

other variables are extraordinarially sensitive to the choice of sample period

as well as the speed with which unfunded social security is phased into the

econon; the social security coefficients ranged from 10.8 to           This exer-

cise suggests that the conventional time series approach has very little power

with respect to rejecting the strict (no altruism) life cycle ndel of saving.

In addition, even if one improved the econometric specification and estimated

the equation with instrumental variables, the absence of cohort—specific time

series data appears to preclude resolving problems of aggregation.

     Surprisingly, there seems to have been no attempts to use time series data

to reject the alternative hypothesis, namely that of intergenerational altruism.
                                         —T3—



This model, which      in its simplest formulation reduces to the case of a single

infinitely lived household, is more suited to aggregate data and has      the
following testable implications.       First, the econoII's stocks of human and non-

human wealth (discounted at pre—tax rates of return) should have identical pre—

dicted effects on aggregate consumption (assuming human wealth can be properly

measured, which is particularly difficult given the potential degree of uncer-

tainty concerning earnings), and the present value of the stream of future

government consumption should have an equal negative effect (see equation (11)).

Second, the distribution of resource ownership by age should have no impact on

aggregate consumption; changes in the distribution of resource ownership by age

could    be proxied by changes in the ratio of the value of the stock market to the

value of human resources, since the elderly own a greater fraction of equities

than    they   do of human wealth.22

        Cross section analyses have also been hampered by limited data; in addi-

tion, many studies, including those of the author, proceed without clearly for—

mulating reectable bypotheses concerning altruism.        These particular studies

involve regressions of household private wealth on social security tax and

transfer variables.       The central question posed in much of this literature is

whether households reduce their private asset accumulation when young because of

the anticipation of receiving net windfall transfers when old.       The evidence

here is mixed, but even if each of these studies had      strongly confirmed    the pro-

position that expected future windfalls lead to higher current consumption and,

therefore, less private wealth accumulation, the results would still leave unre-

solved the issue of intergenerational altruism; the altruistic hypothesis, like
                                         —T —



the life cycle hypothesis, suggests that increases in the future resources of a
particular household should raise that household's consumption and lower its own

savings.23   In the altruistic case, however, the future windfall to the household

in question would presumably also raise the consumption of all other altruisti-

cally linked households in the extended family.         Unfortunately, this latter pro-

position is not tested in the existing literature, nor does it appear capable of

being tested given current data sources.        If one had data on the consumption and

resources of potentially altruistically linked households, one could test for

such linkages by examining whether the consumption of one household depended on

the resources of the other.

     To swnmarize, the empirical literature on intergenerational transfers has

focused very narrowly on the predicted impact of particular policies, primarily

Social Security.        Many of the broader implications of selfish, finite horizon

behavior or altruistic, infinite horizon ndels have not yet been directly

tested.   Blinder, Gordon, and Donald Wise (1981) is a notable exception.        This

paper tests the fundamental prediction of the life cycle cdel that the elderly

have larger marginal propensities to consume goods and leisure than the young.

The evidence presented is weakly supportive of this proposition.


C.   Intergenerational Tax Policy —      Simulation   Analyses

      Presumably   as    a consequence of standard accounting conventions much of the

concern about intergenerational transfers has focused on the impact of "official

deficits" on investment, economic growth, and interest rates.         As stressed in

section III, whether officially reported current deficits are associated in life

cycle ndels with actual intergenerational redistribution requires close scru-
                                         —75—



tiny    of changes in household life time budget constraints.       Conventionally

reported deficits can certainly coincide with real economic deficits; holding

other fiscal policies constant, short—run tax cuts, leading to the accumulation

of debt, the interest on which is paid for by higher future taxes (rather than

reduced government consumption) provide one example in which a higher reported

official deficit is associated with a real redistribution of resources across

generations.

        The simulation nodel outlined in section IV produces the following effects

of temporary tax cuts followed by a policy of maintaining constant the

government's resulting accumulated stock of official debt.          The baseline tax

regime involves a 15 percent proportional income tax.          A one—year cut in the

income tax rate from 15 to 10 percent (a 5      percent    of GNP deficit) has no signi-

ficant    impact on the econon in the long run. This debt policy lowers the long
run    capital   stock by slightly less than 2 percent and reduces the before tax
wage by close to .5 percent. The long run       income    tax rate is 15.3 percent, the
rate    needed to finance the interest payments on the endogeneously accumulated

stock of debt as well pay for government consumption.          Interestingly, the long

run path to a "crowded out" capital      stock involves short run    "crowding in" of

capital.     In year 1 of the transition when the income tax rate is 10 percent,

labor supply increases by 3.7      percent while consumption rises by only 1.7 per-
cent.     The increase in income exceeds the increase in consumption producing a 32

percent increase in the saving rate in year 1 relative to the initial steady

state.     In year 2 of the transition the income tax rate is raised to 15.2 per-

cent to avoid a further increase in the stock of per capita debt; labor supply
                                             —76—



 now falls below its inital steady state value as does the saving rate.              In com-

parison with the long run    effects       of this policy, the immediate effects are

 quite striking.    Sizeable substitution effects from temporary life cycle wage

changes have been estimated by Thomas MaCurdy (1981) and are also suggested by

Hausnian's ((%I)    cross—sectional       evidence.   This exaxiple, in which the saving

rate first rises, then falls, indicates that short run "supply side" responses

may be   quite poor predictors of long        run supplies of capital and labor and of

the   size of the long run tax base.
      A twenty year income tax cut from 15 to 10 percent has much more dramatic

long run effects; the decline in capital across steady states in this case is 149

percent, with every dollar of long run debt associated with 1.2 dollars less in

long run capital.    The pre—tax wage ultimately declines by i14 percent in the

simulation, while the after tax wage falls by 30 percent reflecting, in part,

the 30 percent income tax rate required for long run budget balance.            The long

run real interest rate rises by      14   percentage points in this experiment.
      The year 1 response in the twenty year tax cut simulation involves a 2.5

percent increase in labor supply, but a 2.6 percent rise in private consumption.

Consequently national saving per worker falls and crowding out begins           in   year 1.

The crowding out process is, however, quite slow; in the first ten years the per

capital capital stock falls by less than 2 percent; it falls by an additional 14

percent   between years 10 and 20.        In the subsequent decade after the income tax

is raised, which induces a substitution away from labor supply and saving, there

is an additional 114 percent decline in per capita capital relative to its ini-

tial value.   Thus less than one half of the total drop in capital per person
                                          —71'—




occurs during the first 30 years of the perfect foresight economic transition.

By year 60 about four—fifths of the transition is complete.

     The short run differences in these two tax cut simulations clearly reflect

the predominance of substitution over income effects in the case of the short

period tax cuts and the converse for the 20 year tax cut; in the case of the one

year tax cut all but the oldest generation alive in the first year will .face

higher tax rates through the rest of their lives.        Young generations will face

the higher tax rates for such a long period of time that their budget possibili-

ties and levels of welfare are actually reduced.        While the income effects

experienced by most current a€e groups from the change in the time path of tax

rates in the one year tax cut are trivial, if not negative, the substitution

effect leading to less current consumption and more current labor supply at the

time of the tax cut are non—trivial.        A key lesson of these two simulations is

that policies      that   inevitably crowd out saving and investment can look quite

effective   in   promoting capital formation if one evaluates such policies using

only the first few years of information.

     It is instructive to compare these results arising from presumably expli-

citly reported deficits with those arising from the unreported deficits imbedded

in unfunded Social Security.       Starting out from the same initial equilibrium,

introducing a "pay as you go" Social Security system with a 0 percent replace-

ment rate and financed by payroll taxes leads to a 19 percent long run decline

In capital per person and a 5      percent drop in the pre—tax wage.   Hence, in its

ability to crowd out capital in this life cycle model, introducing an unfunded

Social Security system with a substantial benefit replacement rate can have as
                                        —T8—




deleterious    an impact on capital formation as officially       reported economic defi-
cit   policies formation arising from multi—year tax cuts.

      The   importance   of considering unreported intergenerational transfers is

further highlighted by a final simulation experiment.           Suppose the econoliw's

initial fiscal policy is a 15 percent income tax with 100 percent expensing of

new capital.     As argued above, this tax structure involves no marginal taxation

of capital income, and increases in the capital income tax simply produce capi-

tal losses for elderly owners of capital, with large marginal consumption pro-

pensities, thus transferring resources to young and future generations, with low

or zero current marginal consumption propensities.         Consider a permanent

increase in the tax rate on capital income from 15 to 50 percent coupled with a

20 year cut in the wage tax rate from 15 to 10 percent.           While the government

reports     official deficits in the first few years of the economic transition in

excess of 4 percent of GNP, the unreported economic surplus associated with the

asset revaluation crowds in rre capital than the wage tax cut crowds out.                By

the twentieth year of the transition the increase in the government's tax base

has sufficed to retire the official debt issued in the early years of this

policy, and the government finds itself running a very sizeable surplus.            To

balance its budget after 20 years the wage tax rate must be cut; the new long

run wage tax rate is only 2 percent.       The long run   per   capita capital stock is

TO percent larger than its initial steady state value, and the government

(stock) surplus equals close to 7      percent   of private wealth.

       These results illustrate the variety of outcomes, many of which are quite

surprising, that the standard CES life cycle nodel can produce in response to
                                       —79—


intergenerational tax policies.     They should, however, be viewed cautiously;

augmenting this type of model with liquidity constraints on unsecured borrowing,

as in Dolde and Tobin (1981) can significantly diminish the simulated response

to such policies in life cycle economies.


VII.     The Savings Impact of Intragenerational Tax Policy

       Recent papers by James Heckman (1981), Hausman (1979, 1977), and Diamond

and Hausman (1983) suggest a great deal of heterogeneity in household prefer-

ences.     While these and other articles carefully model taste differences, vir-

tually all applied micro econometric studies successfully employ demographic and

related variables to "control" for differences in household behavior.     This evi-

dence, as well as casual observation, suggests a within cohort distribution of

time preference rates and, therefore, of differences in marginal propensities to

consmne goods and leisure.     For the issue of savings and intragenerational

redistribution, the inortant empirical question is whether transfer recipients

within an age group have, on average, greater marginal propensities to dissave

out of transfers than their contemporaries who are the source of such transfers.

Since the intent of intragenerational transfers is presumably to improve the lot

of the poor, attention has naturally focused on the correlation of spending pro-

pensities with levels of economic resources.     Blinder (1975), using aggregate

time series data finds that equalizing incomes is more likely to stimulate than

retard savings.     On the other hand, Menchik and David's (1983) study as well as

that of Diamond and Hausne.n (1983) supports a view that marginal spending pro-

pensities decline with economic resources.

       Even if the poor do not systematically differ from the rich in their inter—
                                       —80—




temporal preferences, the poor xr.y be liquidity constrained at the margin; i.e.,
they may face different shadow prices for intertemporal consumption than the

rich.     Other within cohort differences in intertemporal relative prices could,

however, be offsetting.     For example, under a progressive income tax the poor

face lower marginal taxes on capital income and, through this channel, lower

relative prices of future consumption and leisure.

        There is mounting evidence that liquidity constraints are binding for lower

income households.     Diamond (1977) and Diainand and Hausman (1983) stress the low

levels of liquid wealth held by a significant fraction of the middle and low

income population.     Kotlikoff and Summers (1982) demonstrate that the timing of

the receipt of lifetime resources significantly influences tterns of lifetime

wealth accumulation.     Hurd and Boskin (l981) present evidence that retirement

probabilities depend on the level of tangible wealth.     Hall and Mishkin

(1982) test the Euler conditions of unconstrained intertemporal maximization and

conclude that such a model is inappropriate for roughly 20 percent of U.S.

households.     King and Dicks—Mireaux (1982) reach a similar conclusion using

Canadian data.     Hayashi's (1982b) focuses directly on the issue of liquidity

constraints.     His novel approach is to see whether the consumption function of

presumably unconstrained households systematically differs from that of

constrained households.     Hayashi's answer is strongly in the affirmative.     Over

half of the households in his sample of the 19631961 Federal Reserve Survey of

Financial Characteristics meet his definition of potentially liquidity con-

strained; this group reported receiving close to 140 percent less in disposable

income than the unconstrained group.     While this group as a whole appears to be
                                       —8i—



consuning only about 3 percent less than they would in the absence of such con—

straints, for the 18 to 33   year old constrained households, actual consumption
is close to 10 percent less than predicted unconstrained consumption.

     Emily Gilde (1983) examines the long run, general equilibrium savings

impact of intragenerational transfers in a 55    period life cycle idel with exo—
genous labor supply, a utility function that is additively separable and iso—

elastic in consumption, and a Cobb Douglas production function.      The model

contains two sets of agents, low earners and high earners.      The populations of

each group are identical.    The high earners have time preference rates of 1.5

percent while the low earners have rates of 6    percent.   Thus low earners have

larger marginal consumption propensities than high earners.      In examining

the impact of within cohort transfers, Gilde considers cases in which the poor

both are and are not liquidity constrained.     Gilde finds tha t very significant

levels of intragenerational redistribution have rather minor impacts on her

econoxr-'s long run stock of wealth.   For example, a uniform lump sum transfer to

each poor worker during each of his (her) working years that raises that

worker's lifetime resources by close to 25 percent and which is financed by a

uniform lump sum tax on rich workers of the same generation during each of his

(her) working years reduces the stock of wealth by less than      percent in the

case of no liquidity constraints and less than 7    percent when liquidity
constraints are binding.    The finding of rather small savings effects of

redistributing to the poor appear to be quite robust in the face of reasonable

variations in the intertemporal elasticity of substitution in consumption, but

they are rather sensitive to the ratio of rich to poor workers.
                                       —82—


        .The explanation for these small changes in the case of no liquidity

constraints is simply that neither the differences in marginal consumption pro-

pensities across the two groups nor the size of the transfers are sufficiently

large to have much impact on the econonw's total wealth accumulation.      In the

case the poor are liquidity constrained, their marginal consumption propensities

are unity, but the resource increment multiplying there unitary propensities is

only the current year's transfers.     For rich, unconstrained young workers ma1'ing

the transfers, their reduction in current consumption equals their much smaller

nrginal propensity to consume multiplied by the present value of the annual

transfers, typically a much larger number than simply the current year payment.


   A.     Fiscal Policy and the Government's Implicit Provision of Insurance

        Interpreting fiscal policy as implicit provision of insurance is

illustrated by the following simple example.      Imagine an econoxy in which each

identical risk averse agent owns a home worth $10,000 and faces an exogenous 10

percent probability of losing his home through fire.      Assume the probability

of' having a fire is independent across households and that exactly 10 percent

of all houses in the economy burn down each year.      In such a setting a com-

petitive insurance market, absent transaction costs, would fully insure each

homeowner, arid the fire insurance premium would be $1,000.     Now suppose

the government passes a law taxing each household $1,000.      At the same time

the government announces a relief program for households hit by fire which pays

$10,000 to each affected household.      Obviously, this fiscal policy replicates

and would replace private provision of fire insurance.      If the government tax is

set at $500 rather than $1,000,and the relief payment is $5,000 rather than
                                          —83—



$10,000, private insurers would find a ready market for $5,000 of additional

fire insurance at a competitive premium of $500.          Rather than under-insuring the

private sector, the government might over—insure by placing a $2,000 tax on each

household and providing $20,000 in housing relief payments.          In this case the

private market would respond by selling insurance against not having a fire;

i.e., the original full insurance equilibrium is restored by having each house-

hold pay a premium of $9,000 for a policy that pays zero in case of fire and

$1,000 in case of no fire.

        This example illustrates two points.       First, fiscal policies could, except

for their accounting labels, constitute insurance markets.          Second, such

implicit insurance provision may have no impact whatsoever on the econon

because equivalent private insurance is available at the margin.

        This result does not hinge on the assumption of no risk in the aggregate

econort.     Assume for example that    with   equal probability either 10 percent or 20

percent of all homes will burn.        In this case the competitive market premium for

$10,000 of fire protection is $1,500 with a $500 surcharge in the case 20 per-

cent of the houses ignite and a $500 rebate in the case only 10 percent catch

fire.     The government could obviously replicate this outcome by imposing a

$2,000 head tax in a bad year (20 percent of houses catch fire) and a $1,000

head tax in a good year (10 percent of houses catch fire).          These funds would,

of course, be used to finance the $10,000 relief payments to fire victims.          As

in the case of no econon—wide risk, over or under provision of insurance by the

government in these two states of nature will be fully offset by perfect private

insurance markets to the extent such markets exist.
                                      _814 —




     To see the connection between this example and capital income taxation,

think of this same economy as having two assets, A and B.    A pays $10,000 if 20

percent of the houses, including one's own, burn down and nothing if only 10

percent of the houses burn down.    B jays $11,000 if 10 percent of the houses

burn, including one's own, and zero if 20 percent are destroyed.     If the price

of both assets is $i,ooo   then an agent who purchases each of these assets will

end up with the same fire protection previously described.

     Now assume the government places a 50 percent tax on the gross return to

each asset.   Hence, if 20 percent of the houses, including one's own, catch fire

the government collects $5,000 from each affected agent on his return of

asset A.   Similarly, the government's receipts per affected agent when only 10

percent of the houses burn down, including one's own, equals $5,500.     Next

assume that these receipts are returned to each affected agent in the two states

of nature in the form of a lump sum subsidy.     If each agent responds to this

fiscal policy by simply continuing to purchase the two assets, he will end

up in exactly the same situation as if the government had not imposed the capi-

tal income tax cum lump sum subsidy; i.e., if 20 percent of the houses catch

fire, each agent whose house burns is left with $8,000, corresponding to an after

tax return of $5,000, on asset A, plus the government subsidy of $5,000, less

the $2,000 initial investment.     If only 10 percent of the houses burn down, each

agent whose house burns ends up with $9,000, representing $5,500 earned after

tax on asset B plus a $5,500 government subsidy, less the $2,000 investment.

     Obviously, there is nothing in this result about taxing the returns to

assets A and B that necessarily relates to the number of fires.     One could just
                                      —85—



as veil consider assets A and B as paying off contingent upon some other event

or set of events, such as the weather, changes in demand conditions, etc.      As

Gordon (1981) emphasizes the assumption that the government's revenue is handed

back to the agents in a lump sum is also not critical to the result that capital

income taxation could effectively represent superfluous government risk pooling

in capital and insurance i.rkets that has no independent effect on the econon.

Rather than returning the capital income tax revenues to the private sector,

suppose the government spends these receipts on consumption.      One can, for con—

venience, think of the government as handing   the   revenues out as a lump sum sub-

sidy and then retrieving them through a separate lump sum tax to pay for its

consumption.   In this case the replacement of capital income taxation by lump

sum taxation leaves the econos' unaffected, since the private market, by assump-

tion, steps in to provide the risk pooling that was previously arising under the

capital income tax.

     Eaton and Rosen (1980) dennstrate that wage taxation, in the presence of

earnings uncertainty, can analogously be viewed as government provision of human

capital insurance.    Social Security's provision of annuity, disability, and life

insurance through its benefit structure is fairly obvious, and Social Security

"taxes" could easily be relabelled insurance premia for the purchase of these

policies.   At first glance, however, many of Social Security's provisions appear

at odds with efficient insurance provision.    Social Security's earnings test for

receipt of benefits is one example.    Diamond and Mirrless (19T8), on the other

hand, argue that this provision is plausibly a component of optimally con-

figured government insurance against the risk of old age disability in cases
                                          —86—




where disability is very difficult to verify.        Just as fire insurance pays of f

only to those experiencing a fire, the earnings test makes sure that only those

who aren't working (or aren't working imach), presumably the disabled, are the

only elderly to receive benefits.        Merton (1981) develops one of the more inge-

nious of these arguments that fiscal policy is a veil for government insurance.

In his model the government combines both unfunded social security and a con-

sumption       tax to pool human capital risk and non—human capital risk optimally
across young and old generations.214
        In    assessing the savings impact of these potential forms of government

insurance provisions, the key question appears to be the extent to which the

private market would otherwise provide each particular form of insurance.           Since

capital markets, at least in developed countries, appear to offer substantial

risk sharing opportunities, it appears unlikely that eliminating capital income

taxation would significantly alter the pooling of risky returns to non—human

capital.        This conclusion seems much less plausible in the case of human capital

risk.        Ignoring possible risk pooling within families and firms, there are no

private markets in which one can sell off a portion of his or her future ear—

flings and purchase that of others.

        Assuming that the government is the sole effective insurer of human capi-

tal, the savings impact of this insurance is assessed by considering an alter-

native hypothetical state of no human capital insurance.        Articles by Leland

(1968), Sandmo (1970), Bruce Miller (19Th, 1976), and Skinner (1983) suggest

that increased earnings uncertainty is likely to lead risk averse agents to

reduce their current consumption and leisure holding the expected level of ear—
                                            —87—


flings constant.     In addition, earnings risk that is specifically related to the

returns     from training may   inhibit   human capital formation, leading to less
training    and more labor supply when young.       This implies a steeper age consump-

tion profile and flatter age earnings profile, on average, in the econon than

would occur with earnings insurance.          This suggests more savings in the no

insurance stochastic steady state.          Estimates of the extent of such differences

in long run wealth stocks would contribute both to understand—ing how potential

government earnings insurance as well as government—generated earnings uncer-

tainty associated with random taxation (Weiss, 1976;         Stiglitz,   1982; Eaton 1981;

Skinner 1983b) affects savings.

      There are now a number of articles dealing with saving behavior in the

absence of private annuity insurance.          Sheshinski and Weiss (1981) is the first

analysis of the pure insurance effects of government pensions on national

saving.      They demonstrate that when private arrangements for pooling the uncer-

tainty of longevity are unavailable, the government's provision of fully funded

old age annuities alters household consumption possibilities.            In their model in

which agents have a bequest motive, the short—run saving impact of such provi-

sion is ambiguous.      Hubbard (1983) points t that this provision unambiguously

reduces national saving if agents have no bequest motive.          A fuller description

of   life   cycle (zero bequest motive) economies, in the absence of annuity

insurance, is presented in Eckstein, Eichenbaum, and Peled (1983) and Abel

(1983).      Both papers independently derived the stochastic steady state proper-

ties of economies in which agents involuntarily leave bequests to their

children.      Abel also considers the effects of introducing a     fully   funded social
                                      —88—




security   system in such an econon, his chief finding being that such a policy

reduces savings.   A related article by Kotlikoff, Shoven and Spivak (1983) corn—

pares the long run stock of wealth prevailing in economies with and without per-

fect annuity insurance.    In the latter type of economies there is partial

insurance provided by family members; older family members selfishly trade title

to their equally selfish children for support if they live longer than average.

In contrast to the perfect insurance steady state, these authors find that

wealth in the stochastic steady state can be significantly higher in an econon

with imperfect family annuity insurance.      Their estimates suggest that social

security's provison of annuity insurance is potentially as important as its

method of finance in reducing wealth accumulation.


IX.   Policy Announcements and Policy Perceptions —

      The Problem of Dynamic Inconsistency

      Sections IV through VII analyzed the impact of new tax policies assuming

such policies take "rational" agents by surprise and that the public fully

believes these policies will be implemented through time.       The proposition that

"rational"   agents can systematically be    "taken by surprise" sounds, and   is,   a

contradiction in terms.    Fischer (1979) nicely illustrates the problem of inter—

temporal change in government policy; he points out that rational agents who are

cognizant of the government's future objectives will be able to predict future

policy changes.    Thus an announced program to stimulate saving may have

the opposite effect on private behavior if the public conjectures that once

additional wealth has been accumulated the government in power will find this a

convenient source of explicit or implicit revenues.       Stated differently, a
                                       —89—




current    wealth tax would depress current consumption and leisure and raise

saving if households believe such a tax will not be imposed again in the future.

The alternative perception of continued future wealth taxes translates into very

high implicit present prices of future consumption and leisure and leads house-

holds to substitute toward current consumption and leisure.

     Of course the public sector nay be incapable of accurately predicting

future fiscal policy.     If such were the case, one would expect (especially in a

neoclassical setting with well functioning capital markets) the private sector

to take steps to self insure against changes in government fiscal policy, in

particular against inter— and intragenerational redistribution.

     Indeed, if the econon consisted of a large number of households with

Barro—type intertemporal preferences (equation (114)) these families could con-

ceivably write binding contracts to hedge themselves through eternity against

intra—marginal redistribution.     If one further assumed that all such families

were interlinked through marital ties, they could conceivably share the same

altruistic objective function.     In this case they would fully internalize the

government's budget constraint and treat all government taxes as lump sum levies

no matter how they were levied.     Thus the government would be powerless to alter

the set of marginal prices entering household budgets.     Finally, if this house-

hold sector viewed government consumption as a perfect substitute for private

consumption, changes in government consumption would also have no impact on the

econonw.     In such a hypothetical econon the government's fiscal policy has no

influence whatsoever on national saving.

     This example and the prior discussion is obviously extreme, but it high—
                                       —90—


lights the fact that nDst   neoclassical   studies of savings and   taxation   appear

implicitly to assume away the existence of particular insurance markets and/or

the ability of otherwise rational agents to learn from the past in considering

the government's impact on their future.


X.   Concluding Comments

     Economics is nest exciting when it challenges conventional views; it is

ultimately most persuasive in relating theory to fact when the theory is based

on fundamental notions of optimization, and it is nst important when it

addresses macro relationships.    Recent neoclassical analyses of taxation and

earnings are exciting, persuasive, and important.     In constrast to conventional

notions, properly designed fical policy can have clear and powerful savings

affects in nest neoclassical nDdels.    Efficacious application of such policies

appears as much a question of choice and timing of changes in fiscal instruments

as it is a question of exact values of preference parameters.       In addition, the

extent of market and family credit and insurance arrangements is critical for

determining the savings impact of policy; fiscal instruments may, themselves,

constitute government insurance provision.     Alternatively, frequent, unexpected

changes in these instruments may be a major source of private uncertainty.

     The findings of recent research provide important lessons for the conduct

of fiscal policy.    First, this research warns that official reporting of fiscal

policy can be highly misleading, with economic deficits (surpluses) reported as

surpluses (deficits) and effective marginal subsidization officially reported as

positive taxation.   Second, in the presence of certain policy instruments,

changes in other instruments can have exactly the opposite affect intended and
                                         —91--



nornnily presumed (e.g., lowering capital income tax rates in the presence of

100   percent   expensing).   Third, short run impacts of fiscal policy may be

exactly the opposite of long run impacts, suggesting that policy assessment

based only on current outcomes may be highly missleading.       Fourth, although the

precise amount of "crowding out" associated with economic deficits remains unre-

solved, the potential major reductions in national wealth associated with expli-

cit and implicit economic deficits make such policies very riskl,y gambles for

future generations.      Fifth, from the perspective of neoclassical ntdels, fre-

quent changes in policy instruments appear undesirable; once the private sector

begins to anticipate fiscal revisions, it will attempt to insure against such

changes, reducing the effectiveness of policy, if not reversing the direction of

its intended impact.      Finally, both the insurance and risk generating properties

of fiscal policy are important, if not primary considerations in policy design.

      As in other fields of economics, theoretical advances in taxation and

savings have outpaced the acquisition of data of sufficient detail to discrimi-

nate among theories.      Resolution of questions as hasic as the burden of the

debt turns on quite subtle types of behavior, such as the extent of mutual

caring within families, that will require new data to fully discern.       Private

beliefs about precise future government policies, while difficult to ascertain,

are crucial determinants of current incentives to work and save.       Such beliefs

need to be identified as part of any empirical assessment of the impact of par-

ticular fiscal measures.      There are other deeper questions that will make

savings and taxation an exciting field for years to come.       The xxst fundamental

question is surely the applicability of the neoclassical paradigm to actual
                                     —92-


household savings behavior.   There is as yet no convincing empirical evidence

and certainly no professional concensus that households make saving decisions in

accordance with the dictates of neoclassical optimization.   The assumption of

continuous equilibrium, particularly in labor markets, and the extensive infor-

mation processing requirements of certainty as well as uncertainty models are

two characteristics of neoclassical models that raise frequent objections.

These and other concerns about the neoclassical framework recommend caution both

in assessing the extensive recent research in neoclassical savings and in

relying on these findings in the actual setting of fiscal policy.
                                         —93—



                                         Footnotes


1.   This is strictly true only in partial equilibrium, i.e,. holding pre—tax

     factor returns and producer prices constant.


2.   Bennett McCallum (1982) demonstrates that the government's budget constraint

     holds under a weaker condition than that assumed here.      In particular the

     constraint holds even if debt indefinitely grows at a faster rate than the

     econoxv provided that rate is less than the long run real return to

     capital.


3.   John Musgrave provided the BEA data used in these calculations.      Imputed

     rent is defined here as depreciation (estimated by the BEA) plus

     beginning of year assets, measured in current dollars, times the average

     annualized three month Treasury bill rate less the annual percentage

     change in the Consumer Price Index.


4.   David and Scadding (19Th) suggest that the private sector may use

     "taxes", as defined and reported by the National Income and Product

     Account, to measure current government consumption.      In this case the

     gross private saving rate equals the perceived gross national saving

     rate, and its constancy, assuming a roughly stable economic environment

     as well as stable preferences, suggests that perceived government con—

     sumption substitutes perfectly and intramarginally for private consumption.

     As Michael Boskin (1978)   points   out, however, "ultrarational" households

     presumably take account of the depreciation of the econozv's physical
                                           9)4 —



       capital   in making economic choices.       Table 1 indicates that the net

       national saving rate, which accounts for depreciation, has been anything

      but constant since 1950.


 5.    David Bradford made this observation in a conversation with the author.


6.    The decision to label prospective expenditures "official liabilities" has

      real effects to the extent that it alters the probability that such expendi-

      tures will be made.       While the default risk may be smaller for official than

      for unofficial, implicit liabilities, the real return to official liabili-

      ties may still be highly risky.      In the U.S., for example, official commit-

      ments to future nominal expenditures do not correspond to commitments to

      future real expenditures.      During the l9TOs the U.S. federal government

      accrued 365.5   billion   dollars, measured in 1980 dollars, in real capital

      gains on its official liabilities while never missing a nominal principle or

      interest payment.     This default on the real value of official liabilities

      through inflation is documented in the 1982 Economic Report of the

      President, Ch. 5.


7.    The government, in this case, "owns" all wealth and
                                                          invests its wealth in

      the private sector each period either directly through government firms or

      indirectly through government loans to private firms and individuals.         For

      neutrality, the allocation of government direct and indirect investment must

      correspond to what would otherwise have arisen in the absence of the

      "surplus".   In this example the government effectively acts like the private

      sector's bank, since private sector wealth is simply funneled through the

      government's hands and invested back in the econon.          The "taxes", T are,
                                        —95—




     in   effect, loans to the government, and the "spending",
                                                                 '   represents
     repayment of principal    plus interest.   Just as positive "taxes" may consti-

     tute private loans to the government, negative "taxes" may be equivalent to

     government loans to the private sector. For example, accelerated depre-

     ciation allowances and other investment incentives at the early stages of an

     investment prospect, coupled with positive taxation of investment returns at

     later stages, can, apart from their impact on marginal incentives, be viewed

     as government loans to the private sector.      The repayment of these "loans" is

     paid in the form of "capital income taxes."


8.   For example, a household's welfare and Social Security benefit payments,

     before any reduction for earnings, are treated as lump sum tax credits; and

     the schedule of potential losses of these benefits because of labor earnings

     is added to other marginal labor tax and subsidy schedules facing the house-

     hold (more precisely specific household members) in year t to produce a

     total net labor earnings tax schedule.     This schedule is applied to house-

     hold i's actual earnings to calculate total taxes on labor earnings in year

     t by household j. Similarly, the government's year t payments of interest

     and principal on net     official debt held by household j are subtracted from

     other net intramarginal taxes to determine household j's total net lump sum

     tax in year t.   Effective (net) capital income tax rate schedules

     confronting each household in each future year are determined by comparing

     before—tax returns earned on a     household's marginal investment with the

     after—tax (including corporate and personal tax) return received by that
                                            —96—



      household (Alan Auerbach and Dale Jorgenson (1980)).


9.    For most fiscal programs the relationship between their provisions and these

      fundamental policy instruments is easily discerned.          For other policies the

      connection is extremely subtle.      Section VI, for example, describes how

      government investment incentives redistribute resources from older to

      younger cohorts not through the explicit collection and transfer of resources,

      but by lowering stock market values.      Another example, pointed out by

      Michael Boskin (1.982), are government regulations governing the charac-

      teristics of particular commodities; a rule that n.ndates automobile seat

      belts in new cars can effectively be equivalent to the government's levying

      a tax on the purchase of each automobile, and spending (consuming) these

      revenues on safety belts for each new automobile.


10. This statement and the subsequent discussion ignores differential rates

      of taxation of the same factor across industries and assumes constant

      pre—tax factor returns and producer prices.


                              Gt
11. Subsituting for                from (10) into (ii) gives the private sector's
                          t0 l+r
      budget constraint with quantities multiplied by before—tax prices.


12.    Note that in the case of' a capital income tax,            the present value of
                                                            Tr'

       revenues is Tr r(E1—c1)/(1+r), where E1—C1     is   first period saving, and

       r(E1—C1) is capital income in period 2.      The household budget constraint,

           =     _*1+11_trfl         can be written as, E1 — Tr      r(El_C*)/(1+r)    —


      C1       C2 /1+r.   In figure 2 C2   equals the verticle distance BC1     ,   and the
      slope of line 2, 1+r, divided by the length BC1           equals the horizontal

      distance E1—G1—C1   ,   i.e.,   E1—G1—C1   =   C2/1+r.   Hence the distance G1, in

      the diagram measures the present value of tax receipts under          either   lump sum

      or capital income taxation.


13.   This equation for national wealth is unaffected by manipulations in govern-

      ment accounting; for example, if the government chooses "to run a larger

      surplus" by levying a lump sum tax of L1, in period 1,          which is returned

      with interest as a lump sum rebate, L2, in period 2, then Wg and W1, will

      respectively increase and decrease by L1, leaving national wealth, W,

      unchanged.


lb.   The assumption that the policy is enacted at time t+l rather than t is made

      to simplify the discussion.        If the policy change is enacted at time t, the

      outcome is the same except the government must raise its capital income tax

      rate after t to reflect the reduced accumulation of the period t young.


15.   According to (ii), in partial equilibrium (i.e., holding the rts constant)

      the government can finance a temporary increase (decrease) in consumption

      by a future decrease (increase) in consumption with no necessary change in

      private consumption or leisure.


16.   The capital income tax component of the income tax also involves an element

      of lump sum taxation since it taxes, in part, the immediate return on

      existing wealth, which is obviously predetermined (Chazniey, 1981)).


17.   Section V.   This crowding in of capital in the consumption tax case is con-

      sistent with a reduced capital—labor ratio because labor supply rises by a

      larger percentage than capital.
                                                    —98-.



18.   .To see this note that under the stated assumptions and ignoring, for

      simplicity, productivity growth, steady state private consumption, C, is

      proportional, to the present value of resources over the infinite horizon,

      R.    Thus we can write: C = OR.               The proportionality factor 0 equals

      r/l+r    ,    where r is the steady state interest rate.                  This follows from the


      infinite horizon budget constraint                    E    c(i + r)   =          OR(i + r)          R
                                                            T0                  'r=O

      where C is not indexed by time because of the assumed steady state.                                 Let

      G be the permanent increase in government consumption.                               Then, since con-

      sumption       or wage taxation are equivalent to lump sum taxation                       in this

      steady       state,      the change in private, consumption, tC, equals —O• T, where

      T is the equivalent present value lump sum tax needed to finance the perma-
      nent stream G, i.e., T = tO AG(i + r)_T = tG (1 + r)      Hence,                 •




           = — OT     =    —
                                -r    T =   G   as asserted.
                               1 +r

19.   A more precise explanation of the redistribution to young and future

      generations          is that they     gain the government's disbursement through

      time of the land rent tax revenues (since government consumption

      is assumed          fixed) and the higher pre-tax wages that would arise in a
      closed   econonv from the increased capital accumulation induced by the land

      rent tax.


20.   The government can be thought of here as lending the investor T dollars

      today which is returned with interest in the future in the form of positive

      capital income taxes.
                                     —99—


21.   •Lawrence Weiss suggested using this variable in a discussion with the

      author.


22.   Robert Barro pointed this out in a 1979 conversation with the author.


23.   In Merton's model elderly generations pay for their receipts of positive,

      but variable social security benefits by paying positive, but variable

      aunts of consumption tax.    Since social security's benefits are propor-

      tional to earnings in Merton's model and variations in consumption tax

      receipts depend, in part, on the random return to capital, these fiscal

      instruments provide the elderly with a share of the econonr's human capital

      risk and the young with a share of the econon's physical capital risk.
_________
_________•
__________
__________
__________•




                                                —100--



                                               References


Abel, Andrew B.          "Dynamic Effects of Permanent and Temporary Tax Policies in a q

        Model of Investment," J. Monetary Econ., 1982, 9,               pp. 353—373.

                   Investment and the Value of Capital.            New York: Garland Publishing,

        1979.

                   "Bequests and Social Security with Uncertain Lifetimes."               Harvard

        University, inimeo, June 1983.

Ando,    Albert    and Franco Modigliani.        "The 'Life Cycle' Hypothesis of Saving:

        Aggregate Implications and          Tests,"    Am. Econ. Rev., March 1963, pp. 55_8I.

Atkinson,       Anthony B.      "The Distribution of Wealth and       the    Individual Life—

        Cycle."       Oxford Economic Papers, No. 23, July 1971, pp. 239_2514.

                 and A. Sandmo.      "Welfare Implication of the Taxation of Savings,"

        Economic Journal, Sept. 1980, pp. 529—5b9.

                 and J. Stiglitz.     Lectures on public economics.            New York: McGraw

        Hill Co., 1980.

Auerbach, Alan J.            "Share Valuation and     Corporate   Equity Policy," J. Pub. Econ.,

        1979, 11, pp. 291—305.

                   "Evaluating    the Taxation of Risky      Assets,"       Cambridge, Mass.: Nat.

        Bur. Econ. Rsrch. Working Paper No. 806., Nov. 1981.

                and D. Jorgenson.         "Inflation—Proof Depreciation of Assets,"

        Harvard Bus. Rev., Sept./Oct. 1980, 5.8(5), pp. 113—18.

                and   L.J.   Kotlikoff.     "National Savings, Economic Welfare, and the

        Structure of' Taxation," in Behavioral 8imulation methods in tax policy

        analysis.      Ed.: M. Feldstein.       Chicago: U. of Chicago Press, 1983a, pp.
__________
__________•




                                               —101—


     •1459—93.


              and      L.J.   Kotlikoff.   "Social Security and the Economics of the

     Demographic Transition," Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1983b.

              and L.J. Kotlikoff. "Investment Versus Savings Incentives: The Size

     of the Bang for the Buck and the Potential for Self—Financing Business Tax

     Cuts," The economic consequences of government deficits.             Ed.: L.H. Meyer,

     Boston: Kluwer—Nijhoff Publishing, 1983c, pp. 12l514.

                 L.J.    Kotlikoff and J. Skinner.     "The Efficiency Gains from Dynamic

     Tax Reform," Internati. Econ. Rev., Feb. 1983d, 24(2), pp. 81—100.

              and L.J. Kotlikoff.          "An Examination of Empirical Tests of Social

     Security and Savings," in Social policy evaluation:             An economic

     tive.       Eds.: Elhainan Helpnn et al.: Academic Press, 1983e.

Bailey, Martin N. "Unemployment Insurance As Insurance for Workers,"

     Symposium on the Economics of Unemployment Insurance, Indus. Labor

     Relations Rev., July 1977, pp. 195_5014.

                 "Some Aspects of 0ptirl Unemployment Insurance," J. Pub. Econ.,

     Dec. 1978, 10(3),          pp. 379102.
Barro, R.J.       "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?," J. Pol. Econ., Nov./Dec. 19714,

     82(6),      pp.    1095—1118.

                  "Social     Security and Private Saving—Evidence from the U.S. Time

     Series," Studies in social security and retirement policy.             Washington,

     D.C.: Am. Enterprise Inst., 1978.

Becker, Gar7 S.         A treatise on the family.      Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University

     Press, 1981.
_________
_________
    ______
__________
__________




                                              —102—



Behrrnan, Jene R., R. Pollack, and P. Taubman.                "Parental Preferences and

     Provision for Progeny,"         J. Pol. Econ., Feb.          1982, 90(1), pp. 52—73.

Bernheim, Douglas.     "Post Retirement Wealth Decumniulation," mimeo, 1982.

              A. Shleifer, and L.H. Summers.               "The Manipulative Bequest Motive."

     mirneo, 1983.

Black, Fisher.     "When is a Positive Income Tax Optimal?"                Cambridge, Mass.:

     Nat. Bur. Econ. Rsrch. Working Paper No. 631, Feb. 1981.

Blinder, Alan S.     "Distributional Effects and the Aggregate Consumption

     Function," J. Pol. Econ.,        1975,    83,   pp.    4147_475.

               "Temporary Income Taxes and Consumer Spending," J. Pol. Econ.,

     Feb. 1981, 89(1),     pp.    26—53.

              R.H. Gordon, and D.E. Wise.            "Life Cycle Savings and Bequests:

     Cross—Sectional Estimates of the Life Cycle Model," Nat. Bur. Econ. Rsrch.

     Working Paper No. 619, Jan. 1981.

Boskin, Michael J. "Notes on the Tax Treatment of Human Capital." Stanford:

     Stanford University and Cambridge, Mass.: NBER, Conference on Tax Research,

     1975, pp. 185—95.

              "Taxation,   Saving, and the Rate of Interest," J. Pol. Econ.,

    April 1978, 86(2), Part 2, pp. 3—27.

               "Federal Government Deficits:               Some 'ths and   Realities,"

    A.E.R., May 1982,      72 (2), pp.     296—303.

             and L.J. Lau.       "Taxation and Aggregate Factor Supply: Preliminary

    Estimates," Cambridge, Mass.:             Nat. Bur. Econ. Rsrch. Working Paper. No.

    221, 1977.
__________
___________
___________




                                               —10 3—



Boswo.rth, Barry      P. "Capital Formation and Economic Policy," Washington, D.C.:

     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1982, 2, pp. 273—317.

Bradford, David.        "Economics of Tax Policy Towards Saving," in Govern, capital

      form.. Ed.: G. von Furstenberg.            Cambridge, Mass.:    Ballinger   Press, 1980.

                  "The Incidence and Allocation Effects of a Tax on Corporate

     Distributions," J. Pub. Econ., 1981, 15(1), pp.1—22.

Bulow, Jeren' I. and L.H. Summers. "The Taxation of Risky Assets," Cambridge,

     Mass.: Nat. Bur. Econ. Rsrch. Working Paper No. 897, June 1982.

Calvo, Guillermo A.           "On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in a Monetary

     Econony,"        Econometrica, 1978, 46,      pp.   1411—1428.

—             ;   L.J. Kotlikoff, and C.A. Rodriguez.         "The Incidence of a Tax on Pure

     Rent: A New C?) Reason for an Old Answer," J. Pol. Econ., Aug. 1979,

     87(4),       pp. 869—74.
Cha.mley,   Christophe.        "Optimal Intertenmporal Taxation and the    Public Debt."

     mimeo, April 1980.

                   "The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation in a Growing Econon,"

     J. Pol. Econ., June 1981, pp.1468—96.

                   "Efficient      Tax Reform in a Dynamic Model of General Equilibrium,"

     Forthcoming, Q.J.E., 1983.

Danziger, S.; J. van der Gaag, E. Smolensky, and M. Taussig.                "The Life Cycle

     Hypothesis       and    the   Consumption Behavior of the Elderly," Mimneo, March 1982.

Darby, Michael R.           Effects of Social Security on income and the capital stock.

     Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute, 1979.

David, Martin, and P.L. Menchik.             "The Effect of Social Security on Lifetime
                                          _10l4


     Wealth Accumulation and Bequests,"           Inst. for Rsrch. on Poverty Discussion

     Paper No. 671, 1981.

David, Paul A. and J.L. Scadding. "Private Savings: Ultrarationality, Aggregation,

     and 'Denison's Law'," J. Pol. Econ., 19714, 82, pp. 225_19.

Davies, James.        "Uncertain Lifetime, Consumption, and Dissaving in Retirement,"

     J. Pol. Econ., June 1981, 89, pp. 561—577.

Denison, Edward F. "A Note on Private Saving." Rev. Econ. & Stat, Aug. 1958, 140,

     pp.    261—67.

Diannd, Peter A.         "National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model," Am. Econ.

     Rev., Dec. 1965, 55, pp.       1126—1150.

                "The Incidence of a Capital Income      Tax,"   J. Econ. Theory,

     Sept. 1970, pp. 2112214.

               and J. Hausman. "Individual Retirement and Savings Behavior," Mimeo,

     May 1983.

                "A Framework for Social Security 'Analysis'," J. Pub. Econ., 1977,

     8,    pp. 275—98.

             and J.A. Mirrlees.     "A Model of Social Insurance with Variable

     Retirement," J. Pub. Econ., 1978, 10(3), pp. 295—336.

Dolde, Walter and J. Tobin.       "Mandatory Retirement Saving and Capital

     Formation," Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No. 5914, May 1981.

Domar, Evsey D. and R. Musgrave.       "Proportional Income Taxation and Risk

     Taking," Quart. J. Econ., 191414, 58, pp. 382—1422.

Dooley, Michael P. and P. Isard.       "Capital Controls, Political Risk, and

     Deviations from Interest—Rate Parity,"          J. Pol. Econ., 1980, 88(2),
                                         —105—


     pp. 370—814.

Eaton,   Jonathan.     "Fiscal Policy, Inflation, and the Accumulation of Risky

     Capital," Rev, of Econ. Stud., 1981, 1t8, pp.

             and H. Rosen.     "Taxation, Human Capital and Uncertainty," Am. Econ.

     Rev., Sept. 1980, 70(14), pp. 705—15.

           and M. Gersovitz.      "Debt and Potential Repudiation:   Theoretical and

     Empirical Analysis," Rev, of Econ. Stud., 1981, 148, pp. 289—309.

Eckstein, Zvi; M. Eichenbaum, and D. Peled.       "Uncertain Lifetimes and the

     Welfare Enhancing Properties of Annuity Markets and Social Security,"

     mimeo, March 1983.

Eisner, Robert.      "Social Security, Saving, and Macroeconomics," J. Macro. Econ.,

     1983, 5(1), pp. 1—19.

             and P.J. Pieper.     "A New View of the Federal Debt and Budget

     Defiäits," mimeo, Jan. 1983.

Evans, Owen J.       "Tax Policy, the Interest Elasticity of Saving, and Capital

     Accumulation: Numerical Analysis of Theoretical Models," Am. Econ. Rev.,

     June 1983, pp. 398—1410.

Feldstein, Martin.       "Incidence of a Capital Income Tax in a Growing Econorr with

     Variable Savings Rates," Rev. Econ. Stud., Oct. 19Dm, iii, pp. 505—13.

              "Social Security, Induced Retirement, and Aggregate Capital

     Accumulation," J. Pol. Econ., Sept./Oct. 1971ib, 82(5), Part 2, pp. 905—26.

               "Social Security and Private Saving:     Reply,"   J. Pol. Econ., 1982a,

     90, pp. 630—142.

              "Tax Incidence in a Growing Economy with Variable Factor Supply,"
_________
_________•
_________•
__________
__________•
__________•




                                           —106—


     .J. Econ., Nov. 19714c, 88, pp. 551—73.

               "The Surprising Incidence of a Tax on Pure Rent: A New Answer to an

     Old Question," J. Pol. Econ., April 1977,       85(2),   pp. 3149_60.

                "The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation," J. Pol. Econ., April

     1978, 86(2), Part 2, pp. 529—51.

                "GovernmentDeficits and Aggregate Demand," J. Mon. Econ., Jan.

     1982, 9(1), pp. 1—20.

                "Domestic Saving and International Capital Movements in the Long

     Run and the Short Run," Eur. Econ. Rev., 1983, 21, pp. 129—51.

              and C. Horioka.     "Domestic Savings and International Capital Flows,"

     The Econ. J., 1980, 90, pp. 3114—29.

              and A. Pellechio.     "Social Security and Household Wealth Accumulation:

     New Microeconometric Evidence,"        Rev. Econ. Stud., 1979, 61(3), pp. 361—68.

Fischer,   Stanley. "Dynamic Inconsistency, Co—Operation and the Benevolent

     Dissembling Government," Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Working Paper No. 2148,

     October 1979.

Flavin, Marjorie A. "The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations

     about Future Income," J. Pol. Econ., Oct. 1981, 89, pp. 9714—1009.

Friedman, Milton.     A Theory of the Consumption Function,       Princeton, N.J.:

     Princeton U. Press (for Nat. Bur. Econ. Rsrch.), 1957.

               Capitalism   and freedom.    Chicago, IL: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1962.

Fullerton, Donald, J.B. Shoven, and J. Whalley.        "Replacing the U.S. Income Tax

     with a Progressive Consumption Tax," J. Pub. Econ., 1983, 20, pp. 3—23.

Gordon, Roger H.     "Taxation of Corporate Capital Income: Tax Revenues vs. Tax
__________
_________-.
__________•




                                              —107—



     •Distortions,"       Cambridge, Mass.:    Nat. Bur. Econ. Rsrch. Working Paper No.

     687,    June 1981.

Goulder, Lawrence H.; J.B. Shoven, and J. Walley.             "Domestic Tax Policy axid the

     Foreign Sector:           The Importance of Alternative Formulations to Results from

     a General Equilibrium Tax Analysis Model," in Behavioral simulation thods

     in tax policy analysis.           Ed.:   M. Feldstein.   Chicago:   University of

     Chicago Press, 1983, pp. 333_624.

Grossman, Sanford and R.J. ShilLer.            "The Determinants of the Variability of

     Stock Market Prices," Am. Econ. Rev., May 1981, 71(2), pp. 222—27.

—_________ and R.J. Shiller.           "Capital Asset Returns and Consumption," mimeo,

     1980.

Hall, Robert E. "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle—Permanent Income

     Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence," J. Pol. Econ., 1978, 86, pp. 971—87.

                "Intertemporal       Substitution in Consumption," Nat. Bur. Econ. Rsrch.

     Working Paper No. 720, July 1981.

                "Consumption Taxes Versus Income Taxes: Implications for Economic

     Growth,"      Proceedings of the 61st National Tax Conference, Columbus, Ohio:

     National Tax Association, 1968, pp. l25—5.

              and F. Mishkin.        "The Sensitivity of Consumption to Transitory

     Income: Estimates from Panel Data on Households," Econometrica, March 1982,

     50, pp.    1461.....82.



Hansen, Lars P. and K. J. Singleton, "Stochastic Consumption, Risk Aversion, and

     the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns," J. Pol. Econ., April 1983, 91(2),

     pp. 2149_65.
_________•
__________•
___________•




                                              —108—



      •       ,   "Generalized Instrumental Variables Estimation of Nonlinear Rational

      Expectations Models," Econoinetrica, Sept. 1982, 50, pp. 1269—86.

Harberger, Arnold C.       "Taxation Resource Allocation and Welfare," in        The role

      of direct and indirect taxes in the Federal Revenue System.           Ed: J. Due,

      Princeton, N.J.: Princeton U. Press, 19614.

                  "Vignettes    on the World Capital Market," A.E.R., May, 1980, 70(2),

     pp.    331—37.

                  "The State of the Corporation Income Tax," American Council for

     Capital Formation.         Paper presented at Conference in Directions in federal

     tax reform for the 1980's, Washington, D.C., Jan. 1983.

Hausman,    Jerry. "Labor Supply," in         How taxes affect economic behavior,

     Eds.    H.J. Aavon and J.A.     Pechinan, Washington, D.C.: The Brookings

     Institution, 1981.

                  "Individual   Discount Rates and Utilization of Enerr Using

     Durables,"       Bell Journal, Spring 1979, pp. 33—514.

Hayashi, F.       "The Effects of Liquidity Constraints on Consumption: A Cross

     Sectional Analysis," Cambridge, Mass.: Nat. Bur. Econ. Rsrch. Working Paper

     No. 882, April 1982.

Hayashi,    F. "Liquidity Constraints and the Consumption Function," 3. Pol.Econ.,

     1982b.

Heckman, James. "A Life Cycle Model of Earnings, Learning, and Consumption,"

     3. Pol. Econ., August        1976,   Part 2, 814(14), pp. 11—1414.

                  "Heterogeneity and State Dependence," in Studies in labor markets.

     Ed.: Sherwin Rosen.         Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981, pp. 91—139.
_________
_________•
___________•




                                                      —109—


Hicks., John.        "Consumer's Surplus and Index Numbers," Rev. Econ. Stud., l942,

      (9), pp. 126—37.

Howrey,   E.P. and S. Hymans.            "The Measurement and Determination of Loanable
      Funds Saving," The Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Washington, D.C.,

      1978,       3, pp.   655—85.

Hubbard, Glenn R., "Uncertain Lifetimes and the Impact of Social Security                        on

      Individual Wealth Accumulation," mimeo, May 1983.

Hurd, Michael D. and M.J. Boskin.                    "The Effect of Social Security on Retirement

      in the Early 1970s," forthcoming, Q.J.Econ., 19814.

King, M.A.         "Savings and Taxation,"            Essays in Public Policy.   Eds.: G.A. Hughes

      and G.M. Heal.           London: Chapman and Hall, 1980.

              •     Public policy and         the    corporation, London: Chapman and Hall, 1977.

                  and L. Dicks—Mireaux.             "Asset Holding and the Life Cycle," Econ. J.,

     June 1982, 92, pp. 2147—67.

                    "The Economics of Saving," Cambridge, Mass.:             Nat. Bur. Econ.

     Rsrch. Working Paper No. 12147, Oct. 1983.

                  and D. Fullerton, eds., The taxation of income from capital:               A

    comparative study of the U.S., U.K., Sweden, and West Germany.                    NBER

    Monograph, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, forthcoming, 19814.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. "Social Security and Equilibrium Capital Intensity,"

     Q.J. Econ., May           1979a,   pp.   233—514.

                    "Testing    the Theory of Social Security and Life Cycle

     Accumulation,"         Am. Econ. Rev., June 1979b, pp. 396_1410.

                    "Elasticities of Labor Supply and Savings — Answers in Search of
_________
__________
__________
__________




                                         —110—



      questions,"   Proceedings of the 73rd Annual Conference on Taxation.

     Eds.: Stanley J. Bowers and Janet L. Staton.       New Orleans, LA: National Tax

     Association Tax Institute of America, 1980.

               "National   Savings and Economic Policy: The Efficiency of Investment

     vs. Savings Incentives," A.E.R., Msy 1983, 73(2),      pp. 82—89.

             and L.H. Summers.     "Tax Incidence in a Life Cycle Model with

     Variable Labor Supply," Q.J.Econ., Nov. 1979, pp. 705—18.

              and L.H. Summers.     "The Role of Intergenerational Transfers in

     Aggregate Capital Accumulation," J. Pol. Econ., 1981, 89(14), pp. 706—32.

             A. Spivak, and L.H. Summers. "The Adequacy of Savings," A.E.R.,

     1982, 72(5), pp. 1056—69.

             and A. Spivak.      "The Family as an Incomplete Annuities Market,"

     J. Pol. Econ., April 1981, 89(2), pp. 372—91.

Kydland, Finn E. and E.C. Prescott.       "Rules Rather than Discretion:    The

     Inconsistency of Optimal Plans," J. Pol. Econ., 1977, 85(3), pp. I47391.

Kurz, Mordecal.     "The Life—Cycle Hypothesis and the Effects of Social Security

     and Private Pensions on Family Savings," Stanford University, IMSSS,

     Technical Report No. 335, Dec. 1981.

              "Capital   Accumulation and the Characteristics of Private

     Intergenerational. Transfers," Institute for Mathematical Studies in the

     Social Sciences, Stanford Univ., Technical Report No. 364, Jan. 1982.

Kuznets, Simon.     Capital In the American Econon, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton

     Univ. Press, 1961.

Leland, Hayne E.    "Saving and Uncertainty: The Precautionary Demand      for   Saving,"
__________




                                            —111—


     •Q.J.Econ., Aug. 1968, 82(3), pp. 1465—73.

Lesnoy, Selig and Leimer, D.R.         "Social Security and Private Saving:                New Time

     Series Evidence with Alternative Specifications," Soc. Sec. Admin. Working

     Paper No. 22, Sept. 1981.

MaCalluin, Bennett.      "Are Bond—Financed Deficits Inflationary?               A Ricardian

     Analysis," J. Pol. Econ., Feb. 19814, 92(1), pp. 123—35.

MaCurdy, Thomas E.       "An Empirical Model of Labor           Supply   in a Life Cycle

     Setting," J. Pol. Econ., Dec. 1981, 89(6)             pp.    1059—1085.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, J.J. Rotemberg, and L.H. Summers.                    "Intertexnporal

     Substitution in Macroeconomics," Nat. Bur. Econ. Rsrch. Working Paper

     No. 898, June 1982.

Masson, Andre.     "A Cohort Analysis of Wealth—Age Profiles Generated by a

     Simulation Model (France 191491975)," mimeo, June 1982.

Menchik, Paul L. and M. David.         "Income Distribution, Lifetii Savings, and

     Bequests," A.E.R., Sept. 1983, 83(14), pp. 672—90.

Merton, Robert C. "On the Role of Social Security as a Means for Efficient Risk—

     Bearing in an Econonr Where Human Capital Is Not Tradeable."                     Financial

     Aspects of the U.S. Pension System.              Ed.: Z. Bodie and J.B. Shoven,

     Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1983, pp. 325—58.

Miller,   Bruce.   "Optimal Consumption with a Stochastic Incox Stream,"
     Econometrica, March 19714,       142(2),   pp.   253—66.

               "The   Effect on Optimal     Consumption of Increased Uncertainty in

     Labor   Income in    the   Multiperiod Case," J.      Econ. Theory, August 1976,

     13, pp. 1514—67.
_________
__________




                                             —112—



Mille.r,   Merton and C. Upton.         Macroeconomics: A neoclassical introduction.

     1974.

Mirer, T.W.      "The Wealth—Age Relation Among       the   Aged,"   A.E.R., June 1979,

            pp   435_143•

Mirrlees, J. "Notes on Welfare Economics, Information and Uncertainty," in
     Essa,ys on economic behavior under uncertainty.             Eds.: Baich, McFadden and
     Uke.     Amsterdam:       North—Holland, 1974.

Modigliani, Franco. "The Life Cyle Hypothesis and National Wealth              — A

     Rehabilitation," M.I.T. Discussion Paper, Jan. 1983.

              and Richard Brumberg. "Utility Analysis and the Consumption

     Function:     An Interpretation of Cross—Section Data," in Post—Keynesian
     economics.       Ed.: Kenneth K. Kurihara.       New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers U.

     Press, 1954.

Mossin, Jan.      "Taxation and Risk—Taking: An Expected Utility Approach,"

     Economica, Feb. 1968, pp. 74—82.

Munnell, Alicia.       "The Impact of Social Security on Personal Savings," Nat.

     Tax. J., Dec. 1974, 17, pp. 553—67.

Musgrave,    Peggy.    "United States Taxation of Foreign Investment Income," in

     Harvard Law School International Tax Program. Cambridge, 1969.

OECD Department of Economics and Statistics.            Flows and Stocks of Fixed Capital,

     1955—1980,       Paris, France: 1983.

                 National    Accounts, 1952—1981,     Paris, France: 1983.

Olson, Mancur and M.J. Bailey.          "Positive Time Preference,"      J. Pol. Econ.,

     Feb. 1981, 89,         pp. 1—25.
_________
__________




                                           —113—


Phelps, E.S. and K. Shell.         "Public Debt, Taxation, and Capital Intensiveness,"

     1. Econ. Theory      ,   1969, 1, pp. 330146.

             and J.G. Riley.       "Rawisian Growth:   Dynamic Programming of Capital

    and Wealth for Intergenerational 'Maximin' Justice,"            Rev. Econ. Stud.,

    Feb. 1978, pp. 103—20.

Poterba, James M.     "Inflation, Income Taxes, and Owner Occupied Housing,t' Nat.

    Bur. Econ. Rsrch. No. 553, Sept. 1980.

Ricardo, David.     The Works and Correspondence of David Ricardo.        Ed.: Piero

     Straffa, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1951.

Sachs, Jeffrey, D. "The Current Account and Macroeconomic Adjustments in the

     1970s," The Brookings Papers on Econonomic Activity.           Washington, D.C.,

     1981a, pp. 201—81.

               "Aspects of the Currrent Account Behavior of OECD Economies," Nat.

     Bur. of Econ. Rsrch. Working Paper No. 859, Cambridge, Mass., 1981b.

Salinger, Michael A. and L.H. Summers.          "Tax Return and Corporate Investment:

     A   Microeconomic Simulation Study," in Behavioral simulation methods in tax
     policy   analysis.       Ed.: M. Feldstein.     Chicago: U. of Chicago Press, 1983,

     pp. 217—88.

Sandmo. A.    "The Effect of Uncertainty on Saving Decisions,"          Rev. Econ. Stud.,

     July 1970, 37(3), pp. 353—60.

Seidman, Laurence S.          "Taxes in a Life Cycle Model with Bequests and

     Inheritances," A.E.R., June 1983, 73(3), pp. 143T—l.

Shavell, Steven, and L. Weiss.          "The Optimal Payment of Unemployment Benefits

     Over Time," J. Pol. Econ., Dec. 1979, 87(6), pp. 1314762.
__________




                                            1114

 Shesh.inski, Eytan.      "A Model of Social Security and Retireint Decisions," J.

      Pub. Econ., Dec. 1978, 10(3), Dec. 1978, pp. 337—60.

              and Y. Weiss.     "Uncertainty and Optimal Social Security,"       Quart. J.

      Econ., 1981, Pp. 189—206.

              and Y. Weiss.     "Inequality Within and Between Families,"       J. Pol.

      Econ., 1982, 90(1), pp. 105—27.

Shiller,    Robert J.     "Consumption    Asset Markets, and Macroeconomic

     Fluctuations," Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 1982,

      17,   pp. 203—38.
Shoven, John B. "Saving in the U.S. Econonr," mimeo, August 1983.
Skinner,    Jonathan S.     "Risky   Income and Life Cycle Consumption,"    mimeo, 1983.

                "Uncertain Tax Policy and Economic Efficiency," mimeo,         1983b.
Starret, David.     "Long Run Savings Elasticities in the Life Cycle Model," mimeo,

     1983.

Stiglitz,    Joseph E. "The Theory of Local Public Goods Twenty—Five Years After
     Tiebout: A Perspective," Nat. Bur. Econ. Rsrch. Working Paper No.              9514,


     Cambridge, Mass., 1982.

               "The Effects of Income, Wealth and Capital Gains Taxation on Risk

     Taking," Q.J.E., May 1969, 83, pp. 263—83.

               "Utility and Horizontal Equity:         The Case for Random Taxation,"

     J. Pub. Econ., 1982, 18, pp. 1—33.

Summers,    Lawrence H. "Taxation and     Capital    Accumulation in a Life Cycle    Growth

     Model," Am. Econ. Rev., Sept. 1981a,           71(4), pp. 533_1414.

                "Taxation   and Corporate Investment: A q       Theory Approach," Brookings
_________•
_________•
__________
__________•




                                             —115—


    Papers on Economic Activity, 11(1), Washington, D.C., 1981b, pp. 67—127.

                "Taxation   and   the   Size and Composition of the Capital Stock:      An

    Asset Price Approach," mimeo,          1981c.

                "Inflation,   the Stock Market, and Owner—occupied Housing,"

    A.E.R., May    1981d,   71(2), pp. 1429_314.

                "Tax Policy, the Rate of Return, and Savings," Cambridge, Mass.,

     Nat. Bur. Econ. Rsrch. Working Paper No. 995, September 1982.

Surrey, Stanley.        Pathwars to tax reform, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press,

     1973.

Tiebout, C.M.     "A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures," J. Pol. Econ., Oct.            1956,


     64(5), pp. 416—24.

Tobin, James.     "Liquidity Preference as Behavior Towards Risk," in Monetary

     Theory and Policy.        Ed.: Richard S. Thorn.     New York: Random House, 1966.

                "Life    Cycle Saving and Balanced Growth," in Ten economic studies in

     the tradition of Irving Fisher.           Ed.: William Feilner et al.    New York:

     Wiley, 1967, pp. 231—256.

              "A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory,"           J. Money

     Credit Bank., Feb. 1969, 1, pp. 15—29.

              and Walter Dolde.         "Monetary and Fiscal Effects on Consumption,"

     Consumer spending and nxnetary policy: the linkages.            Fed. Res. Bank

     of Boston Monetary Conference.           Boston: Fed. Res. Bank, 1971, 5.

              and W. Buiter.       "Fiscal and Monetary Policies, Capital Formation,

     and Economic Activity," in The government and capital formation.             Ed.: George

     M. von Furstenberg.          Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger Press, 1980.
                                        —ii6—


 Turnovsky, Stephen J. and W.A.   Brock.   "Time Consistency and Optimal Govern—

     sent Policies in Perfect Foresight Equilibrium," J. Pub. Econ., April 1980,

      13(2), pp. 183—212.

Varian, Hal R. "Redistributive Taxation and     Social   Insurance," J. Pub. Econ.,

     1980, 14, pp. 49—68.

Weber, W.E.   "The Effects of Interest Rates on Aggregate Consumption," A.E.R.,

     Sept. 1970, 60, pp. 591—600.

              "Interest Rates Inflation and Consumer Expenditures," A.E.R.,

     Dec. 1975, 65, pp. 843—58.

Weiss, Laurence.    "The Desirability of Cheating Incentives and Randomness in

     the Optimal Income Tax," J. Pol. Econ., Dec. 1976, 84,
                                                            pp. 13243—52.
White, Betsy Buttrill. "Empircal Tests of the Life—Cycle Hypothesis," Am. Econ.

     Rev., Sept. 1978, 68, pp. 547—60.

Williamson, Samuel H. and W.C. Jones.      "Computing the Impact of Social Security

     Using the Life Cycle Consumption Function," A.E.R., Dec. 1983, 73(5),

     pp. 1036—52.

Wright, C. "Saving and the Rate of Interest," The Taxation of Income from

     tal,   Eds: Arnold C. Harberger and Martin J. Bailey.      Washington, D.C.:

     Brookings Inst., 1969.

Yaari, Menachim E., "Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of

    the Consumer," Rev. Econ. Stud., 1965, 32, pp. 137—50.
</ref_section>
