                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     BRIBERY IN HEALTH CARE IN PERU AND UGANDA

                                              Jennifer Hunt

                                          Working Paper 13034
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w13034


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2007




I am grateful to Vincent Chandler for excellent research assistance, to the Instituto Nacional de Estadística
e Informacíon for the Peruvian data, and to Niels Ulrich, Paul Mpuga, Barbara Kasura Magezi Ndamira
and K2 Consulting for the Ugandan data. I thank Lorena Alcázar, Leah Brooks, Dean Yang and seminar
participants at McGill, UC Davis, UC Berkeley and the NBER Inter-American Seminar for comments.
I am also affiliated with the CEPR, IZA and DIW-Berlin, and I acknowledge the Social Science and
Humanities Research Council of Canada for financial support. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Jennifer Hunt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Bribery in Health Care in Peru and Uganda
Jennifer Hunt
NBER Working Paper No. 13034
April 2007
JEL No. H4,K4,O1

                                             ABSTRACT

In this paper, I examine the role of household income in determining who bribes and how much they
bribe in health care in Peru and Uganda. I find that rich patients are more likely than other patients
to bribe in public health care: doubling household consumption increases the bribery probability by
0.2-0.4 percentage points in Peru, compared to a bribery rate of 0.8%; doubling household expenditure
in Uganda increases the bribery probability by 1.2 percentage points compared to a bribery rate of
17%. The income elasticity of the bribe amount cannot be precisely estimated in Peru, but is about
0.37 in Uganda. Bribes in the Ugandan public sector appear to be fees-for-service extorted from the
richer patients amongst those exempted by government policy from paying the official fees. Bribes
in the private sector appear to be flat-rate fees paid by patients who do not pay official fees. I do not
find evidence that the public health care sector in either Peru or Uganda is able to price-discriminate
less effectively than public institutions with less competition from the private sector.

Jennifer Hunt
Professor of Economics
Department of Economics
McGill University
Leacock Building Room 443
855 Sherbrooke Street West
Montreal, QC, H3A 2T7,Canada
and NBER
jennifer.hunt@mcgill.ca
       The empirical literature on corruption has identified consequences of corruption for
countries, such as lower growth and foreign direct investment,1 and causes of corruption
across countries, such as the legal, political and fiscal systems.2 It has made progress
in suggesting remedies for corruption: some papers infer corrupt practices in particular
industries, and examine how rule changes or audits affect business practices.3 In this
paper, I contribute to a nascent empirical literature that seeks to understand bilateral
interactions between public officials and clients as a stepping stone to devising policy.4 I
do so by studying bribery in health care in Peru and Uganda, with particular emphasis
on the role of household permanent income in determining who bribes and how much.
       In earlier work, Hunt and Laszlo (2007) analyzed bribery mechanisms for samples
pooling all institutions in Uganda and Peru, and found similar results for the two countries.
The health sector is worthy of separate study for several reasons. First, mechanisms
could differ across institutions, and different mechanisms may require different solutions.
Unlike many public institutions, the public health care system has competition from the
private sector, which could influence bribery mechanisms. Second, the health sector is
one where equitable access, and hence the link between permanent income and bribery, is
of particular concern. Third, this is a sector where differences between Peru and Uganda
might be expected, as health care is relatively free of bribery in Peru, while it has a
bribery rate close to average for the public sector in Uganda. Fourth, for Uganda, a
comparison between bribery in the public and private health care systems may be made.5
Finally, the data for both countries allow a richer set of covariates to be used in the
study of health care than could be used with other institutions. The comparison of Peru
and Uganda is instructive because Peru is a middle–ranking country in Transparency
International’s Corruption Perceptions Index, with a GNI per capita of US$5,830, while
   1
     Mauro (1995), Wei (2000).
   2
     Fisman and Gatti (2002), Treisman (2000).
   3
     DiTella and Schargrodsky (2003), Ferraz and Finan (2005a,b), Olken (2005, 2006), Yang (2005, 2006).
   4
     See also Kaufmann and Wei (1999) and Svensson (2003) for firms, and Deininger and Mpuga (2004)
and Thompson and Xavier (2004) for individuals.
   5
     Corruption is not by definition confined to the public sector: see Gambetta (2002).




                                                   1
Uganda is classified as one of the most corrupt countries by TI and has a GNI per capita
of only US$1,500.6
      Theory suggests that richer clients should be more likely to bribe a public official, and
should pay more conditional on bribing. This stems from the official’s possessing a degree
of monopoly power, and hence the ability to price–discriminate amongst customers. If
such discrimination is observed, it could reflect first–degree price discrimination, or, if the
exact service being paid for by the client cannot be observed, third–degree price discrimi-
nation (the rich pay more and get more). Greater competition between service providers,
whether private or public, should reduce the ability of officials to price discriminate, and
indeed, under perfect competition bribe amounts should be bid down to zero. Lewis
(2006) has proposed that infrequent bribery in health care in certain countries, including
Peru, is explained by the presence of private sector competition in those countries.
      As expected, I find that rich patients are more likely than other patients to bribe in
public health care: doubling household consumption increases the bribery probability by
0.2–0.4 percentage points in Peru, compared to a bribery rate of 0.8%; doubling house-
hold expenditure in Uganda increases the bribery probability by 1.2 percentage points
compared to a bribery rate of 17%. The absolute effect is therefore larger in Uganda,
but the percent effect is larger in Peru. More intriguing is the fact that the probability
of bribing in the Ugandan private sector is unrelated to household expenditure. The in-
come elasticity of the bribe amount cannot be precisely estimated in Peru, but is about
0.37 in the public sector in Uganda: the rich pay more, but pay a smaller share of their
expenditure. This elasticity is the same as that for official payments in both the public
and the private sector. This could be a coincidence, or could indicate that in all three
cases the elasticity is determined by the same combination of fee–for–service (and the
rich demanding more expensive services) and price–discrimination. Private sector bribe
amounts are determined differently, since the income (expenditure) elasticity is only 0.15.
      Although in Peru, particularly, bribery rates and amounts are lower in health care
  6
      Perceptions from Transparency International (2004a). Purchasing power parity Gross National In-
come from siteresources.worldbank.org/DATASTATISTICS/Resources/GNIPC.pdf.


                                                  2
than in other public institutions, I do not find evidence that the public health care system
in either Peru or Uganda is able to price–discriminate less effectively than other public
institutions. This somewhat crude test of whether competition reduces bribery therefore
fails to support the hypothesis.
        Bribes in the Ugandan public sector are disproportionately paid by the richer patients
amongst those not paying official fees. The results, combined with anecdotal evidence,
suggest that much public sector bribery represents a facility–level extortion policy to
raise revenue from patients exempted from payment by government policy. Bribes in
the private sector are flat–rate fees paid almost exclusively by patients not paying official
fees. It is unclear whether private patients pay voluntarily to avoid official fees, or whether
exempted patients are extorted to raise revenue as in the public sector.


1         Health, Health Care and Corruption in Peru and
          Uganda

1.1        Health and Health Care

As would be expected given the differences in economic development, health outcomes
and health care quality are very different in Peru and Uganda. Table 1 shows that life
expectancy at birth is more than twenty years higher in Peru than Uganda. Peru has
1.17 doctors per thousand population, compared to 0.08 for Uganda, although the two
countries have a very similar ratio of nurses to population. Health spending represents
a larger share of GDP in Uganda, but government health spending is a smaller share of
total health spending in Uganda than in Peru (20% compared to 48%). In 2000 there
were 1,226 public, 465 NGO and 49 private (non–NGO) health facilities in Uganda.7 In
Peru, the public sector accounts for 51% of hospitals, 69% of health centers and 99% of
    7
        Uganda Investment Authority www.ugandainvest.com/health.htm. Reinikka and Svensson (2005)
outline the post–colonial history of private and public health care in Uganda.




                                                   3
health posts.8
       My Peruvian data, described below, indicate that for people of all ages, 44% have
some type of health insurance (children are much more likely than adults to be insured,
thanks to subsidized insurance), whereas in Uganda health insurance is essentially non–
existent.9 At least in the early days of the Peruvian insurance expansion, poor uninsured
patients benefited from reduced fees or exemptions from fees.10 In Uganda during the
period relevant for my data, health care at public facilities below the hospital level was
free, while in public hospitals fees were based on the patient’s ability to pay.11 Although
NGO and mission hospitals also make provision for fee exemptions for the poor, Amone et
al. (2005) observe that in their sample of Catholic hospitals, only a minority of exempted
patients were poor (the others were predominantly hospital and church staff, and teachers
and pupils of the Catholic school). Most of these hospitals charged on a fee–for–service
basis (each service had an associated fee), with the exception of treatment for tubercu-
losis and sexually transmitted diseases including HIV/AIDS, which was funded by the
government.12


1.2       Corruption in Health Care

Complaints about corruption in hospitals in Peru include staff charging patients more
than official prices and pocketing the difference, collusion between hospital staff and ex-
ternal pharmacies or external providers of medical tests, high absenteeism on the part of
doctors with a second job in the private sector, doctors referring patients to their private
practice, and bribes of money or sex to obtain jobs.13 Concerning corruption that would
   8
       Pan–American Health Organization www.paho.org/English/DD/AIS/cp 604.htm undated, accessed
18 January 2007.
   9
     Valdivia (2002) describes Peruvian insurance for children and the poor; Peréz and Lenz (2006) de-
scribe this and the organization of the health system more generally.
  10
     Cotlear (2000).
  11
     Nabyonga et al. (2005).
  12
     See also Uganda Ministry of Health Online (2000) at www.health.go.ug/budget.htm.
  13
     lincolnmaylleantaurco.blogspot.com/2006 03 01 lincolnmaylleantaurco archive.html, Alcázar and
Andrade (2001), Webb and Valencia (2006).



                                                  4
involve explicit bribes by patients, patients bribe to advance on hospital waiting lists, and
hospitalized patients bribe to obtain the attention of medical staff, particularly a consul-
tation with the doctor, and to have surgery.14 Many payments appear to inhabit a grey
area between bribes and official payments. Hospitals or groups of professionals within
the hospital raise poorly documented revenue that they keep, rather than remitting to
the central authorities, some of which is used to top up doctor salaries in violation of
official policy. This revenue comes in part from fees for medicines, medical supplies and
laboratory tests. Social workers charge poor patients for evaluations as to their eligibility
for exemptions from fees, and charge for the certificate of exemption.15
       As part of the collection of the Ugandan data, described below, the consulting company
commissioned by the government ran focus groups on bribery and availability of public
services in 180 villages. Almost every focus group notes that medical attention at public
hospitals and health units can only be obtained in exchange for payment despite the
official abolition of user fees at health units. They state that patients have to bribe to
attract the attention of medical staff and pay for all medical supplies, no matter how
small.16 The impression conveyed by the focus groups is less one of individual bad apples
within a particular facility than of facility–wide policies to extort bribes.
       Focus group participants complain that the only drug available at Ugandan health
facilities is Panadol (Tylenol). Other drugs must be purchased at pharmacies, drug shops
or private practices with connections to the doctor recommending the drug, despite the
fact that they should be available free in the public health units.17 Some groups note
that the corruption and poor service in the public health sector lead people to use private
clinics, despite their cost.
       It is possible that the abolition of Ugandan user fees shortly before my study period
led health workers to extract more bribes as a way of allocating scarce resources and
  14
     Lorena Alcázar, personal communcation.
  15
     Webb and Valencia (2006).
  16
     Jitta et al. (2003) observe that patients routinely bring their own syringes and must pay for the
liquids used to mix the injection fluid.
   17
      The respondents in Jitta et al. (2003) make the same observation.



                                                   5
raising revenue. Nevertheless, accounts of the health care system in periods where user
fees existed describe widespread corruption similar to that deplored by the 2002 focus
groups.18 Based on a mixed of quantitative and qualitative data from a period when user
fees were becoming more widespread, McPake et al. (1999) conclude that there is some
evidence that introducing official fees reduced bribery. They also quantify claims of the
focus groups: for example, 76% of drugs at the facilities they studied disappeared before
reaching patients.


2        Data

2.1        Peru

I use the 2002 and 2003 waves of the Peruvian household surveys, the Encuesta Nacional
de Hogares (ENAHO), conducted yearly by Peru’s national statistical agency, the In-
stituto Nacional de Estadı́stica e Información. The surveys, for which rural regions are
oversampled, have more than 18,000 respondent households per year. Beginning in 2002,
the agency included a governance module with questions on the use and bribery of public
officials.19 One randomly chosen adult per household is asked numerous questions per-
taining to the household’s use of 21 different types of officials or institutions: the relevant
one for this paper is state hospitals. If a particular type of official was used in the previous
twelve months, then respondents are asked a series of questions in connection with use of
this official type in this time–frame, and possible bribery: whether the official asked for a
bribe, gift, tip or “coima” (slang for bribe), whether the respondent felt obliged to bribe,
bribed voluntarily, or refused to bribe, and the amount of the bribe if she bribed.
       The health module of the survey asks each adult (and an adult proxy for children)
questions about their health and hospital use in the previous twelve months, as well as
more detailed questions about the previous three months and four weeks. I also use
responses to questions in the bribery module about ill fortune the household has met
  18
       For example, Konde–Lule and Okello (1998).
  19
       However, beginning in 2004 the agency stopped releasing this module with the rest of the data.


                                                     6
with in the previous twelve months, especially whether someone in the household had
had an accident or had been seriously ill. I also identify households with babies born in
the previous twelve months. The Data Appendix provides further information.


2.2    Uganda

I use information on the 12,000 household respondents to the Ugandan Second National
Integrity Survey, which over–sampled urban areas. The Ugandan government commis-
sioned a consulting company to conduct this survey in 2002. All questions are asked of the
household head or spouse. The core of the survey has a similar structure to the Peruvian
bribery section, with a series of questions on usage, bribery, and service quality posed for
each of 21 types of official or institution. However, in this paper I focus on the module
devoted to bribery in the health sector. A series of questions is asked about the most
recent health care visit of a household member in the last three months. Information
gathered about this visit includes the type of facility, whether it was public or private,
the age of the patient and the nature of her ailment, whether the visit was part of a
longer treatment, the amount of official payments and the amount of unofficial payments
(which I call bribes), and qualitative questions about the quality and cost of treatment.
A disadvantage of using the health module is that, unlike in the main bribery module,
the respondent is not asked if s/he received a receipt for payment.
   There are fewer non–corruption variables in this survey than in the Peruvian surveys,
and missing values, zeroes and not applicable responses cannot always be distinguished.
Household expenditure is elicited through six questions pertaining to the previous week,
and three questions pertaining to the previous month, and is hence rather crudely mea-
sured. The question on bribe payments does not seem designed to elicit the value of
in–kind payments. The Data Appendix provides further information.




                                             7
2.3    Samples and descriptive statistics

I restrict my analysis to households who report using the health care system in the relevant
time frame. For Uganda, this means those reporting usage in the health bribery module.
For Peru, this means those who report using state hospitals in the bribery module, since
it is only for them that bribery information is available.
   A comparison of responses to the Peruvian health and bribery modules reveals that
a considerable number of individuals who used state hospitals did not have this usage
reported in the bribery survey by their household’s respondent. The extent of underre-
porting decreased greatly in 2003 in most, but not all, regions, suggesting that survey–
takers in most regions attempted to reduce the discrepancy between the modules in 2003.
For example, in 2002 only 45% of the individuals who said they had been hospitalized in
the main type of public hospital, MINSA, were in households whose respondent reported
usage of public hospitals in the bribery module. This number rose to 73% in 2003. To
account for differing selection into the sample by region and year, I include 24 regional in-
dicators interacted with a dummy for the 2003 survey in all regressions. I do not attempt
to deal with the fundamental selection problem, however.
   Table 2 shows that 12,262 of 36,000 Peruvian households reported using state hospitals
(in the bribery module), and of these 0.8% reported paying or refusing to pay a bribe
(a bribery “episode”), below the 2.3% bribery rate for users of all 21 official types. The
number of bribery episodes in the sample is therefore only 95. Average household monthly
consumption is US$339, but households with a bribery episode are richer, at US$385. The
table also shows the shares of households who had suffered a misfortune, such as a serious
illness or accident of one of its members, and shows such victims are over–represented
amongst households with a bribery episode. The average bribe for bribers was US$9.10,
which is below the (unreported) average bribe across all institutions of $20. The lower
than average bribery rate and amount are consistent with reduced corruption in health
care through competition with the private sector.
   Table 3 shows means of variables from the Peruvian health module for the same sample.


                                             8
The means are of responses to questions asked of all respondents, and the values are for the
respondent to the bribery module. When these variables are used as covariates in bribery
regressions, the matching will introduce measurement error, as the bribery respondent
is not necessarily the household member whose visit led to the behavior reported in the
bribery module. Three quarters of respondents have no health insurance and a quarter
have a chronic health condition, and both groups are over–represented amongst households
with a bribery episode. The 9% of people hospitalized in the previous twelve months
represent 18% of households with a bribery episode. The other variables refer to windows
of less than twelve months, which means that they can control only imperfectly for events
in the twelve month window relevant for bribery.
       I present means of further health module variables in Table 4. The questionnaire asks
about symptoms in the previous four weeks, and if symptoms are present asks about
care sought in response to these symptoms. If the level of care sought was sufficiently
sophisticated, questions are asked about the type of professional the respondent saw and
the types of tests she underwent. Additional Peruvian means are given in Appendix
Table 1.
       I analyze Ugandan patients in the public sector and the private sector separately.
Column 1 of Table 5 shows that the 17% bribery rate for the public sector (panel A) is
an order of magnitude larger than the Peruvian rate (0.8%) despite being based on the
most recent visit in the past three months, rather than on all visits in the previous twelve
months.20 Panel B considers patients of Ugandan public hospitals, to make the sample
comparable to the Peruvian sample, but the bribery rate is similar to the overall public
rate, at 19%. The private bribery rate is lower, at 11% (panel C). In column 2 I show the
share of patients who made official payments: 38% of public patients do so, but almost all
private patients (83%) do so. The amount of the bribes averaged US$6.06 in the public
sector, US$7.88 in public hospitals and is lower at US$5.26 in the private sector. Official
payments, for those paying, are likewise highest at public hospitals, at US$15.81. For
  20
       The three–month rate in the Ugandan health bribery module is more than half the six–month rate
in the Ugandan main bribery module, however.


                                                   9
the public sector, the bribery rate is slightly below the bribery rate for all institutions
together (20%) and the bribe amount is also lower compared to the average bribe of $13.
This could be a sign that competition from the private sector reduces corruption in public
health care, although the difference is less pronounced than for Peru.
    Table 6 contains the means of variables from the Ugandan health module (additional
means are in Appendix Tables 2 and 3). Uganda is much poorer than Peru, and patients
of the public sector (columns 1 and 2) are slightly poorer than patients of the private
sector (columns 3 and 4). Public sector patients who did not bribe had only US$82 in
monthly household expenditure, while public sector bribers had higher expenditure at
US$91. Private sector bribers are not richer than other private sector patients. In each
column, at least 62% of patients suffered from malaria/fever/headache. Slightly more than
half of public patients visited a hospital, while this share was low for private patients:
14% for non–bribers and 6% for bribers (though private clinics perform many functions
of a hospital).


3     Estimation
My first outcome of interest is the probability that household i bribes conditional on using
the health system, P (B|U ). I estimate

                            P (B|U )i = β0 + β1 Wi + β2 Xi + i ,                       (1)

where Wi is household consumption (Peru) or expenditure (Uganda), and Xi are other
covariates. I estimate this using a probit for Uganda and linear probability for Peru,
where the small number of bribes and the large number of categorical covariates makes
estimation by probit difficult.
    My second outcome of interest is the amount of the bribe A. Using the sample of
bribes, I estimate
                              logAi = β3 + β4 Wi + β5 Xi + ηi .                         (2)

    For Uganda, I estimate both equations separately for users of the private and public

                                             10
health systems. In order to allow a comparison of how official and unofficial payments work
to allocate resources, I also compare the Ugandan results when the dependent variable is
official payments, rather than bribes.21 Because Ugandan expenditure is measured quite
crudely, I expect some bias towards zero in the Ugandan estimates of β1 and β4 . In all
cases, the standard errors are clustered at the level of the smallest region in the data.
       Because of the oversampling of rural areas in Peru, and the oversampling of urban areas
in Uganda, all Peruvian specifications control for region (interacted with a 2003 dummy)
and city size, and all Ugandan specifications control for district and urban location. All
Peruvian specifications also control for household size dummies, time to the district ad-
ministrative center and a dummy for the 2003 survey. All Ugandan specifications control
for household size dummies.


4        Results

4.1        Probability of bribing

Table 7 presents coefficients from linear probability regressions for the probability of
bribing at state hospitals in Peru. The first column contains only the basic covariates;
additional non–medical covariates are added in columns 2 and 3; and the medical covari-
ates are gradually added in columns 4–6. The covariates do not affect the coefficient on
consumption greatly: it ranges from 0.0051–0.0063. This implies that were consumption
doubled, the probability of a bribery episode would rise between 0.35 percentage points
(0.0051*log(2)) and 0.43 percentage points. These are small effects absolutely, but are
large compared to the overall bribery rate of 0.8%. For specifications with fewer covari-
ates, probits can be run. The unreported marginal effect is about 0.0036 (a doubling of
expenditure implying a 0.25 percentage point increase in bribery), within the 95% confi-
dence interval of the linear probability effects. The marginal effects for all officials pooled
in Hunt and Laszlo (2007) were lower at 0.0025–0.0028, which means the hypothesis that
  21
       This could in principle also be done for Peru, but the presence of insurance complicates the analysis
of official payments.


                                                      11
expenditure plays a lower role in health care bribery because of private sector competition
is not supported.
       The equivalent regressions for Uganda are presented in panel A of Table 8. Columns 1–
3 contain marginal effects from probits for patients in the public sector. The preferred
marginal effect of 0.017, with the full covariates in column 3, implies that a doubling
of expenditure increases the bribery probability by 1.2 percentage points. This is much
larger than the percentage point effect for Peru, but is smaller than for Peru compared
to the overall bribery probability, which for the Ugandan public sector is 17%. The
Ugandan effect is probably more attenuated by measurement error than the Peruvian
effect, however. Unreported effects for public hospitals are very similar to effects for the
public health sector as a whole. The effects are similar to point estimates of 0.011–0.018 for
all officials pooled in Hunt and Laszlo (2007). There is again no evidence that competition
in health care reduces the role of expenditure in determining bribery. In contrast to the
public sector, there is no significant effect of expenditure on the probability of bribing in
the private sector, in the linear probability regressions of columns 4–6 (nor in unreported
probit counterparts with fewer covariates).
       Hunt and Laszlo (2007) reported that lower–expenditure Ugandan patients were more
likely than richer patients to pay what they considered to be official payments, but receive
no receipt. If these are unwitting bribes, it means that their omission leads the role of
expenditure in paying a bribe to be overstated. These unwitting bribes cannot be iden-
tified in the health module, but I have examined their relation to household expenditure
in the main bribery module for health care alone. The unreported results show a positive
but insignificant relation between expenditure and the payment of unwitting bribes, sug-
gesting that their omission does not bias the health care bribery results as much as was
the case for all officials pooled in Hunt and Laszlo (2007).22
       I investigate the link between expenditure and the probability of an official payment
in panel B of Table 8. In the public sector, the marginal effect of 0.043 in column 3
  22
       This check is not perfect, as in the main bribery module the private and public sectors cannot be
distinguished.


                                                    12
implies that a doubling of consumption increases the probability of making an official
payment by 3.0 percentage points, compared to a mean payment rate of 38%. The absolute
effect is larger than for bribes, while the percent effect is similar. The positive effect is
not a surprise, as there are exemptions from payment for the poor, and the rich may
demand more of the services which are not free. By comparison, Hunt and Laszlo (2007)
found a smaller marginal effect of 0.022 for all officials pooled.23 There is no significant
link between expenditure and official payment probability in the private sector, where
most people make official payments (83%), although the point estimate is 0.01 (panel B,
columns 4–6). This is consistent with the observation of Amone et al. (2005) that patients
exempted at Catholic hospitals are typically not poor.
       The patients paying bribes and the patients making official payments are to a large
degree different people, as Table 9 indicates. In the public sector, while 22% of those
making no official payment bribe, only 8% of those making an official payment bribe,
and 81% of bribes are paid by patients not making an official payment. The contrast is
even greater in the private sector: fully 55% of the small number of patients making no
official payment bribe, while only 2% of patients who make an official payment bribe, and
83% of bribes are paid by patients not making an official payment. The strong negative
correlation between paying bribes and making official payments holds up for both sectors
in regressions with the controls used in Table 8. When the bribery regressions of panel A
in Table 8 are repeated for samples of patients not paying official fees, the marginal effects
are larger for the public sector (though not significantly so), and remain insignificant for
the private sector (these results are not reported).
       It is possible that people bribe to avoid official payments: one focus group mentioned
this, although the bribe in question was paid to the local government official issuing the
exemption certificate. However, most of the public sector bribes mentioned in the focus
groups had a different purpose, which suggests that the causality may be the opposite:
health officials may attempt to extract bribes from the richer patients who need not pay
  23
       For official payments for which a receipt was given. The marginal effect including receiptless payments
would be smaller.


                                                      13
officially (because of the type of facility or because of their low income). This would be a
logical fund–raising response for local public officials whose official fees are set centrally.
   It is possible that local private hospitals likewise try to circumvent centrally imposed
exemption policies, or that in the private sector bribes are indeed paid principally to avoid
official payment (less anecdotal evidence is available on private sector bribes). Patients
with respiratory and sexually transmitted diseases do not appear more likely to bribe in
the regressions, suggesting the purpose of the bribes is not to raise money from patients
whose care is paid for by the government (however, these patients appear more likely
than malaria patients to pay official fees, raising the possibility that they are unaware
their care should be free and are paying unwitting bribes). Whatever the reason for the
private bribes by patients not paying official payments, the procedure differs from that in
the public sector, as the richer patients are not those paying the bribes.


4.2    Amount of bribe

For Peru, (log) household consumption has an insignificant effect on the (log) amount of
the bribe, but standard errors in the range 0.3–0.5 mean that little can be learned from the
small Peruvian sample of bribes. In Table 10 panel A I examine the determinants of the
amount of the (log) bribe in Uganda. The preferred specifications are those in columns 3
and 6 with the maximum covariates: in the public sector, the income (expenditure)
elasticity is 0.37, while is is only 0.15 in the private sector. The rich pay more than the
poor in both sectors, but pay a lower share of their expenditure, since the elasticity is less
than one. These elasticities compare with elasticities of 0.25–0.33 for pooled officials in
Hunt and Laszlo (2007): once again, competition from the private sector does not appear
to reduce price–discrimination in the public sector. If the panel A regressions are repeated
for patients making no official payments, the (unreported) elasticities are similar.
   Panel B shows that the income (expenditure) elasticity for official payments is essen-
tially the same as for bribes in the public sector, at 0.36, while the private sector elasticity
for official payments is much higher than for private bribes, at 0.38. Public sector bribes,



                                              14
public sector official fees, and private sector official fees are extracted from payers in the
same way based on their expenditure. Only private sector bribes are extracted differently,
and are closer to a flat–rate fee.


4.3    Discussion of Ugandan results

Together, Tables 8–10 suggest the following characterization of payments for health care in
Uganda. In the public sector, richer patients are considerably more likely to make official
payments, presumably in part because of official policies charging patients according to
ability to pay, and in part because richer patients demand more of services that are not
free. However, some rich patients are using free services, and some poorer patients not
making official payments are willing to pay non–zero amounts, so health facilities are able
to induce these patients, particularly the richer ones, to make unofficial payments. The
income (expenditure) elasticity for the bribe amounts is the same as for official payment
amounts.
   The private sector differs in that almost everyone makes an official payment, exemp-
tions are not based on household expenditure, and bribes appear to be flat fees assessed on
the exempted. However, the income elasticity for official payment amounts is the same as
for official payments and bribes in the public sector. This could be a coincidence, or could
indicate that in all three cases the elasticity is determined by the same combination of fee–
for–service (and the rich demanding more expensive services) and price–discrimination.
Anecdotal evidence indicating that public sector bribes often consist of paying for supplies
is consistent with an important role for fee–for–service bribes.
   If private–sector health facilities operate in more competitive environments than pub-
lic facilities, this would be an explanation for less frequent and lower–value private–sector
bribes, as well as the inability of the private facilities to price discriminate in bribes. How-
ever, the ability to price discriminate also depends on how well staff can judge patients’
ability to pay, which is in turn influenced by staff turnover, the distance patients travel
to the hospital and procedures for assessing patient eligibility for official fee exemptions.



                                              15
A priori it is unclear whether private or public staff know their patients better.


5     Conclusions
In both Peru and Uganda, richer patients are more likely to bribe in the public health care
system. A doubling of household consumption increases the Peruvian bribery probability
by 0.2–0.4 percentage points, compared to a bribery rate of 0.8%. A doubling of house-
hold expenditure in Uganda increases the bribery probability by 1.2 percentage points,
compared to a bribery rate of 17%, a larger absolute effect than for Peru, but smaller in
percent terms. The income (expenditure) elasticity of the bribe amount is 0.37 in Uganda,
and insignificant in Peru (where the sample size is very small, however). In both Peru
and Uganda, the link between bribery and consumption or expenditure is similar to or
higher than the link for all officials pooled, despite the presence of competition from the
private sector which might be expected to weaken this link.
    For Uganda, additional results combined with anecdotal evidence suggest that the
public sector health staff extort bribes particularly from the richer among the patients
who officially need not pay. The amount of the bribe is then influenced by household
expenditure in the same way as official charges in both the public and private sector,
probably through a combination of price–discrimination and fee–for–service. Although
private sector bribes are even more strongly associated with not making official payments,
the mechanism works differently. Those exempted in the private sector have similar
household expenditures to those not exempted, and appear to pay close to a flat–rate
bribe.




                                            16
References
 [1] Alcázar, Lorena and Andrade, Raúl. 2001. “Induced Demand and Absenteeism in Pe-
     ruvian Hospitals”. In Rafael DiTella and William Savedoff eds. Diagnosis Corruption:
     Fraud in Latin America’s Public Hospitals Washington, D.C.: IADB Press.

 [2] Amone, Joseph, Salome Asio, Adriano Cattaneo, Annet Kakinda Kweyatulira, Anna
     Macaluso, Gavino Maciocco, Maurice Mukokoma, Luca Ronfani and Stefano San-
     tini. 2005. “User fees in private non–for–profit hospitals in Uganda: a survey and
     intervention for equity”. International Journal for Equity in Health Vol.4 (6).

 [3] Cotlear, Daniel. 2000. “Peru: Reforming Health Care for the Poor”. World Bank
     LCSHD Paper Series No. 57.

 [4] Deininger, Klaus and Paul Mpuga. 2004. “Does Greater Accountability Improve the
     Quality of Public Service Delivery? Evidence from Uganda”. World Development
     Vol.33 (1) pp.171–191.

 [5] Di Tella, Rafael and Ernesto Schargrodsky. 2003. “The Role of Wages and Auditing
     During a Crackdown on Corruption in the City of Buenos Aires”. Journal of Law
     and Economics, Vol.1 pp. 269–292.

 [6] Ferraz, Claudio and Fred Finan. 2005a. “Reelection Incentives and Political Cor-
     ruption: Evidence from Brazil’s Municipal Audit Reports”. UC Berkeley working
     paper.

 [7] Ferraz, Claudio and Fred Finan. 2005b. “Exposing Corrupt Politicians: The Effect of
     Brazil’s Randomized Anti–Corruption Program on Electoral Outcomes”. UC Berke-
     ley working paper.

 [8] Fisman, Raymond and Roberta Gatti. 2002. “Decentralization and Corruption: Ev-
     idence Across Countries”. Journal of Public Economics, Vol.83 pp. 325–345.

 [9] Gambetta, Diego. 2002. “Corruption: An Analytical Map”. In S. Kotkin and A. Sajo
     eds. The Political Corruption of Transition: A Sceptic’s Handbook Budapest: Central
     European University Press.

[10] Hunt, Jennifer and Sonia Laszlo. 2007. “Is Bribery Really Regressive? Bribery’s
     Costs, Benefits and Mechanisms”. McGill University working paper.

[11] Jitta, Jessica, Susan Reynolds Whyte, and Nathan Nshakira. 2003. “The availability
     of drugs: what does it mean in Ugandan primary care”. Health Policy Vol.65 pp.
     167–179.

[12] Kaufmann, Daniel and Shang–Jin Wei. 1999. “Does ‘Grease Money’ Speed Up the
     Wheels of Commerce?”. NBER working paper 7093.


                                           17
[13] Konde–Lule, Joseph K. and David Okello. 1998. “User Fees in Government Health
     Units in Uganda: Implementation, Impact and Scope”. Partnerships for Health Re-
     form Small Applied Research Paper No. 2.

[14] Lewis, Maureen. 2006. “Governance and Corruption in Public Health Care Systems”.
     Center for Global Development Working Paper Number 78.

[15] Mauro, Paolo. 1995. “Corruption and Growth”. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     Vol.110(3) pp. 681–712.

[16] McPake, Barbara, Delius Asiimwe, Francis Mwesigye, Mathias Ofumbi, Lisbeth Or-
     tenblad, Pieter Streefland and Asaph Turinde. 1999. “Informal economic activities of
     public health workers in Uganda: implications for quality and accessibility of care”.
     Social Science and Medicine Vol.49 pp. 849–865.

[17] Nabynoga, J., M. Desmet, H. Karamagi, P.Y. Kadama, F. G. Omaswa and O. Walker.
     2005. “Abolition of cost–sharing is pro–poor: evidence from Uganda”. Health Policy
     and Planning Vol.20 (2) pp. 100–108.

[18] Olken, Benjamin. 2005. “Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment
     in Indonesia”. NBER Working Paper 11753.

[19] Olken, Benjamin. 2006. “Corruption and the Costs of Redistribution: Micro Evidence
     from Indonesia”. Journal of Public Economics 90 (4-5) pp. 853-870.

[20] Peréz, Betty Alvarado and Rony Lenz. 2006. “Pro–poor Policies in the Peruvian
     Public Health Sector”. In Daniel Cotlear ed. A New Social Contract for Peru: An
     Agenda for Improving Education, Health Care, and the Social Safety Net Washington
     D.C.: World Bank.

[21] Reinikka, Ritva and Jakob Svensson. 2005. “Working for God?” World Bank working
     paper.

[22] Svensson, Jakob. 2003. “Who Must Pay Bribes and How Much? Evidence From A
     Cross Section of Firms”. Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.118 pp. 207–30.

[23] Thompson, Robin and Ana Xavier. 2002. “Unofficial payments for acute state hos-
     pital care in Kazakhstan. A model of physician behaviour with price discrimination
     and vertical service differentiation”. LICOS Working Paper 124.

[24] Treisman, Daniel. 2000. “The Causes of Corruption: A Cross–National Study”. Jour-
     nal of Public Economics, Vol.76 (3) pp. 399–457.

[25] Valdivia, Martı́n. 2002. “Public health infrastructure and equity in the utilization of
     outpatient health care services in Peru”. Health Policy and Planning 17 (Suppl 1)
     pp. 12–19.



                                            18
[26] Webb, Richard and Sofı́a Valencia. 2006. “Human Resources in Public Health and
     Education”. In Daniel Cotlear ed. A New Social Contract for Peru: An Agenda
     for Improving Education, Health Care, and the Social Safety Net Washington D.C.:
     World Bank.

[27] Wei, Shang–Jin. 2000. “How Taxing is Corruption on International Investors?” Re-
     view of Economics and Statistics Vol. 82 (1) pp. 1-11.

[28] Yang, Dean. 2005. “Integrity for Hire: An Analysis of a Widespread Program for
     Combating Customs Corruption”. University of Michigan working paper.

[29] Yang, Dean. 2006. “Can Enforcement Backfire? Crime Displacement in the Context
     of Customs Reform in the Philippines”. University of Michigan working paper.




                                         19
Data Appendix
Peru – Encuesta Nacional de Hogares
The data are available at www.inei.gob.pe/srienaho/English/Consulta por Encuesta.asp.
The 2002 survey was taken in October, November and December of 2002. The “2003”
survey was taken from May 2003 to April 2004. One quarter of the 2003 households
were also interviewed in 2002. I simply combine monetary values from surveys taken
at different times with no adjustment for inflation or seasonality, which tests indicated
was appropriate for household consumption. Household consumption is computed by the
statistical agency, based on the survey’s 31 pages of questions on household expenditure
and consumption.
    The twenty–one types of official listed in the survey are: municipal (city) government,
social security (providing social insurance other than pensions), state banks, judiciary,
drinking water, telephone, electricity, state schools, arbitration, Ministry of Agriculture,
Ministry of Industry, tax/customs authority, state hospitals, national civil identification
registry, Department of Migration, police, electoral office, electoral court, development
agency, food agency, and “other”.

Uganda – Second National Integrity Survey
The survey was conducted in 55 of 56 districts of Uganda. The subsequent non–random
sampling of sub–counties led to the sub–county of the district headquarters always being
chosen, which means that urban areas are over–sampled. The district’s sub–counties were
divided into three categories based on availability of government services and infrastruc-
ture, and 20% of sub–counties in each category were randomly chosen. Within each of
these sub–counties, the local council 1 areas were similarly divided into three categories,
and one local council 1 area per category was chosen randomly. The selection of which
households to interview within these local council 1 areas did not appear to be random,
as it appeared to involve choosing households near the residence or office of the local
council 1 chairperson.
    It is not possible to distinguish between zeroes and missing values in the components of
expenditure, so I simply assign zeroes to all missing values and sum the nine components.
For seven components, most of the values are missing. In the health module, there
are some valid responses for households who had not used the health care system in the
previous three months: I drop these observations. Also, some households gave information
on more than one health care visit in the previous three months (contrary to the survey
instructions): I retain only one visit per household.
    The twenty–two agencies listed in the survey are: local primary school, Department
of Education, health unit, police, traffic police, local council 1, local council 3, Agri-
culture Department, Veterinary Department, Fisheries Department, Forestry Depart-
ment, Department of Cooperatives, Public Service (pensions), Water Department, Land
Board, Magistrates Court, Ugandan People’s Defence Force, Local Defence Force, Uganda
Revenue Authority (licencing), Uganda Revenue Authority (customs, anti–smuggling),

                                            20
Uganda Electricity Board and “other”. However, the variable for whether or not the
household used “other” officials is missing from the data I have received.




                                       21
                      Table 1: Health and health care in Peru and Uganda

                                                          Peru                 Uganda
                                                   Year          Value     Year     Value
Life expectancy at birth - males                   2004           69       2004        48
Life expectancy at birth - females                 2004           73       2004        51
Share population 15-49 HIV positive                2003           0.5      2003        4.1
Share births attended by skilled personnel         2004          71.1      2000       39.0
Doctors per 1000 pop                               1999          1.17      2004       0.08
Nurses per 1000 pop                                1999          0.67      2004       0.61
Health spending as % GDP                           2003           4.4      2003        7.3
Government spending as % total health spending     2003          48.3      2003       30.4

Source: WHO http://www3.who.int/whosis/core/core_select.cfm
               Table 2: Means of Peruvian variables from modules other than health

                                                       (1)                      (2)
                                                       All                Bribery episode
Bribery episode                                      0.0077                      1
Household consumption,                                 339                      385
monthly, in US $                                      (271)                    (262)
Visits (from bribery module)                           4.2                      5.0
                                                      (3.8)                    (4.9)
Household problem previous 12 mths:
      earner died                                    0.012                     0.053
      member sick or had accident                    0.068                     0.126
      fire in apartment, shop, property              0.002                        0
      crime (robbery, assault etc.)                  0.039                     0.063
      natural disaster                               0.066                     0.074
Child born to household previous 12 mths              0.14                      0.14
Bribery respondent age                                 40                        39
                                                      (16)                      (14)
Bribery respondent years education                     8.0                       8.6
                                                      (4.8)                    (5.1)
Observations                                         12,262                      95
Amount of bribe, in US $ (if reported)                  --                      9.10
                                                                                (15)
Observations                                           --                        76

Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses. The unit of observation is a household that in the
bribery module reported using state hospitals.
               Table 3: Means of Peruvian bribery respondent health characteristics

                                                               (1)                 (2)
                                                               All           Bribery episode
Current:
          no health insurance                                 0.74                    0.83
          chronic health condition                            0.25                    0.36
Previous 12 months:
          hospitalized                                        0.09                 0.18
          duration of hospitalization (days)                  0.80                 1.67
                                                             (5.75)               (5.31)
          surgery                                             0.03                 0.07
Preventative consultation previous 3 months:
          family planning (women 15-49)                       0.10                    0.13
          vaccination program                                 0.06                    0.06
          iron supplement (pregnant, child 0-2)               0.01                      0
          health campaign                                     0.03                    0.03
          promotion of healthy practices                      0.02                    0.04
Previous 3 months:
          dental services                                     0.09                    0.05
          opthalmological services                            0.03                    0.02
          any other medical goods/services                    0.08                    0.08
Previous 4 weeks:
           consultation                                       0.28                    0.35
           medicine                                           0.43                    0.53
           tests                                              0.06                    0.12
           X-ray                                              0.01                    0.05
           other procedures                                   0.02                    0.04
Observations                                                 12,262                    95

Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses. The unit of observation is a household whose
respondent reported using state hospitals in the bribery module. Examples of “other medical
goods/services” are thermometer, orthopedics. Possible chronic health conditions mentioned in the
survey were arthritis, hypertension, asthma, rheumatism.
          Table 4: Means of variables related to health issues in previous four weeks - Peru

                                                                (1)                 (2)
                                                                All           Bribery episode
Health issues previous 4 weeks: symptoms                       0.37                0.43
                Illness                                        0.27                0.29
                relapse of chronic condition                   0.08                0.09
                Accident                                       0.01                0.02
                Pregnancy                                      0.02                  0
                none of above                                  0.37                0.26
Went to health center/hospital/doctor/clinic about             0.25                0.33
previous month’s health issue
Most qualified health professional seen for previous
month’s health issue if went to health center etc:
                Obstetrician                                  0.012                  0
                Doctor                                        0.180                0.253
                Dentist                                       0.002                  0
                Nurse                                         0.040                0.053
                Paramedic                                     0.006                  0
                Pharmaceutical sales rep                      0.001                  0
                Other                                         0.005                0.021
Health procedures for previous month’s health issue if
went to health center etc:
                Tests                                         0.053                0.116
                Medicine                                      0.228                0.284
                X-ray                                         0.013                0.053
                Other                                         0.019                0.042
Observations                                                 12,262                  95

Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses. The unit of observation is a household whose
respondent reported using state hospitals in the bribery module. The symptoms dummy equals one
if the respondent said s/he had “symptoms or discomfort (cough, headache, fever, nausea)”. The
illness dummy equals one if the respondent said s/he had “illness (flu, colitis etc)”. Questions about
the place where care was sought were asked of those who said they had had one of the listed health
issues. Questions about health professionals and procedures were asked of those who responded
that they had sought care at a health center, hospital, doctor’s or clinic. More than one answer was
permitted for the health professional, but I ranked them in the order given and assigned a unique
indicator for the highest qualified professional the respondent saw. Additional Peruvian means are
given in Appendix Table 1.
                      Table 5: Ugandan health unit users in past three months

                           (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)          (5)
                          Bribe       Made official     Amount          Amount      Observations
                                       payment           bribe           official
                                                                        payment
A. Public
All                       0.17            0.38             --              --          4104
Bribe reported             --              --             6.06             --           697
                                                          (15)
Bribe or official           --             --              --            11.66         1550
payment reported                                                          (59)
B. Public hospitals
All                       0.19            0.41             --              --          2350
Bribe reported             --              --             7.88             --           449
                                                          (18)
Bribe or official           --             --              --            15.81          973
payment reported                                                          (74)
C. Private
All                       0.11            0.83             --              --          3467
Bribe reported             --              --             5.26             --           398
                                                          (10)
Bribe or official           --             --              --            12.23         2868
payment reported                                                          (87)

Note: Amounts in US dollars. Standard deviations are in parentheses.
                     Table 6: Ugandan health unit users in past three months

                                   (1)                (2)             (3)               (4)
                                       Public sample                     Private sample
                               No bribery         Bribery         No bribery         Bribery
Household expenditure,             82                 91             109                101
monthly, in US $                 (124)              (125)           (171)             (153)
Urban household                   0.37               0.37            0.44              0.36
Respondent no education           0.11               0.10            0.08              0.10
Respondent 1-4 years edu          0.15               0.16            0.13              0.12
Respondent age                     36                 35              34                 35
                                  (12)               (11)            (11)              (12)
Patient age                        19                 19              17                 17
                                  (18)               (17)            (17)              (16)
Patient illness:
   malaria/fever/headache         0.62              0.61              0.70            0.68
   pregnant/gynecological         0.07              0.09              0.03            0.04
   intestinal/stomach             0.04              0.04              0.04            0.04
   respiratory                    0.04              0.05              0.05            0.03
Patient treatment:
   single                         0.54              0.48              0.54            0.53
   part of course                 0.44              0.49              0.43            0.46
   other                          0.02              0.02              0.02            0.01
Health facility:
   public                          1                 1                 0               0
   private or other                0                 0                0.91            0.96
   mission                         0                 0                0.09            0.04
Health facility:
   hospital                       0.53              0.58             0.14             0.06
   health unit                    0.28              0.24             0.44             0.54
   dispensary                     0.15              0.10             0.13             0.15
   hospital + unit/dispens        0.03              0.06             0.02             0.03
   pharmacy                       0.00              0.00             0.03             0.03
   clinic                         0.01              0.01             0.22             0.17
   drug store, other              0.00               0               0.01             0.01
Observations                      3407              697              3069             398

Note: Standard deviations are in parentheses. Additional Ugandan means are given in Appendix
Tables 2 and 3.
             Table 7: Peruvian state hospital users in past twelve months – who bribes?

                             (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
Log household              0.0056       0.0057      0.0055       0.0051       0.0064      0.0063
consumption                 (3.7)        (3.7)       (3.5)        (3.3)        (3.9)       (3.8)
R-squared                   0.01         0.01        0.01         0.02         0.02        0.02
Basic                        Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
Education, job                --          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
Other non-medical             --           --         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
Symptoms, problems            --           --          --          Yes          Yes         Yes
Insurance                     --           --          --           --          Yes         Yes
Hospital visited              --           --          --           --          Yes         Yes
Hospitalized, surgery         --           --          --           --           --         Yes
Professionals, tests          --           --          --           --           --         Yes

Notes: Linear probability regressions for 12,262 observations with t-statistics in parentheses. The
unit of observation is the household. All regressions include 24 regional dummies interacted with a
dummy for the 2003 survey, nine household size dummies, town size dummies, time to the district
administrative center (basic covariates). Education is years of education; job dummies are dummies
for whether the respondent is a doctor, nurse or medical technician. The other non-medical
covariates are the number of visits and dummies for respondent sex and age, and the presence of
children.
               Table 8: Ugandan users in past three months – who bribes, who pays?

                                 (1)       (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
                                         Public sample                        Private sample
A. Bribe
Log household expenditure      0.015       0.021         0.017        0.001       0.005        0.006
                               (3.0)       (3.9)         (3.2)        (0.1)       (0.7)        (0.8)
R-squared                       0.08        0.10          0.11         0.06        0.07         0.10
B. Official payment
Log household expenditure      0.051       0.053         0.043        0.011       0.010        0.010
                               (5.8)       (5.6)         (4.4)        (1.6)       (1.4)        (1.3)
R-squared                       0.08        0.08          0.12         0.12        0.12         0.14
Observations                                  4104                                 3467
Basic covariates                Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
Education, job                   --         Yes           Yes           --         Yes         Yes
Other covariates                 --          --           Yes           --          --         Yes

Notes: Marginal effects from probits in columns 1-3, linear probability coefficients in columns 4-6.
All regressions include 54 district dummies, 13 household size dummies, and an urban dummy (basic
covariates). Education is captured by dummies and job refers to dummies for respondent
occupation and the main source of household income. The other non-medical covariates are the
number of household males and females over 18, respondent sex, age and age squared, and status as
head or spouse. The other medical covariates are the patient age, dummies for patient illness, type of
facility, ongoing versus once-off treatment, and (in columns 4-6) a dummy for a mission facility.
           Table 9: Bribes and official payments among Ugandan health care users (%)

                                   Public                                 Private
                      No bribe         Bribe        All      No bribe          Bribe     All
                       78             22            100       45              55         100
No official payment
                           58              81                     9                83
                       92              8            100       98               2         100
Official payment
                           42              19                     91               17
All                        100             100                    100              100
         Table 10: Ugandan bribers – log amount of bribe, log amount of official payment


                                 (1)       (2)            (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)
                                        Public sample                          Private sample
A. Bribe
Log household expenditure      0.427       0.431         0.373        0.257        0.251        0.153
                               (7.3)       (6.4)         (5.4)        (3.5)        (3.0)        (2.0)
R-squared                       0.24        0.27          0.37         0.30         0.37         0.51
Observations                                  697                                   398
B. Official payment
Log household expenditure      0.452       0.464         0.357        0.433        0.440        0.376
                               (9.7)       (9.3)         (8.1)        (16.7)       (15.9)       (13.9)
R-squared                       0.26        0.28          0.40         0.23         0.25         0.36
Observations                                 1550                                   2868
Basic covariates                Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
Education, job                   --         Yes          Yes            --          Yes          Yes
Other covariates                 --          --          Yes            --           --          Yes

Notes: Linear probability coefficients with t-statistics in parentheses. All regressions include 54
district dummies, 13 household size dummies, and an urban dummy. Education is captured by
dummies and job refers to dummies for respondent occupation and the main source of household
income. The other non-medical covariates are the number of household males and females over 18,
respondent sex, age and age squared, and status as head or spouse. The other medical covariates are
the patient age, dummies for patient illness, type of facility, ongoing versus once-off treatment, and
(in columns 4-6) a dummy for a mission facility.
                       Appendix Table 1: Means of further Peruvian covariates

                                                      All households        Households reporting
                                                                              bribery episode
Household member is: doctor                                0.004                      0
     Nurse                                                 0.011                   0.032
     Medical technician                                    0.001                      0
Bribery respondent sex (female=1)                           0.54                    0.51
Household contains child aged: 0-3                          0.35                    0.34
      4-7                                                   0.37                    0.34
      8-11                                                  0.38                    0.26
      12-15                                                 0.34                    0.23
Household size                                              4.7                      4.2
                                                           (2.2)                    (2.0)
Minutes travel to district administrative center            62.5                    56.8
                                                          (155.3)                  (83.0)
Town >500,000                                               0.13                    0.11
Town 100,000-500,000                                        0.24                    0.24
Town 50,000-100,000                                         0.06                    0.09
Town 20,000-50,000                                          0.08                    0.08
Town 2000-20,000                                            0.08                    0.06
Town 500-2000                                               0.06                    0.01
Town about 200                                              0.26                    0.26
Town about 100                                              0.09                    0.14
Year=2003                                                   0.71                    0.52
Observations                                              12,262                     95

Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses. The unit of observation is a household that in the
bribery module reported using state hospitals. Unlisted household level variables used are
departmento (region), year=2003.
 Appendix Table 2: Means of Ugandan household main income source and respondent occupation

                                         Public sample               Private sample
                                   No bribery      Bribery     No bribery       Bribery
Farming – cash crops                 0.16            0.15        0.12             0.16
Farming – foods crops                0.25            0.25        0.18             0.19
Farming – livestock                  0.02            0.01        0.02             0.02
Manufacturing, crafts, repair        0.06            0.09        0.07             0.09
Trade - petty                        0.09            0.07        0.09             0.09
Trade – retail/shop/stall            0.10            0.11        0.15             0.15
Trade – wholesale, crop buying       0.02            0.03        0.03             0.02
Government – salaried or wage        0.12            0.10        0.10             0.08
Private – salaried or wage           0.05            0.04        0.08             0.06
Stipends from relatives              0.02            0.01        0.01             0.00
Casual work                          0.08            0.11        0.07             0.10
Other                                0.05            0.03        0.06             0.05
Farmer – mainly crops                0.37            0.38        0.26             0.33
Farmer – mainly livestock            0.02            0.01        0.02             0.02
Trader                               0.18            0.19        0.25             0.21
Civil servant/armed forces           0.06            0.04        0.05             0.03
Teacher                              0.05            0.04        0.06             0.04
Professional in private practice     0.02            0.02        0.03             0.03
(doctor/lawyer)
Craftsperson                          0.06          0.07          0.07            0.08
(carpenter/mechanic etc)
Casual laborer                       0.07           0.08         0.07             0.08
Housewife                            0.10           0.09         0.10             0.10
Student                              0.01           0.00         0.01             0.01
Tailor/builder                       0.01           0.01         0.01             0.01
Bodaboda or taxi driver              0.01           0.01         0.02             0.02
Repair and service jobs              0.04           0.04         0.05             0.04
Unemployed                           0.01           0.01         0.00             0.01
Retired                              0.00           0.00         0.00              0
Observations                         3407           697          3069             398
                    Appendix Table 3: Means of Ugandan patient illnesses

                                     Public sample                    Private sample
                               No bribery      Bribery          No bribery       Bribery
Malaria/fever/headache           0.62            0.61             0.70             0.68
Diarrhea                         0.03            0.02             0.03             0.05
Injury                           0.03            0.04             0.03             0.05
Pregnant/gynecological           0.07            0.09             0.03             0.04
Immunization                     0.03            0.00             0.00               0
STDs                             0.01            0.01             0.00             0.01
Intestinal/stomach               0.04            0.04             0.04             0.04
Heart                            0.02            0.01             0.02             0.02
Accident                         0.00            0.00             0.00             0.00
Dental                           0.01            0.02             0.01             0.01
Ear/nose/throat/eye              0.02            0.01             0.01             0.01
Skin                             0.01            0.01             0.01             0.01
Backache                         0.00            0.00             0.00               0
Bone                             0.00            0.00             0.00             0.00
Other diseases                   0.03            0.03             0.03             0.04
Respiratory                      0.04            0.05             0.05             0.03
Tetanus, measles                 0.02            0.03             0.03             0.01
General check up                 0.00            0.00             0.00               0
Observations                     3407             697             3069             398
