NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BEQUESTS AS A MEANS OP PAYMENT

B. Douglas Bernheim
Anclrei Shlejfer
Lawrence H. Summers

Working Paper No. 1303

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 19811

We would like to thank V. Fuchs, M.A. King, J.M. Poterba, R.
Vishny, as well as seminar participants at Brown, Harvard, North
Carolina State and Stanford for helpful comments. Financial sup-..
port from the NSF is gratefully acknowledged. The research
reported here is part of the NBER 's research program in Taxat ion

and project in Pensions. Any opinions expressed are those of the

authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1303
March 1984

Bequests as a Means of Payment

ABSTRACT

Although recent research suggests that intergenerational transfers play
an important role in aggregate capital accumulation, our understanding of

bequest motives remains incomplete. We develop a simple model of
"exchange—motivated" bequests, in which a testator influences the decisions of

his beneficiaries by holding wealth in bequeathable forms and by conditioning

the division of bequests on the beneficiaries' actions. The model generates
falsifiable empirical predictions which are inconsistent with other theories of

intergenerational transfers. We present econometric and other evidence which
strongly suggests that bequests are often used as a means of payment for services
rendered by beneficiaries.

B. Douglas Bernheim
Department of Economics
Stanford University
452 Encina Hall
Stanford, CA 914305

Andrei Shleifer
National Bureau of
Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Lawrence H. Summers
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 229
Harvard University

Cambridge, MA 02138

Cambridge, MA 02138

"Tell Ire, try daughters

(Since now we will divest us 'both of rule,
Interest of territory, cares of state).
Which of you shall we say doth love us rrost,
That we our largest bounty tray extend
Where nature doth with rrerit challenge."

— King
Lear, Shakespeare (1608)

uch

recent research suggests that intergenerational transfers play an

itrportant role in aggregate capital accun'ulation. Kotlikoff and Surrrers (1981)
estiirate that about four—fifths of U.S. wealth accurrulatiort is due to interge-

nerational transfers.1 Several other studies, including Brittain (1978). Nirer
(1979), and Bernheitr (l98la) have found that the savings behavior of retirees is

inconsistent with strong forrrs of the Life Cycle Hypothesis.2 While intergenerational transfers appear to be of central iirportance in

understanding pat-

terns of capital accutrulation and fatrilial behavior, relatively little is known

about what rrotivates individuals to leave bequests.
In this paper we develop a Irodel of "exchange rotivated" bequests, and present

sorre preliirinary eirpirical tests of it. The central prexrise underlying our

forirulation is that testators use bequests to influence the behavior of potential beneficiaries. Such influence tray be overt as when parents threaten to
disinherit triscreant offspring, or irore subtle as when parents
attentive

children

reward

Irre

with fatrily heirloorrs. As we discuss below, tro.1els of

exchange rrotivated bequests have very different irrplications for the effects of

institutions such as Social Security and private pensions on the x'ate of capital
forn'ation, and individual behavior Irore generally, than do alternative irodels.

In our theoretical forirulation, we envision a testator who derives satisfaction froir consuxrption, and who is also affected by actions taken

individually

by a nun'ber of potential beneficiaries. The testator has no conventional

—2—

bequest irotive, and so, apart fron' strategic considerations, would prefer to

hold his entire wealth in annuities. However, his preferences differ froir those
of his potential beneficiaries (he ray, for exairple. wish to receive additional

attention, or irore generally to alter behavior). By holding wealth in
bequeathable forirs and by conditioning the division of bequests (perhaps through
inforrrl ireans) on actions taken, he can atterrpt to influence his beneficiaries'

decisions. However, he is constrained in this regard by considerations of
credibility; he cannot, for exan'pie, credibly threaten universal disinheritance.

We show that as long as there are at least two credible beneficiaries, it is
possible for the testator to devise a siirple, intuitively appealing bequest
rule which overcoires the problea' of credibility, and allows hut' to appropriate

all surplus generated froir testator—beneuiciary interaction. This surplus provides the incentive for the testator to hold at least part of his wealth in
bequeathable forirs.

No single tractable analytic irodel can capture as varied a phenorenon as

intergenerational transfers. We believe, however, that the trodel of exchange
rrotivated bequests presented here is a valuable suppleirent to conventional for—
irulations which rely on ad—hoc bequest irotives or intergenerational altruisir.

In particular, our irodel helps to explain several eirpirical observations which

seerr inconsistent with other forirulations. Furtherirore, it generates falsi—
fiable eirpirical predictions, thereby lending itself to econorretric testinr.

Since undertaking this project, the authors have frequently been accused of
harboring a perhaps too pessirristic view of huiran nature. It is therefore
iirportant to exrphasize that we intend for the current work to supplerrent, rather

—3—

than substitute for, current theories of bequests. Surely, not all individuaTs

behave unipu1atively, nor does hinted self—interest necessarily determine
the disposition of' all bequeathable wealth. However, even the optimist rrust
concede that certain cases sirack of financial motivation. For example, rich,
elderly, childless widows often appear to have unusually attentive relatives.
More coirironly, although n'any families seem to divide the bulk of financial

wealth in accordance with certain principles of fairness, specific possessions
(for instance, heirlooms and other valuables) rray be distributed in part on the
basis of "Irerit." We model, a polar extretre in order to highlight analysis of

the exchange irotive, rather than to suggest the absence of other motivation.

The relative significance of different motives is properly the subject of
exrpirical inquiry (as in sections II and III), rather than casual anecdotes.

The notion that bequests xray arise as a consequence of exchange between
parents and children has previously received varying arrounts of attention from

Sussmran etal. (19T0), Barro (1971, footnote i4), Ben—Porath (19T8), Adains
(1980), Kotlikoff and Spivak (1981), Tomes (1981), and Becker (19Th. 1981).
These studies, however, lack a coirplete model of the exchange process. Where
forn'al rrodels of exchange are developed, it is implicitly assured that unwritten agreen'ents between family meinbers are perfectly enforceable.

By exp'icitly

n'odelling the strategic choices of parties of such agreeirents, we generite

sharp, empirically testable predictions concerning the circurrstnces under which
these agreeirents are enforceable.
Aside froir the issue of enforceability, our analysis is perhaps irost closely

related to that of Becker (19Th.. 1981), but in his framework, the parent

(testator) is an altruist, and is prixrarily concerned with alleviating inter—
farrily conflict (see, however. Becker's discussion of "irerit goods"). We rodel

a wore elaborate gawe in which testators act selfishly at tiires, prorroting
conflict airong potential beneficiaries to achieve personally desired goals.

Further, we explicitly link the exchange r'otive to decisions to hold wealth in
bequeathable, as opposed to annuitized forirs.

The paper is organized as follows. Section I presents our irodel of
exchange trotivated bequests and characterizes its solution.

In section II, we

present econorretric evidence on bequeathable assets and beneficiary behavior

which supports the trodel. Section III discusses the ability of various bequest

theories to account for certain stylized facts. Finally, in section IV we exa—
wine sorre iirplications of our nndel for issues such as the effect of Social
Security, governirerit debt, and private pensions on capital forrration and fan'ily

behavior. Conclusions are also presented.

I. A_Model of Exchange Motivated Beauests
In this section, we present a riodel in which savings and bequests are
partly deteririned by non—cooperative interaction airong self—interested agents.

For a variety of reasons, testators' preferences tray not coincide with those of

their potential beneficiaries. In such cases, decisions of potential beneficiaries tray be influenced by the hope of financial reward. Exairples abound: An

individual might desire wore attention from his children, object to a relative's
choice of spouse, or want to be cared for by a sibling or grandchild.
Institutions (such as universities) corrironly treat wealthy patrons particularly

—5—

well,

perhaps to encourage further support in the forw of gifts and bequests.
A forrral discussion of strategic issues necessarily requires us to seTect a

structural xrodel. In particular, we envision a world in which the testator is a
dotrinant, fully inf'orwed player. By designing the rules governing the division

of bequests, he influences the behavior of potential beneficiaries, extracting

the full surplus generated by this exchange. There are, of course, a variety of
other ways to irodel exchange Irotivated bequests; ours has no particular ariorj

ciairr to realisir. However, it does have the virtue of siirplicity and tractability, and in addition generates falsiuiable errpirica]. predictions which are
inconsistent with other irodels of intergenerational transfers, which lack the

elewent of exchange. This allows us to test the irodel in sections II and III.
On the whole, the evidence appears to support the hypothesis that bequests are
used extensively to facilitate intrafawily exchange.
In solving for the equilibria of the galre described in the following sub-

section, we wake extensive use of Selten's (1975) notion of subgare perfect
Nash Equilibriuir. Forirally, an equilibriuir is subgaire perfect if strategies

forir an equilibriuir in every proper subgarre. Intuitively, this refinerrent of

the Nash concept requires agents to act in a narrically consistent fashion
(that is, in their own interests) both on and off the equilibriuxr path. This is
coirironly interpreted as weaning that an agent cannot credibly threaten to take

in certain contingencies actions, which, should those contingencies arise, would

be contrary to his interests. In the case of bequests, testators obviously need
to establish credibility in order to wanipulate potential beneficiaries.
Threats of universal disinheritance are, for exairple, unlikely to be belicved.

—6—

Our task is to show that the testator can (in our wodel) successfully tranipulate
potential beneficiaries even though he is constrained to sake credible threats.

A. The_Model
Consider a single testator with N potential beneficiaries, indexed n = 1,
...,

N.

This set of beneficiaries is intended to be exhaustive: it includes

all individuals (spouse, children, other relatives) and institutions (charities,
churches, universities) to which the testator could credibly prorrise a substan-

tial fraction of his estate. For any particular individual, the size of this
set is an eirpirical question.

Tiire proceeds in discrete periods, labelled t =

0.

1. 2, ...

The con-

ditional probability that the testator will die at the end of period t given

that he is alive at the beginning of period t will be denoted w. We assuwe
that the testator's lifetixre is deteririnistically bounded (there exists T such

that T =

i).

Let
ti—i

P(t,t')

=

ii

(i —

it5),

5 =t
i.e., the probability that he will survive until t', given that he is alive in
period t. These survival probabilities are assuired to be publicly known.
Although the testator's lifetirre is uncertain, we take potential beneficiaries

to be infinitely lived. Relaxing this does not change any substantive conclusions.

Each period, the testator and potential beneficiaries choose to consuire

—T —

awounts C, and {C tn1' respectively. In addition, potential beneficiaries
choose actions at

which affect the testator's well—being. For

sinplicity, we assuxre that at is a real nrnrber lying in sou'e interval

.

0 (

We

assuwe that the testator's utility is additively separable in

tirre and discounted at the rate .

In

particular, for every period s and for

all strearrs of future consu.irption and actions, his ex ante utility is given by:

T

Z 8

ts

P(s,t) U (c,,, at

We take U to be increasing and strictly concave in each of its arguL"ents.
Siirilarly, for a potential beneficiary n, utility is given by:5

Z ts un,t

t=s

(C

n,t

,

a

n,t

is taken to be increasing and concave in

Since we are prirrarily

interested in cases of strategic conflict between testator and beneficiary, we
assuire that a
is "bad" froir the beneficiary's point of view (that is, U
n,t

is

decreasing and concave in
At tirre t =

0, the testator and potential beneficiaries possess initial

wealth W0 and {Wn}ni respectively. Aside froir interest, there are no
infusions of incoire into the systeir after period

In each period t, agents

allocate wealth (W, {w}1) between consulrption (ct, {C

one period

—8—

annuity contracts (Ar. {At}5j) and riskless bonds, the latter yielding a
return in the following period of r.

In contrast, for the testator, annuities

> r; however, payirent is conditional upon survival. For the case of

yield

fair annuities, 1 + Pt = (1. + r)/(l —

iTt).

Since beneficiaries survive with

probability one, their annuities are equivalent to bonds.
The testator's total wealth evolves according to equation (1).

=

— A) (1 + r) + At (1 +

—

(we,

Should he die

at

(1)

the end of period t, his total bequest Bt is given by

(2)

BtWt_Ct_At
The evolution of a potential beneficiary's wealth will be governed by an
equation sirrilar to (1):

w

n,t+l

= (w

—
n,t

C

+ b
n,t

n,t

i(t)) (1 + r)

(3)

Here, i(t) equals 1 if the testator actually dies in period t, and 0 otherwise;

bn,t is the arrount bequeathed to the nth beneficiary in the event that the
testator dies in period t.

It is convenient at this point to define, for each n and t. the indirect
utility function Vn,t(W) as the solution to the following progratr:

wax E n BUn,t(c n,t ,o)

subject to

—9—

Z

C

n,t 1(1

+

r)T_t

That is, for each potential beneficiary n, tine period t, and wealth level W,

V(W) indicates the iraxiirus present discounted utility which the potential
beneficiary could obtain if he left the garre (i.e. .

set

=

bt

=

0 for each

t), and sirrply perforrred life cycle lraxizrization.

Strategic considerations enter through decisions affecting the size and

distribution of bequests. In particular, choices within a period take place in
the following sequence. First, the testator deterirines his consurption level,
and divides his reTraining wealth between annuities and bequeathable assets. In
addition, he selects a bequest rule, which specifies criteria for deteririning

the distribution of his bequeathable assets should he die at the end of the

period. Second, potential beneficiaries observe the testator's level of
bequeathable wealth,8 and select current actions and consuirption levels, taking

into account the testator's bequest rule. Nature then deterirines whether or not
the testator survives; in the case of death, the estate is divided according to
the bequest rule.
Forirally, the bequest rule is a vector of N functions, b (IL. B). which wap
the history of the gaire up until the testator dies (H) and the level of

bequeathable wealth (B) into a bequest for each beneficiary. In period t, the
testator iray

choose

a rule which depends on all behavior that is observable

prior to the soonest possible tin'e of his death (i.e., the end of the j'eriod);

we assuire that the history of beneficiaries' actions is observable, hut that
their current consuTrption cannot be ironitored by testators. We require that the

bequest rule satisfy only one condition for all histories H:

—10—

E b (H,B)=B
n1

(6)

This restriction reflects two considerations. First, for feasibility, the lc'ft

hand side of (6) cannot exceed the right. Second, since potential beneficiaries
ist receive all bequeathable wealth upon the testator's death, (6) specifies

equality. Since we have defined the set of potential beneficiaries to be
exhaustive, this sirrply follows fron' the fact that

the

testator "can't take it

with hiir." We have assuired that it is possible to identify a set of credible

potential beneficiaries —— a testator will prefer to leave his wealth to sore

subset

of these individuals and institutions even if they all ignore his wishes9

(as discussed in the introduction, threats to do otherwise are then sirrply not
credible; the perfectness requireirent is irrposed here). Thus, for exairple.
parents iray not be able to successfully issue unreasonable u'Ltirratur's to their

children, threatening universal disinheritance.

In the next subsection, we show that if there are at least two credible

beneficiaries (N

2), then the testator can design a sirrple, intuitively

appealing bequest rule which allows hia' to extract the entire surplus associated

with testator—beneficiary interaction, even though he is constrained to bequcath
his entire estate to their. The rule establishes a gaire in which potential hne—
ficiaries coirpete for bequests. Thus, "sibling rivalry" errerges as a con-

sequence of parental self—interest. The potential benefits of such exchiane
induce the testator to hold wealth in bequeathable forirs, even though his crsonal rate of' return falls.

—1:1—

B.

qilibriuirin a Sile Period
Solving

for the perfect equilibria of the gare described in the preceding

section is a soirewhat intricate task. Significant insight into the nature of
this solution can be garnered by first analyzing a single period irodel.

This

provides a basis for the recursive solution of the full dynairic rrodel presented

in the next subsection. Specifically, assuIre that there is a single period, at

the end of which the testator dies with certainty. His utility is a function of
consuirption and beneficiaries' actions, U(C, a); each potential beneficiary's

utility depends on his chosen action and bequest received,
Decisions are irade in the following order:

U (an, b).

(1) the testator chooses consuirption

and a bequest rule, (2) beneficiaries choose actions.

Subsequently to these

decisions the testator dies, and his estate is divided according to the specified rule.
We Irotivate the solution to this sirrple gaire as follows. Figure 1

illustrates a particular beneficiary's indifference curves in the

plane. Secall that he thinks of a as a "bad" ——

utility

(ar. b)

increases to the

northwest. Consider the set:

S

n

{(an, bn )

:

Un (a n, b n )

' Un

(0, 0)}

S consists of all pairs which the beneficiary weakly prefers to !rinin'urr action
(a

a = 0,

0) and no bequest (see figure 2). Since he always has the option to set
and since bequests are constrained to be positive, any equilibriwr must

involve beneficiary n consuming an allocation in S.

Figure 1

Figure 2

ak

—13—

Now consider the following artificial problew for the testator:

wax LJ(c, a)

C,a,b,

subject to

N
s.t.

E b +C=W

nl n

(a , bn ) C S

n

n

for each n.

The solution to this problew, denoted C*, {a*. b}1, would be appropriate if
testators could choose actions for potential beneficiaries subject to the

constraint that each is still willing to participate. Assure there exists a
bequest rule which, along with a consuirption level 0*, induces (a*, b*}N1 as an
equilibriwr. Since this allocation achieves the optiiruw ignoring incentive
constraints, it trust necessarily be the testator's best choice. The perfect
equilibriuir of this sirrplified gatre would then consist of the testator choosing

C* along with this bequest rule, and the beneficiaries playing Nash strategies
in the subgawe defined by the bequest rule.
To characterize the perfect equilibria for this gaire, we need only exhibit
a bequest rule satisfying (6) for which {a*, b*}N1 etrerges as an equilibriurr

in the beneficiaries' subgaxre)-° One such rule operates as follows. We will
N
refer to {a*, b*}
n
nn=l as "benchirark" actions and bequests. Denote the set of
beneficiaries who take at least their benchirark actions as K =

{n : an > n

let K denote the coirpleirent of K. If K is non—en'pty, the testator bequeaths
nothing to ireirbers of K. In contrast, treirbers of K receive their benchrrark

bequests, plus equal shares of the benchirark bequests for rrerrbers of K. If K is

empty, then the testator bequeaths the entire estate to sore beneficiary m whose

a C a — a n for all n. Note
action is closest to his benchmark level: a*
n
m — m
that total bequests alwvs equal

—

C,

so feasibility and credibility are

satisfied.

This rule defines a simultaneous irove subgare where potential beneficiaries

choose actions an. It is easy to verify that there are N + 1 Nash equilibria
for this subgaire; one consists of every beneficiary playing his benchmark level.

In the N remaining equilibria, N — 1 beneficiaries choose their benchmark

levels, while one takes the minimum action. However, for a variety of reasons,
one can safely ignore these less desirable equilibria.11

To summarize: for the simplified game described at the beginning of this
section, the perfect equilibrium consists of the testator choosing consumption
C* along with the bequest rule described in the preceding paragraph, while
potential beneficiaries play Nash strategies in the subgarre defined by the

bequest rule. All other perfect equilibria will yield the same realizations of
consumption, attention, and bequests along equilibrium' paths. Note that the

testator succeeds in extracting all surplus from his beneficiaries (Un (a, b)
=

Un

(0, a)). The bequest rule exhibited is intuitively appealing: each child

normally receives a positive bequest, but is disinherited if he fails to meet a

standard of "good" behavior. If all children are "bad" the "best" child
receives the entire estate.

Note that the ability of the testator to successfully influence beneficiaries depends critically upon the existence of more than one credible benefi-

ciary. A single credible beneficiary cannot be "played off" against another

—15—

agent. Since he is assured of receiving all bequests, no exchange is
possible, and the garre unravels.

C. qilibriur in the Full Model
We are now prepared to characterize the perfect Nash equilibria of the
fully dynawic garre described in the preceding subsection. We use recursion to

show that the above results generalize: as long as N ) 2, the equilibriur
realizations of all variables directly relevant to the testator (annuities,
bequeathable wealth, testator's consuxrption, beneficiaries' actions, and potential bequests) are uniquely deteririned, and coincide with the values which the
testator hirrself would select if he rraxiirized his utility subject to the

constraint that

beneficiaries are willing to participate. Thus, the testator

manages to extract all the surplus associated with testator—beneficiary interaction through

the use of a sequence of simple, intuitively appealing bequest

rules. This surplus induces the testator to hold wealth in bequeathable forms,
even though his personal return falls.
The solution is determined through backward recursion, beginning with
period T + 1. Each beneficiary n starts this period with some (yet to be
determined)

level, WnT+l Since the testator has previously died with
certainty, no strategic considerations arise. Optimal individual behavior from
period T ÷

wealth

1

onwards yields utility VnT+l (WnT+l) as previously defined.

We generate complete equilibrium

strategies by induction. That is, assume

we have solved all subgames beginning in period t

+ 1.

Assume that the

testator's equilibrium utility for all such subgames (that is, for all period
t + 1 wealth levels) can be written as V1 (W÷1, {Wnt+1}nl)12 and that the

—6--

0th beneficiary's equilibrium utility is given by V÷1 (w,÷1) whether or
not the testator is alive at the beginning of the period. Decisions in period t

must be predicated upon subsequent optimization. There are

two cases to con-

sider. First, the testator may have died prior to period t.

In this case,

beneficiaries act non—strategically, and receive indirect utility
Second, the testator nay be alive at the beginning of period

t. The th

beneficiary's expected utility is then given by.

n,t' at) +

Bn

{(i

L(Wnt —

ir)

+ v+1 E(w —
For any levels of at bat, and
be

C)

+ bnt) (1 + r)1 }

let the maximizing value of

and denote corresponding utility by

(ant, bt .

The testator's utility is given

n,t' bn,t ;

u

at)

(1

+

—

1T)

v1 [w÷1, w+1}11

where
=

(W.,

—

C.

—

A)

(1 + r) +

( '- p)

and
=

(i + r)]

—

(ant, bt wfl (1 + r)

We will write this utility more compactly as:

u. (Ct, At, a, bt ,

W,

ntn1

—17—

By reproducing (with minor difications) our analysis of the single period
case, it is possible to show that the testator can design a simple bequest rule
depending only on current actions which supports his constrained optimum
(beneficiaries Imast willingly participate) as an equilibrium.

Consequently,

during actual play, the testator necessarily selects such a rule. Formally, we
consider the following program.

(Ct, At, a, bt ; w, n,tnl

C, Axa. bt
N

subjectto

E

n=l

b

n,t

+Ct +At

W

t

) s S
for all n
(a
, b
n,t
n,t
n,t

where

5n,t =

{(ant,

0n,t (ant, bnt ; Wnt) >

bn,t)

o Wnt)}

0n,t

The solution to this problem offers the testator the maximum utility which he
could obtain if he was unconstrined by incentive problems regarding the choice
of actions in the current period, subject only to a free participation of bene-

ficiaries restriction)-3 we denote this as V (w
t

t

,

{W

n,t n=l

). Since the free

participation constraint ordinarily binds at the optimuru,1 we have:
U

n,t

(a

n,t

b
n,t

; w

n,t

) = U
n,t

) =
(o, 0 ; w
n,t

v

n,t

(w

n,t

).

(8)

Thus, the beneficiary's indirect utility in period t is independent of whether
or not the testator has died; only the testator succeeds in extracting positive

surplus from this exchange of bequests for attention. This completes the induc—

—iB —

tion

step, allowing us to characterize the unique allocation sustaintd by the

perfect

Nash equilibria of this model.

II. Econometric Evidence
In this section, we provide empirical support for the hypothesis that
bequests are used, in part, as a means of payment for services rendered by bene—

ficiaires.

Specifically, our examination of microeconomic panel data reveals

that contact between parents and children is much higher in families where the

elderly parent has a substantial amount of bequeathable wealth to offer. We show
that this correlation is robust with respect to a variety of specifications and

estimation techniques, which are designed to mie out alternative explanations

based on potentially spurious factors. In addition, we explore some implications of the particular nodel developed in section I which differentiate it from
closely related alternatives, and use these implications to test the model. The
results are extremely favorable to our formulation of exchange rrotivated
bequests.

Bequests can serve as a means of payment for services only if the presence
of bequeathable wealth can influence the behavior of potential beneficiaries, and

if testators exercise this influence. We adopt a slight abuse of terninolo,
referring to these two distinct aspects of exchange as the "supply" and "demand"

sides.

Primarily due to the nature of available data, our basic strat.e if to

estimate the effect of bequeathable wealth on the amount of services which bene-

ficiaries provide to testators —— the "supply" side. Although we do not estimate the "demandt' side explicitly, we provide indirect statistical evidence for

—19—
the

claini

that testators exploit the relationship between services and bequests.

The econometric investigation detailed below requires rather specific data
concerning assets and family interactions for a sample of elderly individuals.
The Longitudinal Retirement History Survey (LRHS), conducted by the Office of
Research and Statistics of the Social Security

Administration, collected surpri-

singly extensive information on these characteristics. Data from the 1969,
1971, 1973, and 1915 waves of the LRHS were available at the time of this
writing; unfortunately, insufficient data on assets were collected in 1973, so

we were forced to drop this year. Over 11,000 individuals aged 58 to 63 were
included in the first wave. Many of these were lost to attrition, on top of
this, we restricted our sample to married couples who had at least one child, no
children living at home, and for whom sufficient data on non—bequeathable assets

were available.15,16 Our final sample consisted of 1,166 observations, 855 of
which had two or nre living children, and 311 of which had only one living
child.

Measures of attention were constructed as follows. For each observation,
the LRHS contains information on total number of children (c.), number of
children who visit or telephone their parents weekly (vw.), and number
children who visit or telephone their parents

monthly

(VM))7 Our

of

I:asure

of

attention per child was Constructed from these variables as follows.
• VW. +

1,7

V.

1

V1 indicates contact per child, normalized so that maximum contact equals unity.

We have adopted the approximation that children who visit weekly give their

—20—

parents four times as imach attention as those who visit monthly. It is
interesting to note in passing that the mean of V. was O.54 in 1969, and rose to
0.63 in 1975 ——

evidently,

the average level of contact is quite high, and rises

with age.

Other variables were constructed as follows. Bequeathable wealth per child
(b) includes financial wealth (stocks, bonds, mutual funds, bank

accounts,

checking accounts), residential and other property, the face value of life

insurance,'8 privately purchased annuities,19 and debt. Non—bequeathable
annuity wealth per child (a.w) includes Social Security and pension wealth.
These were obtained by converting data on income from those sources to capitalized values applying a discount rate of 1.03 and actuarial survival probabili-

ties. Matching administrative records contained data on income earned from 1951
to 1975 in employment covered by Social Security up to the taxable maximum.
This information was extrapolated to yearly earnings using the method described

in Fox (1976). The resulting income stream was then accumulated at a 3% rate of
return to produce a measure of lifetime earnings for both husband and wife.
Other variables used in the following analysis included age of respondent, and

dumn variables indicating whether the respondentts health is better (BH.) or

worse (WH) than that of other members of his cohort, as well as whether the
respondent is retired (RET).
One practical difficulty with these data is that information on the beha-

vior of potential beneficiaries is limited to children. For any given individual, the set of credible beneficiaries may or may not be larger. Since our
theory suggest that successful exchange takes place only when this set contains

—21—

at least two candidates, we cannot be certain that single child families will

behave in the manner predicted here. Consequently, we initially restrict attention to families with two or sore children. Analysis and discussion of behavior
in single child families is deferred to the end of this section.

Another general issue which arises with regard to the use of these data

concerns the treatment of separate sample years. Except where noted, results
presented in this paper are based on simple pooling of the samples years —— no
correction is made for potential correlation between distinct observations on

the same household. Such correlation would not, by itself, cause our estimates
to be inconsistent, however, it would imply that standard errors are calculated

incorrectly. In order to determine the probable magnitude of the resulting
error, we reestimated a number of our specifications, employing the appropriate

GLS correction. Although small changes in some point estimates were noted, no
qualitative conclusions were altered. More importantly, estimated standard
errors on critical coefficients (such as b) differed only slightly from those
obtained with simple pooling.
We begin our analysis by specifying the supply of attention from children
as a function of potential bequest per child:

()
where

and b. are defined above, and where c. is a random error term. Within

the context of our theoretical sodel, one can think of equation (9) as a linear

approximation to the implicit function defined by (8), agreated over benef i—
ciaries.

—22—

Our first step was to estimate equation (9) using 015.20 Results are presented as equation 1 in Table 1. While the sign of the coefficient on b. is
consistent with our theory, one cannot reject the hypothesis that bequeathable
wealth holdings have no effect on attention per child.
There are, however, a variety of reasons for believing that 015 estimates

of this relationship may be inconsistent. One reason follows directly from the

of our model: explicit consideration of the "demand" side suggests

structure

that b will

be determined endogenously. The parent's optimal choice of

b depends in part upon the preferences of his children, and

is an important

component of these preferences. Thus, as long as the parent has more information about the preferences of his children than does the econometrician,

will be correlated. The direction of the resulting bias is, however,

and
ambiguous.

Correlation between b and

is likely to be present for other reasons as

well. Stepping outside the formal model of the last section, one particularly
plausible story is that some parents get along well with their children, while

others do not.21 Those that do may hold more bequeathable wealth simply because
they like their children, while the children in turn nay be attentive simply
because they like their parents.
Our

solution to this set of problems is to instrument for b.1 in ejuation

(9), using the parents' lifetime earnings y.. We justify this choice of
instrument as follows. It is clear that lifetime earnings are positively
lated

with holdings of bequeathable wealth. We trust establish

tion,

this instrument is uncorrelated with ci

For our first

corre—

that, in :tddi—

story, y may be

—23—

correlated with c. if

parents

work harder when young, so that they have more

wealth with which to influence their children when old. For our second story,
this correlation may be non—zero if the elderly parents whose children par-

ticularly like them have been particularly hardworking (or lazy).22 Although one
could, in both cases, plausibly argue that the correlation is non—zero, it is
difficult to believe that it is very large.
2SLS estimates of equation (9)

are presented in column 2 of

Table 1.

Notice that the coefficient of b is approximately eight times as large as the
corresponding OLS estimate, and that the hypothesis of no effect on attention

can be rejected at extremely high levels of confidence. This regression confirms our prediction that, in multiple child families, bequeathable wealth will
be strongly correlated with attention.

The apparently striking difference between OLS and 2SLS estimates can be

tested formally. A Hausman (1978) test reveals that exogeneity of b. can be

rejected at a high level of confidence. This conclusion is consistent with our

model (in which b and a are simultaneously determined), and constitutes
limited evidence in favor of an operative "demand" side. One should, of course,
bear in mind that this rejection of exogeneity is also consistent with other

alternatives. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that the particular alternative
outlined above (correlation between filial and parental altruism) implies that

OLS estimates of the coefficient on b should be biased upwards. In fact, we
observe the opposite.

While our theoretical nedel offers one explanation for the set of results
described above, the observed correlation between attention and bequeathable

wealth could also be attributed to a number of spurious factors. We now turn to
the task of ruling out these alternative explanations.
One might object that our basic specification omits a number of important
variables with which both attention and bequeathable wealth are highly corre-

lated. For example, healthy parents may be rmre pleasant to visit (or conversely, less needy of attention), as well as more successful in the marketplace.
Older parents belong to a poorer cohort, and in general require more care.

Retired parents may have a greater desire for contact with children. We correct
for these difficulties by adding a vector of parental characteristics, Z, to
our basic specification:

V. =

o

+

1b.

+

+ C.

(10)

In particular, Z. includes age, health dummies (BE., WH.), and a retirement

dumn (RET1). Results are presented as equation 3 in Table 1. The inclusion of
these additional variables appears to have very little impact on either the
magnitude or statistical significance of the coefficient on b..
Another apparently compelling objection is that wealth may al'fect attention

through a variety of spurious channels. For example, parents with higher wealth
may simply pay for travelling expenses, telephone calls,and so forth in order to

have re contact with their children. Wealth effects may also be less direct.
In particular, there is presumably a positive correlation between the incomes of

parents and their children. A wealthy child may be more difficult to influence,
or more desirable to visit. Wealthy children may be more capable of defraying
the costs of travel and telephones, buy may also, on average, live farther from

—25—

their parents. Thus, the direction of the potential bias is not obvious.
Note, however, that these alternative explanations do not distinguish between bequeathable and non—bequeathable (social security and pension annuity)

wealth, as does our theory. A parent's ability to defray the costs of contact
is determined both by his ordinary wealth, and by his claims on annuities.

Similarly, while it is true that the wealth of children is correlated with
parental resources, it is not likely to be highly correlated with the division

of parental resources between bequeathable and non—bequeathable forms. Thus, in
order to determine the magnitude of spurious wealth effects, we add annuity
wealth (awi) to our basic specification:

V. =

+ 51b. + 32aw.

+

Zy +

(11)

The effect of holding another dollar of wealth in bequeathable form is then

given by the difference between the coefficients on b and aw.
Estimates of specification (11) are presented as equation

—

•23

in Table 1.

Note that the coefficient of aw (the spurious wealth effect) is negative and
statistically significant, while the coefficient on b. is positive, and highly

significant. The effect of holding wealth in bequeathable rather than
annuitized form, given by the difference between these coefficients, is esti-

mated to be 6.36, with a standard error of 1.89. Thus, correcting for spurious
wealth effects only strengthens our original conclusion.

Another possible solution to the problem of spurious wealth effects is to
restrict attention to a subsample for which these effects are likely to be unim—

portant. If the source of contamination concerns ability to pay, then such

—26—

effects may be minimized by considering a subsample for which financ.al costs of

contact are negligible. Presumably, geographic proximity eliminates much of
these costs. Fortunately, the LRILS

contains

relevant information. In Table 2,

we reestimate equation (11) for two subgroups: parents whose children all live
within the same city or neighborhood, and parents whose children all live within

150 miles. The parameter estimates are quite close to those obtained for the
entire sample. In fact, the effect of bequeathable wealth on attention appears
to be largest for parents living in closest proximity to their children.
A related objection concerns the inclusion of housing wealth in our

measure of b1. It has been suggested to us that a positive coefficient on

simply

b1 may

reflect the fact that children prefer to visit parents who live

in nice houses. To accomodate this objection, we reestimated equation (11),

substituting bequeathable non—housing wealth (bnh1) for b. Our results were
as follows:

V.

1

.150 +

(.211)

+ .6147
(.325)

5.142
(1.38)

age./100
1

bnh. — 1.50
1

(.762)

aw.

1

—2.95 bh./lOO
—.956
1

(i.8')

(2.50)

wh./lOO
1

—2.98 ret./l0O
1

(1.91)

Despite the fact that most elderly individuals hold a large fraction of their
portfolios in residential housing, these estimates are very close to those pre-

sented in Table 1. On the basis of this evidence, we are inclined to reject
the hypothesis that our

results

are simply an artifact of sote special feature

of housing wealth.

As a final check on the robustness of our results, we reestimated

—27—

equation (n) separately for each of our sample years. Estimates based on
cross section data from 1969, 1971, and 1975 are presented in Table 3. Note
that the coefficients of interest (those on b. and awi) are extremely stable
over the sample period.

So far, our empirical analysis has been solely concerned with establishing
a link between attention and bequeathable wealth, and with ruling out alter-

native explanations based on potentially spurious factors. We now explore some

other implications of the particular xdel developed in section I which differentiate it from closely related alternatives, and use these implications to
test the model.
First,
at

a number of the variables included in

should

affect the "price"

which attention can be purchased, as well as the absolute amount of attention

supplied by children. Consider, for example, the variable WH (worse health).
Although
on

sick parents may

a more cynical

recieve more attention simply due to filial devotion,

view, illness increases the probability of death, thereby

making a potential bequest of fixed magnitude more valuable to the child, To
differentiate between these effects, we reestimated equation (ii), adding
interactions between b1

and

WH. BH. and AOE.2b The results presented in Table

are quite striking. Only three coefficients are statistically significant:

those on aw., WH., and WH .

b..

The coefficient of awi changes very little

from our original estimate. The coefficient of WI-I. is

that,

negative, indicating

aside from exchange motivated concerns, sick parents receive less atten-

tion. In contrast, the coefficient of

•

b. is large and positive. This

strongly suggests that, for multiple child families, rich parents who are in

—28—

poor health receive much more attention than their indigent counterparts. Once
again, the data suggest significant financial rmtivation.

A second strong implication of our particular theory is that exchange
motivated holding of bequeathable wealth can influence the behavior of potential
beneficiaries only if there are at least two credible candidates.
Unfortunately, as mentioned above, there is no way to determine the number of

such candidates for any particular respondent in the LRHS. However, logically
speaking, our theory admits the possibility that children are, in some meaningful sense, the only credible beneficiaries for the bulk of a parent's estate.

This hypothesis can be tested empirically by investigating behavior in single

child families, and comparing them to our multiple child results. We must
emphasiie that this hypothesis is not a consequence of our theory; thus, failure
to differentiate between behavior in single and multiple child families would

not recommend rejection of our theory. However, the absence of a positive
correlation between attention and bequeathable wealth in single child familes
would strongly support our theory, as well as the supplemental hypothesis
that parents cannot credibly threaten to disinherit all of their children.
These considerations motivated us to reestiniate each specification above

using data on single child families. A representative set of results is presented in Table 5. Note that in equations 1 through 14, the pattern of signs on

the coefficients of b and aw1 is precisely the opposite of that obtained for
multiple child families. In addition, the standard errors of coefficients on
key parameters are relatively small. It is worth noting that the coefficient of
in these regressions is quite close to the magnitude of the spurious wealth

—29—

effect estimated for Imiltiple child families.25 This is what one would expect,

since b. is no longer "contaminated" by an exchange motivated effect. The only
troubling aspect of these estimates is that there appears to be a statistically
significant difference between the coefficients of b1 and awi. presumably,

aw1 should carry only the spurious wealth effect as well. Strictly speaking,
this is inconsistent with our model. Note finally that in equation 5, worse
health continues to have a negative impact on attention (although the magnitude
is not statistically significant); however, there is no evidence that this can
be compensated for by high bequeathable wealth holdings, as in rrultiple child

families. This evidence strongly supports the hypothesis that exchange
motivated bequests take place only in families with at lest two children; thus,

children are usually the only credible beneficiaries. It is difficult to reconcile this conclusion with any known model of bequests other than that presented
in section I.

One possible alternative explanation of the differing results for single
child famiiles runs as follows. Suppose children are altruists, but they are
primarily concerned with making certain that their parents receive a particular

amount of total care and attention from all children. Then within any sample of
families with the same number of children (such as single child families), there
will be no observed relationship between attention and bequeathable wealth.
However, comparing families with different number of children but the same total
level of bequeathable wealth, one would find a correlation between attention per
child and bequeathable wealth per child ——

As

children

"shirk" in larger families.

long as total wealth is not too highly positively correlated with the number

—30—

of children (which seems plausible), one would observe a positive correlation
between wealth per child and attention per child in the "several children" subsample, but no such correlation anon6 single child famIlies.

Note that this argument does not entirely succeed in explaining the results
of this section, since it applies equally well to both bequeathable and annuity

wealth. Our case is predicated upon the difference between these coefficients.
Nevertheless, as a further check of robustness, we reestiniated equation (11)

separately for two and three child families. Results are presented in Table 6.

For

both groups, key parameter estimates are very close to those obtained for

the original sample. We must qualify this conclusion only by noting that the
standard error for the coefficient of b in three child families is substantially larger than either that obtained for two child families, or for the

pooled sample. We interpret these results as additional strong support for the
exchange nxtivated bequest hypothesis.

A further remark on the difference between single and multiple child fami-

lies is in order. Just as it is difficult to see how this difference could be
reconciled with any other known theory of bequests, it is also difficult to see

why any explanation

of our multiple—child results based on potentially ptxrious

factors

would not apply equally well to single child families. Thus, our

results

refute any alternative explanation which fails to account for the

single/multiple child distinction. We believe that this makes the empirical
case for our theory compelling.

Taken as a whole, the preceding estimates are extremely favorable to our

model. It is therefore important to emphasize that our results were extremely

—31—

robust, and that these estimates are representative of other regressions which

we ran, but did not include in this paper. Aside from some problems with
selecting a proper subsample (for example, one preliminary sample inadvertently
included observations of which children lived at home, making interpretation of
visits and telephone calls difficult), our procedures produced favorable results
on the first try, and subsequent modifications altered no substantive conclusions. Full disclosure requires that we report three apparent "failures.'t
First, OtIS estimates of all but the simplest specification (equation 1, Table 1)

yielded negative coefficients on b.. This is not surprising in light of our
arguments concerning the endogeneity of b. in fact, we submit that the discrepancy between OtIS and 2SLS estimates strengthens the case for an operative

"demand" side. Second, attempts to estimate a fixed effects version of the model

produced nonsensical coefficients with large standard errors. However, since no
sensible instrument is available for fixed effects estimation (there is only one
observation on lifetime earnings for each respondent), we were not troubled by

this finding. Finally, estimates based on an alternative measure of attention
(letters received from children) were much less striking.

Although the pattern

of coefficients was consistent with our theory (the coefficient of b. was

greater than the coefficient for aw for multiple child families, and visa versa
for single child families), alternative hypotheses could not be rejected with

any reasonable level of confidence. Upon reflection we decided that the letters
variable was not a very satisfactory proxy for attention since parents who were
frequently visited persunably received few letters.
Estimates of

—

82 have a very tangible interpretation: since holding an

—32—

additional dollar of wealth in bequeathable forms elicits

—

B2

units of

attention, one can infer from these coefficients a "price" of attention. e

undertake the following rough calculations to et some feel for magnitudes.
Under the normalization employed, our estimates

—
B2

- 6) imply that

increasing bequeathable wealth per child by roughly i6O ODD will raise

from

0 (no attention) to 1 (maximum attention). If we interpret maximum attention as
52 contacts per child per year (each child visiting or calling once per week is
consistent with V1 =

i),

then holding bequeathable wealth of approximately

$3,000 results in an additional visit per year, on average. The cost of holding
wealth in this form is the incremental return which the parent would have

received had he invested this money in annuities. If. for example, the return
sacrificed is 2 percent, then our estimates imply that an additional visit or

call costs the parent $60 on the margin.26 This figure is, of course, very
imprecise, but not implausible.

III. Other Evidence
The preceding econometric analysis of the LRHS data favors the view that

exchange plays an important role in bequest behavior. By and large the rcdic—
tions of our model are confirmed. At least some of these predictions are not
implications of alternative models of bequest behavior. Beyond this evidence,
there are a number of other aspects of individual behavior which are more easily
reconciled our model of exchange motivated bequests than with alternative for—
mulat ions.

There are at least three alternative formulations to the present model of

—33—

bequest behavior which have been widely studied. These are the "accidental
bequests," "bequests for their own sake" and "altruistic bequests" models. The
first, recently urged by Davies (1981), suggests that consumers do not have
bequest motives, and that bequests arise only as a consequence of uncertainty

about the date of death in conjunction with annuity market imperfections. A
second model, used by Blinder (19Th) and many others, assumes that consumers'

lifetime utility depends in part on the size of their bequest. On this view
bequests are a form of terminal consumption. A final possibility is the
"altruistic" view of bequests put forth by Barro (1974) and Becker (1974, 1981).
On this view parents maximize a utility function in which the utility of their
children also enters.

Each of these formulations is inconsistent with the empirical observation
that consumers are reluctant to participate in annuity type arrangements even on

quite favorable terms. Moreover, the second and third formulations cannot
account for the apparent insignificance of gifts. We first review the available
evidence, then indicate why it contradicts the three standard models of bequest
behavior, and finally describe why such behavior is consistent with our model.

Privately purchased annuities are a rarity in the American Economy. The
Retirement History Survey revealed that such annuities rarely represented more
than a very small fraction of wealth, and in most cases were not purchased at

all. Of course, this may well be due to the fact that adverse selection complicates the working of this market.27 Perhaps more persuasive evidence comes from
the lack of market response to "reverse annuity mortgages." These instruments
allow individuals to annuitize their home equity. Even where they are offered

314
on relatively favorable terms, they do not appear to be well received.28

A simi-

lar conclusion is suggested by the lack of a response to a California state
program which allowed property owners to defer property taxes until after their
death, on a subsidized basis.29

Perhaps the strongest evidence of consumer resistance to annuities comes
from an examination of the choices made by retirees under the TIAA—CREF program.

This group is mainly comprised of educators who are presumably better informed

than most pension recipients. Retirees are offered several options, including
full annuities and "n year certain" plans.3° A 10
year certain plan, for
example, guarantees that a retiree and his heirs will receive at least 10
years
worth of benefits, even if the retiree dies sooner.3' A 1913 study
reported that
over 70 percent of beneficiaries chose plans other than those providing full
annuity protection.

This suggests a desire to make allowances for bequests.

This evidence suggests that there is no strong latent demand on the
part of
aged Americans for annuity protection, and is
"accidental bequestt' model. On this view individuals should purchase annuity

protection even if it is very unfair actuarily, since bequests are not value..1 at
all. In particular, the choice of "years certain't annuity protection directly
contradicts the "accidental bequests" model.

Less obviously, the reluctance of consumers to t&ke advantage of actuarially
fair or subsidized annuities is inconsistent with the "bequests for their own

sake" and "altruistic" models of bequests. It is well known (see, for example,
Sheshinski and Weiss (1981) or Bernheim (l98lb)) that under such for.xlations,
consumers who have access to actuarially fair annuity markets will

perfectly

—35—

insure,

financing consumption entirely out of annuity income. An underan—

nuitized individual will finance consumption partly out of bequeathable wealth,
while an overannujtjzed individual will save some fraction of his annuity

income, thereby building an estate. Thus, if an individual consumes some portion of either the principal or income from his bequeathable wealth, we infer
that he is underannuitized, and should take advantage of actuarially fair opportunities to purchase annuities.

There are two reasons to believe that individuals hold bequeathable wealth,

in part to finance their own personal consumption. First, despite the earlier
findings of Brittain (1978) and Mirer (1979), more recent studies by King arid
Dicks—Mireaux (1983), Diamond and Hausman (1983), and Berriheim (l98Ia) suggest

that retirees do dissave from bequeathable wealth. Second, if bequeathable
wealth is held only for the purpose of making intergenerational transfers, then

these transfers would be made as gifts, rather than as bequests at death. Early
transfer confers two advantages: it allows beneficiaries to annuitize the opti—
inal fraction of transferred resources immediately; and it may ease liquidity

constraints encountered by beneficiaries early in the life cycle.32

To summarize: behavioral evidence suggests that individuals hold
bequeathable wealth in part to finance personal consumption. Under either the
"bequests

for their own sake" or "altruistic" models, this implies that

individuals are

such

underanriuitized, and should take advantage of actuarially fair

opportunities to insure. Yet this prediction is counterfactual.
The reluctance of very wealthy individuals to convert bequests into intra

vivos gifts poses a further puzzle for these alternative theories. Despite the

—36—

existence

of significant tax advantages to transferring resources during lifeti-

mes, many wealthy individuals who can anticipate leaving large bequests with

virtual certainty, do not make significant intra vivos gifts. This observation
has disturbed some proponents of dynastic altruism, who recognize that an important implication of this model is that families will con.jure their affaris to

minimize total tax liability. While some (notably Adams (1978)) have defended
dynastic altruism by arguing that, contrary to Shoup (1966),

Cooper (1979),

and

Menchik (1980), tax minimizing transfers are in fact observed, we find this
claim implausible.33

The exchange motivated bequest model described in Section I does not share
these counterfactual implications concerning the acceptance of annuities and the

use of gifts. Since parents do not care about their children's consumption
directly, there is no reason to smooth out transfers over states of nature.
Furthermore, by making all intentional transfers at once, the parent attenuates
his ability to influence his children in subsequent periods. Finally, it is
quite likely that it is easier to influence children by promising bequests, as

opposed to gifts. Few families are so mercenary as to countenance explicit quid

o 2. contracts;

thus, the lure of gifts tends to be

more speculative than a

claim on a known estate, and vague promises of contemporaneous rewards are subject to equivocation by parents who would prefer to retain resources, ex post.
A common finding in empirical analyses of bequests (Sussman et.al. (1970),

Brittain (1978), Menchik (1980fl1 is that, in most cases, parents give equal
amounts to each of their offspring. In part, this conclusion may arise from
focusing

primarily on cash

rather

than the more difficult to value tangible

—37—

bequests.

The model here nakes no prediction that bequests should be equal

across children, except by coincidence or if beneficiaries are identical. Equal
bequests pose an equal or greater problem for the altruistic model, which issues
the clear prediction that bequests should be used to equate as closely as

possible the utilities of various offspring.35 The implication that, in effect,
parents impose 100 percent tax rates on their children's other income is clearly

counterfactual. The other two models of bequests do not have any clear itnplications for this issue.

So far we have been content to infer motives indirectly from behavioral
observations. Studies by Sussrnan et.al.

(1970) and Horioka (1983) offer much

more direct evidence on the nature of bequest motives. Both studies confirm the
significance of exchange motivated bequests.

Sussman et.al. conducted a painstaking study

of

close to 1,000 estates

selected from Cleveland probate court. They document the use of bequests as a
means of payment by finding a significant effect of intrafamily exchange on

deviations from equal division of bequests. In case after case, "reciprocity
was expressed through the distribution to particular children for services rendered to parents," so that "children who took care of their elders ...

received

the largest share of the parentts property or the only share if the estate was
very

small" (p.

290). Disinheritance was usually a side effect of' rewarding a

specific child for care given in old age (p. 103), although some parents specifically disinherited children who ignored them.
It is important to emphasize that both testators and beneficiaries clearly

perceived and consciously exploited opportunities for exchange involving

—38—

bequests. Testators frequently left most of their estates to spouses in jart so
that the spouses would "have a legacy to use in bargaining for services from

children and others later on" (p. 290). Likewise, "children feel that they
should maintain intimate contract with a6ed parents in order to provide them
with emotional support and social and recreational opportunities, and that such
contact maintenance is requisite for obtaining a share of the inheritance" (p.

119). When interviewed, children "generally accept the notion that the sibling
who has rendered the greatest amount of service to the aged parent should
receive a major portion of the inheritance" (p. 118), and usually prefer that

bequests be divided according to the principle of reciprocity (p. 1b8).

Rorioka (1983) reproduces the results of a survey
elderly in Japan toward the distribution of the

ir

of attitudes of the

assets among their children,

35.1 percent of the respondents indicated that they would "give more to the

child or children who did more for me." This, however,

should be thought of

as

a lower bound on the significance of exchange motivated bequests. The traditional pattern in Japanese families is for the eldest son to move in with and
care for his elderly parents until their deaths, at which time he receives the

entire estate. Thus, the 43.2 percent of respondents who indicated that they
would "give all to the eldest son" may have simply announced their equilibrium

choices, having already received cooperation from that child. It is worth
noting that only 12.1 percent said that they would "divide equally between one's
children," while only 4.3 percent were inclined to 'give to the child who is ill

or physically weak or who has no income—earning power." Thus, neither
utilitarian

nor altruistic motives appear to be particularly prevalent.

—39—

IV. Mac roeconomic iplicatio
In the preceding section, we developed the implications of our mud1 for
several aspects of individual behavior, and contrasted these with predictions

based on alternative xjdels. This section focuses on the macroeconomic implica-

tions of exchange ntivated bequests.
Our paper provides an example of an environment in which parents and
children are linked by voluntary utility maximizing intergenerational trinsfers,
but for which the "Ricardian equivalence theorem" and related propositions are
nevert1ieless false. The implications of our formulation for issues such as the
effects of Social Security and government indebtedness on capital formation

correspond very closely to the implications of standard life—cycle model.3b To
see this, observe that the bequests made

parents are independent of the eco—

nomic welfare of their children, except to the extent that changes in their eco-

nomic welfare affect their supply curve of attention. Note that the sin of the
effect of an increase in children's economic welfare on bequests (parental
"expenditures"

attention

is

on attention) will depend on whether the elasticity of dcmtnd for

greater or less than unity.

Several reasons for preferring the current model to the "dynastic a t 'uism"

formulation of Barro were discussed in the preceding sections. We are wuware
of any direct microeconomic evidence favoring the notion of altruistic h1ucts.
Until such evidence is provided, economists should be cautious about jutifying
the analytical use of infinite lived consumers by appealing to dynastic
altruism.

The ndel developed here suggests a number of potentially important

interactions between demographic and economic phenomena.

By condftioning

bequests on behavior, parents may successfully influence decisions by their
children concerning education, migration, and marriage.

The desire to purchase

services from children, coupled with the need to have at least

beneficiaries, may also affect fertility. This could, for
Park's (1983) observation that Korean households have a

two credible

example, account for

strong

preference for

two male children, and could strengthen theories of the so—called "demoraphic
transition" based on parental desire for care during old age. The model also
suggests that various exogenous demographic trends will have specific economic

effects. Declining population growth means more single child families, and
therefore less incentive to save to purchase attention.

For similar reasons,

rising life expectancies, longer retirement periods, and increasing geographic

mobility may

all

affect the national savings rate. These and related issues are

discussed in Bernheim (l98c).
The model also suggests that international variations in savings rates may
be related to differences in family structure, as well as to legal institutions

governing the distribution of estates. For example, Horioka's evidence indicates that exchange motivates the division of bequests in many Japanese house-

holds. In addition to the survey of attitudes discussed in section III, he
documents that over 80 percent of elderly Japanese live with their children,

compared to approximately 10 percent for the U.S. This may help to account for
Japan's high rate of saving. In contrast, certain European countries such as
Sweden (see Blornquist (1919)) require testators to divide the bulk of their

estates evenly between their children. This restriction neutralizes the ruecha—

nism outlined in Section I, and removes a strong incentive for accumulating
bequeathable wealth.

Our analysis also suggests a subtle but possibly important side effect of
the growth of Social Security and the spread of annuitized private pensions.

The model here provides a partial explanation for consumers' reluctance to

purchase annuities at even relatively attractive rates: annuities deny con—
sumers the opportunity to purchase care and attention from their children
(although much of the actual aversion to annuities is undoubtably based on

ignorance and confusion). If Social Security or pensions foist more annuity

protection

on consumers than they wish, a collateral consequence will be that

consumers are able to purchase less attention than they would prefer. A general
decline in attentiveness of children to parents is widely alleged to have taken
place since the introduction of Social Security (see for example Friedman

(1980)). The significance of the effect stressed here is of course difficult to
gauge.37

This research could usefully be ectended in a number of directions. The
theoretical model could be elaborated to allow more fully for the element of
"caring" which explains why

parents

crave attention from their own

children. It

would also be valuable to explore models in which more elaborate interactions

between children were possible. Empirically, the insights siiested by

this

model could be used to inform econometric analyses of the consumption and portfolio choices of the aged. In addition, it might be useful to use simulation
techniques to examine the relation between bequests of the type modelled here

and the level or capital formation. It is unlikely that any

of

these extensions

— 2—

would cast doubt on ir conclusion that the exchange imtive is centr-i.1 to
the economic analysis of bequests.

143.

Footnotes

1. The significance of intergenerational transfers is still the subject of
much debate. Tobin (1961) and Davies (1981) present simuiLation results
which indicate that pure Life Cycle motives are sufficient to account for
the bulk of U.S. capital.
2. Brittain (1978) and Mirer (1979) document continued accumulation of wealth
after retirement. Shorrocks (1975), King and Dicks—rireaux (1981), and
Diamond and Hausman (1983) find limited evidence to dispute this claim.
Bernheini (1984a) confirms this finding, but demonstrates that behavioral
responses of rates of decumulation to non—discretionary annuities are
inconsistent with the predictions of simple life cycle models.

3. As long as it is impossible for a potential beneficiary to predecease the
testator, relaxing this restriction simply involves adjusting the discount
factors of children to account for survival probabilities after period T.
Althugh the analysis becomes more complex when it is possible for children
to die first (we must worry about what happens for all possible patterns of
deaths), it is possible to show that, even in this case, our basic conclusions are unchanged.

4. In the case of parents and children, such actions might include attention,
care, or choice of the "right" spouse. For institutional beneficiaries,
a t might for example represent naming a building after a potential testa—

to.
5. Notice that in the current formulation single period utility does not
depend directly upon whether the testator is alive (the dependence is
indirect, since we will never observe a > 0 once the testator has
died). This restriction is convenient, lut inessential.

6. Time separability of utilities simplifies the method of solution. We doubt
that our basic insights would be changed in a more general model.
7. Allowing exogenous future income for potential beneficiaries would not
alter the analysis at all. Allowing testators to receive some exogcnous
income would not affect the qualitative conclusions as long as desired
wealth held by the testator is always strictly positive.
8. It is in the testators's interest to hold his wealth in easily observed
forms. This may provide a partial explanation of the notorious reluctance
of the elderly to sell their houses (although there are certainly other
factors involved).
9. Limiting the set of potential beneficiaries does involve some notion of
altruism which extends only to a certain class of individuals or intitu—
tions. In this very limited sense the bequests considered here are
altruistic.

_1414_

10. There may be many bequest rules which sustain {a, b}1 as an equilibrium
in the appropriate subgame. However, the perfect equilibrium will be unique in the sense that any such equilibrium must yield C, {a, b}1 on
the equilibrium path.

11. We suggest two reasons: (i) for all e > 0 if the testator sets benchmark
levels at a — c rather than a and otherwise employs the same rule, there
is a unique Nash equilibrium consisting of all agents meeting their benchmarks. In other words, the testator can get arbitrarily close to his optimum without running into the problem of multiplicity, (2) the N undesirable
equilibria are not trembling hand perfect (see Selten (1975)). Consider
the potential beneficiary who sets a = 0, while expecting his competitors
to offer their benchmark levels. He cannot be worse off by playing a =
that
an*. In addition, if he thinks there is any chance, however small,
another beneficiary will make a mistake ("tremble"), thereby missing his
benchmark level, a* will in that event yield strictly higher utility than

a = 0.
12. For t = T we adopt the convention that VT÷l (WT+1, {w T+1n=1 = 0
since the testator is no longer living.

13. Note that in this problem, we do not allow the testator to choose consumption levels for the beneficiaries. This is so because we have restricted
bequest rules to depend on actions only. It might be possible for the
parent to condition bequests on the beneficiary's consumption as well.
Although in our model this makes no difference, in another specification it
may be in parent's interest to do this. It is straightforward to modify
the model so that such strategies are permissible.

1. Assume it does not bind. Then the testator can successfully deaind more
attention from each beneficiary without holding more bequeathable wealth.
This directly increases utility. However, there is also an indirect
effect. Changing ak will alter the beneficiary's optimal level of Cn t
It seems
thus changing W t+) This has an ambiguous effect on
quite unlikely tftat such secondary effects would dominate.

15. Specifically, we include those who began to receive pensions and Social
Security at some point during the sample.
16. Note that our theory predicts that use of bequests to obtain attention
should be more effective when there is only one parent. By considering
couples, we presumably stack the odds against finding evidence of
exchange.

17. For some years,the survey also asked for the number of children who visit
or telephone daily; in other years, this was simply incorporated into the
"at least weekly" category. To be consistent over years, we added daily
contact to weekly contact in years for which the former was available.

_14 5....

18. It is appropriate to include the face value of life insurance, since
children wish to be named as beneficiaries. Unfortunately, data on life
insurance are quite poor; in particular, it is impossible to determine how
much individuals have borrowed against their policies. Omitting insurance
from our definition of bequeathable wealth has an insignificant impact on
the estimates presented in this section.
19. Most privately purchased "annuitiest' fail to match the economic definition,
since they have bequeathable components.

20. Throughout, we have ignored potential problems arising from truncation of
our dependent variable. There is little reason to believe that this biases
our results in any particular direction.
21. Our goal here is only to suggest a significant exchange not ivated element
in bequest behavior, not to deny that altruistic aspects are also present.

22. The direction of this correlation is not clear. If a parent likes his
child, he may work harder to provide sore physical goods, or work less to
spend more time with the child.
=

23. Equation (11) is equivalent to

So

+

(81

—

82)b1

+

S2W

+

Zy

+

where

.th.

W. is the total wealth of the i
individual. 82 captures spurious wealth
e'fects, and 81 —
is
the
independent
effect o? holding wealth in a
82
bequeathable form.
2.&. For the 2SLS regressions, we included interactions between lifetime income
and WH, BH, and AGES in the instrument list.

25. That is, it equals the coefficient on annuity wealth in the equations presented in Table 1.
26. The one year probability of dying is 2.9 percent for 65 year old males and
1.5 percent for 65 year old females. The 2 percent figure assumes approximate fairness of available annuities.
27. Though one would expect the adverse selection to be much more serious in
the relatively well functioning market for life insurance. Warshawsky
(1983) presents evidence that loads on annuities are comparable to loads on
life insurance.
28. For a survey of the evidence on this topic see A Summary of Recent Research
on Inflation and the Elderly, by Urban Systems Research and Engineering,
1983.

29. See URSE (1983).
30. Annuity amounts are set so that the plans are, in principle, equivalent on
an actuarial basis, see TIAA—CREF (1973).

—4 6—

31. In each case, provision is rde for surviving spouses.
32. Note also that the failure of parents to transfer their homes to their
children is inconsistent with the Kotlikoff—Spivak view that families serve
to provide private annuity insurance.
33. Adams overstates the burden of the capital gains tax hy neglecting the fact
that the beneficiary can defer realizing any assets with capital gains, and
can use a variety of other devices to shelter them. Nor does his analysis
explain the failure of most families to set up non—reverting trusts which
allow assets, and in some cases capital income as well to escape tax almost
entirely. Lastly, Adams' analysis cannot explain why assets without capital gains, or even with capital losses, also appear to be transferred as
gifts only infrequently.

34. Disputed, however, by Tomes (1981).
35. Assuming they enter symmetrically the parent's utility function.

36. Barro (1974, footnote 14) himself notes that the Ricardian equivalence
theorem would not hold if exchange played a large role in motivating
bequests.
37. The model also implies that Social Security offsets private savings by less
than one for one.

—4T—

References

Adams, James D. Equalization of True Gift and Estate Tax Rates. 3. Public
Econ., Vol. 9 (March 1978), pp. 59—11.

Personal Wealth Transfers. Q.J.E., Vol. 95 (August 1980), pp.
159—179.

Barro, Robert J. Are Government Bonds Net Wealth? J.Poi.Econ., Vol. 82
(l9T), pp. 1095—1117.
Becker, Gary S. The Theory of Social Interactions. J.Pol.Econ., Vol. 82
(Nov—Dec 1971), pp. 1063—10914.

___

"A Treatise on the Family." Cambridge, MA: Harvard University

Press (1981), ch. 7—8.

Ben—Porath, Yoram. The F—Connection. Families, Friends and Firms, and the
Organization of Exchange. Hebrew University of Jerusalem, The Institute
for Advanced Studies, Report No. 29/78 (1978).
Bernheim, B. Douglas. "Dissaving after Retirement: Testing the Pure Life
Cycle Hypothesis," Mimeo, Stanford University (19814a).

— -.

____
"Annuities, Bequests, and Private Wealth." Mimeo,
Stanford University (19814b).
____
Intrafamily Conflict and its Resolution: Implications
for Demographic Choice. Mirneo, Stanford University (l93l4c).

Blinder, Alan S. "Towards an Economic Theory of Income Distribution."
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press (19714).

R.H. Gordon, and D.E. Wise. Social Security, Bequests and the Life
Cycle Theory of Saving: Cross—Sectional Tests. NBER Working Paiei' b19
(January 1981).
Bloiuquist, N.S. "The Inheritance Function." Journal of Public Economics, Vol.
12 (August 1979), pp. lii_60.

Brittain, John A. "Inheritance and the Inequality of Material Wealth."
Washington, D.C.: Brookings (1978).

Cooper, G. "The Estate Tax: A Voluntary Tax?" Washington, D.C.: Brookings
(1979).

Davies, James B. Uncertain Lifetime, Consumption, and Dissaving in Retirement.
J.Pôl.Ecori.,, Vol. 89 (1981), pp. 561—577.

_14 3

Diamond, Peter A. and J.A. Hausman. "Individual Retirement and Uavings
Behavior." Mimeo, Massachusetts Institute of Techno1oi, 1982.

Feldstein, M.S. "Social Security, Induced Retirement, and Agre,ate Capital
Accumulation." journa1ofPo1iticaECOflOjL, Vol. 82, No. 5 (September!
October 19714), pp. 905—926.

Fox, A. Alternative Measures of Earnings Replacement for Social Security
Benefits, in "Reaching Retirement Age." Research Report p147, Office of
Research and Statistics, Social Security Administration, Government
Printing Office (1976).
Friedman, Milton. Discussion, in Martin Feldstein, ed., "The American Econorr
in Transition." Chicago: University of Chicago Press (1980), p. 3141.
Hausman, Jerry A. Specification Tests in Econometrics.
(November 1978), pp. 1251—1211.

Econometrica,

Vol.

146

Horioka, Charles Y. "The Applicability of the Life Cycle Model of Savings
to Japan." Mimeo, Kyoto University, 1983.
King, M.A., and L.—D.L. Dicks—Mireaux. Asset Holdings and the Life—Cycle.
Econ.J., Vol. 92 (June 1982), pp. 2147—267.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and Avia Spivak. "The Family as an Incoinilete Annuities

Market." journal of Political Ec9, Vol. 89 (April 1981), pp. 372—391.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., and L.H. Summers. The Role of Intergenratioflal
Transfers in Aggregate Capital Accumulation. J.Pol.Econ., Vol. 89
(1981), pp. 706—132.
Mirer, Thad W. The Wealth Age Relation Among the Aged.

Am. Econ. ev. Vol. 69,

(June 1979), pp. 143514143.

Menchik, Paul L. Primogeniture, Equal Sharing, and the U.S. Distribution of
Wealth. Q.J.E., Vol. 914 (March 1980), pp. 299—316.
Park, Chai Bin. "Preferences for Sons, Family Size, and Sex Ratio: An
Empirical Study in Korea." Dernograpy, Vol. 20, No. 3 (Auust 1983),
pp. 333—352.
Selten, Reinhard. Reexamination of the Perfectness Concept for Equilibrium
Points in Extensive Gaines. lot. J.Gan TIeo_rX, Vol. 14 (1915), pp. 25—55.

Shakespeare, William. "King Lear." London (i6o8).
Sheshinski, Eytan, and Yoratu Weiss. Uncertainty and Optimal Social Security
Systems. Q.J.E., Vol. 96 (May 1981), pp. 189—206.

_14 9.

Shorrocks,

A.F. The Age—Wealth Re1ationship A Cross—Section and Cohort
Analysis. Pev. Econ. Stat., Vol. 57 (May 1975), pp. 155—lb3.

Shoup, Carl S. "Federal Estate and Gift Taxes." Washington, D.C.: Brookings,
(1966).

Sussman, M.B., J.N. Cates, and 0.T. Smith. "Inheritance and the Family." New
York: Russel Sage, (1970).
TIAA—CREF. "A Survey of Beneficiaries." Washington, D.C. (1973).
Tobin, James. Life Cycle Saving and Balanced Growth, in William Fellner et al.,
eds., "Ten Economic Studies in the Tradition of Irving Fisher." New York:
Wiley, (1967).

Tomes, Nigel. The Family, Inheritance, and the Intergenerational Transmission
of Inequality. J.Pol. Ecori., Vol. 89 (1981), pp. 928—958.
Urban Systems Research and Engineering. A Summary
Inflation and the Elderly. Mimeo (1983).

of

Recent Research on

Warshawsky, Mark. "Uncertain Lifetime,Demand for Private Annuities, and
Provision for Bequests in Retirement." Mimeo, Harvard University,
December 1983.

Table 1
Dependent Variable: V

Multiple Child Falies — Pooled Panel

Sairple

1

2

3

OLS

2SLS

2SLS

2SLS

.560
(.008)

.531
(.013)

.088
(.201)

.225
(.215)

.333
(.308)

2.30

2.57

(.686)

(.715)

Equation
Procedure

Constant

b/b6

______

.58
(i.18)

—1.78

av/106

(.820)
.722
(.311)

age/100

bh/100

ret/100

Degrees of
Freedow

Standard Error
of Regression

—2.55

—2.96

(1.79)

(i.8)

—1.37

wh/100

2563

.357

2563

.360

.513
(.332)

_.9814

(2.143)

(2.149)

—2.22

—3.26

(1.89)

(1.99)

2559

2558

.360

.369

Table 2
Dependent Variable: V

Sarple: Multiple Child Families — Pooled PaneL
Procedure: 2SLS

Equation
Subsawple

—_______
Constant

b/106

2

1

All children
saire city or

wh/l00

ret/100

rriles

—.070
(.306)

7.59
(2.91)

.35
(2.08)

-1.3
2.10
(.772)

(1.39)

1.22
(.1468)

(14.6)

2.16
(2.87)

1.89

1.19

(5.149)

(3.1414)

—1.07

1.86
(14.514)

Degrees of

150

(.500)

(1.37)

bh/l00

All children within

—.580

aw/106

age/l00

within

neighborhood

—3.23

(2.82)

365

1001

.309

.331

Freedoir

Standard Error
of Regression

Table 3
Dependent Variable: V

Sarple: Multiple Child Fairilies —
Procedure: 2SLS

Sairp Year
Constant

av/106

age/100

bh/100

1969

ret/100

Degrees of
Free dor

Standard

Error
of Regression

1971

1975

1.26

.14145

.1140

(.1497)

(.558)

14.82

5.09

3.71

(1.70)

(2.27)

(2.214)

—1.59

—1.80

—i.8i

(i.i14)

(i.14i)

(2.19)

.070
(.811)

7.31
(6.02)

vh/100

Separate Years

.610
(.88i)

—.993
(.737)

—4.o

—5.141

(3.28)

(2.61)

—10.2

—2.10

(ii.i)

(14.00)

—.238

(.1491)

—763

—.091
(3.147)

—10.0

(14.26)

(2.99)

(8.09)

8148

8148

8148

.3714

.388

.31414

Table 4

Dependent Variable: V
Sanp1e: Multiple Child Fairilies — Pooled Panel

Procedure: 2SLS
Variable

Constant

b/b6

—

Coeficjent
.230
(.350)

8.51

(i8.))
av/106

age/100

bh/100

—1.85
(.867)
.529
(.549)

2.141

(.21)
wh/100

—2.2
(8.22)

ret/100

—3.67
(2.03)

bage/107

—.756
(2.92)

bbh/b07

-.731
(20.7)

bwh/107

Degrees of
Freedoir

Standard Error
of Regression

237
(80.3)

2555

Table 5

Dependent Variable: V
Sairpie: Single Child Fairilies —

I

Equation
Procedure

Constant

b/b6

OLS

.639
(.018)

-.662
(.288)

2

2SLS

.653
(.029)

—1.00

(.615)

Pooled Panel

3
2SL,S

(.1409)

—1.23

(.628)

5

14

2SLS

2SLS

—.651

— .688

(.1423)

—2.37
(.8614)
1.26

aw/106

1.89
(.631)

age /100

bh/b00

ret/bOO

2.16

(.6149)

(3.69)

5.147

.987

2.12

—2.27

(3.86)

(214.7)

(.658)

(3.60)

(5.07)

1.31

(.618)

—3.36

—11.8

wh/100

(1.05)

—11.56
(5.13)

(1.65)
5.82
(9.22)

—12.6
(10.1)

—14.83

—5.82

(3.92)

(14.07)
—.14148

bage/107

(3.95)
—18.3

bbh/b07

(19.6)
.251

bwh/107

(214.9)
Degrees of

931

931

927

.1451

.1451

.14146

926

923

Freed ow

Standard Error
of Regression

.1452

.1453

Table 6
Dependent Variable: V
Sa.rrple: Multiple Child Farilies — Pooled Panel

Procedure; 2SLS

1

Equation

Subsaile

Constant

—

2

Child Fai1ies

aw/106

age/100

bh/l00

3

Child huii1e

.065

(.350)

b/la6

___

(.370)

3.12

3.79

(1.31)

(3.26)

—1.11

—1.5

(1.06)

(1.37)

.728
(.536)

1.21k

.929

9.71k

(.573)

(2.71)
wh/l0O

ret/l00

Degrees of

1.86

—.802

(.2)

(Ji)

—.229
(3.15)

(3.2)

11214

—3.1
710

Freedoir

Standard Error
of Regression

.383

.3145

