NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOCIAL INTERACTIONS WITH ENDOGENOUS ASSOCIATIONS
Bruce A. Weinberg
Working Paper 13038
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13038

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2007

This research uses data from Add Health, a program project designed by J. Richard Udry, Peter S.
Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris, and funded by a grant P01-HD31921 from the National Institute
of Child Health and Human Development, with cooperative funding from 17 other agencies. Special
acknowledgment is due Ronald R. Rindfuss and Barbara Entwistle for assistance in the original design.
Persons interested in obtaining data from Add Health should contact Add Health, Carolina Population
Center, 123 W. Franklin Street, Chapel Hill, NC 27516-2524 (addhealth@unc.edu). I appreciate helpful
comments from Larry Blume, Ed Glaeser, Bryan Graham, Larry Katz, Kevin Lang, Lung-fei Lee,
Erzo Luttmer, Pat Reagan, and Qingyan Shang and from participants at the 2005 AEA Meetings, the
University of Alabama, IZA, Harvard University, the London School of Economics, Ohio State University,
the University of Chicago, and the University of Wisconsin, Madison. Qingyan Shang provided excellent
research assistance. I am also grateful for support from the Mershon Center at Ohio State University
and the NBER, where much of the work on this paper was done. I am, of course, solely responsible
for all errors. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Bruce A. Weinberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Social Interactions with Endogenous Associations
Bruce A. Weinberg
NBER Working Paper No. 13038
April 2007
JEL No. I21,I32,J15
ABSTRACT
This paper develops a model of social interactions with endogenous association. People are assumed
to invest in relationships to maximize their utility. Even in a linear-in-means model, when associations
are endogenous, the effect of macro-group composition on behavior is non-linear and varies across
individuals. We also show that larger groups facilitate sorting. Using data on associations among high
school students, we provide a range of evidence consistent with our model. Individuals associate with
people whose behaviors and characteristics are similar to their own. This tendency is stronger in large
groups. We also show that behaviors vary within and between macro-groups in the way predicted
by endogenous association.

Bruce A. Weinberg
Department of Economics
Ohio State University
410 Arps Hall
1945 North High Street
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
weinberg.27@osu.edu

Social Interactions and Endogenous Association
I.

Introduction
Social scientists have increasingly turned to social interactions models, in which

peoples’ behaviors are affected by their social groups, to understand large disparities in
behaviors and outcomes, and especially the low outcomes among underrepresented and
economically disadvantaged groups.1 Economists interested in social interactions have
focused on controlling for the effect of selection into “macro-groups,” such as schools or
neighborhoods, on estimates of social interactions.2 While analogous forces presumably
operate within these macro-groups, to the best of our knowledge this paper is the first to
systematically study the effects of endogenous association within groups. The absence of
work on this question is troublesome for, while selection into groups almost surely biases
estimates of the effects of groups up, endogenous association within groups limits the
interpretation of conventional estimates and means that they are almost surely biased
down. If associations are endogenous, social groups will have non-linear effects and
individual characteristics and group composition will interact in determining behavior,
markedly changing the policy implications of social interactions models.
This paper develops a formal model of within-group associations. We assume that
individuals choose both their behavior and their associations to maximize their utility,
which depends on both their own and their associates’ behaviors and characteristics. We
specify a cost in terms of time and effort to an individual of associating with the other

1

See, for instance, Wilson [1987, 1996]; Massey and Denton [1993]; and Jargowsky [1997]. Early studies
often contain weak controls for macro-group selection (Datcher [1982]; Corcoran, Gordon, Laren, and
Solon [1992]).
2
Recent attention has focused on controlling for macro-group selection. See surveys by Jencks and Mayer
[1990]; Deitz [2002]; and Haurin, Deitz, and Weinberg [2002] and theoretical work by Bayer and Ross
[2006]. More recent studies seek to identify random variation in social groups. Such studies include Bayer,
Ross, and Topa [2004]; Bertrand, Luttmer, and Mullainathan [2000]; Borjas [1995]; Case and Katz [1990];
Cutler and Glaeser [1997]; Evans, Oates, and Schwab [1992]; Glaeser, Scheinkman, and Sacerdote [1996,
2003]; Hoxby [2000]; Ioannides and Zabel [Forthcoming]; Solon, Page, and Duncan [2000]; Topa [2001];
Weinberg [2000] and studies in footnote 4.

1

members of his macro-group. We also assume and provide evidence that people obtain
the most utility from associating with others whose behaviors and characteristics are
similar to their own, known as homophily in sociology.
We specify a model that yields the standard implication that behaviors depend
linearly on the (weighted) average of the characteristics and actions of the other members
of an individual’s macro-group, with the weights in our model determined by the amount
of their interaction. Even with this linear behavioral model, when associations are
endogenous, macro-group composition has a non-linear effect on behavior and the effect
of macro-groups varies with individual characteristics and behaviors.3 These nonlinearities arise when associations are endogenous because associates’ behaviors and
characteristics will be non-linear functions of own characteristics. To the best of our
knowledge, we are the first to generate these non-linearities endogenously. We apply our
model to understand association patterns in schools. In that context, students who are
inclined to substance use, for instance, in a school-grade where few other students are
inclined toward substance use will be forced to associate with people who do not use
substances, discouraging their own tendency to substance use. As the number of students
inclined to substance use increases, these individuals will find more like-minded
associates accentuating their tendencies.
At a policy level, these non-linearities and interactions imply that even in a linearin-means model, social interactions are not zero-sum. To reduce the amount of a
particular behavior, one would want to avoid placing people who are prone to that
behavior in groups where there are many similar people – in these groups, there will be
enough other people inclined toward the behavior with whom to associate to generate a

3

Krivo and Peterson [1996]; Galster, Quercia, and Cortes [2000]; Galster [2002]; and Weinberg, Reagan,
and Yankow [2004]; and Burke and Sass [2006] provide evidence for non-linear effects and interactions.
Non-linear effects have been argued for at least since Crane [1991], although there are few formal micromodels of these effects (Quercia and Galster [Forthcoming] discuss theories).

2

high level of the behavior. In terms of estimation, these non-linearities also provide a
potential solution to Manski’s [1993] reflection problem that is quite different from
existing solutions (Brock and Durlauf [2001a,b]; Lee [2006]; Blume and Durlauf [2005];
Lin [2005]; and Shang [2006]).
Many studies of social interactions exploit relocations of individuals across
macro-groups.4 Most such studies involve relocating individuals who are at-risk along
some dimensions from social groups where many individuals are at risk to social groups
with a mix of people who are and are not at risk. These studies find surprisingly small
effects of social groups. Our model provides an explanation for these small effects. It
indicates that individuals relocated in this way will tend to re-segregate within their new
groups, attenuating any benefits, even if associates do have effects. Consistent with this
hypothesis, Angrist and Lang [2004] and Kling, Ludwig, and Katz [2005] find larger
effects for girls than boys, who may integrate more into their new social groups, and
Clampet-Lundquist, Edin, Kling, and Duncan [2005] provide evidence that the difference
is due to differences in integration into new neighborhoods.
Emerging studies show that the associations that arise within macro-groups are
not random, but empirical work on social interactions has not taken account of these
results.5 Most studies relate an individual’s behavior to the mean in his macro-group,
implicitly assuming that all members of the macro-group interact equally.6 Some

4

Studies include Plotnick and Hoffman [1995]; Ladd and Ludwig [1997]; Aaronson [1998]; Rosenbaum,
DeLuca, and Miller [1999]; Katz, Kling, and Liebman [2001]; Ludwig, Duncan, and Hirschfield [2001];
Sacerdote [2001]; Oreopoulos [2003]; Zimmerman [2003]; Gould, Lavy, and Passerman [2004a, 2004b];
Jacob [2004]; Weinberg, Reagan, and Yankow [2004]; Kling; Ludwig; and Katz [2005]; and Angrist and
Lang [2004].
5
A number of papers show that people prefer to associate with others of the same racial, ethnic, or
religious group (Moody [2001]; Bayer, McMillan, and Rueben [2002]; Marmaros and Sacerdote [2003];
Bisin, Topa, and Verdier [2004]; Mayer and Puller [2006] see, however, Ross [2003]). People who are
different from their macro-groups are less likely to be impacted by them (Duncan, Connell, and Klebanov
[1997]; DiPasquale and Kahn [1999], Cummings, DiPasquale, and Kahn [2001]; Conley and Topa [2001];
and Hoxby [2000]).
6
Exceptions are Conley and Udry [2001] and Bandiera and Rasul [2002] and Foster [2006]. Bertrand,
Luttmer, and Mullainathan [2002], Munschi [2002], Grodner and Kniesner [2006]; and Hoxby and

3

theoretical analyses allow for variations in associations within macro-groups. Anselin
[1988]; Lee [2001]; Brock and Durlauf [2001a, 2001b] specify a fixed weighting matrix
that gives association patterns. This approach ignores that interactions are determined by
behaviors as much as behaviors are determined by interactions (Coleman [1961];
Wiseman [2002]; and Eder [2003] provide vivid examples). A person who does not
smoke, for instance, is unlikely to choose to associate with someone who smokes heavily,
and so the first person’s smoking is unlikely to be much affected by the other person’s
smoking. Weighting-matrix studies provide no guidance as to who a newly added person
will associate with, nor do they indicate how adding or removing people affects the
associations of people who are already in the macro-group and remain in it (Sobel [2001]
makes these points in a particularly striking form). This gap is troublesome given that
most policies to address the effects of social interactions involve moving people across
macro-groups.
This study employs data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent
Health (Add Health), which surveyed all students in 172 schools, asking about the
respondents’ closest friends as well as their background and behaviors. We provide a
range of evidence consistent with our model of endogenous association. We find that the
majority of variation in friend’s behaviors and characteristics arises within grades in
schools. Individuals associate with others whose behaviors and characteristics are similar
to their own. Consistent with our model, we find that so long as there are a few people
with a particular characteristic in a group, people with that characteristic associate with
each other, and that people avoid associating with people who are different from
themselves until most of the group is comprised of people who are different. We show

Weingarth [2006] use information to specify the group across interactions operate. Conley and Topa
[2001] estimate propensities for racial groups to interact using a structural model. These papers do not
explicitly study the association process, nor do they study how association-patterns are affected by changes
in the population or in the behaviors of group members.

4

that group size facilitates segregation and show that there is a stronger relationship
between own characteristics and associates’ characteristics in large macro-groups.
While estimating the effect of endogenous sorting on behaviors is complicated,
we provide evidence that endogenous association affects behavior. As indicated, our
model implies that the availability of some like-minded individuals permits people to
associate with people with the same behavioral tendencies, accentuating their own
behavioral tendencies. Consistent with this implication, we show the mean behavior
among the associates of people who are inclined to a particular behavior (based on their
exogenous characteristics) is higher (relative to people whose characteristics imply that
they are unlikely to have high levels of the behavior) in groups where there some people
inclined to the same behavior. We also show that the availability of people who are
inclined to a particular behavior increases the behaviors of people who are inclined to
that behavior (relative to people whose characteristics imply that they are unlikely to
have high levels of the behavior). Lastly, we provide some two-stage least squares
estimates of the effect of associates’ behaviors on own behavior.
II. A Model
II.A. The Framework
This section develops a model of social interactions with endogenous association.
People are characterized by observable characteristics, x, and an shock, ε . They choose
an action, y, and a set of associations. An individual with characteristic x and shock ε
who takes action y has a utility of,

ψ A2
1
⎛ A
A
A′
A ⎞ α
U = β ′xy + εy − y 2 − cT
{ + ⎜θy y − y + ω ′xy + x Φx + γ ′x y ⎟T
2 3 Cost of
⎝1444244444244444444
⎠3
144244
Association
Private Utility

Social Utility

This utility function has three components: a private utility; a cost of interacting; and a
social utility, each of which is described in turn. Variables with over-bars and A2

superscripts denote means among a person’s associates ( y A denotes the mean of the
5

squared values of associates’ actions).
In the empirical analysis, we consider a variety of actions and outcomes. The
actions include substance use and behavioral problems. We also study grades, which
depend on own actions, whose utility depends on associates’ actions, and on associates’
grades (if there are human capital spillovers). The private utility is written to imply that
behavior is a linear function of characteristics.
Interactions can be costly in terms of time and effort. To capture these costs
parsimoniously, we assume that people incur a cost, c, per unit of time spent interacting
with others, where T (x, ε , y ) denotes the total time that the person spends interacting
with others.7 We assume that associations are binary. Because of random encounters,
people are assumed spend t 0 N “passively associating” with every other member of
their macro-group. Here N gives the size of the macro-group, so total passive associations
do not depend on group size. People can also “actively associate” with particular
members of their macro-group, spending an additional unit of time for a total of
1 + t0 N .
The social utility has both standard and novel components. In Manski’s [1994]
terminology, θ and γ give the effect of others’ behaviors (the “endogenous effect”) and
characteristics (the “exogenous effect”). The parameters ψ , ω , and Φ have no
counterparts in Manski’s framework, because they do not affect the action directly. They
affect the utility of associations and actions through their effect on associations. High
values of ψ reduce the utility of associating with people with extreme values of y. The
parameter ω allows the utility of associating with someone to vary with the other
person’s behavior, y, and for the effect to depend on a person’s own characteristics. For
instance, people with behavioral problems, may produce disutility. The parameter Φ is

7

The cost could be negative if the opportunity cost of time is low and people like interacting.

6

analogous, but reflects the effect of associates’ characteristics on the utility of
associating. For instance, people likely obtain utility from associating with people who
are attractive or athletic and people of the same race or ethnicity.
Once people are viewed as choosing to associate with a portion of their groups, it
becomes important to consider how the number of associates affect the strength of
interactions, which is governed by α . One view, which comes closest to the literature, is
that new associations completely crowd out existing ones, leaving the total effect of
associates fixed, that α = 0 . One might think that people who have many associates are
affected by their associates (as a whole) more than people with few associates, that
A

A

α > 0 . To simplify notation, it is convenient to define γ = 1 − α and z ≡ z T a , which
is the mean of some variable z among a person’s associates weighted by the total amount
of interactions, T.
II.B. Solving the Model

Differentiation with respect to y gives the person’s optimal action,

(

)

y = β ′x + θy A + γx A T α + ε .

(*)

This is the standard linear-in-means behavioral equation, where the strength of the social
effect varies across people if α ≠ 0 . We consider a model with a binary, scalar
characteristic. (Weinberg [2005] discusses a model with continuous characteristics.) We
begin by eliminating the action to focus on associations on characteristics. We assume
that the characteristic takes on values x ∈ {− 1,1} , and refer to people with these
characteristics as low and high types. Let π i denote the share of the group with
x = i ∈ {− 1,1}. We assume Φ = 1 and that the other social utility parameters (θ, ψ, ω, and

γ) are all zero.
Let π iA| j ∈ [0, π i ] denote the measure of people with characteristic xi with whom a
person with characteristic x j associates, which must be non-negative and is constrained
7

by group compostion. With Φ > 0 and the values of the characteristic taking on opposite
signs, people only associate with people of the same type, so that a type-i person chooses

π iA|i ∈ [0, π i ] . The first order condition for active associations is,
′
∂U ⎛ ′
= ⎜ xi − (1 − α )x A ⎞⎟Φxi t 0 + Nπ iA|i
A
∂π i|i ⎝
⎠

(

)

α −1

− c = 0 subject to π iA|i ∈ [0, π i ] .

(**)

Figure 1 illustrates the associations of a high (the results for lows are reversed).
Panel A shows the “desired” value of π HA|H , which solves

∂U
∂π HA |H

= 0 ignoring the group

composition constraint that π HA |H ≤ π H , as a function of π H . It is possible to show that
the desired π HA |H is non-increasing (and decreasing if α < 1 ) in π H . The figure also
shows a 45º line, which gives the maximum feasible value of π HA|H . Up to three regions
may be present. In region 1, the desired active associations exceed the maximum possible
given the population composition. In the second region, the composition constraint does
not bind and active associations are positive. In the third region, the person chooses not
to actively associate. As the bold curve in the figure shows, active associations increase
in region 1; decrease in region 2; and are zero in region 3. To fully characterize the
model, the figures show all three regions, but the third may be less relevant, than the
others especially with sorting on multiple dimensions.
A

A

A

Panel B shows x H , where x i denotes the value of x among type i people, as a
function of π H . The curve labeled

∂U
∂π HA |H

A

= 0 shows the desired value of x . It is

possible to show that this curve is non-decreasing and concave (when α < 1) . Intuitively,
when more of the group is high, a greater share of passive associations will be with highs,
which decreases highs’ motivation to actively associate with other highs (so long as
A

α < 1 ) partially, but not fully, offsetting the increase in x . Also shown are the
8

A

maximum value of x the person can achieve by associating with all available highs,

x

A Max

=

t 0 [π H x H + (1 − π H )x L ] + π H Nx H

(t 0 + Nπ H )1−α

, which is concave if α < 1 , and the value that

emerges in the absence of active associations, [π H x H + (1 − π H )x L ]t 0 , which is linear.
α

A

The bold curve shows that x H increases monotonically, with the greatest increase at low
levels (in region 1).
Except on the left (and extreme right), changes in group composition have less
effect on highs’ associates than implied by the average characteristics in the group (given
by the diagonal line from (0, x L ) to (1, x H ) . This concavity, which is present except in
region 3, is the key to our results.
A

A

A

Panel C shows that the difference in x between highs and lows, x H − x L , is
hump-shaped in π H . Intuitively, in groups that are largely composed of one of the
groups, there is little scope for sorting, so the associations of both types are relatively
similar. Segregation is greatest when there are many members of both groups.
II.C. Group Size

A novel implication of our model is that sorting should be greater in large groups
than in small groups. Panel A of Figure 2 shows that increasing group size reduces the
desired level of π HA|H . This can be seen from (**) where N and π iA|i only appear
multiplicatively, so as N increases, the same social influence can be obtained with a
A

proportionately lower level of π HA|H . Panel B shows that x H increases in region 1 and is
otherwise unchanged (the increase in N corresponds to more associations in region 1, but
is offset by the decrease in π HA|H in region 2). Increasing group size shifts the x

A Max

curve up because the amount of weight placed on passive associations does not change,
but for any given level of π H , there are more highs with whom other highs can associate.
9

The model implies more sorting in large groups when either group’s associations are
constrainted.
Glaeser, Sacerdote, and Scheinkman [1996] and Graham [2005] estimate the
strength of social interactions using variations across large groups or variations in group
size. Insofar as large groups facilitate sorting one might expect more variation in large
groups. Endogenous association likely biases estimates using Glaeser, Sacerdote, and
Scheinkman’s method upward, but estimates using Graham’s method downward.8 At a
policy level, our results on macro-group size indicate that attempts to integrate people
from different groups will be more successful if macro-groups are kept small, limiting
peoples’ ability to re-segregate within groups.
II.D. Crowding Out

As indicated, once the number of associations is endogenous, one needs to think
about how the number of associates someone has affects the strength of the social
influence he experiences. By focusing on associates’ means, existing models implicitly
assume that additional associations fully crowd out existing ones ( α = 0 ), but it seems
likely that people with more associates will be affected by them more.
It is possible to show that decreasing crowding out increases the difference in the
mean associations between highs and lows. This effect is particularly large when most of
the group is made up of one type or the other and in the middle. Thus, the assumption of
complete crowding out, which is implicit in the literature, limits the scope for people to
segregate within their macro-groups by active associating.
II.E. Endogenous Actions

So far we have considered models with sorting on exogenous characteristics. This
section focuses on a binary action, y ∈ {− 1,1} , assuming that people derive utility from
associating with people taking the same action ( θ > 0 ). (For simplicity, we assume that

10

the other social utility parameters, ψ, Φ, ω, and γ, are zero.) Conditional on the
distribution of actions, sorting on an endogenous behavior is identical to sorting on an
exogenous characteristic.
Characterizing the equilibrium involves solving for the share of the group taking
an action as a function of the distribution of exogenous characteristics in the group. A
person with characteristic xi takes action y H if,
A
A
1 2
1 2
′
′
y H xi β + y H ε − y H + y H θy H > y L xi β + y L ε − y L + y L θy L .
2
2

Let

(

)

A
1
2
2
⎛ A
⎞
y H − y L − ⎜ y H θy H − y L θy L ⎟
2
⎝
⎠ and ε * ≡ − x ′ β + ε *
ε* ≡
i
i
yH − yL

denote the value of ε at which a person with x = 0 or x = xi is indifferent between the
actions. For simplicity, we again assume that xi ∈ {− 1,1} . The probability that a person
with characteristic xi takes the low (high) action is ρ L|i ≡ F (ε i* ) ( ρ H |i ≡ 1 − F (ε i* ) ),
where F (.) denotes the cumulative distribution function of ε.
Let ρ H = ρ H |H π H + ρ H |L (1 − π H ) denote the share of the group taking the high

action, where π H denotes the share of the group with the high characteristic. The effect
of π H on the mean action can be calculated by differentiating this expression with
respect to π H and rearranging. Formally,
∂ρ H
=
∂π H

( ) ( )
∂ε
1 + (F ' (ε )π + F ' (ε )(1 − π ))
∂ρ
F ε L* − F ε H*

*
L

*
H

H

where

8

I am grateful to Bryan Graham for discussing these points.

11

*

H

H

,

∂ε *
θ
=−
∂ρ H
yH − yL

⎛ A
⎜ ∂yH
⎜
⎜ ∂ρ H
⎝

A

π HA | H

∂y
yH − H
∂ρ H

1
yH − yL

.

⎛
⎞ ∂π
⎛
⎞ ∂π
∂yH
∂yL
1
⎜ G
⎟
⎜ G
⎟
−
θ
−
−
θ
cN
y
cN
y
<0
L ⎟
H ⎟
A
A
⎜⎜
⎜
∂
−
ρ
y
y
∂π H |H
∂π L|L
⎟
⎟ ∂ρ H
H
H
L ⎜
⎝
⎠
⎝
⎠
A

+

π LA| L

⎞
⎟
yL ⎟
⎟
⎠
A

A
H |H

A
L| L

If there is some crowding out, if people choose to actively associate, and if
y H > 0 and y L < 0 , it is possible to show that

∂ε *
will be negative, so that as more of
∂ρ H

the group is high, more people take the high action, and that it will be more negative
when ρ H (and π H ) are either low or high.9 At these extremes,

∂ρ H
will be large
∂π H

because its denominator will be small, so that changes in the share of highs in the group
will have a particularly large effect on mean behavior.
Figure 3 shows the share of the group and people with the high and low
characteristic taking the high action as a function of the share of the group with the high
characteristic and the share of the group with the high action assuming that ε is
distributed uniformly with bounds such that people are always in the interior of the
support. This assumption is appealing because it implies that behaviors are linear in
characteristics and associations. In both panels, the share of each type taking the high
action is non-linear. The steeper sections at low and high levels emerge because at low
levels, introducing a few highs makes it possible for highs to find like-minded associates,
while at the high end, eliminating the few remaining highs makes it impossible for lows
to find like-minded associates.

9

Under these assumptions, the first term is negative and more negative whenever either of the groups has
fewer active associations, which will be at extreme values of ρ H (and π H ). The second and third terms
are zero whenever people’s active associations are unconstrained or zero and negative when the constraint

π iA|i ≤ π i

binds, which will be at extreme values of ρ H (and

12

π H ). As π iA|i

increases, these terms become

While the uniform case is useful for demonstrating that the model generates nonlinearities endogenously, it is probably more realistic to assume that the shock, ε, is
normally distributed. In this case, it is possible to show that the gap in both behaviors and
associations between people with the high and low characteristic are hump-shaped in the
share of the group with the high characteristic.10
Figure 4 shows results for normally distributed shocks. The difference in the
action between people with the high and low characteristic is increasing in the share of
the group that has the high characteristic and the share of the group with the high action.
The relationship between the average behavior in the population and the share of the
group with the high characteristic is non-linear, convex at low levels and concave at high
levels. The difference in the mean behavior of the associates of people with the high and
low characteristic are also hump-shaped in the share of the group with the high
characteristic (and the high behavior). These implications are tested below.

less negative, so these terms are also most negative at extreme values of ρ H (and
10

Define ∆ρ H =

ρ H |H − ρ H |L

π H ).

as the difference in behavior between people with the high and

low characteristic. The effect of the mean behavior in the group on this difference is given by

dε *
d∆ρ H
= F ' ε L* − F ' ε H*
.
dρ H
dρ H

( ( )

As indicated above,

( ))

∂ε *
is negative and more negative at low and high values of ρ H . Because
∂ρ H

ε H* < ε L* , (F ' (ε L* ) − F ' (ε H* )) is negative when ρ H is low (and ε * is high) and it is positive when ρ H
*
is high (and ε is low). Thus, ∆ρ H is increasing when ρ H < .5 and decreasing when ρ H > .5 and the
difference in behavior between people with the low and high characteristic is hump shaped in ρ H . Define
A
A
⎛ A
⎞
∆ y = ⎜ y H − y L ⎟∆ρ H as the difference in the mean behavior of the associates of people with the low
⎝
⎠
A

A

and high characteristic. From the results above on sorting on exogenous characteristics y H − y L is humpA

ρ H . Given that ∆ρ H is hump-shaped in ρ H , so is ∆ y . Note that these results hold for any
*
*
*
*
distribution where (F ' (ε L ) − F ' (ε H )) is negative when ε is high positive when ε is low, including a

shaped in

uniform distribution where people move beyond the support.

13

II.F. Implications

A number of important implications arise immediately from the non-linear
relationship between group composition and behavior. First, it breaks the zero-sum
implication of the standard, linear-in-means model. A number of studies across a range of
disciplines have argued for a non-linear relationship between group composition and
behavior (see footnote 3 for references). To the best of our knowledge, our model is the
first to generate non-linearities endogenously.
In the preceding uniform example, if one quarter of the population had the high
characteristic and the population was large enough for three groups, if the highs were
divided equally among the three groups, 30.9% of the population (68.4% of highs and
18.4% of lows) would take the high action. If the population were divided into 2 groups
with no highs and one that was three quarter highs, 23.0% of the population (81.6% of
highs; none of the lows with other lows, and 31.6% of the lows in the three-quarter high
group) would take the high action. Thus, grouping the highs with enough other highs to
allow them to heavily associate with each other generates high overall behavior.
The existing literature places particular emphasis on the multipliers generated
when peoples’ actions depend on the actions of the other people in their social groups.
The strength of these endogenous effects is not identified in the traditional linear-inmeans model of social interactions because the expected behavior of associates is a linear
function of associates’ observable characteristics (see Manski [1994]; Brock and Durlauf
[2001a,b]; Blume and Durlauf [2006]; Lin [2005]; Lee [2006]; and Shang [2006]).
Endogenizing associations overturns these results in two ways. First, the nonlinear relationship between the composition of a group and the mean behavior can, in
principle, identify the model’s parameters. Second, the distinction between traditional
endogenous and exogenous effects itself becomes less interesting once associations are
treated as endogenous because changes in the distribution of exogenous characteristics

14

can generate multipliers through associations. Put differently, for multipliers to arise
some endogenous variable has to respond to changes in the environment, and it can be
associations instead of behaviors.
Lastly, endogenous association limits the interpretation of conventional estimates
of the effects of macro-groups because the effect of macro-groups varies across people
and with group composition. While one can accurately estimate the effect of moving
people like those being studied between groups like those studied, it is impossible to
estimate the effect of moving similar people between different types of groups or
different types of people between the groups being studied. Put differently, one can
estimate the effect of the groups studied on the people studied, but there is no single
“effect” of groups to estimate because the effect of groups depends on associations which
in turn depend on interactions between individual characteristics and group composition.
As indicated, moving people who are at risk along some dimension from groups where
many individuals are at risk to groups with a mix of people who are and are not at risk is
likely to have less effect on the influences a person experiences than one would expect
based on macro-group composition because people can find like-minded associates in
their new groups.
II.G. Actions and Characteristics Directly Affect Interactions

Some behaviors inherently generate utility for one’s associates, while others
generate disutility. For instance, it may be enjoyable to associate with people who party,
but unpleasant to associate with people with behavioral problems. People will associate
with people taking actions that generate utility for their associates, causing those actions
to proliferate if θ > 0 .
It can be shown that people associate more with people taking high levels of
pleasant actions, causing those actions to spread. By contrast, people tend to avoid people
taking high levels of unpleasant actions, which will reduce the amount of those actions. It

15

is well known that actions for which θ is high will spread, but these results imply that for
a given value of θ , actions for which ω is high will spread too.
II.H. Peer Pressure

People often describe social interactions models as models of “peer pressure.”
Peer pressure involves the withdraw of association when one person takes an action that
produces disutility for another. To model peer pressure, associations must be
endogenous.
To capture this idea, we assume that people derive utility directly from having
people associate with them and, in choosing their actions, take into consideration how
their action will affect whether other people associate with them. Let the utility function
be,
1
ψ A2
⎛ A
A
A′
A ⎞ α
U = β ′xy + εy − y 2 − cT
{ + ⎜θy y − y + ω ′xy + x Φx + γ ′x y ⎟T + δP ,
2 3 Cost of
⎠ 443
⎝1444244444424444444
144244
Associating
Private Utliity

Social Utility

where P gives the person’s popularity, the number of people associating with him.
Returning to the case of a continuous action, the first order condition for the action is,

(

)

y = βx + θy A + γx A T α + δ

∂P
+ε .
∂y

(*’)

The condition now includes a term for the effect of a change in the action on the measure
of people who will associate with him. Under peer pressure, a person’s action depends on
the density of people at the margin to interact with him as well as the mean of associates’
behaviors and characteristics. In this sense, the standard linear-in-means model of
interactions may be a poor representation of peer pressure.
The strength of “reception” and “transmission” of peer pressure will likely
depend on characteristics. On the reception-side, insofar as most people in the macrogroup will want to associate with them regardless of their actions, people whose
characteristics make them appealing as associates will be less subject to peer pressure

16

than others. People whose characteristics make them very undesirable as associates may
also be less subject to peer pressure insofar as few people will associate with them
regardless of their actions. Thus the model suggests that the extent to which people are
subject to peer pressure as recipients follows an inverse-U in how appealing they are as
associates. On the transmission-side, people who are attractive as associates may get
more weight in other people’s P’s, so people will be particularly subject to peer pressure
from attractive people. The strength of peer pressure from the transmission side will be
strictly increasing in how appealing someone is as an associate.
II.I. Extensions

This section considers two further extensions to the model – endogenous
popularity and dislike. One could extend the analysis of popularity by making one of the
individual characteristics, x, be the measure of people in the macro-group who associate
with a person. Presumably, people obtain more utility from interacting with people who
are popular. In the context of peer pressure, people will be particularly interested in
having popular people associate with them.
When popularity has effects, an intervention that increases the weight placed on
one person or set of people will generate a feedback to other people in the macro group,
which can generate multipliers – as one person begins to associate with a person that
raises the utility that others derive from associating with him. Such an effect explain the
emphasis placed on affecting how much weight people place on others, by making
positive (or negative) examples of people, such as valedictorians (Moffitt [2001]
discusses a variety of policies).
Lastly, one might allow people to invest time down-weighting some members of
their macro-group. People would optimally want to down-weight people who are most
different from them. Without crowding out, people who are most different from their
macro-groups will invest the most to down-weight others. The possibility of down-

17

weighting reduces the benefits from placing people with bad outcomes into better groups.
III. Data

We use data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health,
commonly known as Add Health. The Add Health data provide information on a wide
range of youth behaviors, including substance use, risky behaviors, grades, and
behavioral problems, and data on family background. They contain nationally
representative data on 90,118 students enrolled in grades 7-12 in 172 schools. Students
were asked about their 5 closest male and female friends, so information is available on
both the macro groups – schools and grades – as well as the subgroupings that emerge
within them. Also, all people are surveyed symmetrically.11
We restrict attention to students enrolled in 9th through 12th grades in classes with
at least 10 students. The data contain a limited panel aspect, which we do not utilize.
Appendix Table 1 lists the behaviors and outcomes used and their construction. In
most cases variables were given as the frequency of a behavior. In these cases, we coded
them so as to give a monthly frequency.
Table 1 reports descriptive statistics.12 Slightly under half the sample is male;
16% identify as black (respondents were allowed to report multiple races); 15% identify
as Hispanic. Just over three quarters of respondents live with their father, and their
mothers have 13.6 years of schooling on average. Average grades vary from a B- to a B,
with the lowest grades in math and the highest grades in history and social studies. On
average the respondents smoked a bit more than once a week, they drink a couple of
times a month, and get drunk about half as frequently. The most common behaviors or

11

Alternative surveys provide information about particular individuals and ask the respondents about the
behaviors of their friends. Under this approach less information is available on friends than on respondents
and reports of friends’ behavior may be biased differently than reports of own behavior.
12
The original sample comprises 90,118 individuals. Once the sample is restricted to individuals in grades
9 through 12 with valid school, grade, and identification information, the sample is reduced to 62,203.
Restricting the sample to people with some identifiable friends with valid information reduces the sample
to 47,570. The remaining deletions are for having missing data for a variety of the other variables.

18

behavioral problems are having trouble paying attention and doing homework regularly.
Skipping school and fighting are the least common, occurring about once a month.
Also shown are the means and standard deviations of the associate averages of the
behaviors and characteristics. The mean of the associates’ behaviors are above the mean
of own behaviors, indicating that people with “worse” behavior are listed as friends more
often than people with better behavior. On the other hand, the mean of associates’ grades
tend to be slightly higher than own grades, indicating that popularity is increasing in
grades. Similarly, the mean of mother’s education and father present among associates is
above the own mean for these variables, indicating that children with “better” family
backgrounds may be more appealing because they are wealthier or more socially adept.
IV. Within-Group Variations in Associations

As indicated, most studies of social effects focus on variations across macrogroups. We begin by investigating how much of the variation in friend’s behaviors and
characteristics arises within macro-groups as opposed to between macro-groups.
Meaningful macro-groups should be reasonably narrowly defined yet contain a
large portion of peoples’ associates. School-grades meet this criterion with 74% of the
surveyed friends being in the person’s school-grade.
Let z ij denote a behavior or characteristic of the jth friend of person i. The mean
value of z among person i’s friends is z iA =

1
Ni

∑

j

z ij , where N i gives the number of

people with whom i is friends. (Here and below, by studying z iA we implicitly focus on
the case where α = 0 ; work that estimates α is in progress.) We decompose the variance
of z i into within and between school-grade components. The total variance in z iA is

[ ]

[

[

]]

[[

]]

VAR z iA = VAR z iA − E z iA S i , Gi + VAR E z iA S i , Gi . The former term represents the

within school-grade variance and the later the across school-grade variance.
The share of the variance arising within school-grades is the R 2 from an analysis

19

of variance with a full set of school-grade interactions, which is reported the first column
of Table 2. The estimates indicate that for most behaviors over 90% of the variation in
friends’ behaviors arises within school-grades. For grades (and television watching)
about 80% of the variation in friends’ behaviors and outcomes arises within school
grades. Between 75% and 90% of the variation in family background, measured by
mother’s education, mother is a homemaker, and father’s presence arises within schoolgrades. Considerably more of the variation in the racial and ethnic composition of friends
can be accounted for by school-grade effects, frequently close to half, which is to be
expected given the extent of racial and ethnic residential sorting.
Because people often form friendships with people who live near them, a portion
of the within school-grade variation likely arises from residential sorting among students
in the same school-grade. Tracking and selection into classes may also generate within
school-grade variations in associations. The Add Health survey does not contain data on
tracking or the classes taken, but it does contain characteristics of the census block group
of residence for a portion of respondents. Because neighborhood characteristics are only
available for one respondent in five, column 3 reports the R 2 from the analysis of
variance described above when applied to the smaller sample; column 4 reports results
when the neighborhood variables interacted with school effects are added to the model.
Switching to the smaller sample tends to increase the R 2 slightly because the
sample size declines dramatically relative to the number of effects. Inclusion of
neighborhood variables typically accounts for 5% of the variance in friends’ behavior.
Even in this smaller sample with neighborhood variables, within macro-group variations
account for 80% or more of the variation in associates’ behaviors; 30%-70% of the
variations in associates’ race and ethnicity; and 70% of the variation in associates’ grades
and family background. To the extent that people choose their friends based on their
behaviors and there is an association between neighborhoods and behaviors, these

20

estimates will overstate the effect of residential proximity.
The substantial variations in associates’ behaviors can not be viewed as the effect
of sorting insofar as exogenous variations in associations combined with social effects on
behavior will generate variations in associates’ behaviors. Nevertheless, we find
substantial variations in associates’ family backgrounds within macro-groups, and these
variations are not caused by associations. Regardless of causality, our estimates indicate
ignoring variations in associations with macro-groups leads to substantial mis-measuring
the social influences to which people are exposed.
V. The Choice of Associates

The preceding analysis indicates that the vast majority of variation in the
composition of social groups arises within narrowly-defined macro-groups. We begin by
studying the determinants of associations on exogenous characteristics (race, ethnicity,
and family background). It is easier to study sorting on exogenous characteristics than
behaviors and outcomes because, as indicated, if social interactions operate, behaviors
and outcomes are affected by others. That is, the relationship between a person’s
behavior and those of his associates may reflect the effect of his behavior on his
associates as opposed to the effect of selective association. Our results on sorting on
exogenous characteristics are of interest in their own right insofar as sorting on racial,
ethnic, and socio-economic lines at the formative ages studied here likely affects attitudes
toward other groups.
V. A. Own Characteristics and Associates’ Characteristics

We begin by regressing the mean of associates’ characteristics on own
characteristics. Let xi denote a characteristic of person i. We regress the mean x among
i’s associates, xiA , on xi and anticipate a positive relationship. Our model is
xiA = φxi + γX i + Π SG i + ε i .
Person i’s own observable characteristics, X i (other than xi ), are included as controls.
21

Also included are fixed effects fully interacting school and grade, SG i . With these
school-grade effects, we estimate whether people with higher levels of x have associates
with higher values of x compared to others in the same school-grade.
The estimates reported in Table 3 indicate a strong positive relationship between
own characteristics and those of peoples’ associates. There are a number of reasons to be
careful about interpreting these estimates as the causal effect of a person’s characteristics
on his associations. As discussed above, the estimated relationships may reflect sorting in
other arenas such as neighborhoods. Moreover, our model implies that people will
selectively associate based on behaviors as well as characteristics. If groups have
different behaviors and this form of sorting is present, our estimates will reflect the effect
of sorting on behaviors that are affected by the characteristics.
To address neighborhood-based selection, we augment our models by including
neighborhood characteristics. The remaining columns of the table report estimates from
the original specification for the sample with neighborhood characteristics and then
estimates that include the neighborhood variables. The substantial reduction in the
sample reduces the precision of the estimates, but neither the change in sample, nor the
inclusion of the neighborhood variables substantially affects the point estimates.
Lastly our estimates here and below can not rule out the possibility of a hierarchy
among groups. For instance, everyone may prefer to associate with white students, but
because the white students associate with each other, students from other groups may be
forced to associate with each other. Even in this context our estimates show active
associations among white students.
V. B. Macro-Group Composition

Under the assumption that people prefer to associate with others who are similar
to themselves, the model implies that for people who have a particular (binary)
characteristic, there should be a concave relationship between the share of their

22

associates that have that characteristic and the share of the group that has that
characteristic. For people who do not have that characteristic, the model implies that
there should be a convex relationship between the share of their associates that have that
characteristic and the share of group that does. The difference in the share of associates
who have the characteristic between people with and without it will be hump-shaped.
Intuitively, once a small number of people with a characteristic are introduced, the people
who also have that characteristic will be able to have associates who are similar to
themselves; people without the characteristic will not be forced to associate with people
with it until most of the group has the characteristic.
We test this hypothesis by regressing the share of peoples’ associates who have
some exogenous binary characteristic, xiA , on cubics in the share of the group who have
the characteristic, xiG , and these cubics interacted with the person’s value for the
characteristic, xi . We focus on race and ethnicity because of the strength of sorting on
them (from Table 3).13 Formally, we estimate,

(

) (

)

xiA = γ 10 xiG + γ 20 xiG + γ 30 xiG + γ 11 xiG + γ 21 xiG + γ 31 xiG xi
{
1444424444
3 14444244443

Associate
Mean

2

3

Cubic in Mean Characteristic
in Grade

+

γ{
Xi

Own
Characteristics

2

3

Cubic in Mean Characteristic in
Grade × Own Characteristic

+ πX iG , Race × X iRace + Π S i × xi + ε i
1442443
1
424
3
Full Racial Composition
Interacted with own Race

School Fixed Effects
Interacted with
Characteristic

The model also includes individual characteristics to control for the direct effect of
characteristics on associations; interactions between the racial composition of the grade
and the individual’s race (in case, for instance, the share of the grade that is white affects
interactions between Asians and blacks); and school fixed effects interacted with the
characteristic. Our estimates are identified from differences in the associations across
students in different grades in the same school.
The estimated polynomials, are reported in table 4. Figure 5 plots the implied

23

share of people’s associates with a given characteristic and the share of the group with
that characteristic, with each point representing a single school-grade. (Echenique, Fryer,
and Kaufman [2006] report similar results, but without school-grade fixed effects,
obtained at the same time.) As expected, the difference in the relationship between
people with and without the characteristics are globally concave. The curves for people
with (own) and without (other) the characteristic generally indicate the expected
relationships, especially in the regions with the greatest density.
V. C. Macro-Group Size

The model implies that large macro-groups facilitate sorting so that there should be a
stronger relationship between individual characteristics and associates’ characteristics in
large macro-groups.14 To assess how school-grade size affects selective association, we
estimate

(

)

xiA = βxi * log N iSG + θxi + γX i + πxi xiG + Π SG i + ε i .
Also included in the regression are individual characteristics (including the one being
studied), interactions between the characteristic under investigation and the share of the
school-grade with that characteristic, and a set of school-grade fixed effects. Our
estimates are identified from differences in the strength of the relationship between own
characteristics and those of associates across grades of varying sizes in the same school.
Under the hypothesis that grade size facilitates selective sorting β > 0 .
The estimates are reported in Table 5. For all of the characteristics (except father
present), an increase in the size of the school-grade increases the relationship between
own behavior or characteristics and those of associates. Thus, our estimates indicate that
larger macro-groups do facilitate sorting.

13

Results are not reported for Indians because less than 3% of school-grades are 15% or more Indian.
The mean and standard deviation of grade size are 236 and 126 (4.28 and .672 in logs) when weighted
by students and 148 and 118 (4.427 and 1.427 in logs) when the data are un-weighted.

14

24

VI. Behaviors

This section studies how endogenous association affects behavior. As indicated,
one can not directly study the effect of sorting on endogenous variables in the same way
as sorting on exogenous variables because endogenous variables may be affected by
sorting. To address this concern, we employ a multi-step procedure in which we predict
both individual and group behaviors using exogenous characteristics. We then study how
changes in (predicted) behavior in a macro-group affects the behavior of people whose
behavior is predicted to be high (or low) based on their characteristics.
Formally, we begin by estimating the relationship between behaviors and
exogenous individual characteristics,
yi = γ 1 X i1 + γ 2 X i2 + Π SG i + ε i .
Here we have partitioned the matrix of characteristics, X i , into two components, X i1 and

[

]

X i2 , where X i = X i1 X i2 . The model also includes school-grade fixed effects to control
for the effect of macro-groups on behaviors.
In our second step, we use the coefficients on the individual characteristics
obtained from this model, to obtain two predictions of the behavior of each individual in
the sample, yˆ ij = γˆ j X i j , j ∈ {1,2} . We then estimate whether student i is expected to be

above the population mean of y based on each set of characteristics. Formally, define
yˆ

Hj
i

⎧1if yˆ ij > y j
=⎨
for j ∈ {1,2} .
j
j
⎩0 if yˆ i ≤ y

We also estimate ŷ iGHj , the share of i’s macro-group that is expected to be above the
mean of y based on characteristic set X j .
VI. A. Sorting on Behaviors

Endogenous sorting implies that the difference between people with high and low
(predicted) behavior, in the share of associates with a high level of that behavior should

25

be concave in the share of the group with a high level of that behavior. To test this
hypothesis, we regress the mean behavior of person i’s associates on interactions between
our prediction of whether i is above the mean for behavior y based on X i j , ŷ iHj ; and the
share of his group that is expected to be above the mean of behavior y based on X i j′ (i.e.
the other set of characteristics), yˆ iGHj′ , and its square. Formally, we estimate,
y iA
{

Mean of
Associates'
Behavior

=

β 1 yˆ i1 yˆ iGH 2

1424
3

Own Behavior Above
Mean* Share of School −
Grade Above Mean

( )

2

+ β 2 yˆ i1 yˆ iGH 2 + γ 1 X i1 + γ 2 X i2 + Π
SG
12
3i + ε i .
142
4 43
4
14
4244
3
Own Behavior Above
Mean* Share of School −
Grade Above Mean 2

Individual
Characteristics

School −Grade
Fixed Effects

As indicated, in the interactions between predicted individual and macro-group
behaviors, we construct the predicted individual and macro-group components from the
“opposite” components of characteristics. We do this because we have already shown
that individuals sort on observable characteristics and we do not want our estimates of
sorting on associations to be biased by sorting on exogenous characteristics.15 We only
include one set of interactions to avoid co-linearity. Our specification also includes
school-grade fixed effects and individual characteristics, so our estimates are identified
from differences in how the (predicted) behavior in a school grade affects people who
(are predicted to) have high levels of an action relative to those who are not in the same
school grade.
Table 6 reports the estimates. As expected, the estimates show that the difference
in the behaviors of the associates of people with high (predicted) behaviors relative to
those with low (predicted) behaviors is concave in the share of the macro-group with
high (predicted) behaviors. The linear term is positive and the quadratic is negative in 15
of 19 cases and the two are statistically significant in 12 of the cases. (None of the

15

We have also regressed one set of predictions on the other and interacted the residuals. We split our
characteristics into one set that comprises race and ethnicity and a second set that comprises family
background and years at the school. The estimates reported use race and ethnicity to predict individual
behavior and the other variables to predict macro-group behavior. Estimates that use race and ethnicity to

26

estimates where the signs are reversed are statistically significant.) Moreover, the two
coefficients are frequently similar in magnitude, indicating that the difference in
associations is greatest in groups where roughly equal numbers of people are predicted to
be above and below the average behavior. As implied by endogenous association, we find
that as the share of a macro-group with high (predicted) behavior increases, the mean
behavior among the associates of people who (are predicted to) have a high level of that
behavior increases relative to others initially and then declines as most of the macrogroup (is predicted) to have a high level of that behavior.
VI. B. Reduced Form Behavioral Models

If associations are endogenous and social interactions operate, the addition of
people with high (predicted) behavior to a group that has a low (predicted) behavior will
raise the behavior among people with high predicted behavior more than those with low
predicted behavior. Once most of the group has a high (predicted) behavior, adding more
people with high (predicted) behavior will affect people with low predicted behavior
more than those with high predicted behavior. Thus, the difference in behavior between
people whose characteristics imply high behavior relative to those whose characteristics
imply low behavior should be hump-shaped in the share of the group with high predicted
behavior.
To test this hypothesis, we estimate a model that is similar to that above except
we replace the mean behavior among associates as the dependent variable with the
individual’s own behavior. Formally we estimate,

(

)

y = π 1 yˆ iH 1 yˆ iGH 2 + π 2 yˆ iH 1 yˆ iGH 2 + γ 1 X i1 + γ 2 X i2 + Π
SG
12
3i + ε i .
{i
14243
144244
3 14
4244
3

Behavior

Own Behavior Above
Mean* Share of School −
Grade Above Mean

2

Own Behavior Above
Mean* Share of School −
Grade Above Mean 2

Individual
Characteristics

School −Grade
Fixed Effects

As above, the interactions between predicted own behavior and predicted group behavior

predict group behavior and other variables to predict individual behavior are broadly comparable.

27

come from different sets of characteristics and the model includes both sets of individual
characteristics and school-grade fixed effects. These estimates can be thought of as
reduced form estimates in a two stage least squares regression of individual behaviors on
associates’ behaviors where interactions between predicted behaviors of the individual
and the group are instruments for associates’ behaviors.
Table 7 reports these estimates. As expected, we find that the difference in
behaviors between those with high and low (predicted) behaviors is a concave function of
and the share of the group with high (predicted) behaviors. Of the 19 estimates, 17 show
the expected pattern (the other two are statistically insignificant) and 11 of the 17 are
statistically significant. As above, the linear and quadratic terms are frequently similar in
magnitude indicating that the difference in behavior peaks when roughly equal numbers
of people (are predicted to) have high and low behaviors. Thus, our results for behaviors
are consistent with social interactions with endogenous association.
VI. C. Two Stage Least Squares Estimates

As indicated, one can think of the two previous sets of estimates as the first stage
and reduced form estimates of the effect of individual behaviors on associates’ behaviors
where interactions between predicted behaviors of the individual and group are
instruments for associates’ behaviors. The second stage equation in this system is
y = θy iA + γ 1 X i1 + γ 2 X i2 + Π
SG
12
3i + ε i
{i
{
14
4244
3

Behavior

Mean of
Associates '
Behavior

Individual
Characteristics

School − Grade
Fixed Effects

and the first stage equation is
yiA
{

Mean of
Associates'
Behavior

( )

2

( )

2

= β 12 yˆiH 1 yˆiGH 2 + β 21 yˆiH 2 yˆiGH 1 + β 221 yˆiH 1 yˆiGH 2 + β 221 yˆiH 2 yˆiGH 1 + γ 1 X i1 + γ 2 X i2 + Π
SG
12
3i + ε i
14444244443 1444442444443 142
4 43
4
Own Behavior Above Mean* Share
of School − Grade Above Mean

Own Behavior Above Mean* Share
of School − Grade Above Mean 2

Individual
Characteristics

.

School − Grade
Fixed Effects

Here we include both sets of interactions between predicted own and group behavior in
order to maximize the fit of our first stage equation. As above, the models include
individual characteristics and school-grade fixed effects. Thus the estimates are identified
28

from differences between individuals with high predicted behavior relative to those with
low predicted behavior in the effect of group composition. Because the first-stage models
generate hump-shaped differences in associates’ behaviors, the identification comes from
the non-monotonic relationship between group composition and the difference between
people with high and low (predicted) behavior.
The results are presented in Table 8. All of the estimates but one are positive and
12 of the 19 are statistically significant. As expected the implied social effects are larger
than those for the effect of macro-groups, but closer to estimates for people who are
likely to associate with one another (Carrell, Fullerton, Gilchrist, and West [2006]).16
VII. Conclusion and Implications

We have developed a model of social interactions with endogenous association.
Our theory implies the standard, linear-in-means model of behavior, but departs from the
standard model by assuming that people invest in developing relationships and that they
do so in order to maximize their utility.
At a policy level, the non-linearities and interactions that arise endogenously in
the model imply that relocations of individuals can be positive or negative sum. Our
finding of greater sorting in large macro-groups implies that relocations will be more
effective when they are to small groups.
Our model provides a novel explanation for the weak effects of housing
relocation experiments. We hypothesize that people who are relocated into groups where
many (but not all) people are different from themselves choose to associate with the
people who are like themselves. Thus, we are reluctant to conclude from these
experiments that people’s associates do not have large effects.
At a policy level, our results suggest that relocation programs may be less
effective than policies that increase the incentives for desired behaviors (e.g. rewards for

29

getting higher grades or more stiff penalties for crime). If endogenous effects are present,
rewards will generate multipliers and because groups can be maintained, we expect less
re-sorting within groups.

16

The mean of the effects is .918 and the mean weighted by the inverse of the standard errors is .900.

30

References

Aaronson, Daniel, “Using Sibling Data to Estimate the Impact of Neighborhoods on
Children's Educational Outcomes.” Journal of Human Resources 33 (no. 4, Fall
1998), 915-946.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Kevin Lang. “How Important are Classroom Peer Effects?
Evidence from Boston’s Metco Program.” American Economic Review 94 (No. 5,
December 2004): 1613-1634.
Anselin, Luc. Spatial Econometrics: Methods and Applications. Dordrecht: Kluwer
Academic Publishers. 1988.
Austen-Smith, David and Roland G. Fryer Jr. “An Economic Analysis of ‘Acting
White’” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Forthcoming.
Bandiera, Oriana, and Imran Rasul. “Social Networks and Technology Adoption in
Northern Mozambique.” Working Paper. London School of Economics. 2002.
Bayer, Patrick; Robert McMillan; and Kim Rueben. “An Equilibrium Model of Sorting in
and Urban Housing Market: A Study of the Causes and Consequences of
Residential Segregation.” Working Paper. Yale University. 2002.
Bayer, Patrick; Stephen L. Ross; and Giorgio Topa. “Place of Work, Place of Residence:
Informal Hiring Networks and Labor Market Outcomes.” Working Paper.
University of Connecticut. 2004.
Bayer, Patrick and Stephen Ross. “Identifying Group Effects in the Presence of Sorting:
A Neighborhood Effects Application.” Working Paper 2006.
Bertrand, Marianne, Erzo F. P. Luttmer, and Sendhil Mullainathan. “Network Effects and
Welfare Cultures.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (no. 3 August 2000):
1019-55.
Bisin, Alberto; Giorgio Topa; and Thierry Verdier. “Religious Intermarriage and
Socialization in the United States.” Journal of Political Economy (Vol. 112, No.
3, June 2004): 615-664.
Borghans, Lex; Bas ter Weel; and Bruce A. Weinberg. “People People.” In progress.
Borjas, George J. “Ethnicity, Neighborhoods, and Human Capital Externalities.”
American Economic Review 85 (no. 3, June 1995): 365-390.
Blume, Lawrence and Steven N. Durlauf. “Identifying Social Interactions: A Review.”
Working Paper 2005.
Brock, William A. and Steven N. Durlauf. “Discrete Choice with Social Interactions.”
Review of Economic Studies 68 (2001a): 235-260.

31

Brock, William A. and Steven N. Durlauf. “Interactions-Based Models.” Handbook of
Econometrics, vol 5. James J. Heckman and Edward E. Leamer, eds. Amsterdam:
North-Holland Press. 2001b.
Burke, Mary A. and Tim R. Sass. “Classroom Peer Effects and Student Achievement.”
Working Paper 2006.
Carrell, Scott E.; Richard L. Fullerton; Robert N. Gilchrist; and James E. West. “Peer and
Leadership Effects in Academic and Athletic Performance.” Working Paper.
2006.
Case, Anne C., and Lawrence Katz. “The Company you Keep: The Effects of Family and
Neighborhoods on Disadvantaged Youth.” NBER Working Paper no. 3705.
Cambridge, MA. 1990.
Clampet-Lundquist, Susan; Kathryn Edin; Jeffrey R. Kling; and Greg J. Duncan.
“Moving At-Risk Youth Out of High-Risk Neighborhoods: Why Girls Fare Better
Then Boys.” Princeton IRS Working Paper 509, March 2006.
Coleman, James S. (with John W. C. Johnstone and Kurt Jonassohn). 1961. The
Adolescent Society: The Social Life of the Teenager and its Impact on Education.
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Conley, Timothy G. and Giorgio Topa. “Socio-Economic Distance and Spatial Patterns
in Unemployment.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 17 (no. 4, July-August
2002): 303-27.
Conley, Timothy G. and Christopher R. Udry. Learning About a New Technology:
Pineapple in Ghana. Working Paper 817. Economic Growth Center, Yale
University. 2001.
Corcoran, Mary, Roger Gordon, Deborah Laren, and Gary Solon. “The Association
between Men’s Economic Status and Their Family and Community Origins.”
Journal of Human Resources 27 (no. 4, Fall 1992): 575-601.
Crane, Jonathan. “The Epidemic Theory of Ghettos and Neighborhood Effects on
Dropping Out and Teenage Childbearing.” American Journal of Sociology 96 (no.
5, March 1991): 1226-1259.
Cummings, Jean and Denise DiPasquale, and Matthew Cummings. Measuring the
Consequences of Promoting Inner City Homeownership. Working Paper. Tufts
University. 2001.
Cutler, David M., and Edward L. Glaeser. “Are Ghettos Good or Bad?” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 112 (no. 3, August 1997): 827-872.
Datcher, Linda. “Effects of Community and Family Background on Achievement.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 64 (no. 1, Feb., 1982): 32-41.

32

Deitz, Robert. “Estimation of Neighborhood Effects in the Social Sciences: An
Interdisciplinary Literature Review.” Social Science Research 31 (No. 4,
December 2002): 539-75).
DiPasquale, Denise and Matthew Kahn. “Measuring Neighborhood Investments: An
Examination of Community Choice.” Real Estate Economics 27 (1999): 389-424.
Duncan, Greg J., James P. Connell, and Pamela K. Klebanov. “Conceptual and
Methodological Issues in Estimating Causal Effects of Neighborhoods and Family
Conditions on Individual Development.” In Neighborhood Poverty, Volume I:
Context and Consequences for Children, edited by Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, Greg J.
Duncan, and J. Lawrence Aber. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1997.
Echenique, Federico; Roland G. Fryer, Jr.; and Alex Kaufman. “Is School Segregation
Good or Bad?” American Economic Review 96 (No. 2, May 2006): 265-269.
Eder, Donna (with Catherine Colleen Evans and Stephen Parker). 2003. School Talk:
Gender and Adolescent Culture. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Evans, William N., Oates, Wallace E., and Schwab, Robert M. “Measuring Peer Group
Effects: A Study of Teenage Behavior” Journal of Political Economy 100 (no. 5,
October 1992): 966-991.
Foster, Jennifer. “It's not your peers, and it's not your friends: Some progress toward
understanding the educational peer effect mechanism.” Journal of Public
Economics 90 (August 2006): 1455-1475.
Galster, George C.; Roberto G. Quercia; and Alvaro Cortes. “Identifying Neighborhood
Thresholds: An Empirical Exploration.” Housing Policy Debate 11(no. 3, 2000):
701-32.
Galster, George. “An Economic Efficiency Analysis of Deconcentrating Poverty
Populations.” Journal of Housing Economics 11 (2002): 303-329.
Glaeser, Edward L.; Bruce Sacerdote; and Jose A. Scheinkman. “Crime and Social
Interactions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (No. 2, May 1996): 507-48.
Glaeser, Edward L.; Bruce Sacerdote; and Jose A. Scheinkman. “The Social Multiplier.”
Journal of the European Economic Association 1 (No. 2-3, April-May 2003):
345-53.
Gould, Eric D; Victor Lavy; and M. Daniele Paserman. “Immigrating to Opportunity:
Estimating the Effect of School Quality Using a Natural Experiment on
Ethiopians in Israel.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (No. 2, May 2004a):
489-526.
Gould, Eric D; Victor Lavy; and M. Daniele Paserman. “Does Immigration Affect the
Long-Term Educational Outcomes of Natives? Quasi-Experimental Evidence.”
Working Paper, Hebrew University. 2004b.

33

Graham, Bryan S. 2005. “Identifying Social Interactions through Excess Variance
Contrasts.” Working Paper.
Grodner, Andrew and Thomas Kniesner. “An Empirical Model of Labor Supply with
Social Interactions: Econometric Issues and Tax Policy Implications.” Working
Paper. 2006.
Haurin, Donald R., Robert Deitz, and Bruce A. Weinberg. “The Impact of Neighborhood
Homeownership Rates: A Review of the Theoretical and Empirical Literature.”
Journal of Housing Research 13 (no. 2, 2002): 119-52.
Hoxby, Caroline. “Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning from Gender and Race
Variation.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7867. 2000.
Hoxby, Caroline M. and Gretchen Weingarth. “Taking Race out of the Equation: School
Reassignment and the Structure of Peer Effects.” Working Paper. 2006.
Ioannides, Yannis M. and Jeffrey E. Zabel. “Neighborhood Effects and Housing
Demand.” Journal of Applied Econometrics, Forthcoming.
Jacob, Brian. “Public Housing, Housing Vouchers and Student Achievement: Evidence
from the Public Housing Demolitions in Chicago.” American Economic Review
94 (No. 1, March 2004): 233-58.
Jargowsky, Paul A. Poverty and Place: Ghettos, Barrios, and the American City. New
York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1997.
Jencks, Christopher, and Mayer, Susan E. “The Social Consequences of Growing Up in a
Poor Neighborhood.” In Inner-City Poverty in the United States, edited by
Laurence E. Lynn, Jr. and Michael G. H. McGeary. Washington: National
Academy Press, 1990.
Katz, Lawrence F., Jeffrey R. Kling, and Jeffrey B. Liebman. “Moving to Opportunity in
Boston: Early Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 116 (May 2001): 607-654.
Kling, Jeffrey R.; Jens Ludwig; and Lawrence F. Katz. “Neighborhood Effects on Crime
for Female and Male Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Mobility
Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (February 2005).
Krauth, Brian. “Social Interactions, Thresholds, and Unemployment in Neighborhoods.”
Working Paper. 2000.
Ladd, Helen F. and Jens Ludwig. “Federal Housing Assistance, Residential Relocation,
and Educational Opportunities: Evidence from Baltimore.” American Economic
Review 87 (no. 2, May 1997): 272-277.
Lee, Lung-fei. “Generalized Method of Moments Estimation of Spatial Autoregressive
Processes.” Working Paper, Ohio State University. 2001.

34

Lee, Lung-fei. “Identification and Estimation of Econometric Models with Group
Interactions, Contextual Factors and Fixed Effects.” Journal of Econometrics.
(2006), doi:10.1016/j.jeconom.2006.07.001.
Lin, Xu. "Peer Effects and Student Academic Achievement: An Application of Spatial
Autoregressive Model with Group Unobservables”. Working Paper. 2005.
Ludwig, Jens, Greg J. Duncan, and Paul Hirschfield. “Urban Poverty and Juvenile Crime:
Evidence from a Randomized Housing-Mobility Experiment.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 116 (May 2001):655-680.
Manski, Charles F. “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection
Problem.” Review of Economic Studies 60 (1993): 531-542.
Marmaros, David; and Bruce Sacerdote. “How Friendships Form.” Working Paper,
Dartmouth College. 2003.
Massey, Douglas S., and Nancy A. Denton. American Apartheid: Segregation and the
Making of the Underclass. Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard University
Press. 1993.
Mayer, Adalbert and Steven L. Puller. “The Old Boy (and Girl) Network: Social Network
Formation on University Campuses.” Working Paper 2006.
Moffitt, Robert A. “Policy Interventions, Low-Level Equilibria, and Social Interactions.”
Social Dynamics, Stven N. Durlauf and H. Peyton Young, eds. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press. 2001.
Moody, James. “Race, School Integration, and Friendship Segregation in America.”
American Journal of Sociology 107 (No. 3, November 2001): 679-716.
Munschi, Kaivan. “Networks in the Modern Economy: Mexican Migrants in the U.S.
Labor Market.” Working Paper. University of Pennsylvania. 2002.
Oreopolous, Philip. “The Long-run Consequences of Living in a Poor Neighborhood.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (No. 4, November 2003): 1533-75.
Plotnick, Robert D., and Saul D. Hoffman. “Fixed Effect Estimates of Neighborhood
Effects.” Working Paper. University of Delaware. 1995.
Quercia, Roberto G. and George C. Galster. “Threshold Effects and Neighborhood
Change.” Journal of Planning Education and Research, Forthcoming.
Rosenbaum, James E., Stefanie DeLuca, and Shazia Miller. “The Long-Term Effects of
Residential Mobility on AFDC Receipt: Studying the Gautreaux Program with
Administrative Data.” Manuscript. Northwestern University. 1999.
Ross, Stephen L. “Segregation and Racial Preferences: New Theoretical and Empirical
Approaches.” Annales d'Economie et de Statistique 71-72 (No. 0, Special Issue
July-Dec. 2003): 143-72.

35

Sacerdote, Bruce. “Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth
Roommates.” Quarterly Journal of Economics (May 2001): 681-704.
Shang, Qingyan. “Estimating Endogenous Neighborhood Effects from Variations in Price
and Price-Responsiveness,” Working paper. 2006.
Solon, Gary, Marianne E. Page and Greg J. Duncan. “Correlations between Neighboring
Children in Their Subsequent Educational Attainment.” Review of Economics and
Statistics 82(no. 3, August 2000): 383-92.
Sobel, Michael E. “What are Neighborhood Effects?” Manuscript. Columbia University.
2001.
Topa, Giorgio. “Social Interactions, Local Spillovers, and Unemployment.” Review of
Economic Studies 68 (No. 2, April 2001): 261-95
Weinberg, Bruce A. “Black Residential Centralization and the Spatial Mismatch
Hypothesis.” Journal of Urban Economics 48 (2000): 110-34.
Weinberg, Bruce A., Patricia B. Reagan, and Jeffrey J. Yankow. “Do Neighborhoods
Affect Work Behavior? Evidence from the NLSY79.” Journal of Labor
Economics, Forthcoming, 2004.
Wilson, William Julius. The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass, and
Public Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987.
Wilson, William Julius. When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1996.
Wiseman, Rosalind. Queen Bees and Wannabes. New York: Crown Publishers. 2002.
Zimmerman, David J. “Peer Effects in Academic Outcomes: Evidence from A Natural
Experiment.” Review of Economics and Statistics 85 (No 1, February 2003): 9-23.

36

Figure 1. Sorting on Characteristics.
A. Active Associations

B. (Weighted) Mean Characteristics of
Associates

π HA|H

A

A

πH

∂π HA |H

xH

A Max

∂U
∂π HA |H

1

Reg 1

x

=0

Reg 2

Reg 3

πH

=0

1

xL

A

xH − xL

xH

∂U

C. High-Low Difference in (Weighted)
Mean Characteristics of Associates

πH

1
High
Reg 1

Low
Reg 3
Reg 1

Reg 2

Reg 3

High
Reg 3

High
Reg 2

Low
Reg 2

Low
Reg 1

πH

Figure 2. The Effect of Increasing Group Size.
A. Active Associations
B. (Weighted) Mean Characteristics of
Associates

C. High-Low Difference in (Weighted)
Mean Characteristics of Associates

π HA|H

xH − xL

A

A

xH

πH
∂U
∂π HA |H

x

xH

=0

A Max

∂U
∂π HA |H

1

A

=0

πH

1

1

πH

High
Reg 1
Low
Reg 3

Reg 1

Reg 2

Reg 3

xL

Low
Reg 2
Reg 1

Reg 2

Reg 3

38

High
Reg 3

High
Reg 2

Low
Reg 1

πH

1

1

0.9

0.9
Share of Group, Highs, and Lows taking the High Action

Share of Group, Highs, and Lows taking the High Action

Figure 3. The Effect of Group Composition on Actions with Uniformly Distributed Preference Shocks.
A. Normally distributed unobserved preference shock.

0.8
0.7
0.6

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0.8
0.7
0.6

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Share of Group with High Characteristic

0.8

0.9

0

1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4
0.5
0.6
Share of Group with High Action

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Note. The curves give mean behavior in the group (solid), among people with x = −1 (dotted), and x = 1 (dashed). Solutions for β = 1 , θ = 1 , t 0 = 1 ,
α = .5 , x ∈ {− 1,1} , y ∈ {− 1,1} , c = .5 , and N = 4 . Bounds of shocks are -2 and 2.

39

1

1

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8
0.7
0.6

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

0.8
0.7
0.6

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Share of Group with High Characteristic

0.8

0.9

1

(Weighted) Mean of Associates Behaviors, XH, XL, and Difference

1

Share of Group, Highs, and Lows taking the High Action

Share of Group, Highs, and Lows taking the High Action

Figure 4. The Effect of Group Composition on Actions with Normally Distributed Preference Shocks.

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4
0.5
0.6
Share of Group with High Action

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

0.6
0.4
0.2

0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
-1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Share of Group with High Characteristic

0.8

0.9

1

Note. In the first two figures, the curves give mean behavior in the group (solid), among people with x = −1 (dotted), and x = 1 (dashed). In the third
figure the curves give weighted mean of associates behavior for people with the high characteristic (dotted) the low characteristic (dashed) and the
difference (solid). Solutions for β = 1 , θ = 1 , t 0 = 1 , α = .5 , x ∈ {− 1,1} , y ∈ {− 1,1} , c = .5 , and N = 4 . Shocks are distributed with mean of 0 and
variance of 1.

40

Figure 5. The Effect of Group Composition on Associates’ Characteristics, by the Individual’s Characteristics.
Black

White
0.6

0.8

0.5

0.7
0.6

0.3
Own
Other

0.2

Difference
0.1

Share of Associates

Share of Associates

0.4

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

0.5
Own

0.4

Other
0.3

Difference

0.2
0.1

1

-0.1

0

-0.2

-0.1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Share in School-Grade

Share in School-Grade

Asian

Hispanic

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5
Own
0.4

Other
Difference

0.3
0.2
0.1

Share of Associates

Share of Associates

0.6

0.4
0.2

Own
Other
Difference

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

-0.2
-0.4

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

-0.6
Share in School-Grade

Share in School-Grade

Note. The own curve gives the share of the associates in the group for people who are in the group. The other curve gives the share of the associates
in the group for people who are not in the group. The difference gives the difference between the own and other curves. Each point represents a
school-grade. Plots generated from estimates in Table 4.

41

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics.
Own Behavior or Characteristic
Mean Std. Dev.
Grade - English
2.858 (0.962)
Grade - Math
2.766 (1.002)
Grade - History, Social Studies
2.926 (0.978)
Grade - Science
2.860 (0.989)
Smoke
4.368 (9.688)
Drink Many Times
0.637 (0.481)
Drink
1.764 (4.215)
Get Drunk
0.993 (3.283)
Trouble with Teachers
4.911 (8.777)
Trouble Paying Attention
9.056 (10.405)
Touble with Homework
8.730 (10.468)
Trouble with Students
7.107 (10.664)
Effort Studying (reverse coded)
1.817 (0.655)
Race Bicycle
3.163 (7.530)
Do Dangerous Things
1.282 (4.675)
Lie
4.239 (7.758)
Skip School
0.921 (3.607)
Fight
1.181 (2.221)
TV
1.878 (1.283)
White
0.673 (0.469)
Black
0.161 (0.367)
Asian
0.068 (0.251)
Indian
0.045 (0.208)
Other Race
0.078 (0.268)
Hispanic
0.149 (0.356)
Mother's Education
13.641 (2.464)
Mother Homemaker
0.178 (0.382)
With Dad
0.785 (0.411)
Age
15.730 (1.217)
Male
0.460 (0.498)
Note. Standard deviations of means in parentheses.

Associates' Behavior or Characteristic
Mean Std. Dev.
2.885 (0.641)
2.769 (0.667)
2.940 (0.682)
2.877 (0.666)
4.538 (6.801)
0.658 (0.301)
1.959 (2.805)
1.152 (2.220)
4.977 (5.111)
9.272 (5.964)
8.865 (6.071)
7.204 (6.366)
1.837 (0.388)
3.228 (4.475)
1.437 (2.968)
4.336 (4.620)
0.990 (2.389)
1.215 (1.374)
1.816 (0.826)
0.664 (0.396)
0.165 (0.332)
0.068 (0.196)
0.045 (0.118)
0.075 (0.172)
0.152 (0.285)
16.679 (5.399)
0.176 (0.225)
0.791 (0.248)
15.745 (1.019)
0.465 (0.295)
42

N
36,384
34,816
31,551
32,379
41,555
41,555
41,555
41,555
41,555
41,555
41,555
41,555
41,555
41,555
41,555
41,555
41,555
41,555
41,555
41,555
41,555
41,555
41,555
41,555
41,247
34,721
36,943
41,059
41,543
41,539

Table 2. Decomposition of Variance in Associates’ Behavior and Characteristics.
Full Sample
Neighborhood Sample
Between Share
N
Between Share Between Share
N
Grade - English
0.181
45,451
0.210
0.270
7,842
Grade - Math
0.207
45,153
0.240
0.297
7,781
Grade - History, Social Studies
0.166
44,388
0.181
0.242
7,666
Grade - Science
0.170
44,625
0.220
0.278
7,664
Smoke
0.086
46,314
0.148
0.212
7,966
Drink many times
0.092
46,314
0.147
0.199
7,966
Drink
0.056
46,314
0.096
0.154
7,966
Get Drunk
0.050
46,314
0.083
0.139
7,966
Trouble with Teacher
0.070
46,314
0.096
0.144
7,966
Trouble paying Attention
0.046
46,314
0.089
0.141
7,966
Trouble doing Homework
0.059
46,314
0.097
0.149
7,966
Trouble with Students
0.100
46,314
0.117
0.173
7,966
Effort Studying (reverse coded)
0.091
46,314
0.138
0.193
7,966
Race
0.056
46,314
0.094
0.153
7,966
Does Dangerous Things
0.046
46,314
0.079
0.150
7,966
Lies
0.045
46,314
0.075
0.126
7,966
Skips School
0.075
46,314
0.103
0.146
7,966
Fights
0.063
46,314
0.087
0.150
7,966
TV
0.233
46,314
0.288
0.349
7,966
White
0.491
46,314
0.612
0.685
7,966
Black
0.431
46,314
0.448
0.630
7,966
Asian
0.350
46,314
0.387
0.461
7,966
Indian
0.077
46,314
0.170
0.246
7,966
Other Race
0.206
46,314
0.223
0.280
7,966
Hispanic
0.459
45,955
0.508
0.561
7,910
Mother's Education
0.243
45,278
0.251
0.323
7,797
Mother Homemaker
0.081
45,659
0.114
0.177
7,867
With Dad
0.130
46,240
0.148
0.227
7,951
With Neighborhood Controls
No
No
Yes
Effects (Main Models)
324
294
700
Note. Between share gives the share of variance in associates between school-grades (or school-grades and school-neighborhoods in the last column).
43

The neighborhood characteristics are whether the block group is urban, percent black, percent living in poverty, the percent of the adult population
without high school degrees, the percent unemployed, and the log of the median family income.

44

Table 3. Mean Associate Characteristics Related to Own Characteristics.
Full Sample
Neighborhood Sample
White
0.235 (0.004)
0.217 (0.009)
0.210 (0.009)
Black
0.572 (0.003)
0.577 (0.008)
0.522 (0.008)
Asian
0.316 (0.003)
0.397 (0.008)
0.390 (0.008)
Indian
0.033 (0.003)
0.044 (0.006)
0.043 (0.006)
Hispanic
0.231 (0.004)
0.237 (0.009)
0.228 (0.009)
Mother has some College
0.094 (0.003)
0.086 (0.008)
0.080 (0.008)
Mother Homemaker
0.018 (0.003)
0.013 (0.007)
0.013 (0.007)
With Dad
0.026 (0.003)
0.028 (0.007)
0.025 (0.007)
N (Race Variables)
46,990
8,080
8,080
N (Hispanic)
42,822
7,371
7,371
N (Family Background)
36,942
6,350
6,350
Full Sample
Yes
Neighborhood Sample
Yes
Yes
With Own*Neighborhood Interactions
Yes
Note. Standard errors reported in parentheses. Dependent variable is mean characteristic among associates. Each estimate is from a separate
regression of the mean characteristics of associates on the individual’s own value of that characteristic. Estimates include individual characteristics
(age, gender, Hispanic background, Hispanic background unknown, race dummy variables, years at school, years at school missing, mother’s
education, mother’s education missing, mother is a homemaker, mother is a homemaker missing, dad present, and dad present missing) and schoolgrade fixed effects. The neighborhood characteristics are whether the block group is urban, percent black, percent living in poverty, the percent of the
adult population without high school degrees, the percent unemployed, and the log of the median family income.

45

Table 4. Associate Characteristics Related to own Characteristic Interacted with Mean in School-Grade.
Person in Group * Person in Group * Person in Group *
Group Share of
Group Share of
Group Share of
Group Share of
Group Share of
Group Share of
2
3
2
School-Grade
School-Grade
School-Grade
School-Grade3
School-Grade
School-Grade
White
0.608
-0.926
0.849
0.220
-0.011
-0.305
(0.230)
(0.476)
(0.303)
(0.303)
(0.512)
(0.325)
Black
0.380
-0.986
1.284
2.042
-3.269
1.207
(0.100)
(0.316)
(0.271)
(0.271)
(0.480)
(0.359)
Asian
0.496
-0.826
0.999
1.392
-2.462
1.069
(0.080)
(0.336)
(0.388)
(0.388)
(0.769)
(0.693)
Hispanic
0.580
-0.507
0.656
0.170
0.157
-0.748
(0.102)
(0.454)
(0.473)
(0.473)
(0.869)
(0.731)
Note. Standard errors reported in parentheses. Each row represents a separate regression. Regressions for whites, blacks, and Asians contain 46,690
observations. The regression for Hispanics contains 42,822 observations because people with missing Hispanic background were excluded. The
dependent variable is the mean of each characteristic among associates. Estimates include individual characteristics (age, gender, Hispanic
background, Hispanic background unknown, race dummy variables, years at school, years at school missing, mother’s education, mother’s education
missing, mother is a homemaker, mother is a homemaker missing, dad present, and dad present missing), the racial (or ethnic) composition of the
school-grade and interactions between race (or ethnic background) and the racial (or ethnic) composition of the school-grade and school dummy
variables interacted with race (or Hispanic background).

46

Table 5. The Effect of Macro-Group Size on Sorting: Associates’ Characteristics Related to own Characteristics Interacted with Macro-Group Size.
Own Characteristic *
Log(School-Grade Size)
White
0.0040 (0.0046)
Black
0.0672 (0.0042)
Asian
0.1382 (0.0049)
Indian
0.0093 (0.0041)
Hispanic
0.1089 (0.0054)
Mother has some College
0.0056 (0.0022)
Mother Homemaker
0.0230 (0.0045)
With Dad
-0.0021 (0.0042)
N (Race Variables)
46,990
N (Hispanic)
42,822
N (Family Background)
36,942
School-Grade Effects
Yes
Note. Standard errors reported in parentheses. The dependent variable is the mean of each characteristic among associates. Estimates are the
coefficient on the interaction between own characteristics and the log of school-grade size. Estimates include individual characteristics (age, gender,
Hispanic background, Hispanic background unknown, race dummy variables, years at school, years at school missing, mother’s education, mother’s
education missing, mother is a homemaker, mother is a homemaker missing, dad present, and dad present missing), interactions between the
composition of the school-grade and own characteristics, and school-grade fixed effects.

47

Table 6. Sorting on Behaviors: Associates’ Behaviors Related to Predicted own Behavior Interacted with Predicted Mean in School-Grade.
Own Behavior Predicted to be High *
Own Behavior Predicted to be High *
Share of School-Grade with Behavior
Share of School-Grade with Behavior
Observations
Independent Variable:
Predicted to be High
Predicted to be High2
Grade - English
2.387 (0.398)
-2.032 (0.354)
33,758
Grade - Math
1.203 (0.348)
-1.056 (0.315)
32,246
Grade - History, Social Studies
2.121 (0.371)
-1.806 (0.333)
29,217
Grade - Science
1.830 (0.404)
-1.579 (0.354)
30,001
Smoke
8.525 (2.905)
-5.331 (3.273)
38,422
Drink many times
-0.200 (0.154)
0.276 (0.173)
38,422
Drink
3.055 (2.726)
-2.440 (2.531)
38,422
Get Drunk
0.933 (1.903)
-1.603 (1.697)
38,422
Trouble with Teacher
17.589 (3.009)
-18.766 (3.477)
38,422
Trouble paying Attention
12.105 (3.771)
-12.166 (4.250)
38,422
Trouble doing Homework
11.543 (3.436)
-10.263 (3.936)
38,422
Trouble with Students
10.474 (3.222)
-9.778 (3.745)
38,422
Effort Studying (reverse coded)
-0.299 (0.278)
0.190 (0.241)
38,422
Race
6.594 (3.249)
-6.575 (2.826)
38,422
Does Dangerous Things
-2.520 (2.377)
1.516 (1.976)
38,422
Lies
5.831 (3.614)
-6.979 (3.825)
38,422
Skips School
7.899 (1.916)
-9.928 (2.113)
38,422
Fights
-1.132 (0.945)
0.616 (0.794)
38,422
TV
0.880 (0.376)
-1.007 (0.371)
38,422
Note. Standard errors reported in parentheses. The dependent variable is the mean of each behavior among associates. Estimates are the coefficient
on whether the person’s behavior is predicted to be above the population mean interacted with the share of the school-grade whose behavior is
predicted to be above the population mean and its square. Own behaviors predicted from regressions of behaviors on race and ethnicity dummy
variables; school-grade behaviors predicted from years at school, years at school missing, mother’s education, mother’s education missing, dad
present, and dad present missing. Estimates include individual characteristics (age, gender, Hispanic background, Hispanic background unknown,
race dummy variables, years at school, years at school missing, mother’s education, mother’s education missing, mother is a homemaker, mother is a
homemaker missing, dad present, and dad present missing), and school-grade fixed-effects variables.

48

Table 7. Effect of Endogenous Association on Behavior: Own Behaviors Related to Predicted own Behavior Interacted with Predicted Mean in
School-Grade.
Own Behavior Predicted to be High *
Own Behavior Predicted to be High *
Share of School-Grade with Behavior
Share of School-Grade with Behavior
Observations
Independent Variable:
Predicted to be High
Predicted to be High2
Grade - English
2.363 (0.626)
-1.892 (0.557)
33,758
Grade - Math
1.051 (0.559)
-0.752 (0.507)
32,246
Grade - History, Social Studies
2.067 (0.555)
-1.541 (0.498)
29,217
Grade - Science
0.965 (0.628)
-0.728 (0.551)
30,001
Smoke
9.553 (4.257)
-4.991 (4.797)
38,422
Drink many times
-0.563 (0.254)
0.541 (0.285)
38,422
Drink
3.117 (4.080)
-1.490 (3.788)
38,422
Get Drunk
3.129 (2.756)
-2.747 (2.457)
38,422
Trouble with Teacher
23.548 (5.227)
-25.951 (6.038)
38,422
Trouble paying Attention
18.231 (6.648)
-19.414 (7.493)
38,422
Trouble doing Homework
13.209 (6.008)
-12.292 (6.882)
38,422
Trouble with Students
15.307 (5.543)
-16.948 (6.443)
38,422
Effort Studying (reverse coded)
1.169 (0.479)
-1.090 (0.415)
38,422
Race
7.282 (5.490)
-8.496 (4.776)
38,422
Does Dangerous Things
6.437 (3.686)
-4.227 (3.064)
38,422
Lies
11.706 (6.136)
-12.510 (6.494)
38,422
Skips School
1.630 (2.880)
-2.086 (3.177)
38,422
Fights
-0.209 (1.527)
0.949 (1.283)
38,422
TV
1.026 (0.638)
-1.269 (0.630)
38,422
Note. Standard errors reported in parentheses. The dependent variable is the individual’s behavior. Estimates are the coefficient on whether the
person’s behavior is predicted to be above the population mean interacted with the share of the school-grade whose behavior is predicted to be above
the population mean and its square. Own behaviors predicted from regressions of behaviors on race and ethnicity dummy variables; school-grade
behaviors predicted from years at school, years at school missing, mother’s education, mother’s education missing, dad present, and dad present
missing. Estimates include individual characteristics (age, gender, Hispanic background, Hispanic background unknown, race dummy variables,
years at school, years at school missing, mother’s education, mother’s education missing, mother is a homemaker, mother is a homemaker missing,
dad present, and dad present missing), and school-grade fixed effects variables.

49

Table 8. Two Stage Least Squares Estimate of Associates’ Social Effect.
Estimate (Std. Err.)
Observations
Grade - English
1.209 (0.234)
33,758
Grade - Math
0.791 (0.314)
32,246
Grade - History, Social Studies
1.044 (0.184)
29,217
Grade - Science
0.752 (0.235)
30,001
Smoke
1.239 (0.099)
38,422
Drink many times
0.716 (0.353)
38,422
Drink
2.659 (1.353)
38,422
Get Drunk
0.562 (0.598)
38,422
Trouble with Teacher
1.204 (0.336)
38,422
Trouble paying Attention
0.671 (0.396)
38,422
Trouble doing Homework
1.009 (0.389)
38,422
Trouble with Students
1.106 (0.420)
38,422
Effort Studying (reverse coded)
-1.389 (1.390)
38,422
Race
1.970 (0.780)
38,422
Does Dangerous Things
0.527 (0.511)
38,422
Lies
1.386 (0.750)
38,422
Skips School
0.328 (0.252)
38,422
Fights
0.364 (0.561)
38,422
TV
1.285 (0.433)
38,422
Note. Standard errors reported in parentheses. The dependent variable is the individual’s behavior. First-stage estimates reported in table 6; reduced
form estimates reported in table 7. Estimates include individual characteristics (age, gender, Hispanic background, Hispanic background unknown,
race dummy variables, years at school, years at school missing, mother’s education, mother’s education missing, mother is a homemaker, mother is a
homemaker missing, dad present, and dad present missing), and school-grade fixed effects variables.

50

Appendix Table 1. Variable Descriptions.
Variable
Description
At the most recent grading period, what was your grade in each of the
following subjects?
Grade - English
Grade - Math
Grade - History, Social
Studies
Grade - Science
Drink many times

Coding

4 (A); 3 (B); 2 (C) 1 (D or
lower)
As above

...English / Language Arts
...Mathematics

Smoke

...History/Social Studies
...Science
Have you had a drink of beer, wine, or liquor—not just a sip or a taste
of someone else’s drink—more than two or three times in your life?
During the past twelve months, how often did you:
...smoke cigarettes?

Drink
Get Drunk
Race
Does Dangerous Things
Lies
Skips School
Fights

...drink beer, wine, or liquor
...get drunk?
...race on a bike, on a skateboard or roller blades, or in a boat or car?
...do something dangerous because you were dared to?
...lie to your parents or guardians?
...skip school without an excuse?
In the past year, how often have you gotten into a physical fight?

Effort Studying (reverse
coded)

In general, how hard do you try to do your school work well?

51

As above
As above
0 (No); 1 (Yes)

0 (never); .5 (once or twice); 1
(once a month or less); 2.5 (2
or 3 days a month); 16 (3 to 5
days aweek); 30 (nearly every
day)
As above
As above
As above
As above
As above
As above
0 (never); 1.5 (1 or 2 times); 4
(3 or 5 times); 6.5 (6 or 7
times); 10 (more than 7 times)
1 (I try very hard to do my
best) to 4 (I never try at all)

Appendix Table 1. Variable Descriptions (Continued)
Variable
Description
Since school started this year, how often have you had trouble:
Trouble with Teacher
...getting along with your teachers?

Trouble paying Attention
Trouble doing Homework
Trouble with Students

TV

...paying attention in school?
...getting your homework done?
...getting along with other students?
Outside of school hours, about how much time do you spend watching
television or video cassettes on an average school day?

52

Coding
0 (never); 1 (just a few times);
4 (about once a week); 3.5
(almost everyday); 30 (every
day)
As above
As above
As above
0 (none); .5 (less than 1 hour);
1.5 (1 to 2 hours); 2.5 (3 to 4
hours); 4.5 (more than 4 hours)

